


ch.  viii     HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


247 


the  field  until  two  o'clock,  when  the  French,  repulsed  1805. 
in  repeated  attacks  with  heavy  loss,  fell  back  out  of  Feb.  2 
range. 

Further  north  the  French  ships  were  retarded  by 
contrary  winds,  but  at  nine  o'clock  they  landed  another 
strong  detachment  a  mile  and  a  half  to  north  of  Roseau 
at  the  foot  of  Morne  Daniel.  Prevost  had  but  one 
hundred  Militia  at  this  point  to  oppose  to  over  a 
thousand  of  the  enemy  ;  but  his  handful  of  men 
attacked  the  boats  gallantly  as  they  came  up  through 
the  surf,  killing  eight  French  soldiers  and  wounding 
several  more,  till  they  were  driven  from  the  beach  by 
the  guns  of  the  men-of-war.  There  remained  now 
only  a  small  redoubt  on  Morne  Daniel,  which  was 
defended  by  a  sergeant  of  the  Forty-sixth  with  four 
men  of  his  own  regiment,  five  of  the  West  India,  and 
a  few  Militia  with  a  single  three-pounder.  This 
gallant  little  party  fought  desperately,  inflicting  much 
loss  on  the  enemy  until  the  ten  men  of  the  Regular 
troops  had  fallen,  when  the  redoubt  was  carried  by 
sheer  weight  of  numbers.  The  French  then  landed 
two  hundred  men  midway  between  their  two  points  of 
attack  ;  and  Prevost,  observing  them  on  the  march  to 
get  into  the  rear  of  O'Connell,  at  about  two  o'clock 
hoisted  the  white  flag.  The  French  fire  thereupon 
ceased,  and  Prevost,  ordering  the  Militia  to  remain  at 
their  posts,  directed  the  civil  Governor  to  negotiate  the 
capitulation  of  Roseau.  He  himself  then  drew  off  the 
whole  of  his  Regular  troops,  white  and  black,  and  made 
a  forced  march  with  them  along  the  whole  length  of 
the  island  to  Rupert's  Bay.  So  steep  was  the  country 
and  so  rough  were  the  tracks  that  the  troops,  carrying 
their  wounded,  took  four  days  to  accomplish  the 
I  journey  ;  but  Prevost  himself  with  two  companies,  by 
great  exertion,  reached  Fort  Cabril  at  Rupert's  Bay  in 
twenty -four  hours,  and  at  once  made  every  pre- 
paration for  a  stubborn  defence.  With  an  adequate 
garrison,  as  he  knew,  the  French  were  powerless  to 
hurt  him  except  by  a  regular  siege.    Thus  though 


248 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1805.  Roseau  was  lost,  Dominica  and  its  precious  anchorage 
were  saved.1 

This  little  affair  was  extremely  creditable  to  all 
concerned  on  the  British  side.  Prevost  had  evidently 
thought  out  his  plan  of  operations  in  every  detail,  and 
though  in  a  measure  surprised  by  the  French  attack, 
was  never  for  a  moment  at  a  loss.  His  officers  also 
knew  their  duty  and  did  it ;  and  of  the  many  tiny 
detachments  scattered  along  the  batteries  on  the  coast, 
every  one  with  a  single  exception  was  safely  brought  in, 
without  direct  orders,  to  Rupert's  Bay.  One  officer 
and  seven  gunners  only  were  captured,  and  the  losses 
of  the  Regular  troops  did  not  not  exceed  thirty-seven 
in  killed  and  wounded.  Those  of  the  Militia  are 
unfortunately  unknown,  but  they  were  considerable, 
for  this  force  behaved  with  admirable  gallantry  and 
spirit.  The  casualties  of  the  French  were  reckoned 
by  Prevost  at  about  three  hundred  ;  but  the  General's 
spirited  defence  produced  more  important  consequences 
than  the  death  or  mutilation  of  French  soldiers. 
General  Lagrange  had  begged  Missiessy  to  divide  his 
squadron  so  as  to  attack  Roseau  and  Rupert's  Bay 
simultaneously,  and  Missiessy  had  refused ;  so  that 
when  it  was  realised  that  Prevost  had  secured  Fort 
Cabril,  Lagrange  felt  anything  but  kindly  disposed 
towards  his  naval  colleague.  The  French  squadron 
reconnoitred  Rupert's  Bay,  but  seeing  that  an  attack 
upon  it  was  hopeless,  sailed  first  to  Guadeloupe,  and 
then  to  St.  Kitt's,  Nevis,  and  Montserrat,  where 
Missiessy  levied  contributions  and  ransoms  on  a  few 
captured  ships.  Returning  thence  to  Martinique  on 
Mar.  12.  the  1 2th  of  March,  he  found  new  orders  from 
Napoleon  awaiting  him.  Their  purport  was  that 
Villeneuve  had  been  driven  back  by  weather  to 
Toulon,  that  his  squadron  had  since  been  detailed 
for  another  service  in  a  different  quarter,  that 
Missiessy  was  now  to  act  independently,  according 
to  the  spirit  of  his  first  instructions,  and  that  Rochefort 
1  Prevost  to  Myers,  1st  March,  1805  ;  Desbriere,  iv.  31 1-3 13. 