


ch.viii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  255 


with  the  so-called  law  of  nations;  but  men  must  not  1805. 
be  too  hardly  judged  when  they  find  themselves,  by 
no  fault  of  their  own,  thrust  unexpectedly  into  a 
false  position. 

Meanwhile  Nelson,  on  receiving  news  of  Villeneuve's 
departure,  had  made  at  first  for  Sicily  ;  and  it  was  not 
until  the  19  th  of  April  that  he  ascertained  that  the  April  1 
French  Admiral  had  passed  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar. 
Nelson  then  followed  him,  much  delayed  by  foul  winds 
and  greatly  apprehensive  lest  Craig's  force  might  have 
come  to  disaster.    On  this  point,  however,  he  was 
presently  satisfied.    Owing  to  the  protests  of  Junot, 
the  French  Ambassador  at  Lisbon,  Knight  was  com- 
pelled on  the  10th  to  remove  his  convoy  from  that  May  1 
port,  and  on  the  following  day  he  fell  in  with  Nelson  May  1 
off  Cape  St.  Vincent.    Nelson  thereupon  made  his 
decision,  reinforced  the  convoy  by  one  line-of-battle 
ship,  and  sailed  straight  for  Barbados ;  while  Craig 
pursued  his  way  safely  to  Gibraltar. 

Upon  the  first  news  of  Missiessy's  appearance  in 
the  West  Indies  the  Admiralty  had  ordered  Admiral 
Cochrane  thither.    On  the  3rd  of  April  that  officer  April  3 
reached  Barbados  with  five  ships  of  the  line  and  three 
frigates.   Thence,  after  adding  to  this  squadron  Hood's 
flag-ship  the  Centaur^  he  sailed  away  to  leeward  on  the 
5th  in  pursuit  of  the  French  Admiral.    For  more  than  April  5 
a  month  General  Myers  at  Barbados  waited  anxiously 
for  news  of  his  success  ;  and  then  there  came  on  the 
13th  of  May  a  warning  from  England  that  a  large  May  i-: 
French  fleet  had   been  seen  off  Cadiz.     This  was 
followed  on  the  18th  by  a  report  from  Martinique  itself  May  iS 
that  a  fleet  of  twenty-nine  sail  in  all,  with  the  flags 
of  one  Spanish  and  two  French  admirals  among  them, 
were  coming  into  Fort  de  France.    "  Of  course  none 
of  the  islands  are  safe  for  long  with  the  enemy  so 
strong  here,"  wrote  Myers.     "  A  more  deplorable 
force    than   our    Militia    in    Barbados   was  never 
seen."    He  prepared,  therefore,  for  the  worst,  never 
doubting  that  Napoleon's  object  was  to  harry  the 


256 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1805.  whole  °f  ^e   British   West   Indies.     The  British 
Government  also  interpreted  the  mission  of  Villeneuve's 

May  1 8.  fleet  in  the  same  sense;  and  on  the  18  th  of  May- 
ordered  Sir  Eyre  Coote  to  take  command  of  some 
seven  thousand  troops,1  and  to  sail  with  them  at  once 
to  the  rescue  of  the  British  islands.  Nevertheless, 
if  the  French  movements  should  prove  to  be  a  feint 
only,  Myers  was  ordered  to  send  these  troops  back 
again ;  and  even  if  Villeneuve  should  have  captured  an 
island  or  two,  it  was  left  to  the  General's  discretion  to 
decide  whether  he  should  recapture  them  at  once  or 
send  Coote's  force  to  Halifax  to  await  the  healthy 
season.  The  appalling  experience  of  1793  to  1795 
had  not  been  wholly  thrown  away  upon  Pitt ;  and  he 
was  not  prepared  again  to  squander  soldiers  by  the 
ten  thousand  in  fighting  over  sugar-plantations.  Still 
it  was  a  time  of  anxious  suspense  for  the  authorities  at 
Whitehall  as  well  as  in  the  Antilles,  for  the  West 
Indian  merchants  were  powerful,  and  a  destructive 
raid  upon  their  cherished  property  would  have  damaged 
the  Government  greatly.2 