

Napoleon's  plans,  however,  had  been  but  imperfectly 
realised.     Villeneuve's  squadron  witk  five  thousand 

May  1 4.  troops  on  board  had  indeed  arrived  on  the  14th  at 
Martinique,  where  three  of  his  missing  Spanish  ships 
had  anchored  before  him  ;  but  Ganteaume  had  failed 
to  make  his  escape  from  Brest.  On  the  24th  of 
March,  when  only  {iftcQti  British  vessels  were  blockad- 
ing him,  he  had  asked  permission  to  go  out  and  fight 
them  with  his  own  fleet  of  twenty-one,  but  Napoleon 
forbade  him.  Within  the  next  few  days  the  British 
fleet  was  reinforced,  and  Ganteaume,  after  a  vain 
attempt  to  put  to  sea  on  the  27th,  retired  once  more 
on  the  29  th  within  the  inner  harbour.  Villeneuve,  of 
course  knowing  nothing  of  this,  set  himself  to  wait 

1  The  8th,  24th,  32nd,  38th,  62nd,  71st,  72nd,  83rd,  89th, 
and  93rd  Infantry  of  the  Line  ;  in  all  6493  rank  and  file  ;  besides 
artillery. 

2  Myers  to  Sec.  of  State,  14th,  18th,  24th  May  ;  Sec.  of  State 
to  Myers,  18th,  25th  May  1805. 

1 


ch.viii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  257 


patiently  for  Ganteaume's  arrival,  according  to  his  1805. 
orders.  He  projected  vaguely  an  attack  upon  Dominica, 
as  the  nearest  island  to  Martinique,  but  finally  re- 
duced his  offensive  operations  to  the  recapture  of  the 
Diamond  Rock,  a  tiny  islet  which  had  been  occupied 
by  the  British  in  order  to  harass  the  French  merchant- 
men. On  the  30th  there  reached  him  a  frigate,  and 
on  the  4th  of  June  two  line-of-battle  ships  and  eight  June  4. 
hundred  additional  troops  under  Admiral  Magon, 
bringing  final  orders  from  Napoleon  dated  the  14th 
and  17  th  of  April.  These  were  to  the  effect  that 
Villeneuve  was  to  wait  thirty-five  days  after  Magon's 
arrival  for  news  of  Ganteaume,  and,  if  he  received 
none,  that  he  should  return  at  once  to  Ferrol,  release 
and  take  under  his  command  the  fifteen  French  and 
Spanish  vessels  blockaded  there,  proceed  with  them  to 
Brest,  and  having  set  Ganteaume  also  free,  sail  with 
the  united  force  to  the  Channel.  Meanwhile  he  was 
to  capture  St.  Lucia,  Dominica,  and  as  many  other 
islands  as  possible  ;  but  due  arrival  before  Boulogne  at 
the  appointed  time  was  the  duty  above  all  imposed 
upon  him.  There  he  would  find  the  Emperor  in 
person  ;  and  the  fate  of  the  world  would  depend  upon 
the  punctuality  of  his  coming.1 

At  last  therefore  it  had  occurred  to  the  Emperor  to 
turn  his  raid  upon  the  West  Indies  into  a  feint  which 
should  give  him  the  mastery  of  the  Channel  ;  but  on 
the  2nd  of  June  Admiral  Cochrane,  having  ascertained  June, 
that  Missiessy  had  sailed  for  Europe,  returned  with  his 
ships  to  Barbados  ;  and  on  the  very  day  on  which 
Villeneuve  received  his  new  orders,  Nelson  likewise 
put  into  Carlisle  Bay  with  his  fleet.  By  the  addition  June  4. 
of  Cochrane's  vessels  Nelson  saw  his  force  raised  to 
twelve  ships  of  the  line  ;  and  though  the  French  fleet 
counted  half  as  many  again,  neither  he  nor  Myers  had 
an  idea  of  remaining  idle  with  such  strength  at  their 
disposal.  Myers's  latest  intelligence  reported,  falsely, 
that  Villeneuve's  fleet  had  been  seen  heading  for 
1  Desbriere,  iv.  513-515. 