

VOL.V  R 


242 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1804.  from  Napoleon;  but  from  the  end  of  1803  he  pre- 
pared quietly  for  war,  and  began  to  hope  for  alliance 
with  England  and  Russia.  After  this  affair  Napoleon 
could  hardly  hope  to  gain  Austria,  and  his  main  object, 
therefore,  was  to  neutralise  her  by  winning  Prussia  to 
his  side.  He  had  also  made  overtures  to  Russia,  but 
without  success,  and  by  the  execution  of  the  Duke  of 
Enghien  on  the  20th  of  March  1804,  he  alienated  the 
Tsar  beyond  any  hope  of  speedy  reconciliation. 

Such  was  the  state  of  affairs  when  Pitt  returned  to 
power.  His  great  objects  were  three  :  to  secure  the 
neutrality  of  Holland  ;  to  paralyse  Spain  by  capturing 
her  treasure-ships  and  stirring  up  revolt  in  her  colonies, 
unless  she  either  joined  England  or  remained  strictly 
neutral ;  and  to  treat  with  Russia  so  as  to  draw  Austria, 
Prussia,  and  Naples  into  a  general  war.  The  Tsar, 
who  was  already  busily  preparing  to  fight  France, 
welcomed  Pitt's  proposals,  and  on  the  24th  of  May 
invited  Austria  to  concert  operations  with  him  ;  but 
the  Emperor  Francis,  wishing  first  to  be  sure  of  a  subsidy 
from  England  before  the  war,  and  of  an  accession  of 
territory  after  it,  would  not  sign  a  formal  alliance. 
Simultaneously  Alexander  turned  to  Prussia  ;  but  King 
Frederick  William  was  also  averse  from  a  treaty, 
hoping  to  gain  Hanover  by  adroit  mediation  between 
Napoleon  and  the  Tsar,  which  was  as  though  a  jay 
should  mediate  between  an  eagle  and  a  condor.  How- 
ever, he  was  so  far  alarmed  by  Napoleon's  seizure  of 
May  24.  Cuxhaven  and  Hamburg  that  he  came  to  a  secret  agree- 
ment with  Alexander  to  resist  any  further  encroachment 
of  the  French  upon  the  North  German  states.  There 
remained  Sweden  ;  and  here  England  was  sure  of  King 
Gustavus  the  Fourth,  who  loathed  the  very  name  of 
Bonaparte,  and  used  the  proclamation  of  the  French 
Empire  as  an  occasion  to  exchange  insults  with  him. 
A  half-witted  king,  as  England  was  later  to  discover,  is 
not  a  very  profitable  ally  ;  but  at  the  time  it  sufficed 
that  he  should  keep  open  to  her  the  port  of  Straisund. 
At  the  end  of  May  1804,  therefore,  matters  had 


ch.viii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


243 


advanced  thus  far  towards  a  Coalition,  not  without  1804. 
vigorous  efforts  on  the  part  of  Napoleon  to  check  them. 
At  Naples  his  threats  extorted  the  dismissal  of  the 
English  Minister,  Acton,  and  the  appointment  of  his 
own  emissary,  Alquier,  in  his  stead.  Prussia  he  surprised 
in  the  midst  of  her  negotiations  with  Russia  by  a  question 
whether  King  Frederick  William  would  refuse  a  passage 
to  Russian  troops  through  Prussian  territory,  if  it  were 
demanded  ;  and  he  actually  drew  from  the  miser- 
able king  a  declaration  that,  unless  the  French  en- 
croached further  on  the  neutral  states  of  Germany,  he 
would  close  his  frontier  to  any  troops  directed  against 
them.  To  Austria  Napoleon  addressed  a  mixed  language 
of  hectoring  and  cajolery,  first  hinting  at  the  coalition 
and  threatening  to  crush  it  at  once,  then  offering  her 
Wallachia,  Bosnia,  and  Servia  in  exchange  for  Venetia. 
For  the  moment  Austria  deferred  to  him,  and  sent 
assurances  of  peaceful  intentions  ;  but  at  the  beginning 
of  October  there  was  an  open  rupture  of  relations 
between  France  and  Russia,  and  the  Tsar,  putting 
further  pressure  upon  Austria,  persuaded  her  to  consent 
to  an  alliance  ;  the  agreement  being  put  into  the  form 
of  a  declaration,  so  that  the  existence  of  a  treaty  could 
be  denied.  Hereby  Austria  engaged  to  enter  upon  Nov.  6. 
military  operations  conjointly  with  Russia,  in  the  case 
of  any  further  augmentation  of  the  French  forces  in 
Naples  ;  but  Russia  was  to  warn  Naples  not  to  provoke 
France  thereto  either  by  manifesto  or  insurrection. 