

As  to  naval  reinforcement,  it  has  already  been  told 
how  the  Government  sent  Cochrane  westward  im- 
mediately upon  hearing  of  Missiessy's  destination,  and 
how  Nelson  followed  Villeneuve  to  the  Antilles  upon 
his  own  initiative,  though  with  the  full  approval  of  the 
Admiralty.  On  the  first  intelligence  of  Villeneuve's 
departure  from  Toulon  there  had  been  great  alarm  lest 
he  should  release  the  blockaded  squadrons  at  Cadiz, 
Ferrol,  and  Brest,  and  enter  the  Channel  to  cover  an 
invasion  from  Boulogne.  "  During  the  week  just  past," 
said  the  Morning  Chronicle,  "  no  one  has  slept  in 


26o 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1805.  peace/'  The  Government,  however,  had  early  intelli- 
gence of  Villeneuve's  true  destination  ;  and  on  the  27th 
April  27.  of  April  the  squadrons  of  Collingwood  and  Orde  were 
ordered  to  meet  at  Madeira  and  pursue  the  French  fleet. 
Lord  Gardner  took  upon  himself  to  delay  this  move- 
ment, which  was  cancelled  when  it  was  certainly  known 
that  Nelson  had  sailed  to  Barbados  ;  and  on  the  1 6th 
of  May  the  Sun  newspaper  commented  with  satisfaction 
upon  this,  remarking  that  the  departure  of  Villeneuve 
westward  might  well  be  a  feint  to  draw  the  English 
fleet  after  him  to  the  West  Indies,  while  he  doubled 
back  to  appear  in  force  in  the  Channel.  Admiral 
Decres  called  Napoleon's  attention  to  this  in  a  letter  of 
June  1.  the  1st  of  June  ; 1  but  the  Emperor  none  the  less  kept 
multiplying  impossible  instructions  to  Villeneuve  as  to 
junction  with  the  fleets  at  Cadiz,  Ferrol,  and  Brest, 
all  with  a  view  to  securing  a  few  days'  control  of  the 
Channel.  "  If,"  he  wrote  on  the  8th  of  May,  "  your 
presence  makes  us  masters  of  the  sea  for  three  days 
before  Boulogne,  we  shall  have  every  chance  of 
forwarding  our  expedition  of  one  hundred  and  fifty 
thousand  men  embarked  in  two  thousand  vessels."  In 
vain  Decres  urged  that  these  junction©  of  fleets  were 
not  so  easily  effected,  that  winds  and  tides  might  well 
prevent  them,  and  that  Nelson  would  infallibly  hang  on 
to  Villeneuve's  skirts  wherever  he  might  go.  The 
Emperor  answered  only  that  the  mind  of  Decres  was 
too  small  for  great  operations,  and  continued  to  frame 
vague  and  speculative  plans.  However,  as  none  of  the 
Emperor's  letters  of  this  period  ever  reached  Villeneuve, 
no  great  result  could  follow  from  them.2  On  both  sides  j 
June,  of  the  Channel  throughout  the  month  of  June  the  j 
directors  of  the  naval  operations  were  at  fault  for  lack  of  { 
information.  In  England,  indeed,  there  seems  to  have 
reigned  a  curious  sense  of  security,  which  on  the  28  th 
of  June   called   forth   a  remarkable  warning  from 