

1  Desbriere,  iv.  596. 

2  Decres  to  Napoleon,  1st  June  ;  Napoleon  to  Decres,  6th  June  ji 
1805  ;  Desbriere,  iv.  596,  602. 


ch.  viii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  261 


Colonel  Robert  Craufurd  in  the  House  of  Commons.  1805. 
The  danger  of  invasion,  he  said  in  effect,  was  not  yet 
over.  The  French  fleet  after  a  raid  in  the  West 
Indies  might  return  unexpectedly,  gain  temporary 
superiority  in  the  narrow  seas,  take  possession  of  the 
Downs,  and  bring  over  Napoleon's  immense  army  of 
invasion.  The  Secretary  at  War,  William  Dundas, 
greeted  the  suggestion  with  a  smile,  to  which  Craufurd 
replied  by  asserting  that  such  a  plan  had  certainly 
been  suggested  by  de  Bouille  to  Count  de  Grasse  before 
the  latter  encountered  Rodney  in  1782.1  There  can 
therefore  be  no  doubt  that  Napoleon's  much  vaunted 
scheme  of  naval  operations  was  not  so  subtle  but  that 
it  could  be  penetrated  both  by  journalists  and  military 
officers. 

In  July  the  situation  began  to  clear  itself  up.  On 
the  9th  the  British  Admiralty  received  intelligence  of  July  9. 
Villeneuve's  departure  from  the  West  Indies  ;  on  the 
19th  Nelson,  having  outstripped  his  quarry,  arrived  July  19- 
at  Gibraltar,  and,  finding   no   news  of  Villeneuve, 
anchored  on  the  21st  at  Tetuan  for  rest.    A  day  later,  July  21. 
Villeneuve  with  twenty  ships  encountered  the  fifteen  July  22. 
vessels  of  Sir  Robert  Calder's  fleet  about  fifty  leagues 
west  of  Ferrol,  and  after  an  indecisive  action,  which  cost 
him  the  loss  of  two  Spanish  ships,  entered  Vigo  on  the 
27th.    Finding  no  instructions  or  information  there,  July  27. 
he  left  three  crippled  ships  in  the  port  and  sailed  for 
Ferrol,  but  in  obedience  to  orders  received  from  France, 
anchored  on  the  2nd  of  August  at  Coruna,  with  his  Aug.  2. 
crews  very  sickly  and  his  fleet  generally  in  a  miserable 
plight. 

Now  for  the  first  time  he  could  form  some  idea  of  the 
course  of  events  and  of  his  master's  matured  plans,  for 
so  far  he  had  received  no  intelligence  of  later  date  than 
I  the  3rd  of  May.    First  he  was  informed  that  Admiral 
Gourdon  at  Ferrol  had  been  instructed  to  move  to 
1  Coruna.    He  was  therefore  ordered  to  add  this  force  to 
his  own,  which  having  done,  he  was  to  pick  up  either 
1  H.D.  v.  pp.  668-669. 


262 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1805.  the  Rochefort  squadron  or  the  Brest  squadron,  and 
manoeuvre  to  gain  the  mastery  of  the  Channel  for  four 
or  five  days.  If  through  any  cause  unforeseen  circum- 
stances had  altered  the  situation,  he  was  to  release  the 
squadrons  at  Rochefort  and  Ferrol  only,  and  anchor 
with  them  by  preference  at  Cadiz.  In  comment  upon 
these  orders  it  must  be  mentioned  that  Gourdon  had 
found  it  impossible  to  move  from  Ferrol  to  Corufia, 
that  a  wind  which  was  fair  for  ships  leaving  Coruna 
was  foul  for  ships  leaving  Ferrol ;  and  that  the  Rochefort 
squadron,  under  Admiral  Allemand,  who  had  superseded 
Missiessy,  had  put  to  sea  on  the  1 6  th  of  July.  Allemand 
had  vague  instructions  to  make  a  raid  upon  Ireland  so 
as  to  draw  off  some  of  the  British  ships  from  before 
Brest,  and  then  to  slip  away,  join  Gourdon  not  earlier 
than  the  3rd  of  August  or,  failing  that,  wait  at  an 
appointed  rendezvous  at  sea  until  the  13th  of  August. 
Aug.  3.  However,  poor  Villeneuve  wrote  dutifully  on  the  3rd 
of  August  that  he  would  try  to  enter  Brest  or  evade  the 
British  and  enter  the  Channel,  if  he  saw  any  chance  of 
success,  but  in  the  contrary  event  would  put  into 
Cadiz.  He  then  sent  out  a  frigate  to  find  Allemand 
and,  waiting  till  the  8  th  for  its  retuTn,  received  the 
news  that  Nelson  had  arrived  at  Gibraltar  on  the  20th 
and  sailed  out  into  the  Atlantic  again  on  the  26th  of 
July.  The  frigate  never  returned,  having  been  cap- 
Aug.  13.  tured  by  a  British  ship,  and  on  the  13th  Villeneuve 
picked  up  the  squadron  at  Ferrol,  which  increased  his 
fleet  to  twenty-nine  ships  in  all,  and  again  put  to  sea. 