

In  the  meanwhile  the  British  Government  had  ordered 
him  to  consider  the  feasibility  of  an  attack  upon 
Minorca ;  and  the  General  was  able  to  report  that, 
though  the  garrison  of  the  island  had  been  raised  to 
five  thousand  men,  these  could  only  defend  themselves 
by  meeting  his  own  six  thousand  in  the  field,  and  that 
therefore  the  enterprise  offered  no  great  difficulty. 
On  arriving  at  Malta,  however,  he  found  that  Ministers 
had  after  all  pushed  forward  their  original  project  for 
British  co-operation  with  Russia  on  the  mainland  of 
Italy.  A  letter  from  General  Lascy,  the  Russian 
Commander-in-Chief  in  the  Mediterranean,  was  awaiting 
him,  asking  what  force  he  could  spare  for  active 
service  ;  and  as  this  had  been  written  from  Naples  on 
the  9th  of  July,  it  was  clear  that  the  court  of  King 
Ferdinand  had  for  the  present  decided  to  throw  in  its 
lot  with  the  Coalition.  Moreover,  before  long  there 
1  Corres.  de  Napoleon,  8787. 


268  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 

1805.  reached  Craig  a  further  letter  from  London,  to  say  that 
fifteen  thousand  tons  of  shipping  would  be  placed  at  his 
disposal  to  convey  Russian  troops  from  the  Black  Sea  or 
elsewhere,  and  that  he  must  do  his  best  to  give  them 
transport  for  twenty-five  thousand  men,  while  reserving 
enough  to  carry  eight  thousand  of  his  own  force.1 

The  outlook,  therefore,  seemed  promising.  An  army 
of  thirty  thousand  men,  though  none  too  strong,  might 
at  least  make  some  diversion  in  the  Mediterranean. 
But  further  inquiry  into  the  Russian  resources  revealed 
some  doubts  as  to  the  strength  of  their  expeditionary 
force.  General  Lascy  gave  it  as  fifteen  thousand ; 
General  Anrep,  commanding  the  Russian  troops  at 
Corfu,  reckoned  on  twelve  thousand  from  Odessa  and 
nearly  ten  thousand  more  from  the  garrison  of  that 
island  ;  though  both  agreed  that  nothing  could  be  done 
until  the  arrival  of  the  detachment  from  the  Black  Sea. 
Nor  was  Lascy's  plan  of  operations  calculated  to  inspire 
confidence.  The  bulk  of  the  French  forces,  about 
fourteen  thousand  men,  were,  according  to  his  informa- 
tion, in  the  districts  of  Bari  and  Otranto,  whereby  they 
secured  a  country  rich  in  corn  and  cattle,  to  the 
privation  of  the  Allies.  It  was  most  important  alike 
to  dislodge  them  from  this  and  at  the  same  time  to 
exclude  them  from  other  fertile  provinces,  notably  from 
La  Terra  di  Lavoro,  wherein  Naples  itself  is  situated. 
Lascy  therefore  purposed  to  land  fifteen  thousand 
Russians  in  the  Bay  of  Naples,  and  to  advance  rapidly 
to  the  first  good  position  to  be  found  within  twenty 
miles  of  the  city,  so  as  to  cover  both  the  district  and 
the  city  itself  and  to  enable  the  Neapolitan  levies  to 
be  organised.  Meanwhile  the  British,  counting  about 
seven  thousand  men  of  all  'ranks,  would  create  a  diver- 
sion by  landing  in  the  Gulf  of  Tarento,  a  little  to  the 
north  of  the  river  Crati,  occupying  the  Castle  of  Roseto 
so  as  to  close  the  road  to  Tarento,  and  advancing 