

1  But  Napoleon  himself  thought  that  if  he  captured  London  no 
one  in  Europe  would  dare  to  move.    Marmont,  Memoir es,  ii.  216. 


CHAPTER  IX 


1805.  The  dread  of  invasion  was  past.  The  Third  Coali- 
tion was  come  into  full  play  ;  Napoleon's  columns 
were  streaming  away  towards  the  Danube,  and  the  time 
was  fully  ripe  for  England  to  take  the  offensive. 
Pitt,  before  he  came  into  office,  had  sketched  the  spheres 
of  employment  for  the  troops  of  the  various  nations. 
The  Neapolitans,  ten  or  fifteen  thousand  British,  and  as 
many  Russians  were  to  be  employed  in  South  Italy, 
the  Austrians  and  sixty  thousand  more  Russians  in 
Northern  Italy.  Forty  thousand  Russians,  with  a  body 
of  Hanoverians  and  the  Swedish  Army  in  Northern 
Germany,  were  to  advance  towards  Holland,  where 
a  second  British  force  would  make  a  differsion.1 

Here,  as  usual,  may  be  observed  Pitt's  incurable 
failing — the  passion  for  frittering  England's  little  force 
away  in  minute  divisions,  instead  of  keeping  it  united 
at  a  single  point.  As  has  been  seen,  he  had  already 
sent  a  force  to  the  Mediterranean  with  Craig,  a  de- 
tachment so  puny  as  to  call  forth  strong  censure  from 
the  House  of  Commons.  "  The  force  is  unnecessarily 
strong  for  the  defensive,"  was  Robert  Craufurd's 
criticism,  "  and  too  weak  to  take  the  offensive." 
Napoleon  was  openly  and  justly  contemptuous.  "  The 
celebrated  secret  expedition,"  he  wrote,  "  entered  Lisbon 
on  the  7  th  of  May  and  left  it  on  the  10th.  Whither 
is  it  bound  ?  ...  If  it  is  destined  for  Malta,  all  the 
better.  Nothing  can  better  prove  the  folly  of  the 
English  Cabinet ;  for  these  combined  Continental  move- 
1  Stanhope,  Life  of  Pitt,  iv.  223-225. 
266 


ch.  ix        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  267 

ments  founded  on  a  few  thousand  men  are  pygmy  1805. 
combinations.    If,  therefore,  you  find  the  expedition  is 
gone  to  Malta,  you  may  rub  your  hands,  for  the 
English  will  have  deprived  themselves  of  six  thousand 
men  and  of  a  certain  number  of  ships." 1 

During  June  and  July,  while  the  British  and  French 
fleets  had  been  restlessly  moving  from  side  to  side  of 
the  Atlantic,  Craig's  position  had  been  an  anxious  one. 
The  naval  operations  had  reduced  the  escort  of  his  forty 
transports  to  a  single  frigate  and  a  sloop  ;  and  when 
the  armament  reached  Gibraltar,  it  was  met  by  a  May  13. 
command  to  halt  there  until  further  order.  Rear- 
admiral  Knight  dared  not  keep  the  ships  at  anchor 
for  fear  of  the  Spanish  gunboats  at  Algeciras.  For 
six  weeks,  therefore,  the  convoy  cruised  on  and  off 
Gibraltar  in  anxious  suspense,  until  at  last  on  the  22nd  June  22. 
of  June  Rear-admiral  Bickerton  received  directions  to 
furnish  ships  sufficient  to  bring  it  safely  to  Malta. 
Even  then  the  passage  was  delayed  by  a  gale  ;  and  it 
was  not  until  the  18th  of  July  that  Craig  finally  carried  July  18. 
his  detachment  into  Valetta. 