

1  W.O.  Mediterranean,  142,  Craig  to  Sec.  of  State,  15th,  16th 
May,  17th,  22nd,  24th  June,  21st  July;  W.O.E.B.  85,  Sec.  of 
State  to  Craig,  1st  May,  8th  June,  27th  July  .1805. 


ch.  ix       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  269 

to  a  strong  position  in  the  mountains,  which  could  1805. 
certainly  be  found  within  a  few  miles.  The  French 
corps  nearest  to  this  point  (so  urged  Lascy)  would  be 
at  least  seventy  miles  distant,  and  if  extended  towards 
that  side  would  be  exposed  to  the  risk  of  being  cut  off 
by  the  advance  of  the  Russians  from  Naples  eastward 
upon  the  province  of  Puglia.  Hence  the  British  dis- 
embarkation would  probably  be  unmolested  and  their 
march  practically  unopposed  until  they  reached  Matera 
or  Tarento.  At  that  point  the  Russians  would  come 
into  line  with  them,  forming  up  on  their  left ;  and 
further  operations  in  Puglia  and  Abruzzi  could  be 
subsequently  concerted. 

With  admirable  moderation  Craig  put  forward  his 
criticisms  upon  this  absurd  plan.  The  final  embarkation 
for  active  service  could  not  take  place  until  the  third 
week  in  September.  By  that  time  strong  winds  would 
have  begun  to  blow,  and  the  slightest  surf  would  make 
disembarkation  impossible.  The  selected  landing-place 
for  the  British  was  not  sheltered  ;  the  transports  would 
not  dare  to  remain  close  to  the  coast ;  and  the  troops 
would  have  to  be  landed  in  the  ships'  boats,  for  there 
were  no  others.  The  disembarkation  of  the  men  would 
therefore  take,  in  the  most  favourable  circumstances,  one 
whole  day,  and  that  of  the  supplies  and  stores  another. 
If  in  the  middle  of  the  operation  a  strong  breeze  sprang 
up,  the  ships  would  have  to  stand  off,  when  perhaps 
half  of  the  force  or  half  of  its  stores  was  afloat,  and 
the  other  half  ashore.  In  such  circumstances  there  was 
imminent  risk  of  the  destruction  of  the  British  in  detail. 
Nor  would  any  movement  of  the  Russians  serve  to 
protect  them.  In  the  first  place,  the  disembarkations 
of  the  British  and  of  the  Russians  could  hardly  be 
i  simultaneous,  for  they  were  to  be  carried  out  on  opposite 
sides  of  the  same  peninsula,  so  that  the  wind  which  was  fair 
for  the  one  would  be  foul  for  the  other.  The  Russians 
j  being  based  upon  Naples  and  all  its  resources,  and  being 
I  also  superior  in  number,  might  have  little  to  fear  if  the 
British  disembarkation  failed  or  was  delayed.    But  the 


270 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1805.  British  force,  weak,  isolated,  and  without  horses,  would 
be  liable  to  be  overwhelmed.  Supposing  both  disem- 
barkations to  be  simultaneously  accomplished,  the  French, 
being  warned  of  the  coming  storm,  would  concentrate 
their  troops  and  either  occupy  Naples  or  take  up  some 
such  central  position  as  Matera,  from  which  they  could 
fall  upon  either  division  at  their  choice.  The  British 
even  if  safely  landed,  could  not  draw  supplies  from  the 
country,  owing  to  the  enemy's  cavalry,  but  would  be 
obliged  to  stick  to  the  coast ;  and  the  landing  of  the 
Russians  would  not  prevent  the  French  from  over- 
powering them.  For  the  Russians  would  need  some 
days  to  collect  transport  before  they  could  advance  ; 
they  would  be  obliged  to  weaken  themselves  by  guards 
for  depots  and  magazines  ;  and  they  would  find  it  hard 
at  once  to  cover  Naples  and  to  cut  off  the  French. 
The  whole  force,  Russians  and  British,  ought  therefore 
to  land  together  in  the  Bay  of  Naples  ;  but  even  so 
it  could  hardly  be  expected  that  the  French  would  not 
evacuate  Bari  and  Otranto,  if  they  saw  the  slightest  risk 
of  being  intercepted.1 