

Meanwhile  Napoleon  had  continually  reiterated  his 
orders  to  him,  to  release  the  various  French  fleets  from 
Cadiz  to  Brest  and  proceed  to  Boulogne.  "  Make  me 
master  of  the  Channel  for  the  space  of  but  three  days,"  j 
he  wrote  on  the  26th  of  July,  "  and  with  God's  help  I 
will  put  an  end  to  the  career  and  existence  of  England. 
.  .  .  One  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  men  are  embarked 
in  two  thousand  vessels."  On  the  3rd  of  August  the 
Emperor  betook  himself  to  Boulogne  in  person,  and 
then  for  the  first  time  he  learned  not  only  of  Villeneuve's 


CH.  viii     HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  263 

return  to  Vigo,  but  of  Nelson's  arrival  in  European  1805. 
waters  also.  On  the  1 3th  of  August  he  ordered  Decres 
to  censure  Villeneuve's  inaction  ;  at  the  same  time 
directing  the  force  in  Holland  to  make  a  feint  of 
sortie  in  its  transports,  in  order  to  keep  twelve  British 
ships  employed.  He  was  now  very  anxious  for  an 
action  to  be  fought  off  Ferrol,  and  gave  Villeneuve 
positive  orders  to  attack  the  British  fleet  if  it  did  not 
exceed  twenty-four  ships.  All  this  was  useless.  After 
two  days'  battling  against  northerly  winds,  Villeneuve 
on  the  15th  turned  southward  and  put  into  Cadiz.  Aug.  1 
On  the  same  day  Nelson  joined  the  Channel  fleet 
before  Brest,  bringing  it  up  to  a  total  of  thirty-nine 
sail,  so  that,  had  Villeneuve  persisted  in  making  his 
way  northward,  he  would  have  been  beaten.  And 
even  if  the  French  admiral  had  reached  Boulogne 
triumphantly,  Napoleon  would  not  have  had  one 
hundred  and  fifty  thousand  men  ready  to  cross  the 
Channel ;  for  at  no  time  had  he  more  than  ninety 
thousand  men  assembled  at  the  ports  of  embarkation. 
The  truth  is  that  the  great  plan  had  failed  at  all 
points,  and  that  the  Emperor  knew  it. 

Since  the  middle  of  July,  too,  the  attitude  of  Austria 
had  become  more  and  more  menacing.    On  the  9  th  of  Aug.  9 
August  that  power  formally  joined  the  alliance  with 
Russia  and  England  ;  and  on  the  1 3th,  the  very  day  on  Aug.  1 
which  Napoleon  ordered  Villeneuve  to  be  rebuked  for 
inaction,  he  informed  Talleyrand  that  he  had  suspended 
the  invasion  of  England  in  order  to  defend  his  southern 
frontiers.   He  still  continued  to  write  stimulating  letters 
to  Villeneuve.    "  Lose  not  a  moment,  but  enter  the 
Channel  with  my  united  fleets,"  so  ran  one  of  the  22nd  Aug.  2 
of  August,  "  England  is  ours  ;  we  are  quite  ready,  and 
everything  is  embarked.    Come  only  for  twenty-four 
hours  and  all  is  over."    Yet  on  this  very  same  day  he 
gave  his  first  orders  for  the  army  to  break  up  and  march 
upon  Ulm  ;  and  by  the  1st  of  September  not  a  man  Sept.  1 
was  left  at  Boulogne.    Other  letters  followed,  containing 
unfair  censure  of  Villeneuve  ;  and  yet  others  implying 