

VOL.  V  S 


258 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1805.  Trinidad ;  and  he  at  once  proposed  to  Nelson  to 
embark  two  thousand  troops  and  sail  to  the  relief  of 
the  threatened  island.1  The  Admiral  eagerly  complied  ; 
June  5.  and  early  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  the  armament 
departed.  On  the  6th  it  passed  Tobago,  on  the  7th 
Trinidad,  and  on  the  9th  Grenada,  and  found  all  safe  ; 
but  off  the  island  last  named  a  British  man-of-war 
brought  the  news  that  the  French  had  passed  Rupert's 
Bay  on  the  morning  of  the  6th.  Nelson  at  once  stood 
June  12.  over  to  Antigua  and  ascertained  on  the  12th  that  the 
French  had  passed  Antigua  on  the  8th,  steering  north  ; 
whereupon  he  promptly  dropped  Myers  and  his  troops, 
and  sailed  in  pursuit.  With  bitter  disappointment 
Myers  saw  him  go,  for  he  had  looked  to  a  campaign 
with  Nelson  as  the  happiest  chance  of  his  life  ;  and 
the  great  Admiral  had  been  so  much  struck  with  the 
spirit  of  the  General  and  of  his  troops  that  he  had 
written  with  his  own  hand  a  letter  in  warm  com- 
mendation of  both.2 

Thus  within,  not  thirty-five,  but  fourteen  days  of 
Magon's  arrival  Villeneuve  had  taken  hasty  flight.  He 
had  already  written  to  Paris  on  the  1st  of  June  that  the 
state  of  his  supplies  did  not  permit  him  to  carry  out 
the  new  instructions  received  through  Magon  ;  but 
nevertheless  he  had  made  some  show  of  activity,  so  that 
the  information  of  Myers  was  not  altogether  at  fault. 
On  the  5  th  of  June  Villeneuve  had  stood  over  to 
Guadeloupe  to  embark  additional  troops  for  an  attack 
upon  Barbados  ;  on  the  6  th  he  had  sailed  for  the  Bar- 
bados with  close  on  nine  thousand  soldiers  ;  and  on  the 
8th  he  had  captured  fourteen  merchantmen  to  leeward 
of  that  island.  But  from  them  he  learned  of  Nelson's 
arrival  and  of  his  junction  with  Cochrane  ;  and  this 
was  enough  for  him.    After  consultation  with  Gravina, 

1  The  force  consisted  of  the  15th,  the  96th,  and  detachments  of 
the  4th  and  6th  W.I.R.  with  artillery,  altogether  2024  of  all 
ranks,  nearly  600  of  which  were  black  troops. 

2  Myers  to  S.S.  3rd,  4th,  12th  June ;  Nelson  to  S.S.  nth  June 
1805. 


ch.  viii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


259 


he  decided  to  send  his  troops  back  to  Martinique  in  1805. 
frigates,  and  to  take  his  own  fleet  straight  to  Ferrol ;  and 
on  the  10th  he  finally  turned  his  back  upon  the  West  June  10. 
Indies.    Nelson,  as  we  have  seen,  followed  hard  after 
him,  sending  warning  both  to  England  and  to  the 
British  squadron  before  Ferrol. 

In  England,  of  course,  nothing  was  known  of  all  this. 
The  War  Office,  upon  the  news  of  Missiessy's  return  to 
Europe,  had  counter- ordered  the  despatch  of  Coote  ; 
but  on  hearing  of  Villeneuve's  arrival  in  the  West 
Indies,  it  decided  again  on  the  5th  of  July  to  send  him  July  5. 
with  four  battalions  only  to  Barbados,  so  as  to  provide 
for  the  safety  both  of  that  island  and  of  Jamaica  ;  the 
latter  being  suspected  to  be  the  object  of  the  French 
attack.  It  was  a  small  force  for  the  purpose,  but  the 
season  was  a  very  deadly  one,  and  the  Government 
would  not  risk  the  loss  of  more.  On  the  8th  of  July,  July  8. 
however,  intelligence  of  Villeneuve's  departure  for 
Europe  reached  London  ;  and  Coote's  sailing  was  again 
delayed  until  further  orders,  though  the  troops  were 
still  kept  on  board  their  ships  at  Cork  to  prevent 
desertion.  Such,  indeed,  was  the  loathing  and  dread  of 
West  Indian  service  that  several  men  jumped  over- 
board and  swam  ashore  to  escape  it.  Finally,  on  the 
26th  of  July  Coote  received  an  intimation  that  the  July  26. 
troops  were  required  for  a  different  object ;  and  the 
idea  of  extraordinary  military  reinforcement  for  the 
West  Indies  was  abandoned. 