


264 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1805.  that  the  flotilla  had  been  from  beginning  to  end  no 
more  than  a  feint.  All  of  this  was  nothing  but  clumsy- 
lying,  designed  to  cover  the  Emperor's  own  blunders. 
Historians  will  debate  for  ever  the  question  whether 
Napoleon  really  intended  to  invade  England  or  not. 
Personally  I  have  no  doubt  that  he  did  so  intend,  pro- 
vided that  he  could  see  any  reasonable  chance  of  trans- 
porting a  sufficient  force  across  the  Channel.  It  was 
one  of  the  dreams  of  his  life,  to  which  he  constantly 
reverted,  even  as  was  the  wild  project  of  an  invasion  of 
India.  The  man  was  continually  conjuring  up  attractive 
visions  of  conquests  over  the  sea,  and  amusing  himself 
and  distracting  his  officials  by  executing  them  upon 
paper.  Twice  he  endeavoured  to  realise  them,  in 
Egypt  and  in  St.  Domingo,  and  on  each  occasion  the 
attempt  ended  in  disastrous  failure.  In  the  case  of 
England,  he  might  have  gone  nearer  to  success  had  he 
not  wasted  untold  sums  in  building  boats  of  the  wrong 
kind,  according  to  his  own  untutored  ideas,  and  had  he 
acknowledged  more  fully  his  complete  ignorance  of  all 
naval  matters.  The  true  secret  of  the  flotilla  is 
probably  to  be  found  in  his  passionate  impatience  of 
making  war  without  the  possibility- of  taking  the 
offensive ;  and  it  must  be  freely  confessed  that  he 
successfully  reduced  the  feeble  Addington  to  a 
passively  defensive  attitude.  At  least,  therefore,  he 
should  receive  credit  for  having  scared  a  British  Govern- 
ment into  the  most  foolish  and  futile  preparations 
conceivable  for  an  effective  war. 

The  further  problem  of  the  failure  or  success  of  an 
invasion,  had  Napoleon  succeeded  in  passing  a  large 
force  across  the  Channel,  must  remain  insoluble. 
Without  details  as  to  the  number  of  men  disembarked, 
the  place  of  landing,  the  time  of  disembarkation,  and, 
above  all,  of  the  warning  received  of  his  coming,  all 
speculation  is  useless.  In  the  early  winter  of  1 803  his 
chances  would  not  have  been  bad  ;  but  in  1 804,  and 
still  more  in  1805  they  would  have  been  less  promising. 
By  that  time  the  people  knew  what  they  must  do,  and 


ch.viii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  265 


were  prepared  to  do  it.  The  positions  for  rendezvous  1805. 
and  for  defence  had  been  chosen,  and  effective  measures 
had  been  taken  for  concentrating  large  bodies  of  troops 
at  the  point  of  attack.  The  general  tactics  of  defence 
had  also  been  thought  out.  The  invaders  were  to  be 
confined  as  far  as  possible  to  a  narrow  front  and 
perpetually  harassed  in  flank  and  rear,  a  task  which  the 
British  superiority  in  cavalry  would  have  made  easy. 
The  best  Generals  in  the  Southern  District,  Sir  David 
Dundas  and  Sir  John  Moore,  had  fully  made  up  their 
minds  to  retreat  to  a  flank  if  defeated,  so  as  to  make 
pursuit  the  more  difficult  and  hazardous.  If  Napoleon 
had  succeeded  in  reaching  London,  his  task  would  not 
have  been  done,  for  every  provision  had  been  made  for 
transporting  the  seat  of  Government  to  Worcester ;  and, 
with  the  stout  old  King  to  show  an  example,  there 
would  have  been  no  talk  of  surrender.  Once  in 
London,  the  French  Army  would  probably  have  taken 
leave  of  all  discipline  for  a  time  ;  the  sick  list  would 
have  been  enormous ;  and  the  force  must  have  been 
much  scattered  to  secure  the  entrance  to  the  Thames 
and  the  capital  at  large.  Moreover,  after  a  few  months, 
supplies  would  have  failed  ;  and  it  would  then  have  been 
necessary  to  procure  grain  and  forage,  by  sending  out 
armed  parties  which  would  certainly  have  been  attacked 
and  probably  defeated  in  detail.  Upon  the  whole,  if 
the  French  Army  had  managed  to  get  into  England, 
it  could  never  have  got  out  again.  The  capture  of 
London  would  not  have  been  such  a  death-blow  as 
it  would  now  be  ;  and,  though  the  loss  and  suffering 
to  England  would  have  been  enormous,  it  is  probable 
that  an  army  of  Russians  and  Austrians  would  have 
made  France  suffer  even  more.1  Thus  a  successful 
disembarkation  of  a  French  army  in  England  might  well 
have  abridged  the  troubles  of  Europe  by  ten  years, 
for  it  is  hardly  possible  that  the  rule  of  Napoleon  could 
have  survived  it. 