

Lascy,  an  easy-going  gentleman  of  Irish  descent 
and  near  eighty  years  of  age,  was  convinced  by  this 
reasoning,  though  his  Quarter-master-general,  Opper- 
mann,  drew  up  a  long  memoir  in  support  of  the 
original  plan,  which  was  of  his  own  designing  and  was 
dictated  not  merely  by  ignorance  but  by  treachery. 
Naturally  the  concerting  of  a  campaign  between  two 
commanders  at  points  so  far  distant  as  Malta  and 
Naples  took  much  time  ;  but  Craig  was  able  to  turn 
the  delay  to  account  in  equipping  his  army  for  the  field, 
though  he  was  driven  to  his  wits'  end  to  obtain  horses 
and  mules,  which  were  equally  few  and  equally  bad 
both  in  Neapolitan  territory  and  in  Sicily.  Meanwhile 
the  Austrians  had  set  their  troops,  under  General  Mack, 
in  motion  for  the  Black  Forest,  while  ninety  thousand 
men  under  the  Archduke  Charles  were  concentrating  on 
the  Adige  ;  and  Craig  now  learned  for  the  first  time 
1  Craig  to  Sec.  of  State,  with  enclosures,  16th  Aug.  1805. 


ch.ix        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  271 

that  Lascy's  operations  were  to  depend  on  those  of  the  1805. 
Archduke,  of  which  he  knew  nothing.  At  length  at 
the  end  of  September  the  Russian  troops  at  Corfu  sent 
for  their  transports,  which  were  duly  despatched  to 
them  on  the  1st  of  October.  But  at  about  the  same 
time  the  British  Minister  at  Naples  reported  that 
Napoleon  had  reinforced  his  troops  in  that  Kingdom 
to  twenty  thousand  men,  notwithstanding  that  Massena 
had  but  fifty  thousand  with  which  to  oppose  the  ninety 
thousand  under  the  Archduke  Charles  on  the  Adige. 
St.  Cyr,  therefore,  was  in  a  condition  to  seize  Naples 
in  a  few  days,  whereas  the  Allies  could  not  reach  it  in 
less  than  a  month,  and  would  even  then  be  unable  to 
move  from  want  of  transport.  King  Ferdinand  at  once 
took  the  alarm.  On  the  nth  of  September  he  had  Sept.  11 
ratified  a  secret  convention  with  Russia  ;  but  on  the 
21st  he  sent  a  mission  to  Paris  with  an  abject  offer  to  Sept.  21 
observe  perfect  neutrality  if  Napoleon  would  be  pleased 
to  withdraw  the  French  troops  from  his  kingdom. 
The  Emperor,  however,  had  not  reinforced  St.  Cyr 
without  a  purpose.  He  had  already  exacted  a  treaty 
of  neutrality  from  the  Neapolitan  Minister  at  Paris, 
and  he  now  presented  this  to  Ferdinand  through  his 
representative  at  Naples,  with  a  demand  that  it  should 
be  ratified  at  once.  Quaking  with  fright,  the  miserable 
old  King  complied  ;  but  at  the  same  time  he  delivered 
to  the  Russian  Minister  a  declaration  repudiating 
this  convention  with  France,  as  having  been  extorted 
by  threats,  and  calling  upon  the  Russian  and  British 
troops  to  repair  to  Naples  as  though  no  such  instrument 
had  ever  been  signed. 