


280 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1805.  included  one  regiment  of  dragoons,  another  of  hussars, 
two  battalions  of  light  and  four  of  heavy  infantry,  with 
two  batteries  of  horse -artillery  and  three  of  field- 
artillery.  Negotiations  were  opened  with  Sweden  to 
procure  recruiting  depots  at  Stralsund  and  Riigen, 
which  were  duly  accorded  by  a  convention  of  the  3rd 
of  December  1804  and  before  the  end  of  1805  the 
Legion  counted  in  all  five  regiments  of  cavalry,  ten 
battalions  of  infantry,  and  six  batteries  of  artillery,  in 
all  some  fourteen  thousand  men.  And  these  were  no 
mere  mercenaries  like  the  Hessians  of  former  days. 
They  were  not  only  excellent  soldiers  under  excellent 
officers,  but  loyal  and  patriotic  subjects,  devoted  to 
the  King,  and  burning  to  avenge  themselves  for  their 
humiliation  in  1803.  They  had  their  will ;  and  these 
Hanoverians  enjoy  the  proud  distinction  of  being  the 
only  Germans  who  from  1803  to  18 14  bore  arms 
unceasingly  against  Napoleon. 

With  so  valuable  an  addition  to  his  offensive  force, 
Pitt  was  really  in  a  situation  to  make  the  arm  of 
England  felt  on  shore  as  well  as  at  sea.  His  first 
thought,  not  unnaturally,  was  to  end  the  fear  of 
invasion  at  once  by  destroying  the  fiWilla  in  Boulogne 
and  the  adjacent  ports.  The  project  was  entrusted  to 
Sir  John  Moore  who,  after  careful  investigation,  reported  j 
that,  unless  undertaken  by  a  really  formidable  force  and 
with  a  sure  port  for  re-embarkation,  the  enterprise  was  . 
unduly  hazardous.  Ministers  very  reasonably  decided 
to  abandon  the  idea.  But  with  Napoleon's  army 
plunged  into  the  heart  of  South  Germany  to  meet  the 
Austrians  and  Russians  on  his  front,  there  could  hardly 
fail  to  be  good  opportunity  for  dealing  a  stroke  upon 
his  flank  or  rear.  Such  a  blow  might  fall  either  upon 
Holland  or  upon  Hanover,  both  of  which  were  reputed 
to  be  weakly  held  by  French  troops  ;  or  it  might  be 
dealt  by  a  force  landing  at  Stralsund,  where  the  King 
of  Sweden  could  without  difficulty  be  persuaded  to  i 
permit  a  disembarkation.  But  in  this  last  case  the 
1  F.O.  Sweden,  33  ;  Pierrepont  to  Sec.  of  State,  3rd  Jan.  1805. 


ch.ix       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  281 

co-operation   of  Prussia  was  essential ;   and  indeed  1805. 
without  at  least  the  countenance  of  Prussia,  it  would  be 
difficult  if  not  impossible  to  effect  anything  decisive 
in  North  Germany.    All  therefore  turned  upon  the 
attitude  of  the  Court  of  Berlin. 

Some  account  has  already  been  given  of  the  artful 
fashion  in  which  Napoleon  kept  Hanover  dangling 
before  the  greedy  eyes  of  Frederick  William,  and  of 
the  King's  infatuation  in  believing  that  he,  weakest 
and  stupidest  as  well  as  falsest  of  men,  could  contrive 
to  obtain  the  coveted  province  from  the  Emperor  and 
yet  remain  friendly  with  the  Tsar.  As  the  outbreak  of 
hostilities  between  France  and  Austria  became  more  and 
more  certain,  Napoleon  strove  more  and  more  to  bind 
Prussia  to  himself.  In  July  he  invited  her  to  occupy 
Hanover  and  to  keep  it  at  the  end  of  the  war,  if 
Frederick  William  would  recognise  the  French  annexa- 
tion of  Genoa  and  give  him  a  free  hand  in  Italy. 
Frederick  William's  answer  reached  the  Emperor  on 
the  22  nd  of  August.  The  King  was  quite  ready  to  Aug.  2 
take  over  Hanover  ;  but,  seeking  as  usual  an  impossible 
neutrality,  he  desired  explanations  as  to  Napoleon's 
dealings  with  Hanover,  Italy,  and  Switzerland.  The 
Emperor  stood  by  his  terms,  and  answered  plainly  that 
unless  Prussia  threatened  Austria,  she  should  not  have 
Hanover.  Meanwhile  Austria  likewise  urged  Frederick 
William  to  join  with  her ;  and  the  Tsar,  to  whom  Prussia 
was  bound  by  treaty,  pressed  him  in  exceedingly  firm 
language  to  enter  the  coalition,  or  at  any  rate  to  allow 
Russian  troops  to  pass  his  frontier,  hinting  not  obscurely 
that  these  concessions,  if  not  freely  granted,  might  be 
extorted  by  force.  Simultaneously  General  Duroc 
arrived  at  Berlin,  as  envoy  from  Napoleon,  to  propose 
an  active  alliance.  Embarrassed  and  bewildered,  sure 
only  that  he  wanted  everything  and  would  give  nothing, 
the  King  on  the  7th  of  September  put  his  army  on  a  Sept.  7 
footing  of  war  ;  warning  the  Tsar  that  any  act  of  violence 
would  drive  him  into  the  arms  of  France,  but  at  the 
same  time  intimating  to  Duroc  that  Prussia  could 