

In  England  the  Ministry  had  meanwhile  resolved  to 
send  a  force  to  aid  in  the  reconquest  of  the  province. 
On  the  10th  of  October  orders  were  issued  for  six  Oct.  10. 
thousand  men  of  the  King's  German  Legion  to  embark 
for  foreign  service  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant- 
general  Don,  who  was  to  proceed  to  Berlin  in  advance 
of  his  force  in  order  to  ascertain  the  feelings  of  that 
Court  towards  the  landing  of  a  British  force  in  North 
Germany.  The  plan  of  operations  was  sketched  by 
Brigadier  van  der  Decken,  a  Hanoverian  officer  who 
had  been  prominent  in  raising  the  first  corps  of  the 
King's  German  Legion.  He  urged  that  the  force 
should  not  be  of  smaller  strength  than  twenty-five 
thousand  men,  so  as  to  enable  it  to  advance  into 
Hanover  with  confidence  and  without  delay.  Napoleon, 
as  he  pointed  out,  could  constantly  detach  troops  to 
overwhelm  any  British  army  that  landed  in  North 
Germany  ;  and  between  November  and  March  such  an 

1  F.O.  Sweden,  33.  Pierrepont  to  Sec.  of  State,  13th  Jan.,  7th, 
15th  Feb.,  20th  March,  8th,  26th  April,  9th  July,  25th  Aug.,  1st 
Sept.,  4th,  14th  Oct. ;  Sec.  of  State  to  Pierrepont,  25th  June,  18th 
Oct.  1805. 


1 


286 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1805.  army  could  not  re-embark,  if  hard  pressed,  but  must 
cross  the  Elbe,  which  might  be  a  hazardous  operation, 
and  retire  eastward  into  Lauenburg.  Owing  to  the 
approach  of  winter  and  the  prospect  of  navigation 
being  obstructed  by  ice,  the  detachment  of  the  King's 
German  Legion  ought  to  sail  at  once,  without  waiting 
for  the  result  of  Don's  mission  to  Berlin,  disembark  at 
Gltickstadt  on  the  Elbe,  occupy  and  fortify  Stade,  and 
establish  magazines  at  Cuxhaven  and  Bremerlehe. 
These  two  last  should  be  the  places  of  disembarkation 
for  the  rest  of  the  troops,  since  the  dearth  of  provisions 
and  horses  in  the  country  was  such  that  it  would  be 
imprudent  to  land  the  entire  force  at  one  spot.  The 
British  contingent  should  be  concentrated  at  Verden  on 
the  Weser  and  should  advance  towards  Nienburg,  while 
the  Swedes  and  Russians  moved  towards  Lttneburg,  Zell, 
and  Hanover.  The  French  were  concentrated  at 
Nienburg,  at  Hameln,  and  at  Fort  St.  George,  over 
against  Hameln,  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Weser  ;  but 
Hameln  was  the  only  place  which  was  really  formidable 
and  would  require  a  regular  siege.1 
Oct.  16.  Decken's  advice  bore  immediate  fruit.  On  the  16th 
Don  was  informed  that  nearly  eleven,  thousand  men2  I 
would  be  embarked  at  once  for  the  Elbe  in  order  to 
expel  the  French,  now  under  four  thousand  strong, 
from  Hanover,  and  that  five  thousand  more  would  be 
held  in  readiness  in  the  Downs.  Meanwhile  he  himself 
was  to  go  out  at  once  to  Berlin.  His  original  in- 
structions bade  him  sound  the  dispositions  of  Prussia 
towards  the  projected  enterprise  and  discover  if  she 
had  an  understanding  with  either  France  or  Russia  as 
to  the  occupation  of  Hanover  ;  though  it  was  not  to  be 
supposed  that  on  any  ground  she  could  object  to  King 
George's  reoccupation  of  his  own  dominions.  He  was 
also  to  ascertain  the  views  of  Denmark  in  case  a  retreat 