

1  Sec.  of  State  to  C.-in-C,  10th,  14th  Oct. ;  Don  to  Sec.  of  State, 
14th  Oct.  ;  Decken  to  Sec.  of  State,  16th  Oct.  1805. 

2  K.G.L.  4808  ;  4  cos.  95th  Rifles,  400  ;  Brigade  of  Guards, 
2000  ;  1st  Regt.  Caval.  K.G.L.  575  ;  4th,  14th,  23rd  Foot,  2800  ; 
2  brigades  of  Artillery,  300. 


ch.  ix        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  287 

of  the  British  troops  through  Holstein  should  be  1805. 
necessary,  and  those  of  the  Duke  of  Mecklenburg,  in  the 
event  of  their  wishing  to  advance  through  his  territory 
upon  Stralsund.  As  regards  the  operations,  he  was  not 
to  land  nor  advance  into  the  interior  unless  assured  of 
the  safety  of  his  force,  nor  to  remain  in  the  country 
after  the  harbours  were  frozen  unless  certain  of  a 
safe  retreat  ;  and  his  chief  business  would  be  to  collect 
the  army  of  the  Hanoverians. 

These  orders  were  due  to  intense  and  rightful  distrust 
of  Frederick  William  ;  but  on  the  18  th  the  news  of  that  Oct.  18 
sovereign's  fury  against  Napoleon  over  the  affair  of 
Anspach  set  many  misgivings  at  rest.  Then  Ministers 
suddenly  woke  to  the  idea  that,  with  the  concert  of 
Prussia,  it  would  be  possible  to  recover  not  only  Hanover 
but  Holland.  For  a  moment  there  was  some  idea  of  a 
descent  upon  Walcheren  ;  and  on  the  24th  orders  were  Oct.  24 
sent  to  Don  not  to  put  to  sea  until  futher  directions  should 
reach  him.  It  seems,  however,  that  the  military  officers 
discouraged  the  project  by  urging  the  possible  difficulties 
of  a  re-embarkation  during  the  depth  of  winter  ;  and  on 
the  25th  Don  was  finally  directed  to  sail  with  the  first  Oct.  25 
detachment  of  troops  to  the  Elbe,  Lord  Harrowby 
having  been  appointed  to  take  his  place  on  a  special 
mission  to  Berlin.1 

By  the  29th  the  first  division  was  embarked  ;  and  Oct.  29 
three  days  later  van  der  Decken  sailed  forward  in 
advance  to  collect  supplies  and  transport.  Arriving  on 
the  8  th  of  November,  he  sent  home  a  report  to  the  Nov.  8. 
following  effect.  Both  Swedes  and  Russians  were 
advancing  westward.  Prussian  troops  had  actually 
entered  Hanover  and  taken  up  positions  on  the 
Ems,  securing  the  chief  passages  into  the  Nether- 
lands by  the  occupation  of  Bentheim,  and  meanwhile 
living  on  the  country  with  extreme  hardship  to  the 
inhabitants.  The  people  rejoiced  greatly  over  the 
arrival  of  the  British  troops  ;  but  between  the  exactions 

1  Sec.  of  State  to  Don,  16th,  17th,  19th,  25th,  28th  Oct.  ;  to 
Lord  Keith,  24th  Oct.  1805. 


288  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 

1805.  of  the  French  and  of  the  Prussians  the  province  was 
much  exhausted,  and  horses  would  be  difficult  to  pro- 
cure. The  whole  of  the  French  force  had  been  withdrawn 
into  Hameln,  where  it  was  blockaded  without  hostilities 
by  a  Prussian  detachment.  The  Prussian  Commander- 
in-chief,  the  Duke  of  Brunswick,  was  very  anxious  for 
his  men  to  be  relieved  in  all  their  present  stations  by 
the  troops  of  the  Allies.  For  the  advance  into  Holland 
Brunswick  would  detach  fifteen  thousand  of  his  own 
troops  to  co-operate  with  the  British,  distributing  the 
rest  of  the  force  between  the  middle  Rhine  and 
Moselle  to  keep  up  communications  between  his  main 
army  and  that  of  the  Allies.  Finally,  on  pretext  of 
guarding  his  magazines,  the  Duke  wished  to  keep  two 
battalions  in  Bremen  ;  and  this  van  der  Decken  evi- 
dently considered  an  extremely  suspicious  circum- 
stance.1 