

It  was  not  difficult  to  determine  that  defence  of  the 
Neapolitan  frontier  was  hopeless.  In  spite  of  all  efforts 
Craig  had  been  unable  to  find  horses  even  for  the 
whole  of  his  artillery,  to  say  nothing  of  his  baggage- 
waggons.  It  would  have  been  possible  to  take  up  a 
strong  position  to  cover  the  plains  of  Naples,  and  even 
to  repulse  for  a  time  a  force  of  superior  numbers.  But 
the  Allies,  having  no  transport,  could  not  move,  and 
the  French  could  always  have  covered  their  retreat  with 
cavalry  and  renewed  their  attacks  until  they  succeeded, 
in  which  case  the  re-embarkation  of  the  British  and 
Russians  would  have  been  difficult  if  not  impossible. 
Lascy,  in  council  of  war,  broached  the  proposal  to 
retire  into  Calabria  and  there  hold  out^depending  upon 
a  small  port  in  the  Gulf  of  Policastro  for  supplies  ;  and 
this  found  favour  with  every  officer  present,  British  and 
Russian,  excepting  Craig  and  Major-general  Campbell, 
his  second  in  command.  The  harbour  was  reported  by 
a  British  naval  officer  to  be  unsafe  for  shipping,  too 
small  for  its  purpose,  and  unapproachable  on  the  side 
of  the  land  except  by  the  roughest  mule-tracks.  This 
was  one  drawback  ;  and  there  was  another  which  Craig 
did  not  venture  to  mention,  namely,  that  the  Russians, 
having  neither  money  nor  credit,  must  live  upon  the 
country  and  would  thus  infallibly  bring  upon  the  entire 
force  a  savage  and  dangerous  struggle  with  the  Calabrese. 
Lastly  Craig  retained  a  lively  recollection  of  his  instruc- 
tions to  secure  Sicily,  and  on  that  account  was  anxious 
to  re-embark  at  once.  Lascy,  however,  dared  not  re- 
embark  without  orders  ;  and  the  Court  of  Naples  in  an 


ch.  ix       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  277 

agony  of  rage  and  fear  would  hear  of  nothing  but  a  1805. 
desperate  resistance  which  would  cover  the  capital  till 
the  last  moment.  In  this  mood  King  Ferdinand 
absolutely  prohibited  any  withdrawal  to  Calabria  ;  and 
the  situation  was  becoming  extremely  dangerous  to  the 
Allies,  for  Craig,  though  utterly  disapproving  as  a 
soldier  any  futile  attempt  to  resist  the  French,  thought 
himself  bound  in  honour  not  to  forsake  the  Russians. 

Fortunately,  however,  on  the  7th  of  January  1806  1806. 
Lascy  received  orders,  dated  a  full  month  back,  from  Jan-  7- 
the  Tsar  that  he  should  return  at  once  to  Corfu  ;  and 
the  two  armies  parted  not  unwillingly,  for  the  Russians 
had  not  yet  forgotten  their  supposed  grievances  in 
North  Holland  in  1799.  ^he  Russians  marched  to 
Naples,  and  the  British  to  Castellamare,  where  on  the 
14th  they  began  their  embarkation.  Craig's  health,  Jan.  14 
always  uncertain,  had  broken  down  under  the  anxieties 
of  the  past  weeks  ;  but  now  came  the  most  trying  time 
of  all  for  him.  Mr.  Hugh  Elliot,  our  Minister  at 
Naples,  always  a  witty  and  usually  a  sensible  man,  for 
some  reason  set  his  face  against  a  retreat  of  the  British 
troops  to  Sicily,  and  would  have  had  them  return  to 
Malta.  The  jealous  imbecility  of  the  Court  of  Naples 
was  of  course  offended  by  the  thought  of  the  British 
repairing  to  Messina  ;  and  King  Ferdinand  went  the 
length  of  announcing  that,  if  they  occupied  Sicily 
without  his  consent,  he  would  join  forces  with  the 
French  to  drive  them  out.  Elliot  so  far  humoured 
this  folly  that  he  offered  to  open  a  negotiation  on  the 
Queen's  behalf  with  the  advancing  enemy.  In  vain 
Craig  protested  that  such  a  course  would  assuredly 
sacrifice  Sicily.  The  faithlessness  of  the  Neapolitan 
Government  was  proverbial ;  Napoleon  would  accept 
nothing  but  a  French  occupation  of  Sicily  in  redemption 
of  King  Ferdinand's  misdeeds  ;  Colling  wood's  squadron 
had  left  the  Mediterranean  for  Cadiz,  leaving  the  sea 
open  to  the  French  ;  and,  if  the  British  troops  retired 
to  Malta,  they  would  probably  be  unable  to  return 
before  Syracuse   and  Messina   had  received  French 