


278  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


806.  garrisons.  All  arguments  were  thrown  away.  Elliot 
persisted  in  his  mad  scheme  of  negotiation  ;  and  Craig 
finally  taking  matters  into  his  own  hands  sailed  away 

.  19.  on  the  19th,  and  on  the  22  nd  anchored  at  Messina. 
The  French  marched  on,  playing  meanwhile  with  King 
Ferdinand's  emissaries  as  a  cat  with  a  mouse,  and  within 
three  weeks  the  King  himself  came  flying  over  to  Sicily, 
where  Craig's  foresight  and  firmness  had  provided  for 
him  a  safe  refuge.1 

Before  quitting  Mediterranean  affairs  for  the  present, 
it  is  worth  while  to  emphasise  the  extreme  futility  of 
this  expedition  under  Craig.   The  criticisms  of  Craufurd 
and  Napoleon  were  amply  justified.    The  combination 
which  Pitt  had  projected  was  a  pygmy  combination, 
and  deserved  no  success  ;  yet,  paltry  though  the  British 
force  was,  no  true  effort  was  made  that  it  should  be 
fit  for  the  field.    At  Malta,  instead  of  a  reserve,  there 
was  a  positive  dearth  of  ammunition  ;  and  Craig,  who 
had  only  brought  with  him  four  hundred  rounds  for 
each  of  his  six  thousand  men,  was  obliged  to  give  one 
hundred  and  sixty  of  this  proportion  to  the  garrison.  I 
Again,  though  he  was  supposed  to  co-operate  with  the 
Austrians  and  might  therefore  find  himself  in  the  plains  i 
of  Northern  Italy,  only  two  squadrons  of  cavalry  ; 
were  granted  to  him,  and  no  notice  was  taken  of  his  j 
urgent  requests  for  more.    Once  more,  though  Aber- 
cromby  had  done  his  best  to  impress  upon  the  Cabinet 
in  1799  that  an  Army  cannot  move  without  horses  and 
waggons,  yet  Craig's  handful  of  dragoons  and  the  j 
whole  of  his  artillery  were  shipped  abroad  without  their  It 
horses.    It  would  have  been  easy  to  ascertain  from  the  j 
officers  who  had  served  with  Charles  Stuart  in  the  I 
Mediterranean  in  1798  whether  horses  and  mules  were  |t 
procurable  in  Naples  and  Sicily  ;  yet  Craig  was  sent  j 
upon  his  mission  with  easy  assurance,  as  though  the  |  t 
animals  could  be  obtained  for  the  asking.    As  to  his  j 
instructions,  they  show  plainly  that  the  Government  1 

1  Craig  to  Sec.  of  State,  nth  Feb.  1806,  enclosing  correspond-  ; 
ence  with  Elliot. 


ch.  ix        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  279 

had  no  definite  military  policy  and  no  distinct  object  1805. 
in  dispatching  a  division  of  infantry  to  Malta  at  all. 
Craig  was  to  go  to  the  Mediterranean  and  do  some- 
thing somewhere  within  its  limits  between  Alexandria 
and  Cagliari.  In  brief,  the  whole  enterprise  bears  upon  it 
the  unmistakable  mark  of  Pitt's  military  administration. 

But  Pitt's  efforts  to  take  the  offensive  were  not 
limited  to  this  paltry  expedition  of  Craig.  Holland 
had  for  some  time  been  virtually  a  province  of  France  ; 1 
and  it  therefore  behoved  England  to  look  well  to  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope.  It  has  already  been  told  how, 
upon  the  first  alarm  of  Villeneuve's  departure  to  the 
West  Indies,  large  reinforcements  had  been  prepared 
for  the  British  islands  under  the  command  of  Sir 
Eyre  Coote.  Nelson's  pursuit  and  Villeneuve's  return 
rendered  the  departure  of  these  reinforcements  un- 
necessary, and,  as  the  troops  were  on  their  transports 
at  Cork,  it  was  resolved  to  send  a  portion  of  them 
under  Sir  David  Baird  to  capture  the  Cape.  Baird 
received  his  instructions  to  this  effect  on  the  26th  of 
July,  and  sailed  a  few  weeks  later  for  his  destination, 
whither  in  due  time  we  shall  follow  him.  It  will  be 
remarked  that  the  decision  to  send  his  force  out  of  the 
country  was  taken  a  full  month  before  the  break-up  of 
the  camp  at  Boulogne  ;  and  it  was  therefore  reasonable 
to  suppose  that,  when  Napoleon  was  in  full  march  for 
the  Danube,  some  far  more  formidable  operation  would 
be  undertaken.  Troops  might  now  be  easily  spared 
from  England,  and  moreover  Pitt  had  had  the  good 
fortune  to  meet  with  a  windfall.  Officers  and  men  of 
the  Hanoverian  Army,  which  had  been  broken  up  by 
the  capitulation  of  1803,  soon  afterwards  drifted  over 
to  England,  where  in  rage  and  shame  they  entreated 
George  the  Third  to  reform  them  and  take  them  into 
his  service  ;  and  in  December  1803  was  begun  the  levy 
of  a  King's  German  Regiment  which  was  very  soon 
expanded  into  that  of  a  King's  German  Legion. 
The  force  grew  apace.  In  January  1805  it  already 
1  Sorel,  vi.  423. 