


ch.  ix       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  273 

hastening  northward  to  join  the  Marshal,  were  halted  ;  1805. 
and  Eugene  Beauharnais  was  collecting  thirty  thousand 
men  to  re-occupy  Naples.  But  so  far  Craig  had  no 
knowledge  of  anything  except  of  the  disaster  at  Ulm 
and  the  Archduke's  retirement ;  and,  though  instructed 
to  second  the  Austrian  operations  on  the  Adige,  he 
had  never  been  placed  in  communication  with  their 
commander  nor  with  the  Court  of  Vienna.  He  could, 
indeed,  obtain  no  information  whatever  except  through 
Russian  channels,  which  he  believed,  not  wholly  without 
reason,  to  be  untrustworthy.  Not  until  long  after  his 
arrival  at  Naples  did  he  hear  that  on  the  21st  of 
October  Nelson  had  broken  the  naval  power  of  France 
and  Spain  at  Trafalgar.1 

However,  after  disembarking  his  troops,  he  collected 
draught -animals  as  fast  as  the  miserable  Neapolitan 
Government  could  supply  them,  and,  by  cutting  down 
the  baggage  of  the  army  to  the  smallest  possible  bulk, 
gradually  brought  his  brigades  forward  from  the  coast. 
Lascy  had  so  arranged  his  line  of  cantonments  on  the 
northern  frontier  that  seven  thousand  Neapolitan  troops 
occupied  the  mountains  of  the  Abruzzi  on  the  right, 
with  the  fortress  of  Pescara  in  their  rear  ;  the  strong 
fortress  of  Gaeta,  on  the  extreme  left,  being  guarded 
by  a  Neapolitan  garrison  under  a  hard-drinking,  most 
gallant  old  soldier,  the  Prince  of  Hesse- Philips tadt. 
The  Russians  held  the  centre,  with  head- quarters  at 
Sulmona,  being  fourteen  thousand  strong  and  professing 
daily  expectation  of  six  more  battalions ;  and  the 
British  formed  the  left,  in  Sessa  and  other  villages 
about  the  Lower  Garigliano.  And  there  the  twenty 
thousand  men  lay,  holding  a  defensive  position,  with  no 
enemy,  except  the  garrison  of  Ancona,  nearer  to  them 
than  the  Po.  Had  Lascy  on  hearing  the  news  of  Ulm 
— or  even  earlier,  seeing  that  on  the  16th  of  October 
he  knew  the  neutrality  of  Naples  to  be  secured — directed 
his  troops  to  Trieste  or  Venice,  Massena  could  never 
have  pressed  the  Archduke  as  he  did,  and  Napoleon's 
1  Bunbury,  pp.  206,  207. 

VOL.  V  T 


274 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1805.  campaign  might  have  ended  differently.  But  Lascy 
had  been  chosen  not  for  his  ability  but  for  his  age,  so 
that  at  all  costs  he  might  be  senior  to  Craig  ;  and  it 
was  vain  to  expect  great  energy  from  the  veteran. 

So  the  little  army  lay  still ;  and  from  time  to  time 
came  French  reports  of  Napoleon's  steady  advance  into 
Upper  Austria,  of  the  reverse  suffered  by  Marshal 
Mortier's  corps  at  Krems  on  the  nth  of  November,  of 
the  retirement  of  the  Emperor  Francis  to  Pressburg  in 
order  to  organise  continued  resistance  in  Hungary,  and 
finally  of  the  presentation  of  an  ultimatum,  in  circum- 
stances which  shall  presently  be  described,  by  Prussia 
to  Napoleon.  Amid  these  hopeful  signs  arrived  a 
letter  from  the  Archduke  Charles  himself,  written  from 
Lay  bach  on  the  22  nd  of  November  during  his  retreat 
through  Carinthia.  Until  that  day,  through  extra- 
ordinary negligence  in  some  quarters,1  he  had  remained 
uninformed  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  French  troops 
from  Neapolitan  territory ;  but  now,  realising  that 
Lascy's  force  was  lying  idle,  he  urged  the  Russian 
commander  to  embark  it  at  once  for  Venice,  which  was 
held  by  a  strong  Austrian  garrison,  and  from  thence 
to  fall  upon  Massena's  rear.  But  as  Craig  pointed  out, 
the  Archduke  had  no  intention  of  standing  at  Laybach  ; 
wherefore  Massena  would  either  continue  to  follow 
him  beyond  hope  of  being  overtaken,  or  would  mask 
Venice  with  part  of  his  force  and  beat  Lascy  with  the 
remainder.  Moreover,  the  British  and  Russian  divisions 
possessed  no  cavalry  whatever  except  two  squadrons 
of  the  Twentieth  Light  Dragoons  ;  that  of  the 
Neapolitans  was  thoroughly  contemptible ;  and  to 
attempt  to  harass  superior  numbers  of  the  French,  under 
such  a  leader  as  Massena,  with  twenty  thousand  infantry 
and  only  three  hundred  horse  was  utterly  absurd.2 