


282 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1805.  hardly  preserve  neutrality  without  the  occupation  of 
Hanover.  The  rival  powers  then  became  keener  in 
their  competition  for  Frederick  William's  help.   On  the 

Sept.  15.  15th  of  September  the  Tsar  sent  a  polite  ultimatum, 
again  claiming  the  alliance  of  Prussia,  and  passage  for 

Sept.  17.  his  troops  through  her  territory;  and  on  the  17  th 
Duroc,  under  Napoleon's  orders,  became  more  than 
ever  importunate  for  Prussia's  alliance  with  France,  since 
one  of  the  French  columns  was  going,  freely  or  by 
force,  to  march  through  country  which  was  under 
Prussian  protection.  The  King  once  more  declared  that 
he  would  maintain  strict  neutrality,  and  sent  a  reproachful 
letter  to  the  Tsar,  asking  for  an  interview,  which  missive 
arrived  just  in  time  to  avert  a  forcible  entry  of  the 
Russian  troops  into  his  dominions.  Count  Hardenberg, 
who  by  his  own  account  had  done  his  best  to  urge 
Frederick  William  to  break  definitely  with  France, 
became  much  agitated  over  the  situation  and  professed 
impatience  to  see  a  British  force  disembark  in  Hanover. 
His  hope  was  that  his  master,  when  he  realised  that 
Napoleon  could  not  give  him  the  province,  would  at 
last  throw  in  his  lot  with  the  coalition. 

All  this  happened  at  the  end  of  September.    On  the 

Sept.  27.  27th  of  that  month  the  Tsar  wrote  again  to  Frederick 
William  politely  asking  him  to  hasten  the  moment 
for  Russian  troops  to  pass  the  Prussian  frontier,  and 
promising  a  subsidy  of  a  million  and  a  quarter  ster-  I 
ling   from    England   for   every   hundred  thousand 
Prussians  put  into  the  field.    The  King  still  stuck  to 
his  neutrality,  and  Hardenberg  was  in  despair  ;  but 
Oct.  6.  fortunately  on  the  6th  of  October,  Frederick  William  | 
learned  that  the  French  troops,  by  their  passage  through  I 
Anspach,  had  violated  his  own  sacred  territory.    Then  I 
the  weak  man,  becoming  suddenly  violent,  wished  to  j 
send  the  French  envoys  their  passports  on  the  spot,  |! 
and  to  invite  the  Russians  to  cross  his  boundaries  I 
immediately.      Hardenberg  averted  this  folly  ;   but  j 
Oct.  7.  on  the  next  day  it  was  decided  in  Berlin  first  to  j 
inform    Napoleon    that    Prussia    considered    herself  | 


ch.ix        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  283 

absolved  from  all  obligation  to  France,  next  to  1805. 
summon  Alexander  over  the  frontier,  and  finally — a 
thoroughly  characteristic  move — to  occupy  Hanover. 
The  matter  seemed  so  far  settled  that,  on  the  15th  of  Oct.  15. 
October,  the  shrewdest  head  in  Europe,  Metternich, 
who  was  in  Berlin  at  the  time,  reckoned  on  seeing  the 
Prussian  and  Russian  troops  united  on  the  Bohemian 
frontier  in  a  few  weeks.  But  on  that  same  day  the 
news  of  Ney's  victory  at  Elchingen  on  the  14th  reached 
Berlin,  and  the  King  began  again  to  waver.  He 
summoned  Count  Haugwitz,  the  advocate  of  peace,  to 
share  the  Foreign  Office  with  Hardenberg,  the  advocate 
of  war,  and  wished  not  only  to  close  his  boundaries  to 
the  Russians  but  to  evade  his  interview  with  the  Tsar. 
Alexander  thereupon  announced  that  he  would  come 
to  Berlin  in  person,  and  arriving  at  Potsdam  on  the  25th  Oct.  25. 
of  October,  soon  revived  the  Prussian  monarch's  drooping 
spirits.  Duroc  took  his  leave  with  threats  ;  and  after 
enormous  persuasion  Frederick  William  was  induced 
to  send  Count  Haugwitz  to  Napoleon.  This  envoy 
was  instructed  to  offer  the  Emperor  the  basis  of 
negotiations  laid  down  in  the  Anglo- Russian  treaty 
of  the  nth  of  April,  to  give  him  until  the  15th  of 
December  to  accept  or  refuse  it,  and,  in  the  event  of 
his  refusal,  to  intimate  that  Prussia  would  join  the 
Coalition  with  one  hundred  and  eighty  thousand  men. 
Metternich  tried  hard  to  reduce  the  period  of  grace  to 
forty -eight  hours,  lest  the  Allies  should  be  devoured 
piecemeal,  but  in  vain.  The  agreement  was  signed  on 
the  3rd  of  November  ;  Haugwitz  departed  on  his  Nov.  3. 
mission  on  the  14th  ;  and  Frederick  William  relapsed  Nov.  14. 
into  misery  over  the  fact  that  he  had  actually  committed 
himself  to  a  decision. 