

Such  and  so  abject  was  the  man  upon  whom  the 
fate  of  Europe  at  this  crisis  depended  ;  and  such  the 
course  of  events  at  his  Court  during  the  momentous 
months  of  the  autumn  of  1805.  It  is  now  necessary 
to  turn  to  Pitt's  dealings  with  him.  Whether 
Hardenberg's  saying  as  to  a  landing  of  the  British  in 


284 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1805.  Hanover  reached  their  ears  or  not,  it  is  certain  that  early 
in  October  Pitt  and  his  colleagues  were  considering 
the  possibility  of  rousing  and  supporting  an  insurrection 
in  that  province.  They  had  at  first  some  idea  of  landing 
troops  at  Stralsund,  and  marching  into  it  from  that 
quarter.  Negotiations  had  been  going  forward  through 
Mr.  Pierrepont,  our  Minister  at  Stockholm,  since  the 
beginning  of  1805  for  the  defence,  through  the  help  of 
British  subsidies,  of  Swedish  Pomerania  by  a  joint  force 
of  Swedes  and  Russians.  The  task  of  concluding  a 
convention  between  these  two  powers  was  of  enormous 
difficulty,  for  the  mad  King  of  Sweden  haggled  in- 
cessantly for  absolute  control  of  all  the  forces,  which, 
though  his  own  contingent  formed  but  one-third  of  the 
whole,  he  was  to  command  in  person.  However,  in 
February  1805  the  agreement  was  signed.  The  Tsar 
was  to  send  from  forty  to  fifty  thousand  troops,  and 
King  Gustavus  twenty  to  twenty-five  thousand  ;  the 
British  Government  was  to  provide  ^50,000  to  place 
Pomerania  in  a  state  of  defence  ;  and  it  was  arranged 
that  the  treaty  should  take  active  effect  whenever  the 
French  in  Hanover  should  move  either  towards  Olden- 
burg, Mecklenburg,  or  Holstein.  « 

Then  followed  months  of  wrangling  over  the  sub- 
sidy to  be  paid  to  the  Swedish  troops  by  England, 
and  new  difficulties  over  the  landing  of  the  Russian 
force  in  Pomerania ;  for  it  is  ill  negotiating  with  any 
lunatic  and  worst  of  all  with  a  royal  lunatic.  How- 
ever, at  last  all  obstacles  were  overcome,  and  at  the 

Sept.  end  of  September  a  treaty  of  alliance  was  signed 
whereby  Sweden  engaged  to  furnish  ten  thousand 
men  for  defence  of  Pomerania,  but  to  call  them 
twelve  thousand  ;  England  on  her  part  agreeing  to 
pay  for  the  latter  number  at  the  rate  of  £12  :  10s. 
a  man.  At  the  same  time  the  Russian  troops,  twenty 
thousand  strong 1  under  Count  Tolstoy,  disembarked  at 

1  Infantry  15,836;  Cavalry  1705,  with  1 61 5  horses;  Artillery 
1749,  with  590  horses.  Total  (including  the  train),  19,348  and 
3205  horses. 


ch.ix        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  285 

Stralsund  on  the  5th  of  October,  so  that  matters  showed  1805. 
signs  of  real  progress.  A  few  days  later,  on  the  14th  Oct.  14. 
of  October,  news  reached  the  Swedish  Court  of  Prussia's 
changed  attitude  towards  France,  in  consequence  of  the 
violation  of  her  dominions  in  Anspach.  This  infused 
new  life  into  the  preparations.  Pierrepont  urged  the 
King  of  Sweden  to  advance  into  Hanover  at  once, 
before  Prussia  could  offer  to  do  so  ;  and  simultaneously 
the  British  Foreign  Office  pressed  Tolstoy  to  take  the 
same  course.  The  King  of  Sweden  did  not  love 
Prussia  and  had  returned  to  Berlin  his  Order  of  the 
Black  Eagle,  on  hearing  that  Frederick  William  had 
accepted  the  insignia  of  the  Legion  of  Honour.  He 
was  likely  therefore  to  seize  any  opportunity  of  making 
himself  disagreeable  to  his  brother  potentate  ;  and 
altogether  all  indications  pointed  to  an  early  recovery 
of  Hanover.1 