

Meanwhile  the  campaign  on  the  Danube  had  pursued 
Nov.  13.  its  course.     On  the  13th  of  November  the  French 

1  Bunbury  hints  strongly  at  treachery  on  the  part  of  the  Russian 
Minister  at  Naples.    P.  20. 

2  Craig  to  Sec.  of  State,  2nd  Nov.,  9th  Dec.  1805. 


ch.  ix       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  275 

entered  Vienna  ;  and  Napoleon  bent  all  his  energies  to  1805. 
the  task  of  preventing  the  junction  of  the  retreating 
Austrians  with  the  Russians.    He  failed  :   the  allied 
commanders  united  their  forces  successfully  at  Wischau 
on  the  19  th,  and  the  game  was  in  their  hands.    They  Nov.  1 
needed  only  to  wait  under  the  guns  of  Olmiitz  for  the 
arrival  of  the  Archduke  Charles  who  was  hastening, 
though  necessarily  by  a  wide  detour,  to  join  them  with 
the  Army  of  Italy,  in  order  to  place  Napoleon  in  a 
most  dangerous  position.    The  Russians,  however,  were 
presumptuous  and   headstrong.     They  preferred  to 
advance  and  fight  at  once  ;  with  the  result  that  on 
the  2nd  of  December  they  were  utterly  overthrown  at  Dec.  2 
Austerlitz. 

This  news,  together  with  that  of  the  armistice  con- 
cluded with  France  by  Austria  on  the  6th  of  December,  Dec  6. 
was  speedily  passed  on  to  Naples  by  French  agents, 
and  reduced  Lascy  to  great  embarrassment.  He  had 
no  instructions  to  guide  his  action,  nor  had  the  Russian 
agent  at  Naples  ;  and  he  did  not  even  know  whether 
there  was  or  was  not  a  suspension  of  arms  between 
Russia  and  France.  As  a  matter  of  fact  there  was  not. 
Napoleon,  having  granted  to  the  Tsar  a  safe  retreat  and 
restored  to  him  the  prisoners  which  he  had  taken 
among  the  Russian  Imperial  Guard,  never  doubted  but 
that  the  war  was  over  ;  but  Alexander  was  too  young 
in  misfortune  to  yield  after  a  single  defeat  and  waved 
aside  all  proposals  of  peace.  Napoleon,  therefore,  had 
a  campaign  in  Poland  still  before  him ;  but  nevertheless 
Austria  had  been  separated  from  Russia  by  the  armistice, 
and  this  was  sufficient  to  make  Lascy's  position  most 
critical.  His  information  was  still  imperfect ;  but  he 
knew  at  any  rate  that  French  forces  were  moving 
southward,  and  that  Napoleon  had  publicly  declared 
his  resolution  to  drive  the  Bourbons  from  Naples  and 
to  take  possession  of  their  kingdom.  Nor  were  these 
his  only  causes  for  disquietude.  His  own  troops  were 
extremely  unhealthy  ;  he  had  more  sick  in  each  of  his 
battalions  than  the  British  in  their  whole  division  ;  his 


276  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 

1805.  fourteen  thousand  bayonets  had  shrunk  to  a  bare  eight 
thousand,  and  the  six  additional  battalions  expected 
in  November  had  never  appeared.  A  few  days  more 
passed  away ;  and  at  the  end  of  the  year  came  definite 
information  that  from  thirty  to  thirty-five  thousand 
French  soldiers  were  in  full  march  southward  and 
would  reach  the  Neapolitan  frontier  in  ten  days.  It 
behoved  Lascy  therefore  to  come  without  delay  to  a 
decision. 