

Nov.  17.  A  few  days  later,  on  the  17th,  General  Don,  after 
long  detention  by  foul  winds,  anchored  at  Cuxhaven, 
and,  pursuant  to  instructions  from  Harrowby,  prepared 
for  immediate  disembarkation.  But  affairs  were  not 
going  happily  with  the  allied  force.  The  King  of 
Sweden  upon  landing  in  Stralsund  found  that  Tolstoy 
had  rushed  off  to  Berlin  to  see  the  Tsar,  leaving  no 
report  concerning  his  army,  nor  so  much  as  an  officer 
to  receive  His  Majesty.  This  was  unmannerly  in  any 
case,  and  Gustavus  was  one  who  was  quick  to  construe 
discourtesy  as  insult.  He  was  already  greatly  incensed 
that  Frederick  William  had  ordered  Prussian  troops  to 
Hanover  without  informing  him  ;  and  he  instantly  sent 
orders  to  halt  his  advanced  guard,  which  had  already 
reached  Lauenberg  on  its  march  westward,  vowing  that 
he  would  return  home.  Pierrepont  hastily  intervened 
It  was  his  function  to  keep  his  Swedish  Majesty  in  good 
temper,  and  he  stood  by  Gustavus  as  a  man  stands  at 
the  head  of  a  nervous  horse,  watching  for  every  motion 
of  eye  and  ear,  and  lavishing  soft  words  and  caresses 
Tolstoy  returned  hurriedly  from  Berlin  with  apologies 
1  Decken  to  Sec.  of  State,  12th  November  1805. 


ch.ix       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  289 

though  he  did  not  conceal  that  he  disliked  the  imposi-  1805. 
tion  of  any  man  as  commander  over  his  head  ;  and  the 
incensed  Gustavus,  having   thrown   everything  into 
confusion  for  several  days,  at  last  consented  that  his 
troops  should  cross  the  Elbe.1 

Having  made  his  peace,  Tolstoy  hastened  to  Liine- 
burg,  summoning  Don  thither  to  go  with  him  to  the 
Duke  of  Brunswick's  head-quarters  at  Hildesheim,  some 
thirty  miles  south  of  Hanover  ;  and  there  at  last  some 
definite  arrangements  were  made.  The  British  troops 
were  for  the  present  to  occupy  a  line  on  the  Lower 
Weser  with  their  right  at  B  lumen  thai,  their  left  at 
Verden,  and  advanced  posts  pushed  forward  on  the 
river  Hunte  ;  while  Tolstoy's  right  division  should 
occupy  the  Weser  from  Hoya  towards  Minden  and  its 
left  should  blockade  Hameln.  In  these  positions  the 
two  commanders  hoped  in  the  course  of  a  few  weeks  to 
be  able  to  find  horses  and  drivers  for  their  artillery,  and 
to  mobilise  their  forces  generally  for  an  advance  into 
Holland,  towards  which  French  reinforcements  were 
already  said  to  be  marching.  How  any  one  could 
expect  for  a  moment  that  a  mixed  force,  in  great 
measure  dependent  on  the  wills  of  such  men  as  the 
Kings  of  Sweden  and  Prussia,  could  operate  successfully 
against  such  a  master  of  energy  and  action  as  Napoleon, 
it  is  difficult  to  see.  The  British  Government  did  in 
fact  lose  patience,  and,  after  urging  upon  Don  an 
immediate  descent  on  Holland,  decided  to  embark 
twelve  thousand  additional  troops  without  waiting 
longer  to  hear  of  the  intentions  of  King  Frederick 
William.  This  reinforcement  increased  the  British 
contingent  to  twenty-five  thousand  men,  of  which 
Lord  Cathcart  was  appointed  Commander-in-chief. 
He  was  directed  to  disembark  it  in  the  Ems,  Ministers 
expecting  that,  by  the  time  of  its  arrival,  Don  and 
Tolstoy  would  already  have  advanced  from  the  Weser 
to  the  Yssel.  But  meanwhile  Tolstoy  had  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  reduction  of  Hameln  by  a  strict 