

Thus  at  last  some  effort  was  made  to  exercise  the 
manhood  of  the  country  in  arms  for  its  defence,  a  step 
which  ought  to  have  been  taken  by  Pitt  in  1794. 
But  though  the  principle  of  the  measure  was  right  and 
sound,  the  details  were  crude  and,  as  the  sequel  showed, 
insufficient.  Windham's  idea  apparently  was  so  to 
instruct  the  nation  in  the  use  of  weapons  that,  after 
augmenting  the  Regular  battalions  to  the  greatest 
strength  compatible  with  efficiency,  the  citizens  should 
group  themselves  into  bands  under  local  leaders,  and 
carry  on  a  harassing  warfare  after  the  fashion  of  La 
Vendee.  There  was  and  there  is  very  much  to  be  said 
for  such  warfare  against  an  invading  enemy.  Indeed 
the  lesson  cannot  be  too  strongly  impressed  upon  the 


ch.x         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  305 

body  of  the  people  that,  if  a  foreign  force  should  land  1806. 
on  their  shores,  every  citizen  who  kills,  captures  or,  to 
use  the  modern  phrase,  puts  out  of  action  even  a  single 
man  of  the  enemy,  has  rendered  a  national  service. 
When  every  straggler,  every  messenger,  every  unwary 
sentry,  every  weak  patrol  and  every  small  party  is 
taken,  shot,  or  knocked  on  the  head,  war  speedily 
becomes  a  weariness  to  the  invaders,  as  the  French 
discovered  in  Spain  from  1808  to  1813,  the  Germans 
in  France  in  the  winter  of  1870,  and  as  we  ourselves 
have  learned  from  more  than  one  experience.  But 
though  Windham's  Act  professed  to  train  the  nation  to 
the  use  of  arms,  its  author  had  only  the  haziest  notions 
as  to  the  manner  in  which  instruction  should  be 
imparted  ;  and  it  seems  that  for  this  most  important 
matter  he  relied  upon  the  parish-constables.  These 
functionaries  were  required  to  be  present  at  all  exercise 
of  the  men  ballotted  under  the  Act,  in  order  to  arrest 
any  who  should  be  guilty  of  misconduct  and  bring  them 
before  a  magistrate,  who  could  punish  them  by  fine,  or 
by  imprisonment  in  default  of  payment.  The  House 
of  Commons,  while  giving  those  enactments  the  force  of 
law,  was  greatly  disposed,  and  with  very  good  reason,  to 
treat  them  as  a  joke.  Nevertheless  in  due  time  a  man 
arose  who  was  able,  as  shall  be  seen,  to  take  what  was 
good  in  Windham's  Act  and  turn  it  to  useful  account. 

Meanwhile  the  state  of  the  Army  for  the  moment 
was  by  no  means  unsatisfactory.  In  March  the  Regular 
force  at  home,  which  had  been  recruited  for  general 
service,  numbered,  including  the  King's  German  Legion, 
twenty-two  thousand  cavalry,  sixty  thousand  infantry, 
xnd  ten  thousand  artillery.  There  was  no  danger  of 
nvasion,  so  that  from  thirty  to  forty  thousand  men 
were  at  disposal  for  offensive  operations.  Moreover, 
the  year  had  opened  well  with  the  news,  which  arrived 
it  the  end  of  February,  that  the  expedition  to  the  Cape 
}f  Good  Hope  had  been  completely  successful.  It  will 
oe  convenient  before  going  further  to  give  a  brief 
iccount  of  this  campaign. 