

1  Pierrepont  to  Sec.  of  State,  28th  Oct.,  3rd,  9th  Nov.  1805. 

VOL.  V  U 


290 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


blockade  was  a  very  important  object ;  and  that  this 
operation,  requiring  as  it  would  nine  thousand  men, 
would  leave  too  few  for  an  invasion  of  Holland.  He 
was  ready,  if  the  British  Government  pressed  him,  to 
leave  a  corps  to  observe  Hameln  and  to  advance  at  once 
to  the  Yssel ;  but  he  and  Don  agreed  that  it  would 
be  better  to  delay  a  forward  movement  until  the 
Swedes  should  have  come  up  and  Prussia  should 
have  finally  declared  against  France.  Then  with 
their  armies  mobilised  and  a  frost  to  make  the 
waters  passable,  invasion  of  Holland  would  be  an  easy 
matter.1 

The  British  Ministers  bowed  to  the  inevitable.  The 
Allied  Army  in  Hanover,  having  neither  transport  nor 
supplies,  was  plainly  unable  to  move  ;  and  Cathcart's 
division  was  ordered  to  disembark,  as  Don's  had  done, 
in  the  Weser.  Cathcart  himself  was  to  sail  at  once, 
and  the  mission  of  his  force  was  explained  to  be  not 
only  to  recover  Holland  but  to  assure  the  Allies  of  the 
British  on  the  Continent  of  England's  firm  determina- 
tion to  aid  them  not  only  by  liberal  subsidies  but  by 
active  operations.  All,  however  (such  was  the  purport 
of  his  instructions),  must  depend  upon  Prussia. 
Harrowby's  latest  reports  left  no  doubt  that  she  would 
remain  neutral ;  but  it  was  certain  that  she  had  sent 
an  ultimatum  by  the  hand  of  Haugwitz  to  Napoleon, 
and  there  was  every  hope  that  Napoleon  would  reject 
it.  In  this  case  Prussia  would  be  committed  to  war, 
and  intelligence  of  the  event  ought  to  reach  the  Weser 
by  the  15  th  of  December.  It  was  understood  that 
Frederick  William  was  desirous  of  the  recapture  of 
Holland  from  France,  and  he  would  probably  be 
strengthened  in  his  zeal  by  Harrowby's  representations 
of  England's  readiness  to  assist  him  in  this  object.  In 
fact,  a  main  object  of  sending  the  British  contingent  of 
troops  was  to  enable  Prussia  to  march  a  force  into 

1  Don  to  Sec.  of  State,  19th,  25th,  28th  Nov.  ;  Sec.  of  State  to 
Don,  19th,  27th  Nov.  ;  to  Lord  Harrowby,  27th  Nov.  ;  E.  Cooke 
to  H.M.  Consul,  Embden,  26th  Nov.  1805. 


ch.ix        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  291 

Holland  without  unduly  weakening  her  strength  in  1805. 
Franconia  and  Lower  Saxony.  But  it  was  possible  that, 
if  the  King  of  Sweden  advanced  with  all  his  troops, 
they,  together  with  the  Russians  and  British,  might 
well  suffice  to  reduce  all  Holland  north  of  the  Meuse 
and  Rhine  ;  and  if  Gustavus  did  actually  take  command 
of  the  Swedes  and  of  the  Russians  whom  the  Tsar  had 
placed  under  his  orders,  then  Cathcart  was,  as  a  pro- 
visional arrangement,  to  obey  directions  from  him  like- 
wise. Finally  the  British  troops  were  not  to  advance 
into  Holland  on  any  ill-concerted  errand,  as  a  mere 
diversion  ;  but  it  was  hoped  that  no  such  idea  would  be 
in  contemplation,  for  the  British  Ministers  were  specially 
anxious  to  recover  Holland  during  1805,  and  would 
deeply  lament  the  necessity  of  deferring  the  operation 
to  another  year.1 