


294  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 

805.  enclosed  to  the  British  General  to  show  that  operations 

of  some  kind  were  still  possible.1 
29-  On  the  29th  of  December,  however,  the  British 
Ministers  in  London  received  unmistakable  news,  long 
delayed  by  foul  winds,  of  the  disaster  of  Austerlitz  and 
of  the  armistice  between  Austria  and  France.  Being 
unable  in  the  absence  of  Pitt  to  give  Cathcart  further 
instructions,  they  merely  sent  him  additional  transports 
to  bring  off  his  troops,  which  in  the  circumstances  was 
the  wisest  thing  that  they  could  do.  Affairs  were  steadily 
going  from  bad  to  worse.  The  King  of  Sweden,  after 
allowing  part  of  his  troops  to  march  as  far  as  the  Elbe, 
and  even  moving  himself  some  way  westward,  declared 
that  he  would  not  act  while  the  attitude  of  Prussia  was 
so  uncertain,  though  the  first  shot  fired  from  a  Prussian 
gun  would  be  the  signal  for  him  to  advance  in  force. 
The  Tsar,  however,  after  retiring  in  deep  depression  to 
St.  Petersburg  upon  the  defeat  of  Austerlitz,  had 
placed  Tolstoy's  detachment  under  the  orders  of  the 
King  of  Prussia  ;  and  King  Gustavus  very  naturally 
refused  to  make  himself  in  any  way  dependent  upon 
the  commands  of  Frederick  William,  «whom  he  rightly 
held  in  utter  detestation  and  contempt.  The  position 
of  Cathcart  was  very  difficult.  Additional  British 
troops  continued  to  arrive  ;  but  many  transports  were 
missing,  and  comparatively  few  of  his  battalions  were 
complete  in  consequence.2    The  French  force  to  west 

1  Sec.  of  State  to  C.-in-C.  19th  Dec.;  to  Harrowby  (private), 
21st  Dec;  to  Cathcart,  23rd  Dec.  1805. 

2  Troops  of  the  second  division  arrived  on  the  Weser  on  or 
before  1st  Jan.  1806  : 


Major-general  Sir  Arthur  Welleslefs  Brigade  . 

3rd  Foot, 

590 

8th  „ 

447 

99                                                    99                                 '..«.  .* 

36th  „ 

657 

Major-general  Fraser's  Brigade 

26th  „ 

438 

91                                 n            •          •  • 

28th  „ 

968 

91st  „ 

508 

Major-general  Sherbrooke's  Brigade 

5  th  „ 

480 

99                                  99            •          •  * 

27th  „ 

251 

9  9                                               99      .           '   '          *  * 

34th  » 

402 

Royal  Artillery,  3  companies,  with  horses ;  R.E.  detachment. 


ch.  ix        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  295 

of  the  Yssel  under  Louis  Bonaparte  was  increasing  ;  tso6. 
and  another  force  under  Augereau  was  menacing 
Hanover  on  the  south  from  Frankfort  on  Main.  The 
behaviour  of  Prussia  was  growing  more  and  more 
equivocal ;  her  preparations  for  war  were  backward  ; 
and  her  army,  owing  to  the  age  and  apathy  of  its 
generals,  was  deficient  in  the  discipline  which  consti- 
tuted its  sole  strength.  Nevertheless,  evacuation  of 
North  Germany  by  the  British  would,  in  Cathcart's 
judgment,  certainly  precipitate  Prussia  towards  a 
disastrous  peace,  whereas  the  presence  of  a  British  force 
might  hearten  her  to  stand  firm  until  the  Russians  had 
recovered  themselves.  On  the  other  hand  a  frost 
might  at  any  moment  make  re-embarkation  impossible, 
and  then  there  would  be  no  retreat  except  into  Prussian 
territory  and  on  to  the  Prussian  armies.  This  retreat 
King  Frederick  William  refused  to  grant  unless  the 
British  troops  on  the  Weser  retired  in  rear  of  the 
Prussians,  so  as  to  ensure  that  there  should  be  no  pro- 
vocative action  towards  Holland,  and  unless  the 
blockade  of  Hameln  were  relaxed  so  as  to  give  some 
relief  to  the  French  garrison.  The  whole  state  of 
affairs  was  so  uncertain  that  Cathcart  could  only  arrange 
a  temporary  disposition  of  his  troops  in  concert  with  the 
Prussian  General  Kalkreuth,  and  then  await  orders.  The 
British  therefore  occupied  Bremen  and  Verden,  and  the 
Russians  Hoya  and  Nienburg.  The  Swedes  were  per- 
force left  on  the  Elbe  to  act  as  a  reserve,  if  they  should 
consent  to  act  at  all;  and  the  Prussian  contingent 
remained  in  observation  on  the  line  of  the  Ems,  ready, 
if  need  were,  to  lean  its  right  upon  Minden  so  as  to 
cover  the  British  left  and  keep  up  communication  with 
Magdeburg.1 