


298 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


1806.  Napoleon  should  be  accomplished.  This  idea  of 
eternal  petty  expeditions  to  the  Netherlands  was  a 
mania  with  Pitt,  which  he  most  unfortunately  bequeathed 
to  his  successors.  The  ultimate  destiny  of  Holland 
was  no  doubt  of  overwhelming  importance  to  England  ; 
but  it  was  idle  to  suppose  that  England's  part  in  the 
shaping  of  that  destiny  would  be  determined  by  a  small 
party  of  red-coats  on  the  spot  rather  than  by  the 
successful  operations  of  a  strong  British  force  against 
France  in  another  quarter.  Yet  such  seems  to  have 
been  the  fixed  idea  of  Pitt  and  his  colleagues.  They 
appear  to  have  argued  that  the  expedition  to  the  Weser 
might  simultaneously  answer  a  number  of  ends.  It 
might  cause  Prussia  to  declare  against  Napoleon,  in 
which  case  it  might  lead  to  the  recovery  of  Holland  ; 
at  all  events  it  would  collect  recruits  for  the  King's 
German  Legion,  and  show  the  earnestness  of  the 
British  intentions.  But,  if  Napoleon  won  a  great 
victory  over  the  Russians,  the  whole  enterprise  fell 
to  the  ground,  for  every  one  in  Europe  knew  that 
Prussia  would  side  with  the  conqueror.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  Cathcart's  troops  had  been  thrown 
into  Italy  together  with  Craig's,  then,  no  matter  what 
the  action  of  Prussia,  no  matter  what  the  success  or 
failure  of  Austria  and  Russia,  the  diversion  was 
bound  to  tell.  Such  employment  of  an  army  for  a 
definite  military  purpose  was,  however,  outside  the 
scope  of  Pitt's  intelligence.  That  military  and  diplo- 
matic operations  can  go  hand  in  hand,  each  seconding 
and  abetting  the  other,  no  man  understood  better 
than  Napoleon  ;  and  his  perfect  mastery  of  the  art 
of  combining  the  two  constitutes  one  of  his  greatest 
claims  to  supreme  genius  in  the  conduct  of  war.  Pitt 
had  some  inkling  of  the  advantages  of  this  art,  but 
lamentable  ignorance  of  its  practice.  For  this  reason 
again  and  again  he  sent  generals  to  different  quarters  of 
Europe  with  vague  orders  to  do  something,  no  great  j 
matter  what,  but  at  any  rate  something,  which  would 
show  that  England  was  an  active  ally.    Such  was  the 


ch.  ix        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  299 

purport  of  the  instructions  which  Abercromby  carried  1806. 
to  Holland  in  1799,  Craig  to  the  Mediterranean,  and 
Cathcart  to  North  Germany  in  1805,  with  results  that 
are  too  well  known  to  us.  By  this  purposeless  dis- 
tribution of  troops  the  armed  force  of  England  was 
frittered  away  in  paltry  and  useless  detachments  ;  for,  if 
an  expedition  is  to  do  nothing  in  particular,  there  is  no 
reason  why  it  should  consist  of  forty  thousand  men 
rather  than  four  thousand.  The  practice  was  infinitely 
mischievous.  It  demoralised  the  men  ;  it  discouraged 
the  officers  ;  it  took  the  heart  out  of  the  Generals. 
More  than  any  other  cause  it  brought  about  that  readi- 
ness to  re-embark  and  to  abandon  enterprises  which 
made  the  British  Army  the  laughing-stock  alike  of  its 
own  nation  and  of  Europe. 