

Before  Cathcart  returned  Pitt  was  dead,  worn  out  Jan.  23 
by  disease,  anxiety,  and  overwork.  Wholly  unsuccessful 
as  he  was  as  a  Minister  of  War,  it  were  ill  to  dismiss 
so  great  a  man  with  no  eye  but  for  his  military  failures. 
The  story  of  his  genius  as  an  administrator  during  ten 
years  of  peace  must  be  left  to  others  to  tell,  but  that  of 
his  leadership  of  England  through  a  time  of  supreme 
peril  must  not  be  set  aside  without  brief  commemoration 
in  a  military  history.  It  was  well  that  at  a  time  when 
many  were  dazzled  by  the  spectacle  of  a  great  people 
uprising  in  blind  fury  to  conquer  what  it  hoped  might 
be  its  liberty,  the  forces  of  order  should  have  found 
such  a  champion  as  Pitt.  It  is  true  that,  as  such,  he 
was  bound  to  join  or  to  seek  as  allies  rulers  so  abject  as 
the  Bourbons  of  Naples  and  Sicily,  so  contemptible  as 
Frederick  William  of  Prussia,  so  insane  as  Paul  of 
Russia  and  Gustavus  of  Sweden,  so  weak  as  the  Emperor 
Francis  ;  but  that  was  the  misfortune  of  his  time,  not 
the  demerit  of  his  cause.  For  the  crusade  of  the 
Revolution  as  initiated  by  the  Girondists,  continued  by 
the  Convention  and  the  Directory,  and  finally  prose- 
cuted to  its  death  by  Napoleon,  was  a  crusade  not  of 
liberty  but  of  enslavement.  It  was  against  this  that 
Pitt  stood  forth,  as  a  man  who  had  learned  the  nature  or 


3°° 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


1806.  freedom  not  from  the  writings  of  sentimental  dreamers, 
but  from  the  history  and  the  wisdom  of  his  own 
countrymen,  and  was  aware  that  it  is  a  "  plant  of  slow 
growth,"  which  has  its  roots  in  patience,  charity,  and 
self-respect,  and  cannot  be  forced  into  blossom  by 
violence,  intolerance,  and  spoliation.  Amid  reptile 
Bourbons,  cringing  Hohenzollerns,  and  irresolute 
Hapsburgs,  the  figure  of  Pitt  towers  aloft  gigantic  ; 
and  gigantic  not  from  the  meanness  of  their  stature 
only.  For  this  was  a  man  of  such  singleness  of  purpose, 
such  immovable  integrity,  such  dauntless  courage,  such 
lofty  patriotism,  that  he  could  not  but  exalt  and  purify 
any  cause  that  he  embraced.  To  Englishmen  he  was 
the  incarnation  of  uprightness,  and  he  was  trusted  by 
them  accordingly.  He  could  not  be  infallible,  and  he 
was  frequently  deceived.  At  a  time  when  the  world 
was  agitated  by  forces  which  seemed  to  be  beyond  the 
range  of  human  experience,  the  insight  and  calculations 
of  the  ablest  statesman  might  easily  be  at  fault.  But 
the  people  felt  certain  that  he  would  take  the  course 
which  he  thought  best  and  most  worthy  for  the  country, 
and  would  pursue  it  with  perfect  contempt  of  possible 
disadvantage  or  danger  to  himself,  so  only  his  honour 
should  be  safe.  Napoleon  ascribed  the  extraordinary 
ascendancy  of  his  great  rival  to  his  eloquence,  and 
envied  him  his  gift  of  oratory.  He  was  mistaken. 
Pitt's  strength  lay  in  his  perfect  straight-forwardness  1 
and  unblemished  character,  without  which  his  speeches, 
in  these  days  unreadable,  might  have  seemed  wearisome 
even  to  his  contemporaries.  So  great  an  example  was 
not  lost  upon  his  successors,  even  the  least  of  whom 
faced  Napoleon  with  a  boldness  which  modern  French  :  l 
historians  survey  with  astonished  admiration  ;  and  in  \ 
truth  England's  part  in  the  struggle  was  dignified  to 
the  very  end  by  the  commanding  nobility  of  William 
Pitt. 