

I 

I 

I 


CHAPTER  X 


The  Ministry  which  succeeded  to  power  upon  the  death  1806. 
of  Pitt  was  that  known  by  the  name  of  All  the  Talents  ; 
and  the  array  of  great  names  was  such  as  to  justify  the 
title.  Lord  Grenville  was  Prime  Minister  ;  Fox  was 
at  the  Foreign  Office ;  Charles  Grey,  later  Lord 
Howick  and  Earl  Grey  of  the  Reform  Bill,  at  the 
Admiralty  ;  Lord  Moira  at  the  Office  of  Ordnance  ;  and 
William  Windham  in  charge  of  the  department  of 
War  and  the  Colonies.  This  last  appointment  was 
significant,  for  Windham  had  been  the  most  bitter 
critic  of  the  military  measures  of  Addington  and  Pitt, 
and  there  could  be  little  doubt  that  he  would  introduce 
drastic  reforms.  Nor  were  reforms  unnecessary,  for 
the  "Twenty  Pound  Act,"  as  Pitt's  Additional  Force 
Act  had  been  nicknamed,  was  conclusively  proved  to 
be  an  utter  failure.  Attempts  had  been  made  at  the 
end  of  1805  to  galvanise  it  into  life  by  increasing  the 
reward  to  the  parochial  officials  for  every  recruit  that 
they  might  levy,  and  by  sending  military  officers  round 
the  country  to  instruct  them  in  their  duties.  Nor  had 
these  efforts  been  wholly  unsuccessful.  In  all  some 
thirteen  thousand  men  had  been  attested  under  the  Act ; 
and  Pitt's  supporters  maintained  that  since  the  be- 
ginning of  1806  it  had  furnished  on  an  average  three 
hundred  recruits  a  week.  But  these  figures  were 
fallacious.  Of  the  thirteen  thousand  enlisted,  nearly 
three  thousand  had  deserted  ;  and  investigation  showed 
that  the  remainder  had  for  the  most  part  been  purchased 
from  crimps,  which  was  the  thing  that  Pitt  had  been 

301 


302 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  bookxiii 


1806,  specially  anxious  to  avoid.  The  fate  of  the  Act  was 
therefore  certain.  The  one  thing  uncertain  was  the 
nature  of  the  new  plan  that  should  follow  upon  its 
repeal. 

April  3.  On  the  3rd  of  April  Windham  in  a  speech  to  the 
Commons  set  all  doubts  upon  the  subject  at  rest. 
After  a  long  preliminary  discussion  of  the  methods 
employed  for  raising  men  in  the  past,  he  laid  it  down 
that  voluntary  enlistment  alone  was  possible  to  recruit 
the  Army  for  service  abroad,  and  that  to  make 
voluntary  enlistment  a  success  the  Army  must  be 
rendered  an  eligible  calling.  This  object  could  be  easily 
accomplished  by  an  increase  of  pay  ;  but  such  a  resource 
was  economically  impossible.  Much  might  neverthe- 
less be  done  by  encouragements  and  rewards,  and  by 
limiting  military  service  to  a  term  of  years  instead  of 
extending  it,  as  heretofore,  for  life.  He  proposed 
therefore  to  allow  every  two  years'  service  in  the  West 
Indies  to  count  as  three  ;  to  increase  the  scale  of 
pensions  ;  and  to  allow  men  to  enlist  in  future  for  a 
short  period,  at  the  end  of  which  they  could  engage 
for  a  second  term,  with  a  slight  increase  of  wages,  and 
again  for  a  third  term  with  a  further  increase.  At  the 
end  of  the  second  term  they  would  be  entitled  to  a 
pension  roughly  equivalent  to  half  pay  ;  and  at  the  end 
of  the  third  term  they  would  finally  retire  on  little  less 
than  full  pay.  The  three  periods  of  service  for  infantry 
were  to  be  each  of  seven  years  ;  for  cavalry,  ten,  seven, 
and  seven  years  ;  for  artillery,  twelve,  five,  and  five 
years.  By  this  arrangement  he  confidently  believed 
that  the  ranks  of  the  Regular  Army  would  be  kept 
permanently  filled. 