

During  the  interval  the  British  Cabinet  awaited  in 
anxious  suspense  the  issue  of  Haugwitz's  mission.  Pitt 
had  gone  to  Bath,  a  dying  man,  though  as  yet  he  knew 
it  not  ;  and  Mulgrave  and  Hawkesbury  had  gone  with 
him.  Harrowby's  letters  gave  none  but  unsatisfactory 
accounts  of  the  attitude  of  the  Court  of  Berlin. 
Frederick  William  was  evidently  waiting  upon  events  ; 
and  the  Prussian  Staff  was  opposed  to  a  direct  attack 
upon  Holland  as  a  permanent  operation,  though 
favouring  the  advance  of  a  small  detachment  towards 


ch.  ix        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  293 

it  to  make  a  diversion.  Anxious,  however,  to  show  1805. 
zeal  and  good-will,  Ministers  ordered  eight  more  British 
battalions  and  some  German  cavalry  to  sail  for  the 
Weser  on  the  10th  of  December,  with  the  melancholy  Dec.  10. 
result  that  the  transports  were  at  once  dispersed  by  a 
heavy  gale  and  part  of  them  cast  away.  Cathcart, 
arriving  at  Cuxhaven  on  the  15th,  was  met  by  the  news  Dec.  15. 
of  Austerlitz  and  by  an  intimation  from  Harrowby  that, 
in  consequence  of  the  armistice  between  Austria  and 
France,  the  Prussian  Staff  deprecated  any  movement 
towards  Holland.  He  therefore  detained  all  his  trans- 
ports so  as  to  be  ready  for  re-embarkation.  A  day  or 
two  later  came  a  strange  rumour,  which  found  its  way 
even  to  England,  that  the  Russians  and  Austrians  had 
fought  a  second  action  against  Napoleon  and  had  driven 
him  back  upon  Vienna.  The  Ministers  in  London 
therefore  ordered  yet  more  troops  to  sail  for  the  Weser, 
and  continued  to  urge  Prussia  to  come  to  a  decision 
as  to  her  policy  and  her  plan  of  campaign.  They  also 
condescended  to  explain  that  England  had  made 
enormous  efforts  to  give  the  Allies  solid  support  upon 
the  Continent,  that  she  was  running  great  risks  by 
sending  men  to  North  Germany  at  a  season  when  they 
might  be  unable  to  re-embark,  and  that  foul  winds  and 
ignorance  of  Prussia's  intentions  were  really  account- 
able for  the  delay  in  the  appearance  of  her  troops. 
Cathcart  was  further  apprised  that  the  position  of  the 
British  on  the  Weser  was  now  becoming  a  matter  of 
substantive  importance  in  itself,  for  the  French  troops 
were  reported  to  be  collecting  in  Holland,  and  there 
was  always  the  chance  that  Napoleon  might  direct  a 
force  upon  Hanover  from  the  south  and  east.  The 
Cabinet  was  anxious  to  protect  the  unfortunate  province 
in  order  alike  to  save  it  from  a  renewal  of  harsh  treat- 
ment, to  ensure  the  recruiting  of  the  German  Legion, 
to  secure  the  British  magazines  on  the  Elbe  and  Weser, 
and  to  maintain  easy  communication  between  England 
and  North  Germany.  Finally  a  long  and  confused 
statement  of  the  disposition  of  the  Prussian  armies  was 