

The  proposition  was  bold  and  startling,  but  it 
was  not  novel  ;  and  it  seems  tolerably  certain  that 
Windham  really  borrowed  it  from  Robert  Craufurd, 
who  had  repeatedly  declared  his  belief  in  short  service. 
To  sound  the  feeling  of  the  Army  upon  the  subject, 
the  Duke  of  York  had  in  1804  called  for  the  opinions 
of  fourteen  prominent  General  Officers,  seven  of  whom, 


ch.  x         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  303 

including  Lord  Moira,  were  in  favour  of  the  change,  1 
six  were  against  it,  and  one  was  doubtful.  It  was,  how- 
ever, remarkable  that  General  Hewett,  the  Inspector- 
general  of  Recruiting,  was  strongly  opposed  to  it,  and 
that  Sir  John  Moore  wrote  an  impatient  answer,  as 
though  the  proposition  were  hardly  worth  discussing. 
In  his  view  it  was  idle  to  talk  of  keeping  the  Army 
full  except  by  some  form  of  compulsion,  in  which  case 
service  ought  certainly  to  be  limited  in  point  of  time  ; 
but  no  change  in  the  terms  of  enlistment  would  procure 
men  who  could  not  be  obtained  without  it.  "If,"  he 
argued  with  much  force,  "  limited  service  and  enormous 
bounties  could  tempt  men  to  enlist,  would  the  Army  of 
Reserve  and  the  Permanent  Additional  Force  created 
by  Mr.  Pitt's  Act  be  incomplete  ? "  However,  the 
House  was  very  willing  to  give  Windham's  plan  a  fair 
trial  ;  and  the  necessary  legislation  was  easily  effected 
by  a  few  changes  in  the  schedules  of  the  Mutiny  Act. 
On  the  other  hand,  Windham  guarded)  himself  against 
possible  danger  from  the  total  failure  of  the  system  by 
a  second  measure,  which  permitted  fifteen  in  every 
hundred  men  of  the  Irish  Militia  to  enlist  in  the  Army 
every  year,  thereby  assuring  a  supply  of  from  three  to 
four  thousand  recruits  from  this  service  annually. 
Pitt's  Act  was  repealed ;  the  fines,  amounting  to 
^1,800,000,  which  were  due  from  defaulting  parishes, 
were  remitted  ;  and  the  traditions  of  military  policy 
inherited  from  Pitt,  so  far  as  they  concerned  the 
Regular  Army,  were  definitely  abandoned. 

Nor  did  Windham  shrink  from  making  an  equal 
break  with  the  past  in  respect  of  the  rest  of  the  land- 
forces.  The  ballot  was  suspended  for  two  years,  until 
the  strength  of  the  Regular  Militia  should  be  reduced 
to  the  establishment  of  1802  ;  and  Windham  did  not 
conceal  his  hope  that  in  future  the  ranks  of  that  force 
might  be  filled  by  voluntary  enlistment  for  a  reasonable 
bounty.  Finally  he  turned  upon  the  Volunteers, 
whom  he  had  always  condemned  as  a  costly  encumbrance, 
and  announced  his  intentions  of  gradually  taking  away 


304  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xm 

1806.  all  their  allowances,  and  of  withdrawing  privileges 
and  exemptions  of  every  kind  from  all  corps  which 
accepted  more  from  Government  than  their  arms 
and  accoutrements.  To  create  a  force  which  should 
take  their  place,  he  introduced  and  passed  an  Act 
which,  after  repealing  the  First  Defence  Act  and  the 
Levy  en  Masse  Act,  provided  for  the  training  of  all 
the  men  in  the  country  who  were  liable  to  service  in 
the  Militia.  Two  hundred  thousand  of  them,  chosen 
by  ballot,  were  to  be  called  out  every  year  and  trained 
for  not  more  than  twenty -four  days,  for  wages  of 
one  shilling  for  each  day,  and  at  no  greater  distance 
than  five  miles  from  their  homes.  Substitutes  were 
forbidden,  but  exemption  from  one  year's  service 
could  be  purchased  by  a  fine  of  £10  ;  and  every  man 
who  had  undergone  one  year's  training  was  exempt 
from  the  ballot  for  two  years.  No  provision  was 
made  for  the  organisation  of  the  men  into  companies 
or  battalions,  though  the  King  was  empowered  to 
appoint  officers  and  non-commissioned  officers  to  in- 
struct them  ;  but  in  case  of  invasion  the  trained  men 
could  either  be  formed  into  new  corjps  or  embodied 
with  old  corps  ;  and  it  was  Windham's  firm  intention 
that  at  any  crisis  of  national  danger  the  trained  men 
should  be  drafted  into  regiments  of  the  Line. 