

Such,  however,  was  Cathcart's  distrust  of  Prussia 
that  he  made  every  preparation  to  collect  and  embark 
the  recruits  which  had  been  gathered  for  the  King's 
German  Legion,  lest  King  Frederick  William's  officers 

1  Sec.  of  State  to  Cathcart,  29th  Dec.  1805  ;  Cathcart  to  Sec. 
of  State,  1st  (with  enclosure),  2nd,  6th  Jan.  1806. 


296 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


1806.  should  try  to  take  them  from  him.  At  length,  on  the 
Jan.  7.  7th  of  January  1806,  Hardenberg  informed  Harrowby 
that  there  was  every  prospect  of  his  master's  coming  to 
an  arrangement  with  Napoleon  to  occupy  Hanover,  until 
peace  should  be  concluded  between  Britain  and  France. 
He  added  that  hostilities  between  Prussia  and  France 
were  most  improbable,  that  the  King  was  about  to 
recall  Tolstoy's  troops  from  North  Germany,  and  that 
he  saw  no  advantage  in  any  continuance  of  the  British 
troops  in  that  quarter.  Harrowby  took  his  leave  on 
the  same  day,  first  sending  a  letter  to  inform  Cathcart 
of  his  departure,  which  message,  however,  did  not 
Jan.  21.  reach  that  General  until  the  21st.  Cathcart  without 
delay  sought  Tolstoy,  who  had  always  been  frank  and 
open  with  him,  and  learned  that  fifty  thousand  Prussians 
were  on  the  march  to  occupy  Hanover  in  force.  A 
few  days  later  he  received  a  copy  of  Haugwitz's  treaty 
of  the  15th  of  December,  with  an  intimation  from  the 
British  Minister  in  Berlin  that  it  had  been  ratified 
(which  was  not  strictly  correct),  and  would  be  carried 
into  effect  at  once.  Almost  immediately  afterwards 
he  received  orders  from  England  tg  re-embark  his 
force,  which  was  now  over  twenty-six  thousand  strong,1 
for  the  King's  German  Legion  had  increased  by  one- 
Feb.  13.  third  during  its  stay  in  Germany.  By  the  13th  of 
Feb.  15.  February  all  was  ready,  and  on  the  15th  the  army 
sailed  with  a  fair  wind,  leaving  Hanover  to  the  tender 
mercies  of  Prussia,  possibly  with  a  hope,  and  most 

1  British. —  1  /  Coldstream  Guards  ;  i/3rd  Guards;  1 /3rd,  1 /4th, 
i/5th,f  i/8th,  i/9th,  1/14-th,  i/23rd,  i/26th,f  2 /zy  th,t  i/28th, 
i/3oth,t  2/34th>  i/3^th,  1/89A,  1/9151,  i/95th*  R.A.;  R.E. 
Waggon  Train. 

(+5  companies  only  arrived  ;  J  6  companies  only  arrived  ;  *  only  4  com- 
panies sent.) 

Germans. — 1st  and  2nd  Heavy  Dragoons ;  1st  and  3rd  Light 
Dragoons  ;  1st  and  2nd  Light  Battalions  ;  1st  to  7th  Line 
Battalions  ;  Regiment  of  Artillery. 

Total-.  British    .  510  officers ;  14,058  N.C.O.'s  and  men. 
„      German  .  382      „        11,693      „  „ 

892  25,751 


ch.  ix        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  297 

certainly  with  an  ardent  wish,  that  Prussia  might  pay  1 
dearly  for  it. 

Such  was  the  end  of  the  expedition  to  the  Weser, 
not  a  small  expedition  measured  by  the  standard  of  that 
day,  and  not  destined,  as  was  thought,  to  play  an 
unimportant  part.  It  proved  to  be  an  egregious  farce  ; 
but  at  this  distance  of  time  it  is  perhaps  difficult  to 
judge  of  it  aright.  The  general  idea  of  operating  upon 
Napoleon's  flank  and  rear  was  no  doubt  sound  ;  but 
for  success  the  whole  plan  depended  necessarily  on 
Prussia.  The  King  of  Sweden  was  so  uncertain  and 
his  force  so  small  that  his  help  was  of  little  moment  ; 
but  the  Russian  contingent  was  an  important  matter, 
and  these  troops  could  not  obtain  access  to  the  sphere 
of  action  without  leave  from  Prussia ;  nor  in  truth 
could  any  important  operation  be  undertaken  without 
the  actual  aid  of  Prussian  regiments.  Was  Prussia  a 
power  to  be  counted  upon  at  such  a  crisis  ?  To  this 
question  all  previous  experience  since  the  French 
Revolution  answered  emphatically  in  the  negative. 
Blindness,  timidity,  self-seeking  and  double-dealing 
had  from  the  first  been  the  special  characteristics  of  the 
Court  of  Berlin  ;  and,  while  Frederick  William  remained 
in  power,  it  was  hopeless  to  look  for  change  or  improve- 
ment. It  may  of  course  be  urged,  probably  with  some 
correctness,  that  Cathcart's  army  was  intended  to  play 
a  diplomatic  part,  partly  tempting  and  partly  forcing 
Prussia  to  join  the  Coalition.  But  was  it  likely  that  a 
man  who  would  not  keep  his  engagements  with  his 
dearest  friend  and  most  powerful  patron,  Alexander  of 
Russia,  but  compelled  him  almost  to  extort  the  fulfil- 
ment of  them  by  armed  strength — was  it  likely  that 
such  a  man  would  learn  strength  of  purpose  and 
common  honesty  from  an  unskilful  negotiator  such  as 
Harrowby,  backed  by  a  handful  of  British  soldiers? 
There  was  therefore  some  further  motive  to  prompt  the 
dispatch  of  this  futile  expedition  ;  and  this  was  almost 
certainly  the  anxiety  of  the  British  Government  to  have 
a  British  force  in  Holland  when  the  overthrow  of 