

Meanwhile  Haugwitz  was  on  his  way  to  Napoleon 
charged  with  the  momentous  ultimatum  which,  as  the 
Allies  hoped,  would  throw  Prussia  into  their  arms. 
He  journeyed  slowly,  being  delayed  partly  by  his  own 
inclination  and  partly  by  Napoleon's  orders  ;  but  at 
last  on  the  28th  of  November  he  was  permitted  to  Nov.  28. 
reach  Briinn  and  was  received  with  icy  coldness  by  the 
Emperor.  He  put  forward  Prussia's  scheme  of  media- 
tion none  the  less,  and  Napoleon  accepted  it,  upon  the 
condition  that  no  troops,  Russian,  Swedish,  or  British, 
should  pass  the  frontier  of  Holland.  Haugwitz  readily 
consented  to  this,  thereby  light-heartedly  upsetting 
the  whole  of  England's  combinations  and  all  the 
elaborate  arrangements  that  Harrowby  and  Hardenberg 
were  debating  at  Berlin.  Napoleon  then  sent  him  to 
Vienna  to  confer  with  Talleyrand.  The  Emperor 
was  on  the  eve  of  a  great  battle  ;  he  understood 
thoroughly  that  Prussia  would  turn  upon  him  if  he 
were  beaten,  and  he  did  not  forget  her  intrusion  upon 
him  at  so  critical  a  moment.  Four  days  later,  as  Dec.  2. 
has  been   told,  he   fought  and  won  the  battle  of 

1  Instructions  to  Cathcart,  Nov. ;  5th  Dec.  ;  Sec.  of  State  to 
Harrowby,  7th  Dec.  1805. 


292 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


1805.  Austerlitz  ;  on  the  6th  was  concluded  the  armistice 
Dec.  6.  which  eliminated  Austria  from  the  struggle  ;  and  on 
Dec.  14.  the  14th  Napoleon  sent  for  Haugwitz  to  vent  upon 
him  his  rage  against  Prussia.  The  interview  was  a 
stormy  one,  and  the  Emperor  closed  it  with  the  ominous 
words  that  in  a  few  days  peace  between  France  and 
Austria  would  be  signed,  and  that  he  would  not  say 
what  his  relations  with  Prussia  might  then  be.  He 
was,  however,  still  anxious  to  conclude  an  alliance  with 
Frederick  William  if  it  were  possible  ;  wherefore 
summoning  Haugwitz  once  more  to  his  presence,  he 
warned  him  that  if  his  King  forced  France  into  war, 
Hanover  should  never  belong  to  Prussia.  He  then 
offered  him  a  treaty  of  offensive  and  defensive  alliance 
upon  the  following  among  other  terms — that  Prussia 
should  take  Hanover,  should  give  Anspach  to  Bavaria, 
should  cede  Neufchatel  and  Cleves  to  Napoleon  himself, 
should  guarantee  to  France  her  present  dominions  and  all 
future  gains  in  Italy,  and  should  further  guarantee  to 
Bavaria  and  Wiirtemberg  such  new  possessions  as  might 
be  dealt  out  to  them  by  himself  as  reward  for  their 
services  to  France.  Haugwitz  duly  accepted  this 
Dec.  13.  offer,  and  on  the  13th  of  December  the  Treaty  was 
Dec.  20.  signed  at  Schonbrunn.  On  the  20th  Haugwitz  was 
given  to  understand  that  the  article  concerning  Italy 
included  Naples,  and  that  Hardenberg  must  be  dis- 
missed from  King  Frederick  William's  councils. 
Therewith  he  was  suffered  to  take  his  departure  to 
Berlin. 