

At  dawn  of  the  next  morning  reconnaissance  showed  June  27. 
that  the  enemy  was  in  position  on  the  further  bank, 
sheltered  by  houses,  hedges,  and  shipping,  whereas  the 
hither  bank  offered  no  cover  nor  shelter  of  any  kind. 
Beresford  at  once  brought  forward  to  the  water's  edge 
the  light  company  of  the  Seventy-first  together  with  his 
eleven  guns,  and  was  received  by  a  wild  and  ill-aimed 
fire  of  all  arms.  His  artillery  soon  silenced  that  of  the 
Spaniards,  and  the  passage  of  a  few  British  troops  in 
rafts  and  boats  brought  the  enemy's  feeble  resistance  to 
an  end.  By  eleven  o'clock  the  whole  British  force  had 
passed  the  river ;  no  enemy  was  to  be  seen  in  the 
three  miles  that  separated  the  stream  from  Buenos 
Ayres  ;  and  Beresford  sent  a  summons  to  the  Governor 
to  surrender.  After  a  short  parley  the  terms  were 
agreed  upon  ;  Beresford  granting  to  the  garrison  the 
honours  of  war  and  to  the  people  protection  of  private 
property,  with  continuance  of  the  existing  municipal  and 
judicial  authority,  and  restoration  of  captured  coasting 
vessels  to  their  owners.  Upon  these  conditions,  and  at 
a  cost  of  one  man  killed  and  a  dozen  wounded, 
Beresford's  handful  of  troops  obtained  possession  of  a 
town  of  seventy  thousand  inhabitants  with  fortifications 
containing  eighty-six  guns  of  all  calibres.1 

So  far  Popham's  audacious  stroke  was  crowned  with 
1  Beresford  to  Sec.  of  State,  nth  July  1806. 


3i 8  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1806.  success,  and  success  of  the  kind  which  was  dearest  to 
his  heart,  for  Beresford  sent  home  nearly  eleven  hundred 
thousand  dollars  of  prize-money.  But  the  situation  of 
the  British  was  critical,  and  Beresford  was  fully  aware  of 
it.  There  remained  in  the  Colony  about  two  thousand 
Spanish  infantry,  of  poor  quality  indeed  but  still  regular 
troops,  besides  four  to  five  thousand  irregulars,  which 
could  assemble  at  need  ;  and  it  was  tolerably  certain 
that  these  would  fall  upon  the  invaders  with  over- 
whelming strength  upon  the  first  appearance  of  weakness 
or  misfortune.  It  was  possible  to  conciliate  the  popula- 
tion of  the  city  itself,  but  not  that  of  the  entire  country  ; 
and  to  reduce  it  to  submission  Beresford  needed  a  strong 
force  of  cavalry,  which  he  did  not  possess.  Moreover, 
the  coming  of  the  British  had  thrown  everything  into 
disorder.  The  viceroy  had  fled  into  the  interior  ;  and 
the  inhabitants,  while  seizing  the  moment  to  shake  off 
the  yoke  of  Spain,  had  not  yet  yielded  to  their  new 
masters.  All  therefore  was  unstable  and  unsettled. 
The  one  thing  certain  was  that  the  Colonists  were  deeply 
ashamed  of  having  surrendered  to  so  puny  a  force,  and 
not  less  alarmed  at  having  no  greater  protection  to  count 
upon  in  case  of  an  attack  by  an  expedition  from  Spain. 
Their  position  was  thus  both  unfair  and  intolerable. 
Beresford,  while  seeking  to  remove  the  most  conspicuous 
of  their  grievances,  rightly  refused  to  commit  the  British 
Government  to  any  definite  line  of  policy.  It  was  only 
natural,  therefore,  that  the  Colonists  should  regard  his 
forcible  intrusion  upon  them  and  his  confiscation  of  the 
King  of  Spain's  property  as  little  better  than  an  act  of 
piracy.  Popham  might  represent  the  proceedings  as 
intended  to  further  the  cause  of  emancipation  in  South 
America  ;  but  the  Colonists  were  to  be  excused  if  they 
considered  a  British  occupation  of  their  capital  as  a 
strange  and  unwelcome  form  of  liberty. 