

I  precaution  and  to  the  skill  of  the  bluejackets,  one  boat 
only,  containing  thirty-six  men  of  the  Ninety-third,  was 
swamped.  Every  one  of  the  unlucky  Highlanders  was 
drowned  ;  and  these  together  with  another  man  killed, 
two  officers  and  two  more  men  wounded  by  the  bullets 
of  the  burghers,  constituted  the  only  casualties  of  the 
disembarkation.  The  rest  of  the  force  with  some 
artillery  and  supplies  was  landed  next  day  ;  and  the  first  Jan.  7 
and  greatest  difficulty  of  the  expedition  was  overcome. 

It  seems  surprising  that  the  Dutch  commander, 
General  Janssens,  having  had  full  forty-eight  hours' 
warning,  should  have  made  no  better  preparations  for 
resistance  ;  but  in  truth  every  circumstance  was  adverse 
to  him.  By  the  use  of  signal  guns  he  alarmed  the 
whole  country  within  fifty  leagues  of  Capetown  ;  but 
the  wheat  was  threshing  ;  the  grapes  were  ripening  ; 
the  farmers  were  in  the  midst  of  their  busiest  season  ; 
and  the  heat  was  such  that  journeys  could  only  be 
undertaken  by  night.  Apart  from  the  burghers,  the 
resources  of  Janssens  were  small.  He  had  one  battalion 
of  Waldeck  mercenaries  four  hundred  strong  ;  a  second 
of  half  that  number,  consisting  of  sharp-shooters 
recruited  from  all  nations  ;  and  a  third — the  Twenty- 
second  regiment  of  the  Dutch  line — besides  a  few 
dragoons  and  artillery,  making  up  a  total  of  twelve 
1  71st,  72nd,  93rd. 


308 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1806.  hundred  regular  troops.  In  addition  to  these  he  had  j 
two  hundred  and  forty  French  sailors,  between  three 
and  four  hundred  coloured  artillerymen  and  infantry, 
and  rather  over  two  hundred  burghers,  the  whole 
composing  a  heterogeneous  and  ill-assorted  force  such 
as  is  seldom  brought  together.  However,  he  collected 
it  for  what  it  might  be  worth,  in  all  about  two 
thousand  men  with  sixteen  guns,  and  at  one  o'clock  on 
Jan.  8.  the  morning  of  the  8  th  he  marched  out  towards  the 
Blueberg  to  meet  the  British. 

On  the  same  morning  and  at  nearly  the  same  hour 
Baird  likewise  began  his  march  upon  Capetown  with  over 
four  thousand  men,  two  howitzers  and  six  light  guns, 
and  seized  the  heights  of  the  Blueberg  before  Janssens 
could  reach  them.    From  thence  discerning  the  Dutch 
General  in  the  act  of  forming  line  of  battle  to  encounter  j : 
him,  he  divided  his  force  into  two  columns ;   the  t 
Highland  Brigade  advancing  straight  on  the  road  to  i 
Capetown,  and  the  remaining  brigade1  turning  off  to  2 
the  right.    Arriving  within  cannon-shot,  Baird  opened  ( 
fire  from  his  artillery  and  was  answered  by  the  Dutch  i 
guns  ;  but,  at  the  sight  of  a  few  rouni  shot  falling  near  t 
them,  the  Waldeckers  turned  and  ran.     The  Dutch  jj 
Twenty-second  thereupon  also  gave  way,  and,  after  f 
rallying  for  a  moment  under  Janssens  in  person,  fled  I 
again  at  the  sight  of  the  Highlanders  advancing  and  i 
could  not  be  stopped.    They  had  suffered  little,  for  the  ? 
Highland  Brigade  had  committed  the  fault,  rare  in  t 
British  troops,  of  firing  a  volley  at  long  range  before  - 
closing  with  the  bayonet ;  and  indeed  the  behaviour  of  ; 
this  Dutch  Twenty-second  and  the  Waldeckers  was  the  • 
more  discreditable  since  the  rest  of  Janssens'  troops,  • 
French,  Dutch,  and  negroes,  regulars  and  irregulars,  c 
stood  and  fought  with  great  gallantry.    However,  with  j 
his  line  thus  weakened,  Janssens  had  no  alternative  but  j 
to  fall  back.    At  Rietvlei  he  was  able  to  collect  what  |  . 
was  left  of  his  force,  when  he  sent  the  Waldeckers  to  c 
Capetown  in  disgrace,  and  led  the   rest,  with  the  | 
1  24th,  59th,  83rd, 