

Matters  at  Buenos  Ayres  had  reached  this  point 
when,  at  the  end  of  July,  the  letters  of  Beresford  and 
Popham  from  St.  Helena  reached  Downing  Street. 
The  enterprise  having  been  undertaken  without  the 


ch.  x         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  319 

knowledge  or  sanction  of  the  Government,  and  its  1806. 
issue  being  still  unknown,  Windham  was  unable  to 
give  Beresford  further  instructions  than  to  maintain 
himself  if  he  could,  to  avoid  all  share  in  any  revolu- 
tionary enterprises,  and  to  interfere  generally  with  the 
inhabitants  as  little  as  possible.  If  he  found  that  he 
could  not  hold  his  own,  then  he  was  to  send  the  troops 
back  to  the  Cape  and  return  home  on  leave.  In  any 
case,  however,  a  reinforcement  of  two  thousand  men 
under  Sir  Samuel  Auchmuty,  together  with  supplies 
and  stores,  would  be  sent  out  to  La  Plata  immediately.1 
It  is  difficult  to  see  what  more,  in  the  circumstances, 
the  Government  could  have  done  ;  for  Popham,  as  it 
turned  out,  had  chosen  a  singularly  inopportune 
moment  for  his  wild  adventure.  The  victory  of 
Austerlitz  and  the  change  of  Government  in  England 
had  led  to  rapid  and  startling  results  in  Europe,  to 
meet  which  the  Ministry  of  all  the  Talents  had  need 
of  all  the  resources  of  England.  Austerlitz  at  a  single 
stroke  had  driven  Austria  from  the  Coalition,  wrecked 
the  Holy  Roman  Empire,  confirmed  Prussia  in  a 
trembling  neutrality,  decided  the  fate  of  Naples,  and 
incidentally  clouded  the  victory  of  Trafalgar  with  the 
dust  that  rose  from  the  collapse  of  Pitt's  pygmy 
combinations  in  the  Mediterranean.  Napoleon's  first 
act  had  been  to  reward  his  German  allies  by  the  grant 
of  higher  titles  and  the  promise  of  large  tracts  of  jg^. 
Austrian  territory.  These  promises  the  Treaty  of  Dec.  26 
Pressburg  enabled  him  to  fulfil.  Thereby  Austria 
yielded  to  Baden  and  Wiirtemberg  sundry  petty  fiefs  ; 
to  Bavaria,  Tirol  and  Voralberg  ;  and  to  France  every 
inch  of  territory  that  she  had  gained  at  Campo  Formio  ; 
recognising  Napoleon  also  as  King  of  Italy,  and 
retaining  on  the  Adriatic  no  more  than  Trieste.  On 
the  same  day  Napoleon  ordered  St.  Cyr  to  march 
upon  Naples ;  on  the  27th  he  decreed  that  the  Dec.  27 
Bourbons  had  ceased  to  reign  in  that  kingdom ;  and 
on  the  31st  he  nominated  his  brother  Joseph  to  carry  Dec.  31 
1  Sec.  of  State  to  Beresford,  24th  July  1806. 


320 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1805.  his  decree  into  effect.  Months  before,  he  had  in- 
corporated the  Ligurian  Republic  into  the  French 
Empire,  and  he  now  designed  to  make  Holland,  which 
was  already  a  department  of  France,  into  a  kingdom 
for  his  brother  Louis. 

