

May  21.  the  2 1  st  of  May  the  armament  resumed  its  voyage  to 
Rio  de  la  Plata.  After  a  long  and  tedious  passage  Cape 
St.  Mary,  which  marks  the  northern  side  of  the  entrance 
June  8.  to  the  river,  was  sighted  on  the  8th  of  June  ;  Popham 
himself  together  with  an  officer  of  engineers  having  gone 
forward  in  a  frigate  on  the  27th  of  May  to  explore  the 
navigation  of  the  channel  and  reconnoitre  the  country. 

I 

1  Baird  to  Sec.  of  State,  14th  April  1806  ;  "Recollections  of  the  j 
British  Army,"  in  Colburne's  Military  Magazine,  June  1836. 

2  Artillery  :  1  officer,  10 1  n.c.o.  and  men.    St.  Helena  Infantry  : 
8  officers,  278  n.c.o.  and  men. 


ch.x         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  315 

Owing  to  fogs  and  baffling  winds  the  convoy  did  not  1806. 
overtake  this  frigate  until  the  14th  of  June  ;  and  then  June  14 
the  two  commanders  decided  that  the  point  to  be 
attacked  must  be  the  open  town  of  Buenos  Ayres. 

This,  it  must  be  remarked,  was  a  serious  deviation 
from  Popham's  original  plans.  Monte  Video  was  the 
place  which  he  had  at  first  intended  to  occupy,  for  he 
trusted,  upon  extremely  slender  information,  that  its 
fortifications  were  in  ruins  and  that  it  would  surrender 
without  firing  a  shot.  His  design  had  then  been  to 
send  the  few  Spanish  regular  troops  in  the  country  to 
Europe,  and  by  repairing  the  defences  of  the  city  to 
give  the  British  a  place  of  arms  from  which  they  would 
not  be  easily  dislodged,  or  where,  at  worst,  they  could 
have  some  chance  of  a  safe  re-embarkation.  The 
reason  alleged  for  his  change  of  plan  was  that  the  bread- 
stuffs  of  the  troops  were  exhausted,  that  none  could  be 
spared  from  the  men-of-war,  and  that  there  was  greater 
certainty  of  collecting  supplies  at  Buenos  Ayres  than  at 
Monte  Video.  The  cogency  of  such  arguments  must 
be  admitted  ;  but  with  our  knowledge  of  Popham's 
antecedents  and  character,  it  may  also  be  suspected  that 
the  Commodore  doubted  the  success  of  an  attack  upon 
Monte  Video,  and  that  he  therefore  declared  for  an 
immediate  movement  on  Buenos  Ayres,  where  he  could 
be  sure  of  finding  the  object  of  which  he  was  really  in 
search,  namely  prize-money.1 

Accordingly  such  troops  as  were  in  the  line-of-battle 
ships  were  transferred  to  transports  of  lighter  draught  ; 
and  on  the  16th  the  vessels  moved  up  the  river,  groping  June  16 
their  way  slowly  owing  to  fogs  and  difficulty  of  naviga- 
tion.   At  length  on  the  night  of  the  24th  of  June  they  June  24 
lay  off  Buenos  Ayres,  and  next  morning  reached  Point  June  25 
de  Quilmes,  some  eight  miles  below  the  city.    The  dis- 
embarkation  was   accomplished   without   mishap  or 
opposition  in  the  course  of  the  afternoon  and  night, 
though  a  hostile  force  was  visible  two  miles  away  upon 