


ch.x         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  309 

exception  of  the  French  sailors,  into  the  mountains  of  1806. 
Hottentot  Holland.    His  losses  appear  to  have  some- 
what exceeded   two   hundred   killed   and  wounded. 
Those  of  the  British  were  one  officer  and  fourteen  men 
killed,  nine  officers  and  one  hundred  and  eighty-eight 
men  killed,  wounded,  and  missing.    Five-sixths  of  the 
casualties  occurred  in  the  three  Highland  battalions,  the 
remaining  brigade  having  been  but  little  engaged.  It 
is  worthy  of  note  that  Baird  reported  Janssens'  force  to 
be  five  thousand  instead  of  two  thousand  strong,  and 
yet  contrived  that  only  the  Highland  Brigade  should  be 
j  employed  in  the  fight.    Such  proceedings  long  have 
w  been,  and  still  are,  far  too  common  among  our  Scottish 
i  Generals. 

On  the  evening  of  the  action  Baird  bivouacked 
I  at  Rietvlei,  in  much  anxiety  as  to  the  possibility  of 
!  obtaining  provisions  from  the  fleet.  Popham,  however, 
I  by  great  exertions  contrived  to  throw  a  small  quantity 

ashore  ;  and  on  the  9th  the  army  pushed  forward  to  Jan.  9. 

Capetown  over  arid  sand,  taking  up  a  position  at  Salt 
)  River,  about  a  mile  and  a  half  north  of  the  town,  where 

the  General  hoped  to  ensure  communication  with  the 
*  fleet  and  if  necessary  to  land  his  siege-train.  Here 
I  Beresford  and  his  detachment  joined  the  army,  and  here 

Baird  received  overtures  for  a  suspension  of  arms  from 

the  Commandant  at  Capetown  ;  with  the  result  that 

I  within  twenty-four  hours  a  capitulation  was  signed  and 

i|  the  town  was  occupied  by  the  British.    Janssens  still  Jan.  10. 

:|  remained  to  be  dealt  with,  but  his  force  was  fast 

\\  dwindling  owing  to  desertion  ;  and  Baird,  while  making 

I  his  dispositions  to  attack  and  cut  him  off,  endeavoured 

,  \  to  end  matters  by  a  letter  complimenting  him  upon  his 

,1  gallantry,  urging  the  fruitlessness  of  resistance,  and 

j  offering  honourable  terms  for  the  surrender  of  the 

j  colony.    After  a  little  hesitation  these  were  accepted, 

I  and  on  the   18th  of  January  was  signed  the  final  Jan.  18. 

}  capitulation  which  delivered  Cape  Colony  to  the  British.1 
,  11 

1  R.O.  Cape  of  Good  Hope.    Military  Transactions,  i.  pp.  104- 
i  142  ;  TheaPs  History  of  South  Africa,  i.  138-15  0. 


310  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xm 

1806.      So  far  all  had  gone  well.    The  capture  of  the  Cape, 
of  course,  signified  the  locking  up  of  from  three  to  four 
thousand  men  in  a  distant  garrison,  but  this  was  no 
great  price  to  pay  for  the  safety  of  India.    There  was 
little  to  be  feared  from  the  inhabitants.    The  Dutch 
and  French  troops,  which  had  formed  the  bulk  of 
Janssens'  army,  were  sent  back  to  Europe  under  the 
treaty  of  surrender  ;  and  the  enlistment  of  the  Wal- 
deckers  from  the  Dutch  into  the  British  service  more 
than  made  good  the  casualties  of  Baird's  short  campaign. 
An  additional  stroke  of  luck  came  soon  after.  The 
Dutch  colours  were  kept  flying  in  Table  Bay  for  some 
time  after  the  country  had  past  into  British  hands  ; 
and  a  French  frigate,  deceived  by  this  wile,  sailed  into 
the  anchorage  and  was  at  once  taken.    She  proved  to  11 
have  on  board  several  companies  of  the  Second  and  t 
Fifty-fourth  British  regiments,  which  she  had  captured  in  1 
transports  at  the  mouth  of  the  Channel,  and  was  carry-  is 
ing  to  Mauritius.    These  men  were  homeward  bound  !; 
from  the  Mediterranean,  so  that  they  were  isolated 
from  their  battalions,  but  at  all   events  they  were  : 
recovered,  and  were  no  unwelcome^addition  to  the  0 
garrison  at  the  moment.     Unfortunately,  however,  c< 
Baird  chose  to  turn  this  windfall  to  the  worst  possible  0 
account. 