


312 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


of  war  between  England  and  Spain,  he  again  sought 
Pitt,  and  so  far  commended  his  scheme  to  the  Ministry 
and  its  advisers  that,  as  we  have  seen,  an  expedition  was 
actually  prepared,  and  only  abandoned  with  the  greatest 
reluctance  and  regret.  On  this  occasion  he  contrived 
to  enlist  the  sympathy  not  only  of  Henry  Dundas 
and  Popham  but  even  of  so  sober  a  person  as  Lord 
Grenville.  When  he  found  that  England  had  her  hands 
already  overfull,  he  returned  in  1801  to  France  to  try 
his  fortune  there.  As  however  he  could  obtain  nothing 
from  Bonaparte,  he  came  once  again  to  England  in 
1802,  when  Addington  gave  him  encouragement  and 
countenance,  though  shrinking  from  the  final  step  of 
equipping  a  ship  for  him.  But,  when  Pitt  returned 
to  office,  Miranda  and  Popham,  having  already  gained 
over  Lord  Melville  1  at  the  Admiralty,  urged  their  views 
upon  the  Prime  Minister  with  increased  vehemence  ; 
and  matters  went  so  far  that  Popham  on  the  16th  of 
October  1804  produced  a  long  memorandum,  working 
out  the  details  of  an  expedition  to  South  America. 
Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,  at  the  request  of  Ministers,  like- 
wise compiled  similar  particulars  for~a  descent  upon 
the  Orinoco. 

Nothing  however  came  of  this,  though  Popham 
afterwards  affirmed  that,  from  his  recollection  of  what 
had  passed,  the  Ministry  had  given  him  a  free  hand  to 
make  a  descent  upon  Buenos  Ayres.  It  is  possible  that 
both  Pitt  and  Melville  were  guilty  of  some  indiscretion 
in  their  frequent  conversations  with  Popham,  for  the 
enterprise  was  exactly  of  a  nature  to  captivate  their 
unmilitary  minds.  Popham  averred  that  the  imports 
from  South  America  into  Spain  in  produce  and  specie 
were  worth  some  twenty  millions  annually,  that  two- 
thirds  of  this  sum  passed  into  the  hands  of  France 
and  that,  unless  the  British  anticipated  him,  Bonaparte 
would  shortly  send  expeditions  to  Vera  Cruz,  Mexico, 
Brazil,  and  Rio  de  la  Plata.  How  Napoleon  was  to 
send  so  large  a  force  over  the  sea  with  a  navy  so  inferior 

1  This  of  course  was  the  Henry  Dundas  above  mentioned. 


ch.x         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  313 

to  England's  Popham  did  not  pause  to  explain  nor  the  1806. 
Ministers  to  inquire.    Lord  Grenville,  on  the  other 
i    hand,  had  taken  a  truer  measure  of  Miranda  than  his 
late  colleagues  and,  whatever  he  may  have  thought 
I    of  him  in  1796,  was  unwilling  to  trust  him  in  1804  ; 
1    but,  being  in  opposition  during  Pitt's  administration,  he 
i    was  of  course  without  influence  with  the  party  in  power, 
j    The  truth  is  that  Miranda  was  simply  a  shallow, 
I    unscrupulous  adventurer,  not  wholly  innocent  of  knavery, 
I    and  that  Popham's  character  at  bottom  perhaps  differed 
not  very  greatly  from  that  of  Miranda.1 