

Sir  Home  Popham,  the  commander  of  the  fleet  : 
which  had  escorted  Baird,  was  a  restless  officer  of  0 
insinuating  manners,  who  had  early  in  his  career  gained  B 
favour  in  high  places.    In  1793  and  1794  he  had  been  n 
entrusted  with  the  charge  of  gun-boats,  pontoons,  and 
similar  matters  under  the  Duke  of  York,  and  had 
acquitted  himself  always  with  credit.    Running  back- 
wards and  forwards  between  the  Low  Countries  and 
England  with  despatches,  he  had  been  seen  and  consulted 
by  Ministers,  and,  being  always  ready  with  a  decided 
opinion  upon  any  enterprise,  enjoyed,  in  a  quiet  way,  con-  |  r 
siderable  influence  with  them.    He  was  by  no  means  .  |c 
without  ability.    He  had  devised  and  was  constantly 
improving  a  code  of  naval  signals  ;  and  in  the  matter  of 

I 


ch.  x        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  3 1 1 

embarking  and  disembarking  troops  in  an  enemy's  1806. 
country  he  was  full  of  skill  and  resource.  He  had 
worked  so  much  with  the  Army  that  he  thoroughly 
understood  the  service,  and  would  spare  no  pains 
to  ensure  the  health  and  comfort  of  any  troops  with 
which  he  was  concerned.  In  the  Navy  also  he  was 
«  popular,  for  he  looked  carefully  to  the  interest  of  the 
men  and  officers  under  his  immediate  command, 
particularly  in  the  matter  of  prize-money,  which  was 
frequently  the  main  object  of  his  operations*  This, 
indeed,  was  his  weakest  point.  Constant  employment 
in  more  or  less  independent  stations  had  given  him  an 
opportunity  of  dabbling  in  mercantile  transactions 
which,  in  the  opinion  of  his  contemporaries,  were  by 
no  means  to  his  credit.  The  same  cause  had  led  him 
to  persuade  himself  that  he  was  a  great  diplomatist  and 
administrator;  and  in  his  distant  command  at  the  Cape 
he  thought  that  he  saw  an  opportunity  for  adding  both 
to  his  wealth  and  to  his  importance. 

Already,  in  previous  volumes  of  this  history,  the 
reader   has   encountered   the  name  of  Miranda,  in 
connection  with  revolutionary  movements  in  the  Spanish 
colonies  of  South  America.    Miranda  was  a  Venezuelan 
of  Caracas,  who  in  1782  had  been  dismissed  from  the 
Spanish  service  under  an  accusation  of  complicity  in  illicit 
trading  with  North  America  and  of  corrupt  delivery 
of  the  plans  of  the  fortifications  of  Havana  to  the 
!  British  Government.     From  that  time  onwards  he 
1  never  ceased  his  efforts  to  drag  the  British  Government 
;  into  countenancing  and  supporting  a  revolution  in  South 
1  America.    In  1783  he  put  forward  a  complete  plan  for 
I  the  emancipation  of  the  Spanish  Colonies  with  the  help 
of  England,  but  was  repulsed  by  Fox  and  North.  In 
1 1790,  at  the  time  of  the  dispute  over  Nootka  Sound,  he 
i  brought  the  same  plan  before  Pitt  and,  though  cordially 
!  received,  was  foiled  by  the  pacific  settlement  of  the 
controversy.    Failing  then  to  obtain  a  pension  from 
Pitt,  he  entered  the  service  of  the  French  Republic  and 
I  fought  under  Dumouriez.    In  1796,  upon  the  outbreak 