

The  result  of  all  these  discussions  as  to  seconding  a 
revolutionary  movement  in  South  America  was  that 
Popham,  finding  himself  at  the  Cape  with  a  fairly 
strong  squadron  and  no  immediate  work  to  be  done, 
thought  the  opportunity  a  good  one  to  make  a  sensational 
stroke  for  his  own  hand.  He  therefore  besought 
Baird  to  trust  him  with  a  battalion  in  order  to  make 
a  beginning  by  the  capture  of  Buenos  Ayres  and  of  the 
province  now  known  by  the  name  of  Argentina.  It  says 
much  for  his  powers  of  address  that  he  could  persuade 
Baird  even  to  listen,  for  that  General  was  hard,  rough, 
difficult,  and  jealous  of  his  own  authority.  But  a  Scot 
is  rarely  loth  to  perpetrate  a  job  for  his  own  countrymen. 
The  General  therefore  told  the  Commander  that  if  he 
chose  to  take  his  own  regiment,  the  Seventy-first,  he 
might  do  so,  but  that  he  should  have  no  other. 
Popham  gladly  accepted  the  offer.  The  Seventy-first 
was  embarked  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Beresford, 
the  future  marshal  of  Portugal,  together  with  a  few 
artillerymen  r  four  guns,  and  a  handful  of  dragoons;2  and 
■ 

1  Athenaum,  April  19,  1902,  Pitt  and  General  Miranda,  by- 
Hubert  Hall ;  Popham's  memo,  of  1 6th  Oct.  1804  in  Popham  to 
Sec.  of  State  of  30th  April  1806  ;  Dropmore  Papers. 

2  R.A.,  3  officers,  33  n.c.o.  and  men,  4  guns  (2  complete  with 

horses  and  drivers) 

20th  L.D.  1  officer,    6  men. 
71st  Foot.  32     „     883  „ 

Total       36  officers,  922  men.    Also  60  women  (6  to  each  company) 
and  40  children. 


3H 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1 806.  the  Colonel  received  instructions  intimating  that,  in 
Baird's  opinion,  a  force  of  less  than  a  thousand  men,  with 
a  few  seamen  and  marines,  was  sufficient  to  master  the 
Spanish  possessions  on  Rio  de  la  Plata — a  country  half 
as  large  as  Europe,  with  a  capital  containing  seventy 
thousand  souls.  In  case  of  failure,  continued  the 
instructions,  Beresford  was  to  return  at  once  with  all 
his  troops  to  the  Cape.  This  clause  was  very  neces- 
sary ;  for  Popham  was  quite  capable  of  making  a 
long  marauding  voyage  round  the  Spanish  settlements 
after  the  Elizabethan  fashion.  The  Commodore  then 
ordered  the  whole  of  his  squadron  to  get  under  way, 
leaving  not  a  single  ship  upon  the  station  ;  and  on 

April  14.  the  14th  of  April  the  armament,  much  envied  by  the 
rest  of  the  garrison,  sailed  away  to  the  west.1 

For  a  week  the  voyage  was  prosperous  ;  but  on  the 

April  21.  2 1  st  one  of  the  transports  with  two  hundred  men  on 
board  parted  company  and  disappeared,  diminishing  the 
military  force  so  seriously  that  Popham  thought  it 
prudent  to  bear  up  for  St.  Helena.  From  thence  he  and 
Beresford  wrote  to  England  on  the  30th  to  report  what 
they  had  done ;  Popham  with  long  and  elaborate  explana- 
tions which  betrayed  his  consciousness  of  having  acted 
amiss  ;  Beresford  with  a  short  but  urgent  appeal  for 
instructions  as  to  his  dealings  with  the  inhabitants. 
Popham  then  contrived  to  wheedle  the  Governor  of  St. 
Helena  into  granting  him  a  reinforcement  of  nearly  four 
hundred  men 2  from  the  garrison  of  the  island  ;  and  on 