

But  at  this  point,  to  the  general  surprise,  the  whole  of 
Napoleon's  combinations  were  upset  by  a  sudden  revolt 
on  the  part  of  Prussia.    When  the  Confederation  of  the 
Rhine  was  first  reported  at  Berlin,  Frederick  William 
received  the  news  with  satisfaction,  giving  out  that  he 
would  himself  form  a  similar  confederation  of  Northern 
Germany,  with  Prussia,  enriched  by  the  possession  of 
Hanover,  at  its  head.    But  presently  he  realised  that 
thereby   he   would   commit   himself    completely  to 
Napoleon's  side  against  Austria  and  Russia  ;  and  the 
bare  thought  of  this  caused  the  greatest  indignation 
among  the  many  Prussians  who  felt  ashamed  of  their 
Sovereign's  ignoble  truckling  to  the  Corsican  adventurer,  s 
A  few  days  later  there  arrived  at  Berlin  Lucchesini's  i 
report  that  Napoleon  had  actually  offered  Hanover  to 
England  ;  and  certain  suspicious  movements  of  French  ] 
troops,  added  to  other  unpleasant  circumstances,  brought 
matters  to  a  crisis.    The  miserable  King  completely  1 
lost  his  head.    Public  feeling  in  his  capital  had  passed  1 
hopelessly  out  of  his  control ;  the  moment  of  trial  which  i 
he  had  so  long  evaded  was  at  hand  ;  and  at  this  perilous  ) 
moment,  his  trusted  friend  the  Tsar  had,  as  he  thought, 
Aug.  9.  made  his  peace  with  Napoleon.    He  indited  a  humble 
letter  to  Alexander  begging  for  help  ;  and  on  the  next  l 
day  he  ordered  his  army  to  be  mobilised,  remaining  in  \ 
despicable  and  trembling  suspense  until  a  courier  from 
St.  Petersburg  should  apprise  him  of  his  fate.    On  the  1 
Aug.  26.  26th  the  answer  arrived.    Alexander  had  declined  to  i 
ratify  d'Oubril's  treaty,  and  had  disgraced  d'Oubril 
himself.    The  clamour  of  the  Prussian  army  for  war 
was  at  once  redoubled  ;  and  Frederick  William  saw  j 


ch.  x         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  329 

that  the  die  was  cast.  The  occasion  was  one  in  which  1806. 
even  a  Bourbon  of  that  period  might  have  risen,  if  only 
for  a  moment,  to  the  height  that  is  worthy  of  a  patriot, 
if  not  of  a  King.  But  of  this  Hohenzollern  it  had  been 
written,  "  Upon  thy  belly  shalt  thou  go,  and  dust  shalt 
thou  eat."  He  wrote  frantic  letters  to  all  the  neighbours 
whom  he  had  swindled  and  deceived,  with  abject 
promises  to  do  anything  that  they  wished.  He  would 
freely  grant  Bavaria  to  Austria,  nay,  if  need  were,  he 
would  share  Germany  with  the  Emperor  Francis  ;  he 
had  never  intended  to  keep  Hanover  against  the  wish 
of  England,  and  he  would  gladly  defer  the  final  settle- 
ment of  the  question  until  the  close  of  the  war  upon 
which  he  was  about  to  enter.  No  doubt  at  the  moment 
he  was  sincere,  for  he  was  sincerely  frightened  ;  but  he 
had  sown  abroad  too  many  lies  to  reap  any  but  a 
goodly  harvest  of  contempt. 