

The  negotiations  with  England  were  informally 
opened  by  Talleyrand  with  Lord  Yarmouth,  one  of 
the  travelling  Englishmen  who  had  been  detained  in 


ch.x         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  323 

France  by  Napoleon's  decree  at  the  opening  of  the  1806. 
war.    Yarmouth  declined  to  enter  into  any  discussion 
of  the  subject  except  on  the  preliminary  condition  that 
Hanover  should  be  restored  to  its  rightful  sovereign. 
To  this  Talleyrand  raised  no  objection  ;  though  the 
article  which  was  most  vital  to  Prussia  in  the  recent 
treaty  was  thereby  very  seriously  imperilled.  The 
effrontery  of  Talleyrand's  action  was  sufficiently  cynical, 
and  yet  it  was  not  unjustifiable,  for  Frederick  William 
the  Little  had  been  as  careless  of  his  obligations  as 
Napoleon  the  Great.    No  sooner,  in  fact,  had  the  King 
of  Prussia  signed  his  treaty  with  France  than  he  sent  the 
Duke  of  Brunswick  to  St.  Petersburg  to  report  it  to  the 
Tsar  ;  with  the  result  that,  within  six  weeks  of  binding 
himself  by  an  alliance  with  France  against  Russia,  he 
concluded  a  secret  agreement   to  ally  himself  with 
Russia  against  France.    Every  precaution  was  of  course 
taken  to  lull  Napoleon  into  false  security  while  this 
trickery  was  going  forward  ;  but  Frederick  William 
had  deceived  too  many  parties  to  escape  betrayal  by 
some  one  of  them.    The  British  Ministry,  indignant 
over  the  occupation  of  Hanover  by  Prussian  troops, 
made  public  the  papers  concerning  Lord  Harrowby's 
negotiations  at  Berlin,  which  showed  that  it  was  not 
from  goodwill  towards  France  that  Prussia  had  refused 
to  join  the  Coalition.    Napoleon,  after  reading  these, 
published  in  the  Moniteur  so  furious  an  attack  upon  Mar.  21. 
Hardenberg    that    Frederick   William    hastened   to  Mar.  29. 
dismiss  that  Minister  ostensibly,  though  not  actually, 
tlfrom  office,  in  order  to  allay  the  Emperor's  wrath. 
MBut   the   British   nation  was   not   less   angry  than 
tH  Napoleon  over   these   revelations,  particularly  when 
)i  Prussia  added  injury  to  insult  by  closing  her  ports  to 
i#  I  British   trade.     The   British   Government  promptly  April  1. 
\  retorted  by  laying  an  embargo  on  all  Prussian  vessels 
I  in  British  ports,  and  declaring  the  Ems  and  Weser  in 
Ufa  state  of  blockade;  and  these  measures  were  finally  Apr.  4-5, 
I  clinched  on  the  21st  of  April  by  a  Royal  message  to  April  21. 
'  jParliament  declaring  war  against  Prussia  by  sea.  In 


324 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1806.  both  Houses  members  seized  the  opportunity  to  state 
as  pointedly  as  possible  their  opinions  of  King  Frederick 
William  and  of  his  policy  ;  and  if  that  monarch  failed 
to  awake  to  a  sense  of  his  own  contemptibility,  it  was 
certainly  not  the  fault  of  the  debaters  at  Westminster. 
The  lesson  was  enforced  by  the  sweeping  of  the 
Prussian  flag  off  the  seas  in  the  course  of  the  next 
few  weeks  ;  and  yet  this  invective  and  these  reprisals 
were  directed  at  one  who  really  clung  with  desperate 
though  dissembled  tenacity  to  England's  most  valuable 
ally,  the  Tsar  Alexander.  Never  was  there  a  more 
grotesque  political  situation. 