

During  this  time  the  Emperor's  negotiations  with 
England  continued,  but  made  little  progress,  the  two 
parties  being  steadily  at  variance  over  two  principal 
points.  The  first  of  these,  as  has  already  been  men- 
tioned, was  Fox's  refusal  to  treat  except  in  concert 
with  Russia  ;  the  second  was  the  cession  of  Sicily  to 
France,  which  Napoleon  persistently  demanded,  and 
Fox  as  persistently  refused.  The  Emperor  designedly 
protracted  the  business,  hoping  always  that  the  capture 
of  Sicily  by  Joseph  Bonaparte  might  give  him  the 
upper  hand  in  dictating  conditions  of  peace  ;  but,  as 
we  shall  see,  his  expectations  upon  this  head  were 
doomed  to  something  more  than  disappointment. 
erS  None  the  less,  the  dexterity  which  he  showed  in  the 
1  Corres.  de  Napoleon,  10,339. 


326  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xhi 

1806.  diplomatic  struggle  was  extraordinary.  After  much 
discussion,  he  deferred  to  Fox's  determination  not 
to  treat  apart  from  Russia  ;  but  he  did  so  only  to 
seek  reconciliation  with  Russia  apart  from  England. 
The  Tsar,  as  it  happened,  was  willing,  though  rather  in 
the  hope  of  gaining  time  than  of  coming  to  an  under- 
standing, to  open  informal  negotiations,  for  which 
purpose  he  despatched  M.  d'Oubril  to  Paris,  ostensibly 
upon  some  business  of  exchange  of  prisoners.  Delaying 
d'OubriFs  arrival  on  various  pretexts  lest  he  should 
meet  and  take  counsel  with  Yarmouth,  Napoleon  made 
a  last  effort  to  break  down  the  resolution  of  the  English 
nobleman.  Finding  persuasion  to  be  useless,  Talleyrand 
did  not  scruple  to  threaten  that  France  would  seize  Spain 
and  Portugal,  shut  their  ports  against  the  British,  and  so 
force  England  to  come  to  terms.  The  menace  failed 
to  move  Yarmouth  ;  and  d'Oubril  was  then  admitted  to 
the  capital.  The  Russian  proved  to  be  clay  in 
Talleyrand's  hands  ;  and  in  a  few  days  he  was  beguiled 

July  20.  into  signing  a  treaty  whereby,  among  other  matters, 
Russia  recognised  the  cession  of  Cattaro  and  Dalmatia 
to  France,  and  of  Sicily  to  Joseph  Bonaparte  as  King  of 
Naples.  Having  obtained  this,  Napoleon  flourished  it 
in  the  face  of  Yarmouth  in  the  hope  that  it  would  scare 
him  into  accepting  the  terms  of  France,  which  con- 
cession would  in  its  turn  compel  the  Tsar  to  ratify 
d'OubriFs  treaty.  He  offered  also  to  restore  to 
England  the  sovereignty  of  Hanover  and  to  confirm 
her  in  possession  of  Malta,  requiring  in  return  that  she 
should  acknowledge  Joseph  as  King  of  the  Two  Sicilies. 
Since  Fox  had  lately  shown  signs  of  relenting  upon  the 

July  26.  article  of  Sicily,  Yarmouth  upon  the  26th  of  July  agreed 
to  cede  that  island  to  France  ;  and  Napoleon  felt  with 
some  confidence  that  he  had  at  last  brought  both 
Russia  and  England  to  the  point  of  signing  peace. 