

Throughout  this  time  Fox  was  pursuing  active 
negotiations  with  Russia,  with  the  special  object  of 
thwarting  Napoleon's  designs  in  the  Mediterranean. 
Throughout  the  long  diplomatic  game  with  Russia  the 
French  Emperor's  great  card  had  been  Turkey,  which  he 
was  equally  ready  to  dismember  in  order  to  conciliate  the 
Tsar,  or  to  champion  in  order  to  embarrass  him.  The 
Eastern  question  had  become  more  urgent  since  the 
Peace  of  Pressburg  ;  for  by  the  acquisition  of  Dalmatia 
the  French  Empire  was  extended  to  the  marches  of 
the  Ottoman.  The  partition  of  the  Sultan's  dominions 
having  long  been  a  favourite  project  with  Russia,  the 
Tsar  embraced  the  opportunity  to  press  it  upon 
England  ;  and  Fox,  though  unprepared  to  go  to  such 
extreme  lengths  as  this,  nevertheless  assured  the 
Russian  Ambassador  that,  in  case  of  need,  England  was 
prepared  to  occupy  Alexandria.  The  point  must  be 
borne  in  mind,  for,  as  shall  be  seen,  this  arrangement 
for  upholding  Russian  influence  at  Constantinople, 
whatever  the  cost,  was  actually  carried  out  within 
twelve  months. 

At  the  time,  however,  Napoleon  was  checked  in 
Eastern  Europe  by  the  intrigues  of  Russia  with  the 
Montenegrins  concerning  Cattaro.  This  place  under 
the  Treaty  of  Pressburg  should  have  been  delivered 
up  to  France ;  but  as  no  French  commissioners 
arrived  at  the  time  to  take  it  over,  Russian  agents 


ch.x         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  325 

persuaded  the  inhabitants  that  they  might  yield  the  1806. 
place  to  whom  they  chose.  The  Montenegrins  at  once 
rose  in  insurrection,  compelled  the  small  Austrian 
garrison  to  surrender  the  fortress,  and  transferred  it 
to  the  Russians,  who  hastened  to  occupy  it  in  force. 
Napoleon  was  furious.  He  suspended  the  march  of 
his  army  from  the  German  states  into  France,  and  de- 
clared his  intention  of  holding  Braunau  on  the  Inn 
until  Cattaro  should  be  delivered  up  to  him.  He  had 
hoped  to  close  the  eastern  coast  of  the  Adriatic 
altogether  to  British  ships ;  and  it  enraged  him  to 
see  its  most  important  port  still  open  to  them. 
However,  he  characteristically  indemnified  himself  by 
seizing  Ragusa,  neutral  territory  against  which  he  had 
neither  quarrel  nor  grievance  ;  which  done,  he  pro- 
ceeded to  develop  his  further  plans  alike  for  excluding 
the  British  from  the  Mediterranean,  and  for  bringing 
fresh  pressure  to  bear  upon  Russia  by  skilful  manipula- 
tion of  Turkey.  On  the  9th  of  June,1  he  ordered  June  9. 
Sebastiani  to  repair  to  Constantinople,  there  to  assure 
the  Sultan  of  his  firm  friendship  and  support  against 
all  enemies  and  in  particular  against  Russia,  while 
he  himself  prepared  to  assemble  a  force  in  Dalmatia  in 
order  to  second  Sebastiani's  mission  by  threats. 