

Without  delay  therefore  he  proclaimed  the  dissolution 
of  the  Holy  Roman  Empire,  and  the  reconstitution  of 
Germany  under  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine.  The 
Confederation  consisted  of  sixteen  states  :  two  kingdoms 


ch.  x         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  327 

— Bavaria  and  Wttrtemberg  ;  three  grand  duchies —  1806. 
Baden,  Darmstadt,  and  Berg ;  one  ecclesiastical  principality 
— Frankfurt ;  and  ten  secular  principalities,  over  which 
presided  two  princes  of  Nassau,  two  of  Hohenzollern, 
two  of  Salm,  and  one  each  of  Isenburg,  Arenberg, 
Lichtenstein,  and  de  Leyen.  The  whole  were  under 
Napoleon's  protection,  and  were  bound  to  provide 
him  with  sixty -three  thousand  troops  when  called 
upon.  Berg,  it  may  be  added,  was  given  to  Murat 
under  Napoleon's  new  system  of  appanages,  even  as 
Holland  had  been  given  in  June  to  his  brother  Louis, 
and  Naples  to  Joseph.  Austria  was  pressed  to  accept 
this  new  model  of  Germany  under  threats  ;  and  Prussia 
was  tempted  to  accede  to  it  by  the  insinuation  that 
Hanover  should  be  assured  to  her  and  that  Frederick 
William  might  shortly  look  for  an  imperial  crown. 
Unfortunately,  however,  Yarmouth  in  his  cups  betrayed 
to  Lucchesini,  the  Prussian  Ambassador  at  Paris,  that 
Napoleon  had  already  promised  Hanover  to  England  ; 
and  this  fact  was  promptly  reported  to  Berlin.  Never- 
theless the  Emperor  continued  to  believe  in  the  prospect 
of  a  speedy  peace  with  England,  for  on  the  5  th  of  Aug.  5 
August  a  formal  negotiator  from  Fox  arrived  in  Paris 
in  the  person  of  Lord  Lauderdale.  But  in  the  mean- 
while the  intelligence  of  d'Oubril's  treaty  had  reached 
London  and  raised  a  storm  of  indignation,  which 
was  heightened  by  the  news  of  the  Confederation  of 
the  Rhine,  signifying  as  it  did  further  restrictions  upon 
England's  commerce.  Lauderdale,  moreover,  had  been 
directed  after  all  to  insist  that  Sicily  should  not  be 
abandoned  to  France ;  and  indeed  had  Fox  known 
at  the  moment,  as  Napoleon  did  know,  what  had 
lately  passed  in  Calabria  between .  the  British  and 
I  French  troops,  his  instructions  would  no  doubt  have 
been  even  firmer  upon  this  point  than  they  were. 
However,  Lauderdale  was  resolute  enough  as  to  Sicily, 
and,  finding  Napoleon  equally  determined  to  the 
contrary,  on  the  9th  of  August  demanded  his  passports.  Aug.  9 
Day  after  day  Napoleon  excused  himself  from  granting 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1806.  them,  hoping  that  time  would  work  in  his  favour. 
Francis  of  Austria,  in  obedience  to  his  mandate,  had 
renounced  the  title  of  Emperor  of  Germany  and  had 
recognised  Joseph  as  King  of  the  Two  Sicilies  ;  and  any 
day  might  bring  the  Tsar's  ratification  of  d'Oubril's 
treaty  from  St.  Petersburg.  Then  England,  forsaken 
both  by  Russia  and  Austria  would,  as  the  Emperor 
reckoned,  be  thankful  to  close  with  his  conditions. 