


ch.  xi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  333 

placed  under  his  command,  unasked,  the  line  of  defence  1806. 
from  Milazzo  to  Cape  Passaro,  though  the  Neapolitan 
force  which  was  allotted  to  this  charge  amounted 
to  fewer  than  four  thousand  bad  and  discouraged 
men.  The  Militia  was,  indeed,  placed  at  the  General's 
disposal,  but,  as  it  consisted  merely  of  a  list  of  names, 
was  of  little  profit.  Stuart,  therefore,  obtained  leave 
from  the  Court  to  raise  a  corps  of  five  hundred  Sicilian 
Fencibles,  drawing  British  pay  and  wearing  the  British 
uniform  ;  and  men  were  readily  found  to  fill  its  ranks. 
At  the  same  time  a  flotilla  of  small  craft  was  organised 
for  the  defence  of  the  straits,  the  men  being  chiefly 
mariners  of  Sicily  and  the  Lipari  Islands,  under  the 
direction  of  a  few  officers  of  the  British  Army.  It  is 
curious  that  the  crews  of  these  vessels  declined  to  come 
forward  until  General  Stuart  permitted  them  to  serve 
under  the  British  flag,  for  they  refused  utterly  to  fight 
under  that  of  King  Ferdinand.  Thus  by  the  end  of  May  May. 
the  British  force,  increased  to  seven  and  eight  thousand 
men,  lay  ensconced  with  its  left  fortified  at  Milazzo 
and  with  outposts  on  its  right  extending  towards 
Taormina  ;  the  flotilla  scouring  the  straits,  and  a  few 
vessels  of  war  being  anchored  at  Messina.1  Altogether 
the  situation  was  greatly  improved,  and  would  have 
been  promising  but  for  the  defects  of  the  military  and 
naval  commanders. 

Stuart,  whom  we  have  already  seen  in  Egypt,  was 
not  without  brains  and  energy  ;  but  he  was  vain,  flighty, 
and  superficial,  and  therefore  incapable  either  of  project- 
ing or  executing  any  sound  or  far-seeing  plan  of 
operations.  Sidney  Smith,  the  naval  commander, 
though  brave  and  restlessly  active,  was  quite  as  super- 
ficial as  Stuart  and  a  great  deal  vainer.  He  had 
rendered  a  very  conspicuous  service  at  Acre,  and  took 
good  care  that  all  the  world  should  know  it.  As  a 
partisan  leader  he  had  unquestionably  great  gifts  of 
daring,  readiness,  and  resource;  but  for  the  higher 
operations  of  war  he  was  absolutely  unfitted,  having 

1  Stuart  to  Sec.  of  State,  26th  May  1806  ;  Bunbury,  227-229. 


334 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1806.  neither  depth  nor  foresight  nor  fixity  of  purpose.  He 
could  talk  of  no  subject  but  himself ;  he  worked  chiefly 
if  not  exclusively  for  his  own  hand  and  his  own  dis- 
tinction ;  he  would  flaunt  himself  like  a  peacock  in  any 
company  ;  he  had  a  pestilent  love  of  displaying  his 
name  and  exploits  in  the  newspapers  ;  and,  worst  of 
all,  he  was  docile  even  to  servility  when  concerned  with 
crowned  heads.  In  a  word,  he  was  utterly  unfit  for 
supreme  command. 