

Napoleon's  answer  to  all  these  preparations  was  an 
order  to  Berthier  to  countermand  the  return  of  his 
troops  to  France,  to  concentrate  at  Bamberg,  and  to 
send  officers  to  reconnoitre  the  country  between  Bamberg 
and  Berlin.1  He  had  no  intention  of  refusing  Prussia's 
challenge,  though  the  situation  for  him  was  serious. 
Here,  within  less  than  a  year  of  Ulm  and  Austerlitz,  was 
a  new  coalition  of  England,  Russia,  and  Prussia  leagued 
against  him  ;  and  a  defeat  would  bring  all  Europe 
upon  his  back.  Above  all,  there  were  bad  signs  in 
Italy,  where  since  July  things  had  gone  but  ill  with 
Joseph  Bonaparte  and  his  arms.  It  is  now  time  to 
look  into  Italian  affairs  more  closely. 

1  Corres.  de  Napoleon,  10,730,  10,744,  3rd,  5th  Sept.  1806. 


CHAPTER  XI 


1806.  Our  last  sight  of  Sicily  was  in  February  1806,  when 
by  the  firmness  of  Craig,  in  spite  of  Mr.  Elliot's  pro- 
tests, the  small  British  force  in  the  Mediterranean  was 
brought  into  the  harbour  of  Messina  after  the  evacua- 
tion of  Naples.  Upon  the  flight  of  the  Neapolitan 
Court  to  Sicily,  the  help  of  these  troops  was  hastily 

Feb.  16.  invoked  for  defence  of  the  island  ;  and  on  the  16th  of 
February  they  began  their  disembarkation  at  Messina. 
On  the  same  day  Craig,  worn  down  with  illness  and 
anxiety,  wrote  to  ask  leave  to  resign  his  command, 
since  he  felt  himself  no  longer  equal  t^the  burden.  It 
was  in  truth  no  light  one.  The  people  of  Messina  from 
the  highest  to  the  lowest  welcomed  the  British  as  pro- 
tectors ;  but  the  Neapolitan  army,  which  should  have 
seconded  their  efforts,  did  not  exist.  By  the  Queen's 
command,  her  reigning  favourite,  M.  de  Damas,  and 
the  Hereditary  Prince  of  Naples  were  left  behind  with 
some  six  or  seven  thousand  men  to  bar  the  entrance  to 
Calabria.  These  were  attacked  by  a  much  smaller 
body  of  French  and  scattered  to  the  four  winds  by  the 
first  shot.  About  a  thousand  of  them,  chiefly  mounted 
troops,  fled  after  the  Prince  to  Reggio,  from  whence 
they  were  carried  by  British  transports  into  Sicily.  The 

Mar.  24.  French  followed  close  upon  them  ;  and  on  the  24th  of 
March  French  posts  and  picquets  were  lining  the  northern 
shore  of  the  Straits  of  Messina.  But  for  the  presence 
of  the  British,  they  would  have  passed  the  sea  at  the 
same  time — almost  in  the  same  boats,  to  use  Sir  John 

330 


ch.xi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  331 

Stuart's  own  phrase, — with  the  fugitives.  So  truly  were  1806. 
vindicated  Craig's  foresight  and  resolution.1 

This  defeat  of  Damas,  for  he  and  not  the  Hereditary 
Prince  was  in  truth  the  commanding  officer,  proved  to 
be  a  blessing  in  disguise.  Though  the  mishap  was  prob- 
ably no  fault  of  his,  he  was  of  course  held  responsible 
for  it.  He  was,  therefore,  dismissed  from  all  his  offices 
to  make  room  for  the  return  of  old  Sir  John  Acton, 
who,  until  sacrificed  to  the  wish  of  Napoleon,  had  for 
many  years  been  King  Ferdinand's  principal  adviser. 
By  Acton's  counsel,  the  feeble  old  monarch  was  induced 
to  come  alone  to  Messina,  nominally  to  issue  orders 
for  defence  of  the  country,  but  really  in  order  that  he 
might  be  withdrawn  from  the  influence  of  the  treacherous 
Queen  and  of  her  party.  In  fact,  it  was  little  help  that 
the  Neapolitan  Government  could  afford,  for  even  the 
most  important  fortresses  were  destitute  of  guns  and 
stores ;  and  the  only  national  garrison  consisted  of 
some  seven  thousand  worthless  troops  in  and  about 
Palermo.  Practically,  therefore,  the  whole  weight  of 
the  defence  was  laid  upon  the  British  ;  and  Craig  was 
compelled  to  summon  the  Eighty-first  regiment  from 
Malta  to  Sicily,  which  he  did  very  unwillingly,  for  the 
garrison  of  Valetta  contained,  in  his  opinion,  far  too 
large  a  proportion  of  untrustworthy  foreign  troops. 
Shortly  afterwards,  at  the  beginning  of  April,  Craig  April, 
sailed  for  England,  so  ill  that  he  was  not  expected  to 
reach  it  alive,  and  the  command  in  the  Mediterranean 
devolved  upon  Major-general  Sir  John  Stuart. 