

Rightly  thinking  that  rejection  of  this  treaty  would 
e  mean  war,  Haugwitz  signed  it   and  sent  it  on  to 
e  1  Berlin.    There  also  Hardenberg  perceived  that  the 
I1;  only  alternative  to  ratification  was  war,  and  King 
"  Frederick  William  accordingly  confirmed  the  agreement 
1  on  the  26th  of  February.    He  was  well  advised  ;  for  Feb.  26. 
e  Napoleon,  finding  that  Prussian  troops  had  already 
-  loccupied  Hanover,  took  possession  of  Anspach,  Neuf- 
ichatel,  and  Cleves  without  waiting  to  hear  of  the  fate 
M  of  the  new  treaty  at  Berlin.    However,  this  point  of 
'e  friction  between  the  two  powers,  though  ominous  for 
y>  (the  future,  did  not  disturb  the  most  important  condition 
iwhich  had  been  accepted  by  Frederick  William — the 
vol.  v  y 


322 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1806.  closing  of  the  Baltic  ports  to  British  trade.  This 
stroke  against  England  was  followed  up  by  open 
declarations  of  Napoleon  to  his  Legislative  Chamber 
Mar.  2,  5.  on  the  2nd  and  5th  of  March  that  Italy,  Belgium,  and 
Holland  were  thenceforward  essential  parts  of  his 
Empire,  subject  to  his  immediate  direction,  and  there- 
fore, as  a  necessary  consequence,  barred  to  British 
commerce. 

The  object  of  the  Emperor's  policy  was  now  com- 
paratively plain.  He  had,  as  he  hoped,  tied  Prussia 
hand  and  foot  by  his  last  treaty.  It  remained  for  him 
to  come  to  an  agreement  either  with  Russia  or  with 
England,  in  full  confidence  that  the  secession  of  either 
power  from  the  Coalition  would  force  the  other  to  come 
to  terms.  But  this  was  no  such  easy  matter.  In  the 
first  place,  the  restrictions  laid  by  his  late  measures  upon 
British  trade  were  evidently  designed  to  dragoon  rather 
than  to  persuade  England  towards  a  peaceful  settlement. 
In  the  second,  Fox  was  resolute  to  prosecute  no  negotia- 
tions except  in  concert  with  Russia.  In  the  third,  no 
arrangement  with  England  could  be  final  unless  it  decided 
the  fate  of  Hanover,  which  country  Napoleon  had  already 
promised  to  Prussia  ;  and  until  the  question  of  Hanover 
was  determined,  the  Emperor  could  not  carry  out  the 
final  reconstitution  of  Germany  which  was  to  take 
shape  shortly  in  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine. 
Lastly,  the  darling  wish  of  Napoleon's  heart  was  to 
turn  the  Mediterranean  into  a  French  lake  ;  and  this 
of  necessity  involved  the  attainment  of  two  preliminary 
ends,  namely,  predominance  of  French  influence  with 
the  Ottoman  Porte,  and,  still  more  important,  the 
possession  of  Sicily.  All  circumstances  combined  to 
create  a  diplomatic  situation  of  extraordinary  intricacy, 
which  was  not  simplified  by  the  fact  that  all  parties 
were  striving  eagerly  to  second  their  diplomacy  by 
some  telling  strategic  blow. 