

Meanwhile  a  conviction  was  growing  in  the  British 
Cabinet  that  the  general  theatre  of  the  war  was  moving 
eastward,  and  that  the  British  force  in  the  Mediterranean 
might  play  an  important  part  in  it. .  The  controversy 
over  Cattaro  had  turned  Windham's  attention  to  the 
eastern  shore  of  the  Adriatic  ;  and  on  the  10th  of  May 
he  wrote  privately  to  Craig  lamenting  the  weakness  of 
his  little  army,  but  authorising  him,  if  he  could  do  so 

1  Craig  to  Sec.  of  State,   12th,  16th  Feb.;  Sir  J.  Stuart  to 
Mr.  Cooke,  19th  Feb.  ;  to  Sec.  of  State,  26th  May  1806. 


332 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1 806.  without  endangering  Sicily,  to  send  troops  to  occupy 
some  of  the  ports  in  Dalmatia.  As  it  happened,  even 
while  Windham  was  writing,  Craig  was  on  his  way  from 
Plymouth  to  London,  with  his  health  much  restored  by 
the  voyage,  and  hence  with  full  ability  to  give  informa- 
tion and  advice  exactly  when  it  was  most  wanted. 
Windham's  design  of  frittering  away  his  troops  in 
Adriatic  ports  arose  from  an  idea  that  Napoleon, 
having  once  established  himself  in  Dalmatia,  would 
carry  the  war  into  Hungary,  the  Turkish  provinces, 
and  ultimately  into  Russia.  Craig  gently  set  his 
foot  both  on  the  design  and  on  the  reasoning.  The 
occupation  of  Adriatic  ports  by  the  British  would,  he 
said,  be  useless  in  itself  and  would  cause  extreme 
jealousy  in  the  Russians.  As  to  Napoleon's  advancing 
from  Dalmatia  into  Russia,  such  a  notion  was  highly 
speculative  ;  for  a  country  without  roads,  population, 
or  supplies  was  ill-calculated  for  operations  against  so 
powerful  an  enemy  as  the  Russians  ;  while  an  advance 
of  the  French  upon  Constantinople  would  certainly 
bring  the  Austrians  down  at  once  upon  their  flank  and 
rear.  Napoleon's  assembly  of  troops  %as  in  fact,  as  we 
have  seen,  simply  a  device  for  strengthening  Sebastiani's 
diplomacy  with  the  Porte.  Instead  therefore  of  wasting 
men  and  money  on  visionary  schemes,  Craig  recom- 
mended rather  the  despatch  of  heavy  guns  and  carriages 
for  the  fortification  of  Syracuse,  Agosta,  and  Milazzo, 
and  of  light  field-pieces  which  could  be  carried  on  the 
backs  of  mules  for  the  defence  of  the  interior  of 
Sicily.1 

This  advice  Windham  wisely  took  to  heart.  Already 
roused  by  the  negotiations  to  a  sense  of  the  importance 
of  Sicily,  he  had  directed  Collingwood  to  detach  a 
squadron  for  its  protection,  and  ordered  two  more 
battalions,  the  Seventy -eighth 2  and  Eighty-ninth,  to 
reinforce  the  garrison.  Moreover,  Stuart,  upon  the  spot, 
was  energetic  in  self-help.    In  April  King  Ferdinand 

1  Craig  to  Sec.  of  State,  8th,  28th  May,  7th  June  ;  Windham 
to  Craig,  10th  May  1806.  2  z/jSth. 