None  the  less  when  the  Emperor  returned  to  Paris 
on  the  24th  of  January  1806  his  further  plans  for 
the  reconstitution  of  Germany  were  not  yet  feasible, 
and  his  situation  was  still  an  anxious  one.  The  Tsar, 
despondent  for  the  moment  after  Austerlitz,  recovered 
himself  and  resumed  his  defiant  attitude  when  he 
reached  St.  Petersburg.  In  the  Mediterranean  the 
British  and  Russians  had  been  driven  from  Naples, 
but  not  yet  from  Sicily.  Lastly  there  was  always 
uncertainty  as  to  the  intentions  of  Prussia.  It  is 
true  that  Napoleon  had  extorted  a  favourable  treaty 
from  Haugwitz  at  Schonbrunn  on  the  15th  of 
December,  but  it  remained  to  be  seen  whether 
Frederick  William  would  ratify  it.  As  a  matter  of 
fact  Haugwitz,  returning  triumphantly  with  his  treaty, 
was  extremely  ill-received.  Frederick  William  hated 
any  definite  arrangement  which  he  could  not  evade; 
and  Haugwitz  had  brought  him  back  an  alliance  with 
France.  The  weak  King  again  became  violent  for  a 
time,  and  assured  the  Russian  envoy  that  he  would 
never  divide  his  fate  from  that  of  the  Tsar.  Then 
he  subsided  into  abjection  and  resolved  to  ratify  the 
treaty  with  modifications.  He  would  have  the  alliance 
with  France  to  be  purely  defensive  ;  he  would  guarantee 
Venetia  only,  among  the  new  acquisitions  of  France  in 
Italy  ;  and  he  would  hear  of  no  guarantee  for  Naples  until 
England  sanctioned  the  transfer  of  Hanover  to  Prussia. 
He  then  again  assured  the  Tsar  of  his  unalterable 
friendship,  ordered  his  troops  to  occupy  Hanover — 
the  one  thing  which  he  was  sure  that  he  wanted — and 
sent  Haugwitz  to  Paris  with  the  treaty  thus  amended. 
The  man's  only  idea  of  honour  was  a  graduated  scale 
of  deceit,  of  which  he  reserved  the  lower  degrees  for 
his  friends  and  the  intenser  for  his  enemies. 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


321 


Haugwitz  reached  Paris  on  the  1st  of  February,  1806. 
and  on  the    3rd  was  received   by  Talleyrand  with 
alarming  coldness.    On  the  4th  Napoleon  heard  the  Feb.  4. 
news  of  Pitt's  death  and  of  the  accession  of  Fox  to 
the  Foreign  Office,  and  at  once  conceived  the  idea  of 
detaching  England  from  the  Coalition,  or  at  any  rate 
of  paralysing  her  for  a  time  by  negotiations.  Fox 
gave  him  an  opening  by  warning  him  of  a  plot  for  his 
assassination  ;  and  the  overture  was  joyfully  welcomed. 
But  first  it  was  necessary  to  come  to  decisive  con- 
clusions with  Prussia  ;  which  was  duly  effected  on  the 
5  th  of  February.    On  that  day  Talleyrand  informed  Feb.  5. 
Haugwitz  that  the  treaty  of  the  15  th  of  December,  not 
i  having  been  ratified,  was  void;  and  ten  days  later  he  Feb.  15. 
I  peremptorily  submitted  to  him  a  new  treaty  to  the 
,  1  following  effect.    Prussia  was  to  take  over  all  the 
1  dominions  of  King  George  the  Third  in  Germany,  and 
\  in  return  was  to  yield  Neufchatel  to  France,  Cleves  to 
a  nominee  of  Napoleon,  and  Anspach  to  Bavaria  ;  and 
» I  the  several  parties  were  to  enter  into  possession  of  the 
^  territories  thus  transferred  within   five  days  of  the 
>  i  ratification  of  the  treaty.    Prussia  was  further  to  close 
1 \  Liibeck  and  all  ports  and  rivers  in  the   Baltic  to 
1  British  shipping,  to  guarantee  the  French  Empire, 
1  including  Venetia  and  Naples,  as  also  the  integrity  of 
1  Turkey,  Bavaria,  Wurtemberg,  and  Baden. 