

Meanwhile  Smith  sailed,  as  has  been  said,  to  Palermo, 
where  his  servile  instincts  and  portentous  vanity  made 
him  a  ready  tool  of  the  Queen.  The  King,  Queen,  and 
Royal  family,  to  his  intense  delight,  accepted  hospitality 
from  him  on  board  his  flag-ship,  the  Pompk  ;  and  he 
obtained  from  them  a  decree,  dated  on  the  28th  of 
June,  investing  him  with  unlimited  authority,  by  land 
as  well  as  by  sea,  within  the  Neapolitan  dominions. 
By  this  instrument  he  became  in  fact  the  King's  vice- 
gerent for  the  recovery  of  his  kingdom  ;  and  he  was 
fully  authorised  to  take  command  of  any  Neapolitan 
troops  or  subjects  without  reference  to  Stuart.  It  need 
hardly  be  said  that  he  was  careful  not  to  consult  the 
General  before  accepting  this  office  ;  and  it  is  superfluous 
to  add  that  this  accession  to  his  importance  inflated  his 
conceit  to  bursting  point.  Basking  in  the  moonshine 
of  the  royal  smiles,  Smith  omitted  all  further  communi- 
cation with  Stuart  concerning  the  projected  expedition, 
until  on  the  23rd  of  June  the  General  lost  patience,  June  23, 
and  announced  that,  unless  the  Admiral  appeared  before 
the  27th,  he  would  sail  without  him  to  the  Bay  of  St. 
Euphemia,  under  the  escort  of  the  senior  naval  officer 

VOL.  V  Z 


338 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


806.  at  Messina.  The  time,  Stuart  added,  was  propitious  ; 
for  the  French  had  enraged  the  Calabrian  peasants  by 
attempting  a  forced  levy  of  them  for  military  service, 
and  the  whole  population  was  ripe  for  insurrection. 
Smith  answered  with  the  air  of  a  man  who  had  more 
important  matters  to  attend  to.  The  Prince  of  Hesse 
had  written  that  Gaeta  was  in  distress  for  supplies  ;  the 
Admiral  had  therefore  sent  two  Neapolitan  men-of-war 
with  troops  to  his  assistance,  and  was  himself  about  to 
fly  to  the  succour  of  the  place.  In  the  circumstances 
he  recommended  Stuart  to  cruise  along  shore,  menace 
Policastro,  Salerno,  and  the  Bay  of  Naples,  then  by  a 
"  night-run  "  relieve  Gaeta  from  immediate  pressure, 
land  in  some  unexplained  and  mysterious  fashion  on 
both  sides  of  the  besieging  army,  "  make  a  clean  sweep 
of  the  besieger,"  fill  up  Gaeta  with  stores,  and  return 
to  profit  by  the  alarm  which  would  be  spread  by  the 
appearance  of  his  armament  on  the  coast.  In  fact,  Smith 
scribbled  down  every  wild  idea  that  occurred  to  him  at 
the  moment,  in  singularly  incoherent,  ungrammatical, 
and  unintelligible  English.1 

Meanwhile,  without  waiting  for  thi»  precious  missive 

25.  to  arrive,  on  the  night  of  the  25th  Stuart  had  called 
his  transports  alongside  the  quays  to  take  in  the  guns 
and  horses.  The  men  likewise  had  received  their  orders 
to  march  to  their  appointed  places  and  embark  at  day- 
break. The  duty  was  performed  with  perfect  order  and 
secrecy  ;  not  a  soul  had  an  idea  of  the  object  of  the 
expedition  except  the  General  and  two  of  his  staff ; 
and  altogether  it  must  be  said  that  this  part  of  the 
proceedings  was  admirably  managed.  The  troops  con- 
sisted of  seven  battalions  besides  artillery,  numbering  in 
all  about  five  thousand  five  hundred  of  all  ranks, 
and  were  organised  into  an  advanced  corps  and  three 
brigades.2    Two  of  these  battalions  were  composed, 