

Throughout  that  day  and  the  next  Stuart  remained  July  3. 
stationary.    His  landing  had  been  a  complete  surprise  ; 
1  Sec.  of  State  to  Stuart,  15th  Sept.  1806. 


342 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1806.  and,  to  turn  this  advantage  to  full  profit,  it  was  obvi- 
ously his  policy  to  advance  at  once,  and  to  fall 
upon  Reynier's  troops  while  they  were  still  dispersed. 
Unfortunately  a  heavy  surf  rose  on  the  beach  on  the 
night  of  the  1  st  of  July,  which  made  the  landing  of  pro- 
visions, reserve-ammunition,  and  baggage-animals  a  slow, 
difficult,  and  dangerous  matter  ;  and  it  is  hard  to  blame 
the  General  for  refusing  to  take  the  risk  of  marching 
until  he  was  sure  of  his  supplies  and  stores.  None  the 
less,  the  delay  enabled  Reynier  to  collect  a  superior 
force  and  to  move  at  once  against  his  opponent.  As 
a  matter  of  fact,  the  bulk-  of  the  French  General's 
troops  were  immediately  under  his  hand  at  Reggio 
or  within  a  day's  march  of  it ;  and  the  detachments 
which  held  his  line  of  communications  could  all  be 
picked  up  on  the  way  as  he  marched  northward  upon 
St.  Euphemia.  Starting  accordingly,  with  four  thousand 
men,  upon  the  first  intelligence  of  Stuart's  departure 
from  Messina,  Reynier  gathered  up  in  succession  three 
battalions  at  Palmi,  Tropea,  and  Monteleone,  and  in 
three  days  covered  the  eighty  miles  from  Reggio  to 
Maida,  where  he  arrived  on  the  nigkt  of  the  2nd  to 
3rd  of  July.  The  force  then  with  him  included  about 
fifty-seven  hundred  infantry  in  nine  battalions,  rather 
over  three  hundred  sabres  of  cavalry,  and  one  battery 
of  horse  artillery,  with  close  upon  four  hundred  gunners 
and  engineers,  making  in  all  just  under  six  thousand 
four  hundred  of  all  ranks.1   The  infantry  was  organised 

1  The  exact  figures,  for  which  we  have  to  thank  the  industry 
and  research  of  Mr.  Oman,  are  : — 

6  French  battalions         .       .       .        .  4123 

1  Swiss  battalion     .....  630 

2  Polish  battalions   .       .       .       .       .  937 

Cavalry          .        .        .        .        .        .  328 

Artillery  and  Engineers    .        .       .       .  373 

Total         .       .  6391 

Mr.  Oman,  and  apparently  Reynier's  return,  make  the  total  6440, 
which  does  not  tally  with  the  sum  of  the  details ;  but  the  difference 
is  trifling. 


ch.  xi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  343 

into  two  brigades  under  Generals  Compere  and  Digonet,  1806. 
Compere's  consisting  of  the   1st  Light  Infantry  and 
42nd  of  the  Line,  each  of  two  battalions,  Digonet's  of 
the  two  battalions  of  the  23rd  Light  Infantry  and  the 
three  battalions  of  Poles  and  Swiss. 

On  the  morning  of  the  3rd  Stuart  received  positive  July  3. 
intelligence  that  Reynier  was  encamped  by  the  river 
Lamato,  below  San  Pietro  di  Maida;  but  the  reports 
as  to  his  numbers  were  extremely  contradictory,  some 
stating  them  at  six  thousand,  others  at  three  thousand, 
with  the  commentary  that  more  troops  were  expected 
from  Reggio  but  were  not  yet  come  up.  Stuart  there- 
fore rode  out  in  the  afternoon  with  his  staff,  escorted  by 
a  company  of  Grenadiers,  and  reconnoitring  the  French 
position  from  a  height  over  against  it,  decided  that  it 
must  be  turned  by  its  left  flank  ;  for  its  entire  front 
was  covered  by  the  Lamato,  which  though  fordable  was 
an  impediment,  and  its  flanks,  especially  on  the  right, 
were  protected  by  dense  underwood.  The  country 
being  much  broken  by  olive-yards  and  thick  brushwood, 
he  reconnoitred  also  the  edges  of  the  forest  of  St. 
Euphemia,  gave  special  directions  as  to  the  outposts, 
and  rode  back,  little  suspecting  that  Reynier,  with  a 
small  escort  of  cavalry,  had  been  in  the  wood  at  the 
same  time  as  himself,  observing  the  British  position, 
and  had  only  missed  him  by  a  few  minutes.  That 
night  Stuart  issued  his  orders  that  the  troops  should 
march  at  daybreak  next  morning  to  attack  the  French 
position.  Four  companies  of  Watteville's  with  artillery- 
men and  three  field-guns,  altogether  about  three 
hundred  and  thirty  men,  were  appointed  to  hold  the 
I  entrenchment  on  the  beach  ;  leaving  something  under 
I  forty-three  hundred  of  all  ranks  (for  Ross's  battalion- 
companies  of  the  Twentieth  Foot  had  not  yet  appeared), 
with  three  field-guns  and  eight  mountain-guns,  to  enter 
the  line  of  battle.  In  sanguine  confidence  Stuart  had 
accepted  the  lowest  estimate  of  the  French  army,  and 
felt  sure  of  numerical  superiority. 