

1  Sidney  Smith  to  Stuart,  26th  June  1806.    Enclosed  in  Stuart's 
narrative. 

2  Stuart's  embarkation-return,  forwarded  in  his  despatch  of  6th 
July,  gives  the  strength  of  the  force,  artillery  included,  at  4795 


ch.  xi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  339 

according  to  the  accepted  but  vicious  practice,  of  jflank-  1806. 
companies.  Indeed  Craig  had  so  far  extended  the 
principle  of  forming  the  choicest  men  into  special 
corps,  as  to  take  the  best  shots  from  the  battalion- 
companies  also  and  set  them  apart,  with  the  name  of 
"  flankers,' '  as  sharp-shooters  under  picked  officers. 
The  "  flankers  "  of  the  Thirty-fifth  only  accompanied 
the  expedition,  and,  added  to  the  flank-companies,  must 
have  represented  the  cream  of  the  regiment.  The 
flank-companies  generally,  excepting  those  of  the  Eighty- 
first,  were,  to  use  Bunbury's  expression,  hard,  biting  old 
soldiers  ;  and  the  battalion-companies  of  the  Twentieth 
and  Twenty-seventh  were  of  the  same  quality.  The 
three  remaining  battalions  were  young  and  had  never  seen 
a  shot  fired.  Of  cavalry  Stuart,  for  want  of  horse- 
transports,  had  none,  except  sixteen  of  the  Twentieth 
Light  Dragoons  to  act  as  orderlies.  The  Brigadiers 
were,  taken  together,  a  far  abler  lot  of  officers  than 
were  generally  to  be  found  in  a  British  force  ;  Cole, 
Kempt,  Oswald,  and  Ross  being  all  men  who  made 
their  mark  later  in  the  Peninsula.  Any  one  of  the 
four  would  have  made  a  better  commander  than  Stuart. 

Sailing  on  the  26th  under  the  escort  of  the  Apollo  June  26. 
frigate  and  of  two  more  ships  of  war,  the  expedition 

rank  and  file.  Adding  one-eighth  for  officers  and  for  the  sergeants, 
we  get  a  total  of  5400.  The  returns  given  by  Mr.  Oman,  Journal 
of  the  Royal  Artillery,  March  1908,  show  a  total  of  251  officers  and 
5280  non-commissioned  officers  and  men. 

Advanced  Corps :  Colonel  Kempt.     Light  Companies  of  20th, 

or  L.  I.  Brigade.     l/iyth,  1/3 5th,  1  /58th,  i/6ist,  i/8ist,  and  of 
Watteville's  regiment. 
"Flankers"  of  1/3 5th. 
2  companies  of  Corsican  Rangers. 
I  company  of  Sicilians.    2  four-pounder  guns. 

1st  Brigade.  Cole,    \jzjth.  (8  companies).  Grenadier-Com- 

panies of  20th,  1 /27th,  1 /36th,  1/5 8th,  1/8 1st, 
and  Watteville's.    3  four-pounder  guns. 

2nd  Brigade.  Acland.    2/ySth.    (10   companies),    i/8ist  (8 

companies).    3  four-pounder  guns. 

ird  Brigade.  Oswald.    1  /58th,  and  Watteville's  (each  8  com- 

panies).   3  four-pounder  guns. 

20th  Foot  (8  companies)  detached  to  make  a  diversion. 


34° 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


i  806.  reached  the  Bay  of  St.  Euphemia  on  the  30th  of  June, 
June  30.  Colonel  Ross  with  the  Twentieth  being  left  to  make 
a  feint  of  attacking  Reggio  and  Scilla,  with  orders 
to  follow  the  main  body  as  soon  as  the  purpose 
of  making  a  diversion  should  have  been  fulfilled. 
The  transport  which  carried  Kempt  and  his  Light 
Infantry  had  lagged  astern  ;  wherefore  Colonel  Oswald 
was  appointed  to  lead  the  debarkation  at  dawn 
July  1.  of  the  next  day  with  seven  flank-companies  and  the 
Corsican  Rangers.  No  enemy  appeared  on  the  beach  ; 
and  this  first  division  was  safely  landed  a  mile  below 
the  village  of  St.  Euphemia  itself.  As  the  boats 
returned  to  shore  with  a  second  load  of  men,  Oswald 
pushed  his  party  forward  in  extended  order  towards  the 
village,  the  ground  being  covered  with  trees  and  scrub. 
Very  soon  they  were  met  by  a  sharp  fire  in  their  front, 
and  the  Corsican  Rangers  were  driven  in  upon  their 
supports  by  a  sudden  rush  of  the  enemy.  Oswald, 
however,  speedily  restored  the  fight,  and,  seeing  that 
the  second  division  of  troops  was  now  on  the  beach, 
advanced  rapidly,  charging  his  opponents  on  both  flanks 
and  routing  them  completely,  with^the  loss  of  ten 
officers  and  some  eighty  men  killed  and  taken.  They 
proved  to  be  three  companies  of  Poles  from  the  French 
post  at  Monteleone  ;  and  it  was  fortunate  that  their 
commander  was  so  ill-advised  as  to  make  his  resistance 
after,  instead  of  during,  the  disembarkation  of  the 
British. 