


ch.  xi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  347 

came  on,  each  of  them  eight  hundred  bayonets  strong,  1806. 
in  columns  of  companies  three  ranks  deep,  that  is  to  say,  July  4- 
with  a  front  of  not  more  than  fifty  men  apiece,  and  with 
no  great  interval  between  them ;  for  Compere,  faithful 
to  the  Revolutionary  traditions  which  had  never  been 
abandoned  by  Napoleon,  relied  mainly  upon  shock-tactics. 
He  led  his  men  rapidly,  and  they  followed  him  eagerly  ; 
for  Frenchmen  love  fighting,  and  the  experience  of 
these  old  soldiers  was  that,  after  one  or  two  not  very 
destructive  volleys  at  long  range,  their  opponents  would 
turn  their  backs.  At  a  range  of  one  hundred  and  fifteen 
yards  Kempt  poured  in  his  first  volley  with  telling 
effect.  The  French  returned  the  fire,  though  feebly, 
owing  to  the  narrowness  of  their  front,  but  continued 
their  advance  gallantly  enough,  when  at  eighty  yards' 
range  the  British  delivered  their  second  volley. 
Compere,  doubtless  seeing  his  men  waver,  hurried 
them  on,  calling  to  them  to  fire  no  more  but  to  charge 
with  the  bayonet.  Kempt  on  the  other  hand  halted, 
with  the  words  "  Steady,  Light  Infantry.  Wait  for  the 
word.  Let  them  come  close.' '  Biding  his  time  until  the 
French  were  within  thirty  yards,  Kempt  gave  the  word 
to  fire,  and  a  third  volley  sent  almost  every  Frenchman 
flying  back.  Compere's  right-hand  battalion,  which 
being  overlapped  on  both  flanks  may  be  presumed  to 
have  suffered  the  more  heavily,  broke  and  fled  without 
attempting  to  close.  Of  his  left-hand  battalion,  whose 
left  flank  was  level  with  the  British  right,  a  few  brave 
men  did  come  up  to  the  bayonets  of  the  Twentieth  and 
Thirty-fifth,  led  by  their  gallant  Brigadier.  He,  though 
struck  by  two  bullets,  rode  actually  into  the  British 
ranks,  gesticulating  wildly  with  his  unwounded  arm  and 
swearing  with  the  strength  of  seven,  devils.  It  was  a 
fruitless  effort.  Kempt  after  the  third  volley  gave  the 
word  to  charge,  and  the  French  were  swept  away  with 
fearful  slaughter  ;  for  Englishmen  were  not  afraid  of 
killing  a  foe  in  those  days.  The  fugitives  fled  headlong 
up  the  hill  towards  their  camp  with  the  red-coats  dashing 
savagely  after  them.    Through  the  camp  and  along  the 


348 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1806.  hill-side  for  more  than  a  mile  the  pursuit  continued, 
July  4.  untii  at  iast)  at  village  of  Maida,  Kempt  succeeded 
in  halting  and  rallying  his  men.  By  that  time  the  1st 
Light  had  lost  nearly  nine  hundred  men  in  killed, 
wounded,  and  prisoners,  whereas  Kempt  had  hardly  lost 
fifty.  None  the  less,  for  the  future  purpose  of  the 
battle,  Kempt's  brigade  was  useless  and  out  of  action. 