

And  now  the  French  cavalry  galloped  away  towards 
the  British  left  ;  the  dust  subsided  ;  the  French  infantry 
was  seen  advancing  rapidly  to  the  attack  ;  and  the 
British  officers  could  not  fail  to  notice  that  it  was 
considerably  superior  in  numbers,  to  their  own. 
Reynier's  plan,  as  he  reported  after  the  action,  was  to 
make  "  a  vigorous  charge  which  should  break  up  a 
section  of  the  enemy's  force,  so  that  the  remainder 
should  not  be  able  to  embark,  and  would  be  obliged  to 
surrender,  especially  the  part  which  had  been  turning 
the  French  left."    He  formed  his  troops  therefore  into 


346 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1806.  three  columns.  On  the  left  was  Compere's  brigade, 
July  4-  namely  the  1st  Light  Infantry  and  the  42nd  of  the 
Line,  veteran  regiments  of  deserved  reputation  and 
counting  over  twenty-eight  hundred  bayonets.  Next 
to  Compere's,  and  intended  either  to  support  it 
or  to  form  the  centre  of  the  line,  was  Peyri's  brigade 
of  one  Swiss  and  two  Polish  battalions,  altogether 
fifteen  hundred  bayonets.  Finally  on  the  right  was 
Digonet's  brigade,  which  included  twelve  hundred  and 
fifty  bayonets  of  the  23rd  Light,  besides  the  cavalry 
and  guns.  Since  the  French  camp  faced  to  north,  and 
Reynier's  line  of  battle  was  to  face  westward,  the  French 
army  had  to  begin  by  changing  front  to  the  left. 
Hence  it  necessarily  followed  that  Compere's  brigade, 
which  formed  the  left  of  Reynier's  line,  was  the  first  to 
come  into  position,  Peyri's  and  Digonet's  having  to 
make  a  wider  circuit  to  take  up  their  new  alignment. 
The  consequence  was  that  Reynier's  advance,  like  that 
of  Stuart,  was  made  in  echelon  of  brigades,  but  from 
the  left  instead  of  from  the  right ;  both  armies  refusing, 
as  was  natural,  the  flank  which  was  unsupported. 
From  this  again  it  followed  that  the  4ieads  of  the  two 
echelons,  namely  the  brigades  of  Compere  and  Kempt, 
were  bound  to  be  the  first  that  should  come  into  collision. 

Kempt,  true  to  British  methods,  deployed  his  two 
battalions  into  line,  two  deep.  Every  man  of  his  seven 
hundred  soldiers 1  was  a  good  marksman  ;  and  he 
trusted  to  missile-tactics.  A  quarter  of  a  mile  to  his 
left  rear  was  Acland's  brigade,  thirteen  hundred  strong. 
Opposed  to  him  was  the  brigade  of  Compere  who, 
either  from  design  or  from  eagerness  to  close,  was 
advancing  in  echelon  of  regiments,  the  1st  Light  lead- 
ing and  the  42nd  of  the  Line,  one  thousand  strong,  to 
its  right  rear.  The  two  battalions  of  the  1st  Light  were 
therefore  those  with  which  Kempt  had  to  deal.  They 

1  The  Corsican  Rangers  had  been  left  in  the  wood  on  the  other 
side  of  the  river.  The  British  of  Kempt's  brigade  numbered  661 
non-commissioned  officers  and  men,  say  630  firelocks  ;  and  the 
Sicilian  company,  say  100. 