

The  French,  on  the  other  hand,  were  little  more 
fortunate  than  ourselves.  Joseph  Bonaparte  was  timid, 
irresolute,  and  querulous,  and  as  a  general  absolutely  in- 
capable. Subordinates,  indeed,  he  had  many,  to  the 
extent  of  two  marshals  and  twenty-seven  generals  for  a 
force  of  fifty-two  thousand  men.  Massena,  the  ablest 
of  them,  joined  to  the  highest  military  gifts  a  low 
character  and  an  avarice  so  insatiable  as  to  swallow  up 
all  principles  of  honesty.1  Reynier,  the  most  prominent 
of  the  rest,  was  a  fairly  good  officer,  but  pompous  and 
fatally  conceited.  The  entire  army  was  spoiled  by  easy 
successes.  The  regimental  officers,  though  undoubtedly 
brave  and  probably  able,  were  careless  to  the  last 
degree,  negligent  of  the  elementary  rules  of  their  pro- 
fession, and  content,  from  a  sense  of  their  own  and 
their  army's  superiority,  to  accept  any  risk  rather  than 
be  troubled  to  take  the  simplest  precautions.2  Their 
first  advance  into  Neapolitan  territory  had  been 
practically  unopposed  ;  and  Napoleon  had  never  ceased 
to  urge  Joseph  to  press  on  to  Sicily  at  once,  being  the 
more  anxious  to  possess  it  for  the  hold  that  it  would 
have  given  him  over  the  British  in  the  current  negotia- 
tions. But  there  was  one  Neapolitan  General  who  was 
ready  to  fight  and  could  make  his  men  fight,  the 
Prince  of  Hesse -Philipstadt,  who  held  the  sea-girt 
fortress  of  Gaeta  in  defiance  of  the  new  King  of  Naples 
and  all  his  men.    Gaeta  was  a  terrible  thorn  in  Joseph's 

1  See,  for  Napoleon's  opinion  of  him,  Nap.  Corres.  10,311  ;  one 
among  many  such  judgments  of  the  man. 

2  See  the  letters  of  Paul  Louis  Courier. 


ch.  xi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  335 

side.  Throughout  the  month  of  March  Napoleon  was  1806. 
urging  his  brother  to  besiege  it ;  and  though  at  last  at 
the  beginning  of  April  the  operations  were  begun,  they 
made  no  progress  until  by  Napoleon's  positive  order 
the  direction  was  given  in  June  to  Massena.1  Another 
sore  trial  to  Joseph  was  a  tendency  of  the  Calabrese 
to  rise  in  insurrection,  obedient  to  the  agents  sent 
among  them  by  the  Queen  of  Naples.  His  brother 
adjured  him  to  be  severe  and  merciless,  not  wholly 
without  effect  ; 2  but  these  troubles  caused  him  to 
scatter  his  troops  at  wide  intervals  over  the  country. 
This,  as  Napoleon  early  pointed  out,  was  a  perilous 
arrangement  when  his  enemy  was  master  of  the  sea,  and 
able  at  any  moment  to  land  a  force  which  could  sever 
his  communications.3 

Sidney  Smith,  to  his  credit,  soon  perceived  the 
opportunities  offered  to  his  squadron  by  the  conforma- 
tion of  the  Italian  peninsula.  He  had  arrived  on  the 
2 1  st  of  April  at  Palermo,  from  whence  he  presently  April  21. 
sailed  to  the  true  centre  of  operations,  Gaeta.  The 
fortress  was  exceedingly  strong  ;  though  blockaded  by 
the  French  on  the  side  of  the  land,  it  was  always  open 
from  the  sea  ;  and  so  long  as  Gaeta  held  out,  Joseph's 
hold  upon  Neapolitan  territory  was  precarious.  Smith 
threw  a  much-needed  supply  of  ammunition  into  the 
place,  and  left  a  part  of  his  naval  force  to  second  a 
sortie  of  the  garrison  on  the  15th  of  May,  which  was  May  15. 
attended  by  complete  success.  This  was  good  and 
essential  service,  but  it  did  not  suit  Smith's  vanity  to 
mix  himself  up  in  any  operations  in  which  he  had  not 
supreme  command.  He  therefore  turned  aside  to 
attack  Capri.  This  island  was  by  no  means  unimportant, 
since  it  covered  the  maritime  communications  of  the 
French  to  southward  ;  but  on  the  other  hand  every 
insular  post  thus  seized  signified  the  locking  up  not 
only  of  troops  but  of  ships  for  its  protection  ;  and  this 
was  doubly  true  of  Capri  because  of  its  vicinity  to  a 