

1  Nap,  Corres,  10,296.  2  Ibid.  10,131. 

3  Ibid.  10,085-6. 


336 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1806.  strong  French  force  at  Naples.  Smith,  however,  was  a  1 
man  who  looked  no  further  than  to  the  issue  of  the 
next  Gazette.  He  could  master  Capri  with  the  resources 
of  the  squadron  alone,  and  would  be  able  to  write  a 
pompous  despatch  upon  the  subject.  He  attacked  the 
May  12.  island  accordingly  on  the  12th  of  May,  took  it  with 
little  difficulty,  wrote  his  pompous  despatch,  and  asked 
Stuart  to  provide  his  conquest  with  a  garrison.  Stuart 
thereupon  sent  five  companies  of  Corsicans  under  an 
excellent  officer,  whose  reputation  still  lies  crushed 
under  a  mountain  of  slanders,  Captain  Hudson  Lowe 
June.  At  the  beginning  of  June  Smith  returned  to  Messina 
where  he  requested  of  Stuart  the  loan  of  a  few  troops 
to  make  raids  and  destroy  batteries  on  the  Neapolitan 
coast.  Stuart  rightly  refused  to  squander  detachments 
of  soldiers  upon  objects  so  trivial,  but  offered  to  supply 
a  large  force  for  operations  on  a  greater  scale,  and 
suggested  a  descent  upon  Calabria.  Smith  assented 
and  sailed  away  to  Palermo  to  ensure  the  assistance  of 
the  Neapolitan  Court. 

A  descent  upon  Calabria,  that  is  to  say,  a  mere  raid 
with  no  ulterior  object,  was,  it  will4)e  observed,  the 
highest  enterprise  which  these  two  vain  and  jealous  men 
could  set  before  themselves.  It  was  a  painful  contrast 
to  the  wise  and  far-seeing  designs  which  Charles  Stuart 
had  thought  out  when  he  sailed  to  Messina  eight  years 
before.  Moreover,  Smith  and  Stuart,  as  it  happened, 
had  founded  their  plans  upon  false  information.  They 
reckoned  that  Joseph  had  but  thirty  thousand  instead 
of  fifty  thousand  men  in  all,  and  that  five  thousand  of 
these  were  in  lower  Calabria  under  General  Reynier, 
scattered  and  isolated,  and  therefore  easily  to  be  dispersed 
with  the  help  of  the  Calabrese  insurgents.  As  a  matter 
of  fact  about  fifteen  thousand  men  were  with  Massena 
round  Gaeta ;  three  thousand  more  were  holding  Naples ; 
about  twelve  thousand  under  St.  Cyr  were  occupied  in 
subduing  Apulia  ;  and  the  troops  in  Calabria  under 
Generals  Verdier  and  Reynier  counted  ten  thousand. 
And  these  numbers  represented  effective  men,  Joseph's 


ch.xi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  337 

original  army  having  been  reduced  by  casualties  and  1806. 
sickness  from  fifty  to  forty  thousand.  However,  an 
offensive  movement  founded  upon  false  intelligence  was 
far  better  than  no  offensive  movement  at  all ;  and 
Stuart  even  carried  his  projects  so  far  as  to  hope, 
vaguely,  that  upon  his  landing  the  partial  insurrection 
of  the  Calabrese  would  become  general,  and  that  without 
further  exertion  upon  his  part  Massena  would  be 
forced  to  raise  the  siege  of  Gaeta.  He  therefore  made 
his  preparations  quietly  and  stealthily,  embarked  the 
necessary  stores  by  degrees  and  without  ostentation, 
sent  his  transports  to  various  little  ports,  and  kept  his 
troops  marching  from  quarter  to  quarter  as  though  to 
occupy  a  more  extended  line  of  defence  ;  whereby  he 
was  able  at  once  to  bring  the  men  into  condition  and  to 
conceal  his  real  designs.  With  all  his  defects,  Stuart 
was  by  no  means  without  ability  of  a  certain  kind. 