

Accordingly  at  daylight  on  the  4th  of  July  the  July  4. 


344 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1806.  British  troops  moved  southward  along  the  shingly 
JulX  4-  beach  and  the  marshy  pastures  that  adjoined  it,  upon 
the  river  Lamato,  from  whence  they  were  to  strike  inland 
upon  the  left  of  Reynier's  position.  The  march  was 
made  in  two  parallel  columns  ;  Kempt's  brigade  leading 
the  left  or  inland  column,  with  Cole's  in  rear,  and 
Acland's  the  right  column,  with  Oswald's  in  rear.  Two 
light  mountain-guns,  carried  by  mules,  were  attached 
to  each  brigade ;  three  slightly  heavier  field-guns 
followed  Acland's  column  ;  and  the  Apollo  with  two 
smaller  vessels  sailed  parallel  to  the  army  by  sea,  to 
protect  it  in  case  the  French  should  fall  upon  its  flank. 
The  march  was  slow  and  fatiguing,  the  marshes  being 
in  many  places  deep  and  the  sand  on  the  shore  so  heavy 
that  the  field-guns  could  only  with  difficulty  be  brought 
forward.  The  sun  rose  intensely  hot  before  the  few  miles 
along  the  beach  had  been  traversed,  and  the  men  were 
already  jaded  when  they  reached  the  Lamato,  where  the 
columns  wheeled  inland  to  their  left  and  entered  the  plain 
of  Maida.  It  was  now  a  quarter  to  nine.  The  patrols 
of  the  French  cavalry,  which  so  far  had  followed  the 
march  of  the  British,  fell  back  ;  andmReynier's  army 
was  seen  filing  by  its  right  from  its  bivouacking  ground 
and  descending  into  the  upper  portion  of  the  same 
plain.  Reynier  likewise  was  advancing  confidently  to 
the  attack,  though  he  believed  himself  to  be  inferior  in 
numbers.  Five  thousand  men,  he  said,  were  enough 
to  drive  six  or  seven  thousand  English  into  the  sea  ; 
and  the  great  Emperor  himself  had  written  less  than 
a  month  before  that  with  nine  thousand  picked  troops 
of  Joseph's  army  he  would  undertake  to  beat  thirty 
thousand  English.1  Reynier,  who  had  tested  the 
quality  of  the  red-coats  in  Egypt,  ought  to  have  known 
better  than  this  ;  but  he,  in  common  with  the  whole 
of  the  French  army,  was  demoralised  by  easy  successes. 

Upon  wheeling  eastward  into  the  plain  the  British 
columns  had  to  thread  their  way  through  the  marshes 
of  the  lower  Lamato  and  through  belts  of  coppice  ;  upon 
1  Corres.  de  Napoleon,  10,325. 


ch.  xi       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  345 

emerging  from  which  Stuart  formed  them  into  order  of  1806. 
battle  and  continued  the  advance  in  echelon  of  brigades  July  4- 
from  his  right.  Kempt's  Light  Infantry  led  the  way 
with  its  right  skirting  the  thickets  that  bordered  the 
Lamato  ;  next  to  it  came  Acland's  brigade,  and  next  to 
Acland's  that  of  Cole  ;  Oswald  with  his  twelve  companies 
and  three  field-guns  formed  a  reserve  in  rear  of  the  centre. 
Meanwhile  the  French  cavalry  and  horse  -  artillery 
manoeuvred  in  the  front,  raising  much  dust,  which, 
added  to  the  haze  of  a  burning  day,  obscured  the 
movements  of  their  infantry.  Their  guns  and  the  British 
field-pieces  exchanged  shots  during  the  advance  ;  and 
on  reaching  the  French  huts  by  the  Lamato,  Kempt 
deployed  his  light  companies  and  detached  the  Corsican 
Rangers,  supported  by  the  light  company  of  the 
Twentieth,  across  the  thread  of  water  and  bed  of 
shingle  which  represented  the  Lamato,  to  clear  some 
thickets  on  the  further  side.  The  Corsicans  had  hardly 
entered  the  wood  when  a  sharp  fire  and  a  charge  from 
two  companies  of  sharp-shooters,  which  had  been  con- 
cealed there  by  Compere,  drove  them  back  in  confusion 
upon  their  supports.  The  company  of  the  Twentieth 
was  hard  pressed  and  its  captain  was  killed,  but  it 
stood  its  ground  until  the  "  flankers  "  of  the  Thirty- 
fifth  came  to  its  help  and  drove  the  French  back  in 
disorder.  The  Corsicans,  rallying,  followed  them  up, 
and  the  British  companies  doubled  back  to  their  places 
on  the  right  of  Kempt's  brigade. 