

Immediately  upon  the  rout  of  the  1st  Light,  the 
French  42nd  of  the  Line  came  into  action  with 
Acland's  brigade.  Acland  opened  fire  at  three  hundred 
yards  ;  and  the  42nd,  dismayed  by  the  flight  of  their 
comrades  and  seeing  themselves  to  be  outnumbered, 
would  endure  only  two  volleys  before  they  too  turned 
and  ran.  But  even  so  the  fire  of  the  British  had  been 
terribly  severe,  and  more  than  a  third  of  the  French 
were  lying  on  the  field.  The  fugitives  fled  straight  to 
their  rear  along  the  Catanzaro  road ;  and  Acland 
following  them  came  upon  the  three  foreign  battalions 
of  Peyri's  brigade.  The  two  Polish  corps,  which  were 
opposed  to  the  Eighty-first,  behaved  very  badly  and 
gave  way  directly.  The  Swiss  on  the  other  hand  almost 
succeeded  in  turning  the  whole  tide  of  tke  action.  They 
wore  a  scarlet  uniform  ;  and  it  is  said  that  the  Seventy- 
eighth,  mistaking  them  for  Watteville's  Swiss,  allowed 
them  to  approach  unharmed  within  very  close  range 
and  received  from  them  a  very  sharp  volley.  Certain 
it  is  that  for  a  few  minutes  there  was  some  con- 
fusion in  both  battalions  of  Acland's  brigade,  that 
the  two  commanding  officers  misapprehended  orders 
and  lost  their  heads,  and  that  the  Seventy-eighth  actually 
began  to  retreat.  The  retrograde  movement  was 
fortunately  checked  in  the  nick  of  time  by  the  Major, 
David  Stewart  ; 1  the  Seventy-eighth  recovered  itself  at 

1  My  authority  for  this  incident  is  a  very  modest  memorandum 
of  David  Stewart's  service,  wherein  he  declines  to  give  full  details 
from  respect  for  the  officers  concerned,  but  adds  that  General  Stuart 
only  forbore  to  notice  the  occurrence  in  his  despatch  on  Stewart's 
own  urgent  request.  I  have  to  thank  Lady  Tullibardine  for  most 
kindly  placing  a  copy  of  this  document  at  my  disposal.  The  truth 
of  the  story  is  confirmed  by  Bunbury,  p.  252. 


ch.  xi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  349 

once  ;  and  after  a  short  struggle  the  Swiss  retired  in  1806. 
good  order  towards  their  right,  where  they  rallied  and  July  4- 
reformed  upon  Digonet's  brigade.  Acland  pressed 
forward  in  his  pursuit,  but  the  French  cavalry  and 
horse -artillery  came  forward  to  check  him ;  and 
Acland  ordered  his  two  battalions  to  form  squares. 
Being  young  troops,  flushed  by  their  first  action  and 
their  first  success,  they  were  already  in  some  disorder  ; 
and  as  they  were  further  crowded  together  in  an  attempt 
to  execute  this  complicated  manceuvre,  they  suffered 
some  loss  from  the  French  guns.  However,  they  had 
done  their  part  well ;  and  it  is  now  time  to  turn  to  the 
left  of  the  British  line. 

Cole's  brigade  had  been  early  thrown  back  beyond 
its  proper  distance  in  the  echelon  by  the  first  menace 
of  the  French  cavalry  and  guns,  owing  to  which  it  had 
been  halted  until  its  own  artillery  could  be  brought 
!  forward.    Hence  it  did  not  come  into  action  until 
some  twenty  minutes  later  than  Acland.    Its  strength 
was  about  thirteen  hundred  men,  and  Oswald's  reserve 
was  at  hand  to  support  it.    Opposed  to  it  were  the  two 
I  battalions  of  the  23  rd  Light  of  nearly  equal  numbers, 
supported  by  the  rallied  Swiss  of  Peyri's  brigade,  two 
squadrons  of  cavalry,  and  four  guns.    Seeing  how  ill 
the  battle  was  going  for  the  French,  Reynier  used  this 
force  as  a  rear-guard,  which  was  very  skilfully  handled 
by  General  Digonet.   Placing  the  23rd  on  the  one  flank 
;  I  and  the  Swiss  on  the  other  flank  of  his  guns,  this  officer 
i    stood   on   the  defensive  on   slightly  rising  ground, 
f    threatening  every  movement  of  Cole's  with  a  charge 
5    of  cavalry,  and  detaching  his  light  companies  to  harass 
,    the  British  battalions  from  the  brushwood  on  Cole's  left 
t   flank.    Cole  threw  back  the  left  of  the  Twenty-seventh 
to  repel  this  attack  ;  but  he  could  do  no  more  than 
I,   hold  his  own,  for  ammunition  was  running  short,  and 
rt  the  men  were  growing  exhausted  under  the  intense  heat 
's  of  the  sun.    Oswald  presently  brought  up  his  reserve 
J  on  Cole's  right,  which  improved  matters  ;   and  just  at 
1  the  critical  moment  a  staff-officer  galloped  up  to  report 