

Following  up  his  success,  Oswald  pushed  forward 
and  occupied  St.  Euphemia  ;  and  by  the  evening  of 

July  1.  the  1st  of  July  every  man,  gun,  and  animal  had  been 
disembarked.  The  engineers  were  then  set  to  work  to 
form  lines  of  defence  with  sandbags  on  the  beach, 
using  an  old  ruined  tower  as  a  centre,  so  as  to  cover 
the  re-embarkation  in  case  of  disaster ;  while  the 
Advanced  Corps  moved  on  to  Nicastro,  five  miles 
inland,  where  they  were  j'oined  by  two  hundred  armed 
Calabrese,  described  by  one  of  Stuart's  officers  as  ruffians 

July  2.  of  the  lowest  type.    On  the  2nd  there  came  to  Stuart 


ch.  xi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  341 

a  letter  from  Smith,  written  off  Amantea,  on  the  coast  1806. 
about  fifteen  miles  north  of  St.  Euphemia.    Smith  was 
I  careful  to  mention  that  he  had  been  long  delayed  by 
!   the  presence  of  the  royal  family  of  Naples  on  board  his 
ship,  that  he  had  been  further  detained  by  the  necessity 
:  of  arranging  for  a  diversion  in  Sardinia  and  for  throw- 
l  ing  stores  into  Gaeta,  and  that  consequently  he  had  not 
1  been  able  to  leave  Palermo  until  the  29th.    He  added 
:|  that  he  had  received  no  news  of  Stuart  at  Milazzo  on 
;  the  previous  night,  and  could  perceive  no  sign  of  him 
/  at  daylight  on  the  1st  ;  that  he  did  not  like  to  go 
5  into  St.  Euphemia's  Bay,  in  case  he  should  not  find  the 
1  General  there  and  might  not  be  able  to  get  out  again  ; 
:  and  that  he  was  therefore  cannonading  Amantea  as  a 
,  diversion  in  his  favour.    Finally  he  announced  that  he 
,  had  circulated  the  Royal  Decree,  which  appointed  him 
r  Commander-in-chief,  to  the  insurgent  leaders,  and  had 
,  much  pleasure  in  authorising  Stuart  himself  to  give 
t  orders  to  them  and  to  the  natives  at  large.  The 
,  General,  though  consumed  with  inward  wrath  at  the 
s  patronising  tone  of  this  letter,  dissembled  his  feelings 
1  and  replied  quietly  by  begging  Smith  not  to  distress  the 
f  I  adjoining  coast,  as  it  would  only  turn  friends  into 
1  enemies.  He  intimated  further  that  he  had  already  issued 
r  a  proclamation  to  the  inhabitants  as  Commander-in-chief 
of  King  George's  army,  and  could  see  no  necessity  for 
authorisation  of  his  proceeedings  by  King  Ferdinand 
or  his  deputy.    This  statement  was  only  too  true, 
for  Stuart  had  gone  so  far  as  to  call  upon  the  in- 
habitants to  rise,  giving  them  an  indefinite  promise  of 
assistance  from  England  ;    a  proceeding  which  was 
beyond  his  powers  and  instructions,  and  which  rightly 
brought  upon  him  the  censure  of  the  Government.1 
However,  the  immediate  point  for  us  is  that  the  two 
commanders  were  already  within  measurable  distance 
of  a  quarrel. 