

This  disaster,  for  it  was  nothing  less,  was  due 
wholly  to  Sidney  Smith's  egoism  ;  and  by  a  righteous 
nemesis,  it  occurred  in  circumstances  which  deprived 
him  of  an  extraordinary  opportunity  of  gaining  dis- 
tinction. Smith's  leading  motives  in  avoiding  Gaeta  had 
been  two,  jealousy  of  the  Prince  of  Hesse-Philipstadt, 
to  whom  would  justly  have  been  awarded  the  chief 
credit  for  a  successful  defence  ;  and  jealousy  of  Stuart, 
over  whom  he  claimed  to  hold  command.     It  so 

1  I  give  here  the  text  of  the  letter,  slightly  abridged.  Impostors 
of  Sidney  Smith's  type  are  always  among  us  ;  and  it  is  well  that  a 
brand  should  be  set  upon  any  one  of  them  who  is  detected.  "  The 
advantage  of  the  concentration  of  authority  is  already  manifest. 
He  who  can  speak  as  supreme  commander  can  accomplish  coups  de 
maUre.  It  is  this  unity  of  plan  and  action  which  gives  Bonaparte  his 
success.  Now  this  unity  of  power  is  vested  in  me.  Let  it  remain 
in  me,  and  I  will  dare  to  do  more  than  he  will  dare  to  imagine. 
If  Italy  can  dispute  no  longer  the  empire  of  the  world  with  France, 
she  can  at  least  preserve  her  independence.  Stuart  has  done  what 
he  promised  me.  He  beat  Reynier  in  a  masterly  fashion.  One 
more  battle,  and  both  Calabrias  are  ours.  We  have  already  Further 
Calabria  except  a  few  ports  which  I  am  now  engaged  in  reducing." 
Yet  upon  Stuart's  complaint  of  Smith's  delegation  of  authority  to 
him,  the  Admiral  had  written  (2nd  July)  that  the  powers  given  to 
him  by  the  Court  of  Naples  were  much  greater  than  he  had  thought, 
and  that  he  considered  it  his  duty  to  the  General  to  remove  any 
possible  difficulty. 


360 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1806.  happened  that  the  gallant  old  Prince  was  wounded; 
and,  released  from  the  pressure  of  his  strong  hand, 
the  Neapolitan  officers  of  the  garrison  at  once  be- 

ly  14.  thought  them  of  surrender.  On  the  14th  news 
reached  Capri  that  affairs  in  Gaeta  were  going  amiss, 
whereupon  Captain  Rowley  of  the  Royal  Navy  resolved 
to  proceed  there  at  once,  taking  with  him  the  naval 
force  at  his  command  and  an  officer  of  engineers,  lent  to 
him  by  the  military  commandant.  Hudson  Lowe  was, 
indeed,  eager  to  go  himself ;  and  was  only  restrained 
by  the  fact  that  Rowley's  withdrawal  left  Capri  exposed 
to  the  attack  of  a  superior  naval  force  at  Naples.  The 
British  officers  inspected  the  works  of  Gaeta  and 
finding  them  still  tenable  ordered  repairs  to  be  made, 
taking  the  Governor  with  them  to  explain  what  should 
be  done.  To  their  surprise,  the  Governor  had  never 
even  seen  the  batteries  of  the  fortress,  much  less 
Massena's  lines  ;  but  for  all  that  he  refused  to  deliver 
up  his  command  to  a  British  officer.  The  utmost 
that  could  be  extorted  from  him  was,  that  he  would 
consult  his  officers  before  thinking  of  surrender,  and 
that  at  worst  he  would  ask  for  an  armistice  of  three 
days.  The  British  captains  went  back  to  the  ships,  but, 
hearing  that  a  flag  of  truce  had  been  sent  to  Massena, 
relanded  to  find  that  the  Neapolitan  chiefs  were  drawing 
up  a  capitulation.  Breaking  in  upon  them,  they  read 
the  articles,  which  seemed  to  be  honourable.  The 
Neapolitans  also  pledged  themselves  to  fight  to  the 
death  if  their  terms  were  refused,  and  to  take  no  final 
step  without  communication  with  their  allies.  Satisfied 
by  these  assurances,  the  British  officers  retired  for  the 
night.  A  few  hours  later  they  heard  that  the  best  of 
the  Neapolitans  had  deserted  to  the  enemy,  and  that 