

1806.  marched  to  Cosenza  and  effected  by  design  what  had 
now  come  about  by  happy  chance. 

Within  the  paltry  sphere  of  operations  to  which  he 
had  limited  himself,  all  was  going  as  well  as  possible. 
His  faithful  naval  helper,  Captain  Fellowes  of  the 
Apollo^  was  moving  steadily  down  the  coast  and 
gathering  in  the  isolated  French  posts  one  after  another, 
his  first  capture  being  that  of  one  hundred  prisoners 
July  7.  at  Tropea  on  the  7th.  Brigadier  Brodrick,  again, 
who  had  been  left  in  command  at  Sicily,  grasping  at 
once  the  true  significance  of  the  victory  at  Maida,  had 
collected  twelve  hundred  British  and  Neapolitans,  and 
with  the  co-operation  of  Captain  Hoste  of  the  Amphion, 
had  crossed  the  straits  to  Reggio.  Surrounding  the 
place  before  the  garrison  could  escape,  he  received  its 
surrender,  together  with  that  of  some  six  hundred 
prisoners,  after  two  days'  investment.  The  news  of 
July  14.  this  success  reached  Stuart  on  the  14th  at  Palmi,  to 
which  he  had  at  last  moved  after  his  long  delay  at 
Monteleone.  But  additional  news  accompanied  it, 
which  only  made  the  General  the  more  anxious  to 
return  to  Sicily.  It  now  appeared  tfcat  Sidney  Smith, 
under  pretext  of  sailing  to  Gaeta,  had  but  disguised 
another  determined  effort  to  wrest  from  the  General 
the  credit  of  the  military  successes.  Instead  of  sailing 
to  Gaeta  he  had  hurried  round  to  Scilla,  had  landed  his 
marines,  and  was  actually  besieging  the  fortress  accord- 
ing to  his  own  peculiar  military  ideas.  Meanwhile  he 
had  sent  to  Sicily  pompous  accounts  of  the  naval 
operations  and  of  his  share  in  the  success  of  Maida, 
which  were  duly  published  in  the  Messina  Gazette. 
He  claimed  to  have  taken  four  hundred  prisoners  at 
Amantea,  a  piece  of  news  which  somehow  never  reached 
the  army  while  the  Pompee  lay  in  the  Bay  of  St. 
Euphemia.  He  averred  that  Stuart  had  landed  under 
the  fire  of  the  Apollo^  which  was  not  only  untrue  but 
absurd,  for  there  was  nothing  for  the  Apollo  to  fire  at. 
He  informed  the  Queen  of  Naples,  in  language  of  almost 
incredible  bombast  and  absurdity,  that  the  success  of  the 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


359 


recent  operations  was  due  to  the  vesting  of  the  superior  1806. 
direction  in  himself.1    Nothing  could  be  more  false  ; 
and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  King  of  Naples,  in  reply  to 
Elliot's  remonstrances,  incontinently  cancelled  the  decree 
under  which  the  Admiral  had  acted,  declaring  that  it 
had  been  turned  to  a  use  for  which  it  had  never  been 
intended.    But  this  was  not  the  worst  of  Sidney  Smith's 
shortcomings.     On  the  19th  of  July  he  wrote  again  July  19. 
to  the  Queen  of  Naples  that  the  reaction  caused  by 
recent  measures  had  made  itself  felt  at  Gaeta,  and  that 
on  the  9th  three  thousand  French  troops  had  been 
seen  by  a  British  naval  officer  marching  from  the 
trenches  upon  Naples.    But,  in  truth,  on  the  18th,  July  18. 
even  before  he  had  written  the  words,  Gaeta  had 
surrendered. 