

To  return  now  to  the  course  of  the  operations, 
Stuart,  after  a  prolonged  struggle  of  forty-eight  hours 
with  his  despatches,  wrote  to  Sidney  Smith  on  the  6th  July  6. 
of  July  that  he  should  detach  a  brigade  under  Colonel 
Oswald  to  Monteleone,  with  orders  to  capture  all  the 
posts  upon  the  west  coast  on  his  way  southward,  and 
that  he  himself  should  lead  his  main  body  over  the 
mountains  to  Catanzaro.  Smith  answered  on  the  same 
day  that  he  should  use  every  effort  to  give  the  General 
naval  force  on  the  Adriatic,  adding  in  his  usual 
inflated  style,  "  I  hope  to  electrify  the  people  of  Terra 
di  Lavoro  by  our  pressure  on  the  enemy  at  Gaeta." 
Satisfied  with  this  assurance,  Stuart,  after  a  most  un- 
justifiable delay  of  three  days,  pushed  Oswald's  Light 
Brigade  forward  on  the  evening  of  the  7th  to  July  7 
Monteleone.  The  garrison  of  three  hundred  and 
seventy  of  all  ranks  at  once  surrendered  ;  but  Stuart, 
on  entering  the  place,  learned  to  his  amazement  that 
Sidney  Smith  was  still  on  the  south  coast,  renewing  the 
capitulations  of  all  the  places  that  had  already  yielded 


35^ 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1806.  to  the  army  on  shore,  and  that  he  had  even  despatched 
July  7-  a  naval  officer,  in  advance  of  Oswald,  to  summon 
Monteleone  in  his  own  name.  Thus  the  Admiral,  in 
the  face  of  his  promise,  had  left  Gaeta  to  its  fate,  and 
was  following  the  track  of  the  General  in  order  to 
steal  his  poor  laurels  from  him.  Stuart's  vanity  was 
unfortunately  wounded  more  deeply  than  his  sense  of 
military  honour.  Without  a  thought  for  Gaeta,  he 
deliberately  halted  for  four  days  at  Monteleone  to 
write  a  tale  of  complaints  to  Mr.  Elliot.1  This  letter 
ran  to  the  efFect  that  he  could  not  continue  to  expose 
the  lives  and  reputation  of  his  victorious  troops  for  the 
re-establishment  of  the  Kingdom  of  Naples,  so  long  as 
King  Ferdinand's  decree,  instead  of  inculcating  confidence 
in  the  army,  directed  public  obedience  and  attention  to 
"  another  channel,1 '  or  in  other  words  to  Sir  Sidney 
Smith.  He  had,  he  continued,  advanced  as  far  as 
Borgia  in  pursuit  of  Reynier,  when  he  perceived  that 
the  said  decree  paralysed  his  efforts  to  direct  the  country. 
He  therefore  trusted  to  Elliot  "to  impress  upon  the 
Court  of  Naples  the  magnitude  of  his  army's  services 
and  their  great  importance  to  the  future  security  of  the 
Kingdom  of  Naples."  2 

Practically  therefore  this  man  of  small  mind  re-? 
nounced  all  the  few  profits  still  to  be  gathered  from  his 
victory  owing  to  sheer  sulkiness  over  the  proceedings  of 
his  still  smaller  colleague.  In  fact  he  confessed  to  Mr. 
Elliot  a  few  days  later  that  it  was  Sidney  Smith's 
assumption  of  supreme  command,  and  the  medley  of 
control  resulting  from  it,  that  had  arrested  his  pursuit 
of  Reynier.3    But  it  was  really  true  that  Sidney  Smith 