

Fortunately  Hoste  and  Colonel  Macleod  of  the 
Seventy-eighth  were  men  of  a  different  stamp.  Sailing 
from  Reggio  on  the  evening  of  the  25th,  they  caught 

July  26.  sight  of  part  of  the  French  army  next  morning  in  full 
retreat  upon  Cotrone.  The  road  ran  nearly  parallel  to 
the  beach  and  within  gunshot  of  the  sea,  being  bounded 
to  the  landward  by  a  chain  of  mountains,  on  which 
Macleod  had  entreated  the  Masse  to  assemble  in  order 
to  harass  the  enemy's  flank.  Macleod  at  once  sailed 
ahead  of  the  French  column,  and  made  a  demonstration 
of  landing.  The  column  halted,  and  changed  direction 
towards  the  mountains,  whereupon  Hoste  opened  fire 
on  its  centre  and  rear  and  dispersed  it ;  and  had  the 
insurgents  but  been  present  to  do  their  part,  they  might 
have  inflicted  very  heavy  loss.  But  nof  a  man  appeared. 
The  leaders  upon  whom  Sidney  Smith  had  lavished  arms 
and  flattery,  disbanded  their  followers  upon  the  mere 
rumour  of  a  French  advance  ;  and  a  great  opportunity 
was  thus  lost.  Hoste's  cannonade  killed  and  wounded 
fifty  or  sixty  men  ;  and  the  fleet  then  sailed  to  Cotrone 
where  it  anchored,  after  exchanging  a  few  shots  with 

July  27.  the  citadel  late  in  the  evening.  On  the  following 
morning  Hoste  allowed  the  French  to  take  up  a  position 
within  range  of  his  guns,  when  he  stood  in  and  again 
drove  them  to  the  mountains.  Several  deserters  came  to 
the  British  that  evening,  who  reported  their  comrades  to 
be  much  harassed  and  discontented  and  their  leaders 
much  perplexed  ;  but  after  a  day's  halt  the  column 

July  28.  resumed  its  retreat  northward  on  the  28th,  wreaking 
savage  vengeance  on  the  villages  that  lay  in  its  path. 
Unable  to  ascertain  by  what  route  they  were  moving, 
1  Stuart  to  Sec.  of  State,  26th  July  1806. 


ch.  xi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  363 

Macleod  urged  the  peasants  to  pursue  and  harry  them  ;  1 
and  after  receiving  the  capitulation  of  Cotrone,  returned 
to  Messina.  He  brought  with  him  five  hundred 
prisoners,  half  of  them  wounded,  from  the  hospital  at 
Cotrone.  It  is  difficult  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that 
by  a  little  more  vigour  immediately  after  Maida 
Reynier's  army  might  have  been  almost  totally  de- 
stroyed.1 

Stuart  meanwhile  returned  to  Messina  to  exhibit  his 
laurels,  as  his  chief  staff-officer  expressed  it.  In  truth, 
in  spite  of  his  failings,  he  had  done  some  solid  work. 
He  had  fought  an  action  which  had  shaken  the  reputa- 
tion of  the  French  and  enhanced  that  of  the  British  ; 
he  had  destroyed  five  hundred  of  their  best  troops,  and 
taken  from  two  to  three  thousand  prisoners  ;  he  had 
driven  the  enemy  from  both  Calabrias,  capturing  all  the 
stores,  guns,  and  boats  that  they  had  collected  for  the 
invasion  of  Sicily  ;  and  by  the  occupation  of  the  ports 
on  the  north  of  the  straits  he  had  averted,  for  a  time 
at  least,  all  danger  of  such  an  invasion.  But  on  the  other 
hand  Gaeta  had  fallen,  and  not  all  his  petty  successes 
could  counterbalance  this  great  failure.  Naples,  which, 
by  a  little  attention  to  his  duty,  Stuart  might  have 
made  a  distraction  to  Napoleon  for  another  twelve 
months,  perhaps  even  to  the  wrecking  of  the  Emperor's 
plans  in  Germany,  was  now  firmly  established  in  French 
hands  ;  and,  while  this  was  so,  Sicily  could  not  be  con- 
sidered safe.  It  is  true  that  Sidney  Smith  was  far  more 
responsible  for  this  state  of  affairs  than  was  Stuart, 
for  the  Admiral  had  actually  given  the  General  to 
understand  that  he  would  sail  to  the  relief  of  Gaeta. 
No  language  of  reprehension  can  be  too  strong  for  his 
behaviour.  But  Stuart  also  was  greatly  to  blame  for 
his  general  inefficiency  ;  and  happily  he  met  with  his 
reward. 