


35° 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1806.  that  Ross  had  landed  with  the  Twentieth  Foot  and  was 
JulY  4-  hurrying  forward  in  double  quick  time.  Sidney  Smith 
had  arrived  in  St.  Euphemia  that  morning,  and  seeing 
Ross's  transports  coming  in,  had  happily  advised  that 
the  troops  should  be  landed  at  once  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Lamato.  During  the  disembarkation  Ross  heard  the 
firing  begin,  andr  the  progress  of  the  boats  being  slow 
owing  to  a  heavy  surf,  he  did  not  wait  for  the  last  loads 
but  ran  with  all  speed  to  the  scene  of  action.  He  was  met 
by  Bunbury,  who  briefly  explained  the  state  of  affairs  ; 
when,  promptly  grasping  the  situation,  Ross  plunged 
into  the  brushwood  on  Cole's  left,  drove  out  the  sharp- 
shooters, poured  a  volley  into  the  French  squadrons, 
which  sent  them  into  the  rear  in  confusion,  and  then 
wheeling  to  the  right  opened  a  shattering  fire  upon  the 
flank  of  Digonet's  battalions.  This  decided  the  action. 
After  a  feeble  attempt  to  hold  his  ground  Reynier  drew 
off  his  troops  towards  the  42nd,  which  had  rallied  some 
distance  in  rear,  and,  skilfully  covering  his  retreat  by 
his  cavalry  and  sharp-shooters,  retired  rapidly  towards 
Catanzaro.  Had  the  British  possessed  but  two  or  three 
squadrons  of  cavalry,  hardly  a  man  o^Reynier's  army 
could  have  escaped. 

The  action,  as  has  been  seen,  was  fought  in  three 
sections  by  each  of  the  three   British  brigades  in- 
dependently, from  which  it  might  be  surmised  that 
the  Commander-in-chief  had  been  killed.    But  it  was  2 
not  so.    Stuart  was  cantering  about  all  over  the  field, 
heedless  of  personal  danger,  enjoying  himself  keenly  as  |  11 
a  spectator,  but  giving  not  a  thought  to  the  direction  n 
of  the  battle.      From  the  moment   when  Kempt's  I  t 
brigade  had  routed  that  of  Compere,  Stuart's  head  was  1 
completely  turned  by  the  brilliancy  of  present  success  Qi 
and  visions  of  a  glorious  future.    His  staff,  unable  pr 
to  obtain  any  orders  from  him,  gave  information  as  ii 
to  what  was  passing  to  the  Brigadiers,  who  carried  on  i 
the  action  practically  by  themselves.    When,  however,  all 
was  over,  Stuart  was  obliged  to  say  whether  there  should  |  ic 
or  should  not  be  a  pursuit,  and  he  decided  that  there 


ch.xi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  351 

should  not.  The  men  were  indeed  jaded  by  the  march  1806. 
and  the  fight  and  choking  with  thirst ;  water  was  only  July  4- 
to  be  found  in  the  Lamato  ;  and  there  was  no  means  of 
bringing  forward  supplies.  But  the  action  after  all 
had  lasted  little  more  than  two  hours  ;  it  had  been 
brilliantly  successful,  and  victory  will  carry  troops  far. 
Moreover,  Ross's  regiment  was  fresh  and  Kempt's 
brigade  was  well  forward — indeed  was  actually  marching 
for  some  time  parallel  with  the  retreating  French — 
though  in  the  absence  of  orders  from  Stuart,  Kempt 
dared  not  take  the  initiative.  After  a  while  therefore 
he  halted,  only  detaching  the  Light  Company  of  the 
Twentieth  under  Captain  Colborne — the  future  Lord 
Seaton — to  keep  touch  with  the  enemy.  Kempt's 
brigade  did  not  return  to  camp  till  next  morning ; 
and  Colborne,  as  was  to  be  expected  from  so 
good  an  officer,  hung  closely  to  Reynier's  skirts 
as  far  as  Borgia,  within  ten  miles  of  Catanzaro, 
when  finding  himself  unsupported  he  was  fain  to 
return. 