

Meanwhile  Stuart  ordered  the  rest  of  his  army  back 
to  the  beach  for  repose  ;  and  each  of  the  brigades 
received  permission  in  turn  to  bathe  in  the  sea. 
Cole's  brigade  was  enjoying  this  privilege  when  a 
staff- officer,  deluded  by  the  dust  raised  by  some 
frightened  buffaloes,  came  galloping  down,  crying  aloud 
that  the  French  cavalry  was  approaching.  Then  followed 
a  scene  which  has  no  parallel  in  the  history  of  the 
army.  The  Grenadiers  and  Twenty- seventh  rushed 
out  of  the  water,  seized  their  belts  and  muskets  and 
fell  into  line  with  ordered  arms,  ready  to  fight  and  give 
a  good  account  of  themselves  without  a  shred  of 
clothing.1  The  staff- officer,  who  .  has  fortunately 
preserved  the  scene  for  us,  treats  only  of  its  ludicrous 
aspect  ;  but  to  us  it  gives  also  some  insight  into  the 
discipline  and  spirit  of  the  old  soldiers  of  the  past. 
It  is  only  unfortunate  that  Colonel  Bunbury  did  not  set 
down  the  judgment  passed  by  these  men,  in  their  own 
1  Bunbury,  pp.  249-50. 


352 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1806.  language,  upon  the  hapless  but  imbecile  officer  who 
July  4.  gave  tne  faise  alarm. 

Stuart  for  his  part  was  subjected  to  a  trial  which 
must  have  been  inexpressibly  galling  to  him.  Still 
intoxicated  by  his  success  and  troubled  only  by  nervous 
anxiety  to  give  proper  expression  to  it  in  his  despatch,  he 
found  on  his  return  to  the  shore  that  the  Pompee  was 
at  anchor  in  the  bay  with  Sir  Sidney  Smith  on  board. 
On  that  very  morning  a  letter  had  reached  the  General 
from  that  illustrious  sailor,  explaining  at  great  length 
the  reasons  why  he,  as  King  Ferdinand's  vicegerent, 
had  thought  right  to  delegate  certain  authorities  to  his 
military  colleague,  and  adding  that,  since  Stuart  was 
content  with  the  naval  assistance  already  at  his  dis- 
posal, he  should  go  with  his  flag-ship  to  northward. 
Yet  there  the  Admiral  was,  and,  worse  than  this,  he 
accounted  for  his  presence  by  saying  that  he  had  fully 
expected  the  army  to  be  beaten,  and  had  resolved  to 
run  the  Apollo  ashore  with  her  broadside  to  the  beach 
to  cover  the  flight  of  the  red-coats.  However,  he  was 
full  of  compliments  and  hospitality,  invited  Stuart  and 
his  staff  on  board  the  flag-ship,  tallied  a  great  deal 
about  himself  and  the  siege  of  Acre,  instructed  Stuart 
in  the  art  of  folding  a  turban  on  a  lady's  head,  and 
incidentally  asked  him  how  he  could  best  serve  him. 
"  By  going  northward,"  said  Stuart,  with  such  emphasis 
as  can  be  guessed.  "  Everything  to  southward  is  now 
July  5-  in  the  power  of  the  army."  Next  morning  came  news  | 
that  Reynier  was  endeavouring  to  rally  his  army  at  :: 
Catanzaro  ;  and  at  daybreak  the  General  returned  t 
ashore,  after  receiving  once  again  Sidney  Smith's  assurance 
that  he  would  sail  to  the  north,  or  in  plain  words  to 
Gaeta. 