

There  was  in  fact  a  great  opportunity  open  to  these 
two  commanders.    By  hastening  at  once  to  Gaeta  with 
a  thousand  troops  and  the  news  of  the  victory,  Sidney 
Smith  could  have  put  new  life  into  the  garrison  ;  and  05 
if  at  the  same  time  Stuart,  after  leaving  a  small  force  to  r 
secure  Lower  Calabria,  had  carried  the  rest  by  sea  to  p 


ch.xi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  353 

threaten  Naples,  the  French  must  not  only  have  raised  1806. 
the  siege  but  evacuated  both  the  Calabrias  in  order  to  July  4- 
save  the  capital.  The  insurrection  might  then  have 
gained  formidable  headway  ;  the  French  hold  upon  the 
Neapolitan  dominions  would  have  become  extremely 
precarious,  and  Italian  affairs  might  have  marred 
Napoleon's  plans  on  the  eve  of  his  quarrel  with  Prussia. 
But  General  and  Admiral  alike  were  impostors,  and  the 
favourable  moment  was  allowed  to  pass.  For  forty- 
eight  hours  the  army  was  left  "  kicking  its  heels  and 
eating  grapes,"  to  borrow  Colonel  Bunbury's  picturesque 
phrase,  while  the  General  laboured  in  travail  with  his 
despatch.  So  absorbed  was  he  in  the  task  of  adorning  his 
exploits  with  an  appropriate  setting,  that  he  could  spare 
no  attention  for  the  movements  of  the  army — so  eaten 
up  with  self-esteem  that  he  could  find  no  time  for  duty. 

In  truth  the  action  of  Maida  was  an  extremely 
brilliant  and  creditable  little  affair.  Five  thousand  two 
hundred  British  troops  had  met  six  thousand  four 
hundred  French  in  the  open  field,  with  no  advantage  of 
circumstances  or  position,  and  had  inflicted  upon  them 
so  crushing  a  defeat  as  to  amount  very  nearly  to  a 
disaster.  Reynier's  losses,  considering  that  the  British 
had  not  a  mounted  man  in  the  field,  were  almost 
incredibly  severe,  and  Stuart's  as  incredibly  small.  Of 
the  British  there  fell  in  all  three  hundred  and  twenty- 
seven,  of  whom  one  officer  and  forty-four  men  were 
killed,  eleven  officers  and  two  hundred  and  seventy-one 
men  wounded.  The  heaviest  casualties  fell  upon  the 
Seventy-eighth  and  Eighty-first,  though  in  each  of  these 
two  battalions  they  were  fewer  than  one  hundred.  On 
the  French  side  Reynier  acknowledged  a  loss  of  thirteen 
hundred  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners  ;  but  the  true 
figure  was  probably  over  two  thousand.  The  number 
of  the  killed  was  abnormally  great.  According  to 
Stuart's  despatch,  over  seven  hundred  bodies  were  buried 
on  the  field  ;  according  to  his  Quartermaster-general, 
who  is  more  probably  correct,  over  five  hundred.  The 
prisoners,  wounded  and  unwounded,  exceeded  a 
vol.  v  2  A 


354 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


i  806.  thousand,  and  the  wounded  who  were  not  captured 