

ly  18.  the  rest  had  signed  a  disgraceful  surrender.  Treachery, 
of  course,  underlay  the  whole  transaction  ;  but  if  Sidney 
Smith  had  arrived  there  with,  or  even  without,  a 
thousand  men  on  the  day  after  Maida,  the  whole 
garrison  would  have  been  heartened  ;  and,  after  the 
disablement  of  the  Prince   of  Hesse,  Smith  would 


ch.xi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  361 

certainly  have  secured  command  and  could  have  added  1806. 
a  second  really  fine  and  useful  service  to  his  defence  of 
Acre. 

As  things  fell  out,  he  not  only  missed  the  glory  of 
.    Gaeta,  but  was  ignominiously  repulsed  from  Scilla,  which 
by  a  delightful  irony  became  the  trophy  of  the  army, 
i    The  French  commandant  made  a  most  gallant  defence, 
'   and  the  walls  of  the  fortress  were  so  thick  that  the 
1    British  could  make  no  impression  upon  them  until  they 
i    brought  up  their  siege-artillery.    With  heavy  guns,  how- 
lj  ever,  Colonel  Oswald  speedily  reduced  it  to  surrender,  July  24 
\   and  made  its  garrison  of  nearly  three  hundred  men 
1   prisoners  of  war.   Sidney  Smith  had  already  disappeared, 
i   on  the  1 8  th,  bound  at  last  for  Gaeta  ;  but  meeting  the 
I   news  of  the  surrender  on  the  way,  he  turned  aside  to 
f   carry  on  a  little  warfare  of  his  own  in  the  Gulf  of 
s   Policastro.     Deprived  of  the  command-in-chief,  of 
r   which  he  had  made  such  parade,  and  threatened  with 
t  the  prospect  that  the  name  of  Gaeta  might  be  thrown 
in  his  teeth,  he  doubtless  thought  it  prudent  to  hide 
himself  away.    Stuart,  on  the  other  hand,  embarked 
his  troops  at  Reggio,  leaving  garrisons  there  and  at 
Scilla,  and  returned  to  Sicily.     He  expressed  some 
compunction   at   leaving  the  Masse,  who  had  now 
committed  themselves  deeply  against  France  ;  but  the 
insurrection  was  the  work  of  Sidney  Smith,  for  which, 
in    consequence,  he   did  not  feel   responsible.  He 
hoped  nevertheless  to  second  and  encourage  them  by 
demonstrations  upon  the  coast,  for  which  purpose  he 
sent    General   Acland   with   the    Fifty  -  eighth  and 
Eighty -first  to  cruise  off  Salerno  and  the  Bay  of 
Naples.     As  regards  Reynier,  Stuart  was  content  to 
send  one  battalion,  the  Seventy -eighth,  by  sea  to 
Catanzaro   with    Captain    Hoste    of   the  Amphion. 
:j  Surrounded  as  the  French  General  was  on  all  sides  by 
1  insurgents,  Stuart  thought  that  he  would  find  it  difficult 

to  escape  so  long  as  Gaeta  held  out,  for  on  the  27  th  of  July  27 
July  he  had  not  yet  heard  of  the  fall  of  that  fortress. 
There  were,  however,  unpleasant  reports  from  Palermo 


362 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1806.  that  Massena  was  marching  with  ten  thousand  men  to 
the  rescue  of  his  colleague,  and  therefore,  in  Stuart's 
opinion,  it  was  necessary  to  act  with  caution.1  No  one 
would  dream  from  his  despatches  that  he  considered 
either  Gaeta  or  Reynier's  army  to  be  any  concern  of 
his  ;  he  had  won  a  brilliant  action  in  the  open  field,  and 
that  sufficed  him. 