

cannot  have  fallen  far  short  of  another  thousand.  The  i 
British  were  lucky  in  the  contempt  with  which  their 

opponents  treated  them,  and  still  more  lucky  in  the  \ 

timely  arrival  of  Ross  and  his  regiment  on  the  field  ;  [ 

but  nothing  can  detract  from  the  credit  of  their  victory,  L 

The  conduct  of  all  the  men  was  good,  and  that  of  the  1 
old  soldiers  admirable. 

The  action  has  long  been  celebrated  because,  accord- 
ing to  Stuart's  despatch,  the  British  and  French  crossed  b 
bayonets.    The  fact  is  at  best  doubtful ;  and  Maida  U 
has  of  late  received  more  proper  and  sensible  com-  a: 
memoration  as  an  early  instance  of  the  triumph  of  % 
the  British  line  over  the  French  column.    The  fight  \{ 
presents  all  the  familiar  features  of  the  later  battles  in  |( 
the  Peninsula — a  reckless  dashing  of  a  deep  but  narrow  l: 
mass  of  bayonets  against  a  shallow  but  broad  front  of  a 
muskets,  with  the  inevitable  result  that  the  narrow  L 
front  could  not  compete  with  the  broad  in  development 
of  fire,  and  that  the  columns  were  shattered  to  pieces 
in  front  and  flank  by  bullets  before  the  bayonets  could 
come  into  play.     The  consequence  which  seems  in-  Ij 
variably  to  have  followed  was,  psychologically,  most  c:* 
curious.    The  head  of  the  column,  though  staggering 
and  wavering,  still  strove  gallantly  to  advance,  but  the  K 
tail  turned  and  ran  ;  and  the  leading  files  finding 
themselves  abandoned,  broke  at  once  before  the  charge 
of  the  victorious  line.     Reynier,   in  reporting  the 
results  of  the  action,  most  unjustly  laid  upon  his 
troops  all  the  blame  which  was  by  right  his  own  ;  L 
and   King   Joseph's   staff  very   foolishly   supported  (• 
him.    "The  1st  Light  should  remember,"  wrote  Cesar  ^ 
Berthier  to  Reynier,  "  that  it  has  never  feared  the  E 
English,  and  hitherto  has  always  made  them  fly.  His 
Majesty  knows  not  to  what  to  attribute  their  moment 
of  panic.    He  hopes  that  the  regiment  has  by  this  time 
recovered."  1    But  in  fact  the  gallant  and  unfortunate  0. 

1  Intercepted  letter  of  8th  July  in  Gen.  Fox  to  Sec.  of  State,  & 
2nd  Aug.  1806.  Ca; 


ch.xi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  355 

corps  had  been  sacrificed  by  the  blundering  of  its  1806. 
commanders. 

The  true  issue  of  the  matter  is,  however,  obscured 
by  narrowing  it  down  to  a  mere  contrast  of  tactical 
formations,  of  line  against  column.  It  is  really  a 
contrast  of  tactical  principles,  of  missile-action  against 
shock-action.  All  nations,  through  an  old-fashioned 
prejudice,  value  themselves  on  their  prowess  with  the 
bayonet,  all  having  had  experience  of  demoralised  or 
imperfectly  trained  enemies  who  would  not  await  their 
advance  to  close  quarters.  But  from  the  days  of  the 
archers  onward  the  British  have  won  their  victories  by 
cool  and  steady  marksmanship  ;  and  the  whole  secret 
of  Maida,  as  of  Wellington's  triumphs  in  the  Peninsula, 
lies  in  the  fact  that  the  British  troops,  by  good  training 
and  strict  discipline,  could  disable  at  a  range  of  fifty  or 
a  hundred  yards  an  infantry  which,  however  imposing 
in  appearance,  was  powerless  for  deadly  mischief  at  a 
greater  range  than  thirty-six  inches. 