

1  Bunbury  says  that  he  employed  these  days  in  polishing  still 
further  his  despatch  concerning  Maida,  which  in  fact  was  not  sent 
to  England  (though  a  vessel  was  ready  to  take  it)  until  a  fortnight 
after  the  action.  No  doubt  this  is  partly  true  ;  but  Bunbury  either 
did  not  know,  or  loyally  concealed,  the  bitterness  of  Stuart's  feeling 
against  Smith. 

2  Stuart  to  Elliot,  10th  July  1806;  enclosed  in  his  general 
narrative. 

3  Same  to  same,  19th  July  1806. 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


357 


had  enormously  increased  Stuart's  difficulties.  That  1806. 
volatile  officer,  completely  under  the  influence  of  the 
infamous  Queen  of  Naples,  had  been  flitting  about  the 
coast,  scattering  arms  and  proclamations  among  the 
refuse  of  the  population  and  inciting  them  to  insur- 
rection. These  people,  generically  known  as  the 
Masse,  quickly  formed  themselves  into  bands  under 
leaders  termed  the  Capitani  delle  Masse,  and  laid 
themselves  out  for  a  carnival  of  brigandage.  No  con- 
fidence could  be  reposed  in  these  ruffians,  whom  Smith, 
in  his  shallow  ignorance,  had  chosen  to  dignify  as  patriots. 
The  Capitani  would  forsake  their  commands  at  the 
mere  rumour  of  the  approach  of  the  French,  and  were 
more  likely  to  join  than  to  oppose  them  if  the  French 
were  victorious  ;  and  meanwhile  they  turned  their  arms 
against  their  wealthier  compatriots  and  confounded  the 
whole  of  Calabria  with  cruelty,  murder,  and  rapine.1 
Stuart  restored  order  so  far  as  his  strength  permitted  ; 
but  before  the  12th  he  learned,  while  still  at  Monte- July  1 
leone,  that  the  insurrection  had  produced  at  least 
one  weighty  result.  The  insurgents  had  hoisted  the 
royal  standard  at  Cosenza  ;  General  Verdier,  his 
ammunition  being  exhausted,  had  been  compelled  to 
retreat  with  some  loss  by  forced  marches  from  thence 
northward  ; 2  and,  more  important  still,  Reynier's  direct 
retreat  was  now  cut  off,  and  the  only  line  left  open  to 
him  was  the  road  that  followed  the  windings  of  the 
eastern  coast.  Yet  Stuart  in  reporting  these  facts  to 
England  could  find  nothing  to  present  with  them  but  a 
request  that  a  medal  might  be  granted  to  his  army  for 
Maida.3  He  appears  never  to  have  thought  of  the 
effect  that  Verdier's  retreat  would  produce  on  Reynier, 
who  still  lingered  at  Catanzaro,  trying  to  restore  order 
and  spirit  in  his  demoralised  army.  It  seems  never  to 
have  occurred  to  him  that  he  might  himself  have 

1  Gen.  Fox  to  Sec.  of  State,  31st  Aug.  1806. 

2  Intercepted  letter  from  Verdier  to  Reynier,  15th  July,  in  Fox 
to  Sec.  of  State,  2nd  Aug.  1806. 

3  Stuart  to  Sec.  of  State,  12th  July  1806. 


358  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 