

To  Beresford  himself  Ministers  wrote  with  a  certain 
grimness,  which  showed  their  embarrassment  and  mis- 
giving. "  You  are  not  accountable  for  the  expedition/ ' 
they  said  in  effect,  "  and  your  conduct  is  approved. 
We  have  for  long  been  restrained  from  invading  Spanish 
South  America  by  the  fear  of  exciting  a  revolt  against 
Spain,  which  could  only  be  controlled  by  a  British  force 
of  superior  strength.  It  is  with  this  view,  as  much  as 
with  that  of  securing  valuable  possessions,  that  your 
force  has  been  so  much  increased.  Use  your  judgment 
and  your  troops  principally  to  avert  the  evil  of  such 
a  revolt  as  we  have  mentioned,  making  none  but  un- 
avoidable changes  in  the  Government.  Above  all, 
avoid  pledging  the  King's  Government  to  conditions 
which  it  might  not  be  able  to  make  good.  We  can 
only  assure  the  inhabitants  of  protection  so  long  as 
our  troops  are  there ;  and  our  desire  is  that  they  shall 
never  suffer  from  their  amicable  disposition  to  us." 1 
From  such  scanty  information  as  was  before  them 

with  drivers  }       *  .170 

17th  L.D  700  (dismounted) 

2996  rank  and  file. 

(Sec.  of  State  to  Auchmuty,  22nd  Sept.).   Military  Transactions,  i.  20. 
adds  the  9th  L.D.,  and  calls  the  total  3400  r.  and  f.    But  the  9th  had 
not  sailed  in  November.    Courts  and  Cabinets  of  George  III.,  iv.  95. 
1  Sec.  of  State  to  Beresford,  21st  Sept.  1806. 


ch.  xii       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


Ministers  could  hardly  have  written  more  fairly  than  1806. 
this.  Beresford,  upon  the  first  hasty  view,  had  reported 
that  the  inhabitants  were  friendly,  and  that  a  rein- 
forcement of  two  thousand  infantry  and  six  hundred 
cavalry  would  be  sufficient  to  hold  the  country.  More- 
over it  was  true  that  Ministers  had  refused  to  invade 
South  America,  Lord  Grenville  having  declined  to 
listen  to  the  most  insinuating  arguments  of  Miranda; 
and  their  unwillingness  to  incite  an  insurrection,  which 
they  could  not  support,  had  doubtless  been  heightened 
not  only  by  the  memories  of  La  Vendee,  but  by 
Sidney  Smith's  recent  follies  in  Calabria.  Why  then 
did  they  direct  Auchmuty  to  make  good  or  to  supple- 
ment Beresford's  work  by  the  employment  of  force? 
The  only  explanation  is  that  they  yielded  to  the 
pressure  of  the  merchants  and  to  the  outburst  of  vulgar 
enthusiasm  with  which  England  is  apt  to  greet  those 
self-seeking  adventurers  who,  under  pretext  of  wreaking 
an  old  national  grudge,  force  their  country  into  war  for 
their  private  advantage.  Moreover,  it  must  be  granted 
that  the  temptation  to  undertake  the  venture  was  strong. 
Napoleon's  great  plan  for  excluding  British  commerce 
from  the  Continent  of  Europe  could  be  laughed  at  if 
the  whole  of  South  America  were  thrown  open  as  a  new 
market ;  and  there  was  promise  of  further  advantage 
in  the  interception  of  the  gold  which  flowed  through 
the  channel  of  Spain  into  the  Emperor's  treasury. 
Still,  piratical  raids  of  the  kind,  from  Cromwell's  attack 
upon  St.  Domingo  onward,  have  never  prospered  when 
countenanced  by  Government ;  and  it  would  have  been 
a  good  warning  to  adventurers  of  later  generations  if 
Popham's  action  had  been  repudiated  and  Popham 
himself  disgraced. 