

On  arriving  at  Reggio  he  heard  that  General  Fox 
had  been  appointed  to  command  in  the  Mediterranean, 

1  Macleod  to  Fox,  27th,  29th  July ;  in  Fox  to  Sec.  of  State, 
3rd  Aug.  1806. 


364 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1806.  and  that  large  reinforcements  were  on  their  way  to  him. 
This  in  itself  was  nothing  very  mortifying.  Fox  was 
high  up  on  the  list  of  Lieutenant-generals,  though  by 
reason  of  his  age,  health,  and  mediocrity,  he  was  by 
no  means  the  man  who  should  have  been  appointed  to 
the  post,  which,  in  fact,  he  owed  to  the  interest  of  his 
brother  Charles  James.  Having  much  of  his  brother's 
generosity  and  sweet  temper,  Fox  nominated  Stuart  to 
command  in  the  two  Calabrias,  sought  his  advice,  and 
did  everything  that  a  courteous  gentleman  could  do  to 
uphold  his  subordinate's  honour  and  importance.  All 
this  was  pleasant  enough  for  the  victor  of  Maida  ;  but 
together  with  Fox  the  Government  very  wisely  sent  out 
Sir  John  Moore,  to  be  actually  though  not  nominally 
Commander-in-chief.  Now  this  was  the  rival  of  whom 
above  all  others  Stuart  was  most  jealous.  Moore  was 
not  only  his  senior  in  the  service,  but  of  far  greater 
reputation,  a  man  of  clear  insight  into  the  heart  of 
things,  of  high  disdain  for  charlatans,  and  of  a  critical 
faculty  which  was  but  too  keen.  Good-natured  old 
Fox  might  be  cajoled  ;  but  Moore  was  a  man  who 
would  put  hard  questions  with  a  bright  searching  eye, 
and  would  combat  hollow  arguments  with  unsparing 
contempt.  Stuart  shrank  from  the  ordeal,  and  obtained 
leave  to  go  to  Malta  until  he  could  take  a  passage  to 
England.  He  was  rewarded  with  the  ribbon  of  the 
Bath,  which  he  ill  deserved,  and  his  chief  subordinates 
with  a  medal  for  Maida,  which  they  had  most  justly 
earned.  We  shall  see  Stuart  again  in  the  Mediter- 
ranean, and  shall  find  him  unchanged. 
July  22.  Fox  arrived  in  Sicily  on  the  22nd  of  July,  and 
within  a  fortnight  the  situation  had  become  anything 
but  satisfactory.  Sidney  Smith's  wild  proceedings 
and  the  belated  dispatch  of  Acland  to  Salerno  had  done 
great  mischief.  Several  leaders  on  the  coast  about 
Naples  and  Salerno  had  called  their  followers  out  to 
insurrection  prematurely,  only  to  find  French  columns 
descending  upon  them  directly  after  the  fall  of  Gaeta. 
The  Masse  made  no  attempt  to  withstand  the  enemy  by 


ch.xi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  365 

uniting  their  bands,  nor  even  to  impede  them  by  1806. 
occupying  the  passes.    It  served  the  purpose  of  their  Julv- 
leaders  much  better  to  use  the  arms,  which  Smith  had 
given  them,  for  forcible  plunder  of  their  own  towns  and 
villages.    With  great  difficulty  Hudson  Lowe  per- 
|  suaded  many  leading   persons  in  the  Principato  to 
; ;  remain  quiet  ;  and  it  was  well  for  them  that  they  did 
1  so,  for  the  French  took  signal  vengeance  on  the  native 
villages  of  the  worst  offenders,  and  shot  all  men  taken 
1  with  arms  in  their  hands.    Meanwhile  refugees  in  in- 
[  conveniently  large  numbers  were  crowding  into  Capri ; 