

1 /62nd  „  ...      498  „ 


4018 

2  companies  R.A.     ....  250 
Sec.  of  State  to  Fox,  15th  Sept.  1806.    Return  in  Bunbury, 
p.  459. 


*  These  appear  to  have  been3  cos.  of  i/95th  and  5  cos.  of  2/95^.  Cope's 
History  of  the  Rifle  Brigade,  p.  17.  But  this  portion  of  Cope's  book  is 
extremely  slovenly  and  inaccurate. 


368 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


1806.  Maida  and  Capri,  was  ready,  as  in  1799,  to  turn  upon 
the  French.  In  three  weeks  all  was  over.  On  the 
Oct.  14.  14th  of  October  were  fought  the  battles  of  Jena  and 
Auerstadt,  and  by  the  31st  Prussia's  boasted  army  had 
ceased  to  exist  and  her  power  was  shattered  to  frag- 
ments. Her  collapse  was  not  only  complete  but 
ignominious,  and  excited  little  pity  though  great  dismay. 
Russia  still  remained  in  arms  ;  but  Alexander  had 
chosen  this  most  inopportune  moment  for  a  quarrel 
with  the  Turks.  England's  part  was  above  all  things 
to  give  him  assistance  ;  but  the  chances  of  a  successful 
offensive  in  Italy  had  been  wasted  by  Sidney  Smith  and 
Stuart,  and  unfortunately  British  troops  which  should 
have  been  employed  in  Europe  were  diverted  far  over 
sea  by  the  avarice  and  self-seeking  of  Smith's  brother 
charlatan,  Home  Popham.  It  is  necessary,  therefore, 
now  to  return  once  more  to  events  in  South  America.1 

1  The  authorities  for  the  operations  in  the  Mediterranean  are 
the  official  records  in  the  Record  Office.  W.O.  Mediterranean, 
Vols.  142  seq.,  and  the  Secretary  of  State's  Entry  Books,  W.O. 
Vols.  52  seq.  Bunbury's  Great  War  with  France  is  also  invaluable 
as  well  as  admirably  written  ;  and  there  is  useful  information  also 
in  Boothby's  Under  England's  Flag,  and  the  Life  of  Lord  Seaton. 
Mr.  Oman  in  his  study  of  Maida  {Journal  of  the  Royal  Artillery, 
March,  1908)  has  collected  most  valuable  statistics  and  facts  from 
the  French  archives.  The  inimitable  letters  of  Paul  Louis 
Courier  are  of  the  greatest  interest  and  worth  on  the  French  side. 


CHAPTER  XII 


Immediately  upon  his  occupation  of  Buenos  Ayres,  1806. 
as  has  been  told,  Beresford  wrote  to  Baird  an  urgent 
appeal  for  reinforcements.  Sir  David  promptly  responded 
by  dispatching  to  him  two  battalions,  three  squadrons, 
and  other  small  detachments  to  the  number  of  about 
twenty-two  hundred  of  all  ranks,1  which  sailed  from  the 
Cape  on  the  29th  of  August.  Sir  Home  Popham,  for  Aug.  29. 
his  part,  took  the  extraordinary  step  of  sending  a 
circular  round  to  the  leading  merchants  of  London, 
reporting  that  he  had  opened  a  gigantic  market  for  their 
goods  and  inviting  them  to  take  advantage  of  it. 
Nevertheless  Beresford  was  not  deceived  as  to  the 
danger  of  his  position  ;  and  very  soon  the  Spanish 
colonists  awoke  to  a  shameful  sense  of  the  surrender 
which  they  had  made  to  a  handful  of  men.  By  the 
third  week  in  July  Beresford  was  aware  that  a 
rising  against  him  was  in  preparation,  and  that  the 
leaders  of  the  movement  were  two  men,  Captain  Liniers 