

It  may  seem  strange  that  Fox,  with  Moore  at  his 
elbow,  made  no  attempt  to  beat  up  Reynier's  quarters  ; 
but  there  were  two  strong  reasons  against  such  action. 
In  the  first  place,  both  the  Generals  on  the  spot  and  the 
Government  at  home  were  rightly  averse  from  raising 
false  hopes  among  the  Neapolitans  by  petty  raids  which 
were  of  no  permanent  value.  In  the  second,  after  the 
signature  of  d'Oubril's  treaty,  Fox  was  firmly  persuaded, 
having  no  information  to  the  contrary,  that  France  and 
Russia  had  come  to  an  agreement,  and  that  England, 
being  now  isolated  in  Europe,  must  most  carefully 
husband  her  resources.  He  was  strengthened  in  this 
conviction    by  the  fact  that  further  reinforcements 

1  These  appear  to  have  landed  on  July  26th,  and  were  the 
i/2ist,  2/27th,  2/35th.  They  all  came  from  England.  The  two 
second  battalions  were  very  weak,  and  composed  of  the  indifferent 
material  which  had  been  collected  under  the  Army  of  Reserve  Act. 


ch.xi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  367 

promised  to  him  from  England  had  not  appeared.  1806. 
The  truth  was  that  the  British  Cabinet,  in  consequence 
of  Talleyrand's  threats  against  Portugal,  was  urging  the 
Court  of  Lisbon  to  emigrate  to  Brazil  with  its  fleet  and 
army ;  and  on  the  6  th  of  August  had  resolved  to  support  Aug.  6. 
its  diplomacy  by  the  dispatch  of  an  armament  to  the 
Tagus.  A  force  of  nine  battalions,1  was  therefore 
embarked  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant-general 
Simcoe,  though  it  could  only  be  completed  by  inter- 
cepting the  reinforcements  that  had  been  designed  for 
the  Mediterranean  and  South  America.  The  plan  was 
however  abandoned  ;  and  in  the  middle  of  September 
the  Government  decided  to  dispatch  these  troops  to 
their  original  destinations.  In  December,  therefore,  Dec. 
after  a  long  voyage  of  three  months,  nearly  five  thousand 
men  2  were  added  to  the  force  in  Sicily,  increasing  it  to 
a  total  of  nearly  nineteen  thousand  of  all  ranks. 

But  meanwhile  the  storm  in  Germany  had  burst,  and 
all  the  hopes  of  the  Coalition  had  been  dashed  to  the 
ground.  On  the  12th  of  September  Napoleon  called  Sept.  12. 
upon  Prussia  to  disarm,  and  receiving  only  defiance 
in  reply,  took  up  the  challenge,  and  on  the  6th  of  Oct.  6. 
October  declared  war.  All  Europe  was  high  in  hope 
that  deliverance  was  come  at  last.  Godoy,  impatient  of 
the  control  of  Spain  by  France,  opened  negotiations 
with  England  ;   and  Italy,  fired  by  the  successes  of 

1  1  and  3/ 1  st  Guards,  i/i 3th,  i/40th,  i/45th,  1/5 2nd,  i/62nd, 
i/87th  ;  8  cos*  /95th. 

The  Brigadiers  were  Wynyard,  Paget,  Brent  Spencer,  and  Sir 
S.  Auchmuty. 


and  3/ 1st  Guards  ....  2559  rank  and  file. 
i/52nd  „  ...      961    „  „ 