

Auchmuty  sailed  on  the  9th  of  October  ;  and  four  Oct.  9. 
days  later  Baird's  reinforcements  from  the  Cape  entered  Oct.  13. 
Rio  de  la  Plata,  to  learn  with  blank  amazement  that 
Beresford  and  the  whole  of  his  men  were  prisoners. 
Lieutenant-colonel  Backhouse  of  the  Forty-seventh 
thus  found  himself  in  command  of  some  two  thousand 


376 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1806.  men  in  a  strange  land,  with  no  orders  and  no  means 
of  divining  what  the  Government  might  wish  him  to 
do.  However,  after  consultation  with  Popham,  he 
determined  to  land  and  take  up  a  position  on  shore. 

Oct.  29.  Disembarking  accordingly  on  the  29th  with  four  hundred 
men  of  the  Thirty-eighth  off  Maldonado,  he  swept  away 
with  the  bayonet  some  six  hundred  colonists,  who  tried 
to  protect  the  place,  and  duly  installed  himself,  having 

Oct.  30.  captured  their  two  guns.  On  the  following  day  the 
island  of  Goretti,  which  secured  the  harbour,  as  well  as 
batteries  mounting  thirty-two  guns,  were  surrendered 
to  him  ;  and  thus  both  ships  and  men  were  completely 
provided  for  at  a  cost  to  the  British  of  six  men,  and  to 
the  colonists  of  fifty  men,  killed  and  wounded.  After 
this  brief  encounter  no  enemy  came  within  ten  miles  of 
Maldonado  for  some  time  ;  and  this  was  fortunate,  for 
it  was  an  open  town  and  so  situated  as  to  be  untenable 
by  a  small  force.  However,  since  Backhouse  did  not 
discover  that  fact,  he  was  not  uneasy  ;  and  as  Popham 
had  obtained  a  good  anchorage,  which  was  all  that  he 
wanted,  he  was  careful  not  to  point  out  the  defects 
of  the  position,  even  if  (as  was  very  improbable)  he 
perceived  them.  Moreover,  Backhouse  was  able  at  first 
to  procure  horses  for  his  cavalry,  and  to  bring  in 
supplies  with  little  difficulty  or  danger.  There  he 
remained,  therefore,  for  over  three  months,  unmolested 
indeed,  but  wholly  isolated  from  the  world  until  in  due 
time  Auchmuty  arrived  in  the  river. 

But  meanwhile  popular  pressure  or  infection  by 
popular  sentiment  had  enlarged  the  Government's 
ambition  with  regard  to  South  America  ;  and  in  the 
course  of  October  Windham  evolved  one  of  the  most 
astonishing  plans  that  ever  emanated  from  the  brain 
even  of  a  British  Minister  of  War.  Robert  Craufurd, 
a  Colonel  low  down  on  the  list  was,  to  the  great 
indignation  of  his  superior  officers,1  the  instrument 
selected  to  carry  this  out.    His  instructions  began  by 

1  An  Authentic  Narration  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Expedition  under 
Brig.-Gen.  Craufurd  (London,  1808). 


ch.  xii       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


377 


premising  that  the  fame  of  the  superiority  of  British  over  1806. 
Spanish  rule  must  no  doubt  have  crossed  the  Andes,  and 
that  it  was  therefore  intended  to  send  four  thousand 
men,1  escorted  by  a  sufficient  squadron,  to  gain  a  footing 
upon  the  west  coast  of  South  America.    The  reduction 
of  the  province  of  Chile  was  to  be  the  ultimate  purpose, 
and  the  capture  of  a  strong  military  post  on  the  west 
;  coast  the  primary  object,  of  the  expedition.    If  Craufurd 
:  should  succeed  in  conquering  Chile,  or  any  part  of  it, 
!  he  was  to  preserve  peace  and  order.    He  was  not  to 
I  encourage  revolt  in  the  neighbouring  provinces,  and  not 
r  to  pledge  England  to  give  protection  longer  than  her 
)  troops  should  remain  on  the  spot ;  but  at  the  same  time 
'  he  was  to  be  most  careful  to  announce  and  to  prove 
f  that  protection  and  not  booty  was  the  purpose  of  the 
f  enterprise.    If  he  should  obtain  possession  of  Valparaiso, 
1  he  was  to  lose  no  time  in  informing  Beresford,  "  and  in 
t  concerting  with  him  the  means  of  securing  by  a  chain 
1  of  posts,  or  in  any  other  adequate  manner,  an  unin- 
Si  terrupted  communication  both  military  and  commercial 
s  between  Chile  and  Buenos  Ayres." 2 
e       This  last  brilliant  suggestion  for  carrying  a  chain  of 
t  posts  across  the  Andes  along  a  line,  as  the  crow  flies, 
n  of  nine  hundred  miles — the  distance,  roughly  speaking, 
e  from  Madrid  to  Amsterdam — is  added  to  the  draft  of 
d  the  despatch  in  Windham's  own  handwriting.    How  it 
e  was  to  be  effected,  and  how  at  the  same  time  Valparaiso, 
Buenos  Ayres,  and  Monte  Video  were  to  be  occupied 
y  by  a  total  force  of  six  thousand  men,  the  Minister  did 
s  not  explain.    Nor  is  it  obvious  how  an  invading  General 