


1  R.A. 
i/38th    .      .  . 
47th 

1  company  /54th 

2  squadrons  /20th  L.D. 
1  squadron  /21st  L.D. 


Add  one-eighth  for  officers,  sergeants, 
and  drummers 


6 
811 
685 
103 
191 
140 

936  rank  and  file. 
244 


2180 


VOL.  V 


369 


2  B 


370  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 

i  806.  of  the  Spanish  Navy  and  Puerridon,  one  of  the  municipal 
officers  of  Buenos  Ayres,  who  had  at  first  been  most 

friendly  towards  him.    These  two  began  to  collect  : 

forces  on  both  sides  of  the  river,  Liniers  at  Monte  : 

Video,  and  Puerridon  at  Pedriel,  about  twenty  miles  i 

outside  Buenos  Ayres.     Leaving  Popham  to  check  r 

Liniers,  Beresford  marched  at  two  o'clock  on  the  1 

Aug.  1.  morning  of  the  1st  of  August  upon  Pedriel,  with  five  : 

hundred  and  fifty  men  and  six  guns.    Misled  by  his  1 

guides,  he  did  not  reach  his  destination  until  eight  z 

o'clock,  when  he  found  about  two  thousand  hostile  i 

troops  drawn  up  in  a  good  position  with  ten  guns,  ci 

Twenty  minutes  sufficed  to  disperse  them  and  to  capture  t 

all  their  cannon  ;  and  Beresford  returned  to  Buenos  1 

Ayres  the  same  night,  having  lost  five  of  his  own  men  j 

wounded,  against  a  loss  to  the  enemy  of  about  one  r 
hundred  killed,  wounded,  and  taken. 

Beresford  counted  upon  this  success  to  secure  him  t; 

at  least  until  reinforcements  should  arrive ;  but  on  the  1 
Aug.  3.  night  of  the  3rd  Liniers  successfully  crossed  the  river 

with  twenty-eight  vessels,  unobserved  by  Popham's  1 

squadron,  and  landed  at  Las  Conchas,*4:wenty-one  miles  ti 
from  Buenos  Ayres.    Gales  and  torrents  of  rain  pre- 
vented  Liniers  from   moving   and   Beresford  from 
marching  out  to  attack  him,  as  he  desired  ;  but  at  length, 

Aug.  10.  on  the  10th,  Liniers,  having  been  joined  by  several  j 
thousand  raw  levies  from  Buenos  Ayres,  began  his  advance 

upon  the  city,  sending  forward  a  summons  to  Beresford  j 
to  surrender.    The  latter  replied  by  a  defiance  ;  and 

shortly  afterwards  one  of  his  outlying  guards  was  surprised  t< 

and  attacked  at  the  north  end  of  the  town.    Sallying  t 

forth  to  rescue  this  party,  he  found  himself  too  late  ;  \ 

whereupon  taking  up  a  defensive  position  in  front  of  c 

the  fort,  he  resolved,  if  there  were  yet  time,  to  retreat.  s 

Aug.  n.  On  the  nth  accordingly  he  ordered  the  sick,  the  women  j  j 
and  the  children  to  be  embarked  during  the  night, 
and  arranged  a  signal  with   Popham  which  would 
intimate  to  the  Commodore   that   the   troops  had 
evacuated  the  fort  and  were  marching  to  Ensenada  to 


ch.xii       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


37i 


Jl  re-embark.  Throughout  the  10th  and  1  ith,  however,  1806. 
!j  a  constant  fire  was  maintained  upon  his  men  from 
i  the  houses  adjoining  their  position  ;  and  on  the  morning 
§  of  the  1 2  th  it  was  evident  that  the  whole  population  Aug.  1 
%  had  turned  out  to  the  attack.  Beresford's  chosen 
k  refuge  was  in  the  square  directly  in  front  of  the  fort, 
e  an  open  space  about  one  hundred  yards  across,  and 
e  divided  almost  in  half  by  a  long  colonnaded  building, 
is  Two  streets  entered  it  from  the  rear  on  each  side  of 
it  the  fort  and  were  protected  by  its  guns  ;  two  more 
le  debouched  into  it  from  each  flank  opposite  to  the  ends 
si  of  the  central  building  ;  and  two  more  again  met  at 
e  each  of  the  further  angles.  In  the  building  itself 
is  was  stationed  the  Seventy-first ;  the  St.  Helena  infantry 
n  was  posted  so  as  to  enfilade  the  rear  entrances  ;  and  the 
ie  marines  and  seamen  were  drawn  up  in  front.  Guns 
were  also  brought  up  to  close  the  approaches  on 
n  the  flanks,  and  the  principal  houses  in  the  square 
ie  were  likewise  occupied. 