

and  the  French  were  steadily  advancing  southward. 
:  The  British  consul  for  the  Ionian  islands  had  applied 
r  to  the  Russian  commander  at  Corfu  to  spare  some 
i  portion  of  his  eight  ships  of  the  line  and  twenty-nine 
j  armed  vessels  for  a  demonstration  on  the  coast  of  Puglia 
•  and  Abruzzi ;  but  the  request  was  refused  on  the  ground 
f  that   the   security   of  Cattaro   forbade  compliance, 
j  Furthermore,  when   the   news   reached  Palermo  of 
1  d'Oubril's  treaty  with  Napoleon  and  of  his  cession  of 
Cattaro,  the  Court  of  Naples  at  once  veered  round 
towards  friendship  with  France ;  the  Queen's  party 
regained  the  ascendency  ;  Acton  was  dismissed  from 
office,  and  Circello,  Her  Majesty's  reigning  favourite, 
was  installed  in  his  place.    Altogether  the  outlook  was 
extremely  disquieting,  and  Fox  very  wisely  sent  Moore 
in  a  vessel  up  the  western  coast  to  inquire  and  to  report. 

Moore  sailed  accordingly,  and  fell  in  with  Sidney 
Smith  in  the  Bay  of  Policastro,  with  his  flag-ship 
seriously  damaged  and  a  long  list  of  killed  and 
wounded,  the  result  of  cannonading  a  tower  armed  with 
one  gun  and  garrisoned  by  thirty  Corsicans,  who  were 
only  waiting  for  the  Admiral  to  cease  fire  in  order  to 
desert  from  the  French  service  to  the  British.1  Having 
satisfied  himself  that  Smith  was  doing  far  more  harm 
than  good  by  indiscriminate  distribution  of  arms  and 

1  Bunbury,  pp.  267-8.  Sidney  Smith  of  course  said  nothing  of 
this  in  his  despatches,  and  merged  the  casualties  into  those  of 
several  weeks  of  petty  operations. 


366 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1806.  incitement  to  rebellion,  Moore  sent  Acland  and  his 
AuS-  two  battalions  back  to  Messina,  in  order  to  give  no 
countenance  to  further  risings.  Before  the  fall  of 
Gaeta  such  demonstrations  might  have  been  of  service, 
but  they  were  so  no  longer.  Every  day  in  fact  showed 
that,  by  their  fatal  neglect  of  that  one  essential  point, 
Smith  and  Stuart  had  ruined  all  favourable  prospects  in 
the  Mediterranean.  The  force  in  Sicily,  though  aug- 
mented by  the  arrival  of  three  new  battalions1  to  a 
strength  of  between  twelve  and  thirteen  thousand  men, 
was  none  the  less  compelled  to  stand  on  the  defensive, 
for  the  entire  French  army  was  now  released  for  active 
Sept.  operations  in  the  field.  At  the  beginning  of  September 
Reynier  began  again  to  push  his  patrols  towards 
Monteleone.  The  few  Neapolitan  troops  that  held  the 
place,  being  unsupported  by  the  Calabrese,  fell  back 
before  them  ;  and  the  French  General  finally  fixed  his 
headquarters  at  Mileto,  from  whence  his  advanced  posts 
were  thrust  forward  towards  Palmi.  Meanwhile  he 
made  every  preparation  against  the  arrival  of  reinforce- 
ments, which  should  enable  him  to  reoccupy  the  entire 
coast  of  Lower  Calabria.  I 