

i  At  about  half-past  nine  the  enemy  delivered  their 
'j  attack  upon  Beresford's  front  and  both  flanks,  directing 
s  their  artillery  chiefly  against  his  front.  In  the  streets 
the  assailants  were  easily  beaten  off  and  three  of  their 
j  guns  taken ;  but  a  galling  fire  from  the  tops  of  the  build- 
%l  ings  that  commanded  the  fort  and  square  worked  havoc 
al  among  the  British.  Towards  noon  Beresford,  having 
:ej  lost  one  hundred  and  sixty-five  men 1  and  being  unwill- 
dling  to  sacrifice  more  to  no  purpose,  ceased  firing  and 
d|  hoisted  the  white  flag.  The  tumultuous  levies  opposed 
I  to  him  showed  no  respect  to  the  flag  ;  and  it  was  some 
J  time  before  Liniers  could  check  their  further  aggression, 
J  towards  which,  as  is  usual  in  such  cases,  the  absence 
oil  of  any  danger  prodigiously  emboldened  them.  After 
tl  a  short  parley  with  Liniers,  a  capitulation  was  drawn  up 
a  and  signed  by  the  two  commanders,  to  the  effect  that 
it,  British  property  should  be  respected,  and  that  Beres- 

1  2  officers  and  46  n.c.o.  and  men  killed. 
8  officers  and  99  n.c.o.  and  men  wounded. 
tc  j  10    „     „     „  missing. 


372 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1806.  ford  and  his  people  should  become  prisoners  ;  but  that 
they  should  be  immediately  exchanged  for  the  prisoners 
captured  by  him  at  Buenos  Ayres,  and  should  be  shipped 
to  England.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  Liniers 
intended  faithfully  to  observe  this  treaty,  for  he  sent 
his  own  aide-de-camp  to  Popham  with  orders  to  bring 
up  the  transports  for  embarkation  of  the  troops  ;  but 
circumstances  were  too  strong  for  him.  Popham's 
raid  had  caused  an  insurrection  against  the  authority 
of  the  Spanish  Government ;  the  Viceroy  had  been 
driven  out ;  and  revolutionary  leaders  had  usurped  his 
power.  Such  folk,  especially  if  they  are  of  southern 
blood,  do  not  boggle  at  trifles.  The  colonists  had 
lost  six  or  seven  hundred  killed  and  wounded  in  the 
attack,  and  their  chiefs  had  some  excuse  for  feeling 
vindictive  against  the  British.  They  therefore  re- 
pudiated the  treaty,  confiscated  all  British  property,  and 
carried  Beresford  and  his  men  away  prisoners  some 
hundreds  of  miles  into  the  interior. 

Here  then  closed  the  first  act  of  this  little  drama. 
Popham,  and  later  on  Beresford,  inveighed  bitterly 
against  the  treachery  of  the  colonists,*  who  had  turned 
against  them  after  swearing  allegiance  to  King  George. 
Such  outcry  was  ridiculous.  If  the  British  had  offered 
the  inhabitants  deliverance  and  protection  from  Old 
Spain,  they  would  have  been  received  with  open  arms  ; 
but  there  was  no  reason  why  the  colonists  should  expose 
themselves  to  the  vengeance  of  their  mother-country 
simply  to  satisfy  the  cupidity  of  a  British  Commodore. 
Most  unfortunately  Popham  was  safely  on  board  his  ship 
in  the  river,  so  that  the  colonists  had  no  chance  of 
hanging  him  as  he  deserved.  However,  it  was  no 
pleasing  task  for  him  to  report  the  disastrous  issue  of 
his  raid,  which  he  endeavoured  to  palliate  by  alleging 
that  at  least  it  had  done  material  damage  to  Spain.1 
But,  long  before  his  letters  reached  home,  Spain  was 
negotiating  for  alliance  with  England  ;  and  when  that 