


1  Popham  to  Admiralty,  25th  Aug.;  to  Duke  of  York,  6th  Sept. 
1 806. 


ch.xii       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


373 


alliance  was  finally  made  two  years  later,  the  memory  1806. 
of  this  attack,  being  naturally  though  wrongly  ascribed 
to  the  British  Government,  still  rankled  in  the  minds 
of  good  Spaniards.  However,  the  mischief  was 
done ;  and  Popham  could  only  withdraw  his  ships, 
having  first  embarked  a  few  small  British  detachments 
which  were  still  ashore,  and  drop  down  the  river  to  a 
safer  anchorage. 

A  month  later,  on  the  13th  of  September,  Beresford's  Sept.  1 
report  of  his  original  capture  of  Buenos  Ayres  arrived 
in  England,  and  was  received  by  the  nation  at  large 
with  transports  of  delight.  Visions  of  new  markets, 
boundless  wealth  and  relief  from  the  terrible  burden 
of  taxation  rose  before  the  eyes  of  all  ;  and  merchants 
and  speculators  hastened  to  ship  off  large  cargoes  to  La 
Plata  in  response  to  the  imprudent  circular  from  Popham. 
Only  the  unfortunate  Cabinet  which,  with  its  hands 
already  over-full,  had  to  provide  for  a  new  and  unforeseen 
demand  for  troops,  was  touched  by  doubt  or  dismay. 
At  least  one  of  its  members,  the  Prime  Minister  Lord 
Grenville,  was  extremely  angry  ;  and  it  was,  I  suspect, 
mainly  at  his  instance  that  the  decision  was  taken  to 
recall  Baird,  the  Governor  of  St.  Helena,  and  Popham, 
and  to  try  the  last  named  by  court-martial.  But, 
most  regrettably,  no  effort  was  made  to  repudiate  the 
Commodore's  action.  We  have  seen  that  a  force  had 
already  been  appointed  to  sail  for  Rio  de  la  Plata  under 
Sir  Samuel  Auchmuty,  and  had  been  countermanded  in 
order  to  furnish  troops  for  the  Portuguese  expedition 
in  August.  The  latter  enterprise  having  been  aban- 
doned, there  was  no  reason  why  the  reinforcements 
should  not  proceed  to  South  America ;  and  Auchmuty 
received  instructions  to  that  effect  on  the  22nd  of  Sept.  2 
September.  His  troops  numbered  in  all  rather  over 
four  thousand  of  all  ranks,1  and  his  orders  bade  him 


1  Auchmuty's  force — 

1 /40th   1000 

1/87U1   826 

3  cos.  /95th  .....  300 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1806.  place  himself  under  Beresford's  command.  Incase 
Beresford  should  be  in  difficulties  or  should  have 
surrendered,  he  was  to  endeavour  to  repair  the  loss 
and  to  obtain  a  footing  which  should  enable  him  to  hold 
his  own,  pending  the  arrival  of  a  further  reinforce- 
ment of  three  thousand  men,  which  would  sail  three 
weeks  after  him.  If  this  task  should  appear  hopeless, 
he  was  to  return  to  the  Cape.  In  any  case,  the  further 
reinforcement  above  mentioned  was  required  elsewhere, 
and  was  not  to  be  detained  longer  than  was  demanded 
for  the  relief  of  Beresford  or  the  recovery  of  a  station 
on  the  coast. 