


ch.  xii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  385 

and  the  Eighty-seventh  were  posted  by  the  north  1 
gate,  which  was  to  be  opened  for  them  by  the  other 
column.    The  remainder  of  the  force  was  held  in  re- 
serve against  the  possible  arrival  of  a  relieving  force  from 
without. 

At  three  o'clock,  in  extreme  darkness,  the  attacking  F 
column  stole  out  towards  the  breach,  arriving  close  to 
it  before  it  was  discovered.    The  first  discharge  of  the 
enemy's  guns  struck  down  only  one  man,  but  the  second 
laid  low  twenty-five  men  out  of  thirty  who  were  follow- 
ing in  immediate  support ;  and  the  leaders  on  arriving 
at  the  breach  mistook  it  for  the  untouched  wall  and 
passed  it  by.    In  truth  the  enemy  had  so  cunningly 
barricaded  it  by  vast  piles  of  hides,  laid  one  upon 
another,  that  it  was  hardly  practicable.    For  fifteen 
minutes  the  column  wandered  about  under  a  very 
heavy  fire,  until  at  last  Captain  Renny  of  the  light 
company  of  the  Fortieth  found  the  breach,  and  fell  as 
he  mounted  it.    With  great  difficulty,  for  the  passage 
would  admit  but  three  men  abreast,  his  soldiers  forced 
their  way  to  the  summit  and  dropped  from  it  twelve 
feet  into  the  body  of  the  place.    Some  then  dashed 
into  the  town,  while  others  turned  to  their  left  and 
carried  in  succession  all  the  batteries  round  the  place  as 
far  as  Fort  St.  Philip.    Even  so,  however,  the  Fortieth, 
which  followed  in  support,  also  missed  the  breach,  and 
passed  twice  under  the  fire  of  the  batteries  before  they 
found  it.    Meanwhile  the  second  column  by  the  north 
gate  grew  impatient,  and  some  of  the  Rifles,  scaling  the 
wall,  forced  the  gate  open  to  admit  their  comrades. 
The  streets,  which  were  laid  out  regularly  at  right 
angles,  were  defended  by  field-guns  unlimbered  at  their 
[nlheads  ;  but  these  were  speedily  captured  and  the  town 
iorlcleared  with  the  bayonet.    The  citadel  still  made  a 
iklshow  of  resistance,  but  some  riflemen  ascending  the 
raltowers  of  the  cathedral,  which  commanded  the  works, 
9a  ispeedily  made  an  end  of  it.    At  half-past  eight  the 
t,  place  surrendered  at  discretion  ;  and  after  some  slight 
disorder,  which  was  easily  repressed,  the  troops  were  so 
II    vol.  v  2  c 


386  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xm 

1807.  thoroughly  under  control  that  within  a  few  hours  the 
inhabitants  were  walking  as  usual  about  the  streets. 

The  enemy's  loss  in  the  assault  was  very  heavy. 
About  eight  hundred  were  killed,  five  hundred  wounded,  I 
and  two  thousand  taken  prisoners,  the  remainder 
escaping  across  the  harbour  in  boats,  unmolested  by  the 
British  squadron.  The  British  casualties  also  were  not 
light — six  officers  and  one  hundred  and  ten  men  killed ; 
twenty-one  officers  and  two  hundred  and  fifty-eight 
men  wounded.  The  Light  Battalion,  with  sixty-three 
killed  and  eighty-four  wounded  out  of  four  or  five 
companies,  suffered  most  heavily,  and  next  to  them  the 
Thirty-eighth  with  twenty-seven  killed  and  one  hundred 
and  twenty-one  wounded.  In  this  regiment  alone  nine 
officers  were  struck  down,  three  of  them  by  mortal 
hurts.  It  was  noticed  that,  in  the  case  of  wounds  of 
the  lower  extremities,  tetanus  invariably  supervened, 
with  fatal  results  ;  and  to  this  cause  were  due  the  deaths 
of  Colonel  Brownrigg  and  Colonel  Vassall,  the  excellent 
commanding  officers  of  the  Light  Battalion  and  Thirty- 
eighth.  Altogether  the  action  was  creditable  to 
Auchmuty  and  to  his  troops,  for  the  cross-fire  upon 
the  breach  from  the  uninjured  batteries  on  each  flank 
was  terrific,  and  would  have  daunted  any  but  good  and 
resolute  soldiers.  In  fact,  but  that  the  shortness  of  the 
range  prevented  the  enemy's  grape-shot  and  canister  j 
from  scattering,1  the  attack  would  very  probably  have 
failed. 