

1  Auchmuty  to  C.-in-C,  6th  Feb.  1807. 

The  force  was  brigaded  as  follows  : — 

Cavalry  Brigade.        Col.  Lloyd,   17th  L.D.  ;   17th,  20th,  21st 
L.D.  959  sabres. 

1st  Infantry  Brigade.  Col.  Browne,  40th  ;  38th,  40th,  87th,  and 
3  cos.  of  95th. 

2nd  Infantry  Brigade.  Brig.-gen.  Lumley  ;  47th,  1  co./7ist,  naval 
batt.  (800)  L.I.  cos.  of  infantry  regiments. 
R.A.  123  men  with  6  guns. 

Total.  5632  r.  and  f.,  say  6300  of  all  ranks. 

Admiral  Stirling  had  generally  1400  men  ashore,  and  his  flag-ship 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1807.  The  General's  first  task  was  to  land  his  own  heavy 
guns  and  several  others  borrowed  from  the  broadsides 
of  the  fleet,  the  latter  of  which,  owing  to  the  small  size 
of  their  wheels,  were  a  source  of  much  trouble.  Mean- 
while the  scattered  buildings  outside  the  northern  front 
were  cleared  away,  the  largest  only  being  left  standing 
in  order  to  cover  the  erection  of  the  first  batteries, 
namely  one  of  four  twenty-four  pounders  and  another 

Jan.  23.  of  two  mortars,  against  the  citadel.  On  the  23rd  an 
additional  battery  of  two  guns  was  constructed  with 
the  object  (which  was  not  attained)  of  preventing 
the  enemy's  gunboats  from  bringing  stores,  supplies, 
and  even  water  into  the  town  from  the  other  side  of 

Jan.  25.  the  harbour.  On  the  25th  the  four-gun  and  mortar 
batteries  opened  fire,  while  the  smaller  vessels  stood  in 
to  cannonade  the  town  ;  but  the  attack  produced  no 
appreciable  effect  either  on  the  works  or  on  the  spirit 

Jan.  28.  of  the  inhabitants.  On  the  28th,  therefore,  another 
battery  of  six  guns  was  established  against  the  citadel, 
which  soon  knocked  the  parapet  to  pieces,  but  left  the 
ramparts  little  injured.  The  supply  of  powder  now  began 
to  run  short,  and  Auchmuty,  as  a  last  resource,  threw 
up  another  battery  of  six  guns  within  six  hundred  yards 
of  the  works,  in  the  hope  of  breaching  the  wall  close  to 

Feb.  2.  the  south  gate.  By  the  2nd  of  February  the  breach 
was  reported  to  be  practicable,  and  since  a  hostile  force 
of  four  thousand  men  was  said  to  be  approaching, 
Auchmuty  summoned  the  Governor  to  surrender.  He 
was  answered  by  defiance,  and  resolved  to  assault  before 
dawn  on  the  morrow.  The  forlorn  hope  consisted 
chiefly  of  men  of  the  Fifty-fourth  under  a  sergeant  of 
the  Thirty -eighth  and  Lieutenant  Everard  of  the 
Queen's,  who  though  attached  to  the  Thirty-eighth, 
claimed  the  privilege  as  belonging  to  the  senior 
regiment.  Two  companies  of  Rifles,  the  flank- 
battalions,  and  Thirty- eighth  were  to  follow  them,  \ 
with  the  Fortieth  in  support.    One  company  of  Rifles 

was  frequently  left  with  only  thirty  men  aboard.  Stirling  to 
Admiralty,  8th  Feb.  1807. 