

1  9th  L.D.,  54;  R.A.,  315  40th,  481  ;  95th,  200;  Light 
companies,  247.  The  detachment  at  Colonia  consisted  of  9th  L.D., 
40th,  3  cos.  /95th,  3  cos.  L.I. 


ch.xii       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


39i 


on  a  very  narrow  front,  waist  deep  in  water,  formed  up  1807. 
on  the  further  side,  always  under  heavy  fire  of  artillery,  June  7- 
and  advanced  to  the  attack  without  firing  a  shot.  The 
enemy's  cavalry  fled  at  once,  but  the  infantry  stood 
until  the  British  were  within  a  few  paces,  when  they 
suddenly  broke  and  were  pursued  with  heavy  slaughter. 
They  left  on  the  field  one  hundred  and  twenty  dead, 
as  many  wounded,  over  one  hundred  prisoners  and 
eight  guns,  while  Pack's  casualties  did  not  exceed  forty- 
eight,  nearly  one -third  of  which  were  due  to  the 
accidental  explosion  of  an  ammunition-waggon. 

Now,  therefore,  it  was  for  Whitelocke  to  determine 
upon  his  plan  of  campaign  ;  and  in  order  to  do  so  he 
had  first  to  decide  some  very  difficult  questions.  That 
his  first  object  must  be  to  capture  Buenos  Ayres  there 
was  no  doubt  ;  and  there  was  equally  no  doubt  that 
the  brunt  of  the  work  must  fall  upon  the  Army,  for  the 
river  near  the  shore  was  so  shallow  that  the  men-of-war 
could  not  approach  nearer  than  within  six  to  eight 
miles  of  the  city.  First,  therefore,  a  place  of  dis- 
embarkation must  be  selected  ;  and  the  investigations  of 
the  Navy  soon  narrowed  the  choice  down  to  a  single 
point.  Above  Buenos  Ayres  the  navigation  was  too 
difficult  and  intricate  for  a  fleet  of  transports  ;  below  it 
there  was  but  one  place  where  an  army  could  be  dis- 
embarked under  cover  of  the  ships  of  war,  namely 
Ensenada  de  Barragon,  some  twenty-four  miles  below 
the  city.  If  the  protection  of  the  fleet  during  the 
disembarkation  were  dispensed  with,  there  was  the 
Point  of  Quilmes,  where  Beresford  had  landed,  which 
possessed  the  advantage  of  lying  within  eight  miles,  as 
the  crow  flies,  from  Buenos  Ayres  ;  but  reconnaissance 
showed  that  a  battery  had  been  erected  to  command 
the  passage  through  the  marsh,  and  so  to  foil  any 
future  attempts  similar  to  Beresford's.  It  was  therefore 
no  reproach  to  Whitelocke  that  he  fixed  upon  Ensenada 
for  his  landing-place. 

Next,  how  was  the  march  from  the  strand  to  the  city 
to  be  accomplished?    The  shore  from  Ensenada  to 


392 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1807.  Buenos  Ayres  to  a  distance  of  two  to  four  miles  inland 
is  but  two  feet  above  the  level  of  the  river,  and  in 
the  rainy  season  was  almost  entirely  under  water.1 
Beyond  this  marshy  ground  the  land  rises  gradually  to 
a  height  of  twelve  or  fifteen  feet ;  and  this  higher  tract 
extends  westward,  broken  only  by  a  multitude  of  little 
streams,  as  far  as  the  village  of  Reduction,  where 
another  wet  level,  running  far  up  the  country,  is  inter- 
posed between  that  village  and  the  capital.  Through 
this  level  runs  the  little  river  Chuelo,  over  which  the 
wooden  bridge,  which  had  been  destroyed  on  the  occasion 
of  Beresford's  landing,  had  been  replaced.  Little, 
however,  was  known  or  could  be  learned  of  the  country, 
except  of  that  portion  of  it  which  had  been  traversed  by 
Beresford  between  Point  Quilmes  and  Buenos  Ayres. 
The  few  colonists  of  Monte  Video  friendly  to  the 
British  knew  nothing  of  the  opposite  shore  over  one 
hundred  miles  away  ;  and  little  more  was  to  be  learned 
at  Colonia,  which  lies  indeed  over  against  Buenos  Ayres, 
but  rather  remoter  from  it  than  is  Calais  from  Dover. 
Such  vague  information  as  could  be  collected  amounted 
to  this.  From  Ensenada  to  Reduction^the  distance  was 
twenty  miles  ;  and  from  Reduction  to  the  capital  nine 
miles  more.  There  were  three  different  roads,  one  on 
the  sands,  a  second  through  the  marsh,  and  a  third, 
which  was  the  best,  on  the  heights.  To  reach  this 
last  some  marshy  ground  must  be  passed,  which  was 
reported  to  be  always  practicable  for  a  coach,  and  to  be 
commonly  traversed  by  the  waggons  of  the  country  ; 
but,  the  heights  once  gained,  the  road  was  firm  and 
good.  From  Reduction  the  high  road  crossed  the 
Chuelo  by  the  bridge  ;  but  by  making  a  detour  the  head 
of  the  river  could  be  turned.  There  were  few  farm- 
houses on  the  road,  and  the  troops  could  expect  little 
shelter  short  of  the  suburbs  of  Buenos  Ayres.  As  to 
fuel,  it  was  not  to  be  found  except  in  human  dwellings, 
for  there  was  not  a  tree  to  be  seen  for  miles.  With 
regard  to  supplies,  the  plain  swarmed  with  cattle,  which 
1  An  Authentic  Narrative,  etc.,  p.  183. 