

The  General  sailed  accordingly  in  the  Thisbe  frigate 
at  the  end  of  March,  and  reached  Monte  Video  on  the 
10th  of  May  after  a  voyage  of  nine  weeks.  He  found  May  10. 
all  well  with  Auchmuty.  An  attempt  had  been  made 
on  the  22nd  of  April  to  surprise  Pack's  detachment  at  April  22. 
Colonia,  but  this  had  been  foiled  with  trifling  loss,  and 
all  was  quiet.  On  the  other  hand,  neither  Craufurd 
nor  the  reinforcements  from  England  had  arrived  ; 
and  Whitelocke  decided  to  await  their  coming  before 
attacking  Buenos  Ayres,  devoting  himself  meanwhile  to 

1  Colburne's  Military  Magazine,  loc.  citat. 
2  Windham  to  Whitelocke  (secret),  6th  March  1807. 


39o 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


1807.  preparations  for  an  advance.  These  were  not  easily 
accomplished.  In  spite  of  all  exertions,  horses  enough 
could  not  be  procured  for  the  guns  and  cavalry.  Such 
as  were  obtained  were  unbroken,  and  soon  sank  under  the 
burden  of  unwonted  work  and  insufficient  food  ;  for  it 
was  midwinter  south  of  the  line,  when  the  native  grass 
contained  little  nourishment  and  no  other  description  of 

May  30.  forage  was  obtainable.  At  last,  on  the  30th  of  May, 
Craufurd's  detachment  was  reported  to  be  off  the 
mouth  of  the  river.  On  arriving  at  Table  Bay  on  the 
23rd  of  March,  he  had  agreed  with  Admiral  Murray  to 
sail  in  ten  days,  as  soon  as  the  transports  should  have 
been  victualled  and  watered  ;  and  in  fact  the  armament 
actually  sailed  on  the  6th  of  April,  reached  St.  Helena 
on  the  2 1  st,  and,  after  taking  in  water,  set  off  again  on 
the  26th.  But  even  on  the  30th  of  May  Craufurd's 
voyage  was  not  nearly  over.    Fogs  and  contrary  winds 

June  14.  delayed  him  in  the  river,  and  not  till  the  14th  of  June 
did  the  whole  of  the  transports  reach  Monte  Video.  By 
that  time  some  of  the  troops  had  been  on  board  ship 
for  nine  full  months. 

Meanwhile  the  enemy  was  collecting  reinforcements 
to  cut  off  or  attack  Pack's  isolated  troops  at  Colonia  ; 
and  Whitelocke  had  found  it  necessary  to  reinforce  the 
post  to  a  strength  of  some  fifteen  hundred  men.  On  the 
June  6.  evening  of  the  6th  Pack  received  intelligence  of  a  body 
of  the  enemy  encamped  at  San  Pedro,  some  twelve 
miles  away,  under  the  command  of  General  Elio,  an 
officer  lately  arrived  from  Spain.  Starting  at  three 
June  7.  o'clock  on  the  next  morning  with  a  force  of  about 
eleven  hundred  men  of  all  ranks,1  Pack  came  upon 
Elio  at  seven  o'clock,  and  found  him  securely  posted  on 
rising  ground,  with  a  deep  and  marshy  stream  covering 
his  front  and  both  flanks,  and  the  only  ford  defended 
by  four  field-guns  and  two  howitzers.  He  decided  to 
attack  at  once.    The  troops  therefore  crossed  the  ford 