

The  losses  of  the  British  during  the  siege  had  been 
trifling,  and  those  in  the  preliminary  operations  had  not 
amounted  to  one  hundred  and  fifty  ;  but  Auchmuty, 
none  the  less,  felt  powerless  to  do  more  until  Craufurd's 
Feb.  6.  detachment  should  arrive.  On  the  6th  a  welcome 
reinforcement  appeared  in  the  shape  of  the  Ninth  Light 
Dragoons,  which  had  been  sent  forward,  as  has  been; 
already  related,  from  Porto  Praya  ;  but  this  in  itself 
was  insufficient.  The  population  was  to  all  appearance 
inveterately  hostile  ;  and  the  only  operation  which 
1  Colburne's  Military  Magazine,  loc.  citat. 


ch.xii       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


387 


might  possibly  alter  its  attitude  was  the  capture  of  1807. 
Buenos  Ayres.  But  even  if  this  were  successfully 
accomplished,  six  thousand  men  were  too  few  at  once 
to  hold  Monte  Video  and  to  occupy  a  capital  of  sixty 
to  seventy  thousand  inhabitants.  The  province,  more- 
over, continued  to  be  unquiet.  In  Buenos  Ayres  the 
revolutionary  party  had  installed  General  Liniers  as 
Governor  ;  and  the  Spanish  Viceroy,  who  was  hovering 
near  Monte  Video  with  a  small  force  and  watching 
Auchmuty's  movements,  was  seized  by  emissaries  of  this 
party  and  carried  prisoner  to  the  capital.  Convinced 
by  this  that  the  inhabitants,  however  hostile  to  the 
British,  were  still  more  hostile  to  Spain,  the  General 
was  about  to  invite  them  to  throw  off  Spanish  rule  and 
accept  that  of  King  George,  when  he  was  surprised  by 
the  sudden  appearance  of  Beresford  and  Pack  who,  by 
the  help  of  two  South  American  gentlemen,  had  con- 
trived to  escape,  while  travelling  inland  towards  their 
appointed  place  of  confinement.  Beresford  declined  to 
take  the  command  from  Auchmuty,  and  prepared  to  go 
home ;  but  he  was  able  first  to  assure  him  that,  though 
the  party  which  was  friendly  to  England  was  strong, 
yet  that  it  looked  above  all  things  for  independence, 
and  would  not  accept  British  rule  except  with  a  proviso 
that  the  country  should  not  be  handed  back  to  Spain 
upon  a  peace.  This  being  the  one  pledge  that  Auch- 
muty was  unable  to  give,  his  overtures  naturally  came 
[to  nothing.  To  strengthen  his  position,  therefore,  he 
occupied  Colonia  del  Sacramento  on  the  north  shore 
over  against  Buenos  Ayres,  kept  small  columns  in 
movement  around  Monte  Video  to  preserve  order  and 
bring  in  supplies,  and  possessed  his  soul  in  patience 
until  reinforcements  should  arrive.1 

Meanwhile  the   British  Cabinet,  looking   to  the 
diversion  of  Craufurd's  force  to  Rio  de  la  Plata  and  to 
the  steady  accumulation  of  troops  in  that  quarter  from 
ar"lEngland  and  the  Cape,  decided  to  send  out  a  senior 
TC|pfficer  to  take  command  of  the  whole.    One  member  at 
1  Auchmuty  to  Sec.  of  State,  6th,  20th  March  1807. 