


I 


ch.xii       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


379 


I  an  impudent  proclamation  that  he  had  come  to  fight  1806. 
e   "  for  the  independence  of  the  Venezuelans  under  the 

e  auspices  and  protection  of  the  British  fleet."  This 
ti  done,  he  wrote  to  Sir  Eyre  Coote  at  Jamaica  for  any 
i  assistance  that  could  be  afforded.  Coote,  like  Bowyer, 
s  declined  to  send  him  anything,  and  in  November  the 
y.  Secretary  of  State  wrote  to  approve  of  Coote's  action.1 
§  To  judge  by  appearances,  therefore,  the  audacious 
a  I  greed  of  a  Commodore  had  sufficed  to  throw  the 
y  entire  Ministry  off  its  balance,  so  that  it  swayed  to 
and  fro,  in  hopeless  vacillation,  between  the  expediency 
s  either  of  devoting  all  the  strength  of  England  to  the 
h  conquest  of  South  America,  or  of  leaving  that  con- 
r  tinent  wholly  untouched. 

s       Fortunately  Grenville's  wild  idea  was  abandoned  ; 

II  though  Craufurd's  force,  after  long  delay,  sailed  from 
ti  Falmouth  amid  much  curiosity  as  to  its  destination, 
a  Some  of  the  troops  had  already  been  embarked  for 
11  months,  but  by  the  care  of  their  officers  they  were  in 
e  good  health  ;  and  Craufurd  before  sailing  examined 
"  every  ship  minutely  himself,  giving  liberal  orders  for 
y  all  articles  that  could  contribute  to  the  comfort  of  the 
I  men.  The  whole  convoy  numbered  forty  sail  of 
d  transports  and  merchantmen,2  and  was  escorted  by 
y  four  ships  of  the  line  and  as  many  smaller  vessels 
J:  under  Commodore  Stopford  ;  but  this  squadron  was 
J  to  be  replaced  before  the  end  of  the  voyage  by  a  fleet 
it  I  under  Admiral  Murray,  who  was  the  naval  commander- 

1  in-chief  of  the  expedition.    On  the  14th  of  December  Dec.  14. 
J  the  fleet  anchored  at  Porto  Praya  in  the  Cape  de 
in  Verde  Islands,  to  await  the  arrival  of  Murray.  Three 
;|  weeks  passed  without  a  sign  of  the  Admiral ;  and  on  l8o7 
d|  the  6th  of  January  Craufurd,  pursuant  to  his  orders,  Jan.  6. 
it  I  sent  off  the  Ninth  Light  Dragoons  under  convoy  of  a 
J  frigate,  to  Rio  de  la  Plata.    On  the  following  day  he  Jan.  7. 
5 1  represented  to  the  Commodore  that  Government  had 

1  Bowyer  to  Sec.  of  State,  20th  June  ;  Coote  to  Sec.  of  State, 
51 !  26th  August ;  Sec.  of  State  to  Coote,  6th  Nov.  1806. 

2  The  9th  L.D.  sailed  with  this  convoy. 


38o 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1807.  particularly  urged  haste  upon  him,  and  proposed  that, 
unless  Murray  should  come  in  by  the  nth,  Stopford 
should  escort  him  on  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.1 

Jan.  1 1.  Stopford  agreed;  and  accordingly  on  the  nth  the 
squadron,  less  two  ships  of  the  line  which  returned 

Feb.  23.  home,  weighed  anchor,  and  on  the  23rd  of  February 
reached  Table  Bay.  Here  Admiral  Murray,  who  had 
left  Porto  Pray  a  after  Craufurd's  departure,  was  already 
expecting  his  arrival  impatiently  ;  for  new  orders  had 
just  come  in  from  England.  Vague  reports  of  the 
recapture  of  Buenos  Ayres  had  penetrated  to  London 
by  way  of  Lisbon  on  the  2nd  of  January  ;  and  a  swift 
sailing  vessel  had  been  sent  forward  to  the  Cape  to 
direct  Murray  and  Craufurd  to  proceed  straight  to 
Rio  de  la  Plata.  To  Auchmuty  2  likewise  were  now 
sent  definite  orders  to  recover  the  territory  of  Buenos 
Ayres,  and,  only  after  that  object  had  been  accomplished, 
to  despatch  Craufurd  to  fulfil  his  original  mission. 