

1  Auchmuty  to  Sec.  of  State,  7th  Feb.  1807. 

2  The  Admiralty,  which  did  not  love  Popham,  carried  its 
resentment  against  him  so  far  as  to  leave  him  to  pay  for  his  own 
passage  home  in  a  merchant  brig.  Colburne's  Military  Magazine, 
August,  1836,  p.  491. 


382 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


807.  this  position  he  was  attacked  next  morning  by  a  force 
.  20.  Qf  sjx  thousand  men  with  several  guns.  They  advanced 
in  two  columns,  the  right  consisting  of  cavalry  which 
threatened  to  turn  his  left  flank  ;  while  the  left,  made 
up  of  infantry,  assailed  his  left  centre.  The  infantry 
was  checked  by  a  picquet  of  four  hundred  men,  which 
held  its  own  until  reinforced  by  three  companies  of 
the  Fortieth.  But  the  Spanish  foot  refused  to  yield  to 
a  charge  of  this  little  body  until  the  Rifles  and  Light 
companies  fell  upon  their  flank,  when  they  gave  way  and 
were  pursued  with  great  slaughter  into  the  town.  From 
two  to  three  hundred  Spaniards  were  killed  and  as 
many  taken  ;  and  the  cavalry,  seeing  the  fate  of  their 
comrades,  at  once  retired,  leaving  Auchmuty  free  to 
invest  the  city  without  the  slightest  further  molestation. 

Monte  Video  stands  on  a  rocky  ridge  of  distinct 
formation  from  the  land  around  it,  and  at  that  time 
covered  no  more  than  a  peninsula  measuring  about 
a  mile  north  and  south  by  a  mile  and  a  half  east  and 
west.  Surrounded  by  water  on  three  sides,  it  was 
fortified  upon  those  sides  with  a  series  of  thirteen  very 
heavy  seaward  batteries,  which  were* built  to  suit  the 
configuration  of  the  ground  and  were  connected  by  a 
covered  way.  All  were  difficult  of  approach  owing  to  the 
rocky  nature  of  the  shore  ;  the  most  important  of  them 
were  covered  by  a  small  enclosed  fort,  called  after 
St.  Philip,  at  the  north-western  angle  of  the  peninsula  ; 
and  the  only  landing-place  was  on  the  northern  front, 
at  a  stone  pier  within  the  harbour.  On  the  east  or 
landward  side  the  city  receded  from  the  water  on  each 
flank  in  such  manner  as  to  form  a  great  salient  angle, 
of  which  the  southern  face  was  about  a  thousand  yards 
long,  and  the  northern  about  twelve  hundred.  The 
landward  front  had  been  originally  protected  only  by 
a  stone  wall  some  four  feet  thick  and  fifteen  feet  high, 
but  to  this  had  been  added,  at  the  point  of  the  salient 
angle,  a  square  fort  with  four  bastions,  whereof  the  face 
towards  the  country  was  further  covered  by  a  ditch  and 
a  small  ravelin.    The  whole  was  revetted  with  brick, 


ch.xii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  383 

and  possessed  no  entrance  except  from  within  the  town  1 
over  a  small  drawbridge.  On  each  flank  of  this  fort 
were  two  demi-bastions,  mounting  heavy  ordnance  ; 
and  beyond  these  again,  at  a  distance  of  about  three 
hundred  yards,  stood  two  more  demi-bastions,  that  on 
the  north  side  mounting  fourteen,  and  that  on  the  south 
side  seven  guns.  The  entrances  to  the  town  were  two  : 
the  north  gate  between  the  citadel  and  the  fourteen- 
gun  battery ;  and  the  south  gate,  about  one  hundred 
yards  from  the  river,  being  strongly  protected  not  only 
by  the  cannon  of  the  seven-gun  battery  but  by  two  heavy 
guns  in  a  round  tower  near  the  water.  Altogether  the 
defences  of  Monte  Video  showed  one  hundred  and 
thirteen  pieces  of  artillery,  twenty-four  of  them  in  the 
citadel,  and  over  forty  more  on  the  landward  face.  The 
works,  contrary  to  the  information  furnished  to  Auch- 
muty,  were  in  excellent  repair  ;  and  in  their  vicinity 
the  rock  was  so  close  to  the  surface  that  ordinary 
entrenching  tools  were  useless.  The  garrison  numbered 
six  thousand  brave  but  imperfectly  trained  men.  Auch- 
muty's  numbers  were  slightly  superior,  but  his  troops  were 
by  no  means  all  of  the  first  class.  The  Forty-seventh 
was  in  indifferent  order  ;  the  company  of  the  Seventy- 
first  consisted  of  mere  children  ;  and  Auchmuty  could 
only  describe  the  Eighty -seventh  as  fine  boys.  The 
Thirty-eighth,  Fortieth,  and  Seventeenth  Light  Dra- 
goons were,  however,  excellent ;  and  it  was  on  them, 
together  with  the  seamen  and  marines,  that  Auchmuty 
depended  chiefly  for  success  in  a  hazardous  enterprise.1 