

Meanwhile  Auchmuty  himself  after  a  weary  voyage 

Jan.  5.  had  at  last  reached  Maldonado  on  the  5th  of  January. 
His  transports  being  bad  sailers,  he  had  been  obliged 
to  put  into  Rio  Janeiro  for  water  ;  3hd  having  there 
heard  of  the  recapture  of  Buenos  Ayres  and  of  the 
occupation  of  Maldonado  by  a  force  of  unknown 
strength,  he  was  prepared  for  the  possibility  of 
unpleasant  news  on  his  arrival.  Nothing,  however, 
was  yet  amiss  with  Backhouse,  though  his  provisions 
were  becoming  scanty  and  the  difficulty  of  obtaining 
them  was  very  seriously  increased.  The  enemy  kept 
four  hundred  horse  perpetually  hovering  round 
Maldonado,  and  these  troops  had  become  extremely 
troublesome.  They  were  armed  with  musket  and 
sword,  and  their  methods  of  warfare  were  such  that 
the  English  dragoons,  whose  natural  bulk  added  to  a 
cumbrous  equipment  was  far  too  heavy  for  the  native 
horses,  were  powerless  against  them.  "  They  ride  up," 
wrote  Auchmuty,  "  dismount,  fire  over  the  backs  of 

1  Craufurd  to  Sec.  of  State,  nth  Jan.  1807. 

2  Sec.  of  State  to  Auchmuty,  3rd  Jan.  1807. 


ch.  xii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


38i 


their  horses,  mount  and  gallop  off.  All  the  inhabitants  1 807. 
are  accustomed  to  this  sort  of  warfare,  and  every 
inhabitant  is  an  enemy." 1  The  prospect  was  not 
cheering.  Feeling  himself  too  weak  to  attempt 
Buenos  Ayres,  Auchmuty,  after  consultation  with 
Admiral  Stirling,  who  had  come  out  with  him  to 
supersede  Popham,2  decided  that  the  only  possible 
enterprise  was  an  attack  upon  Monte  Video.  This, 
however,  was  no  easy  matter.  Four  twenty -five 
pounders  had  indeed  been  sent  with  him,  but  no 
battering-train,  no  ammunition,  no  sappers,  no  military 
artificers,  very  few  entrenching  tools,  and  only  one 
subaltern  of  engineers.  All  material  for  a  siege  had  to 
be  drawn  from  the  ships  ;  and  Popham's  squadron  had 
already  expended  much  of  its  powder.  But  there  was 
no  help  for  it.  Auchmuty  on  the  13th  evacuated  Jan.  13. 
Maldonado,  leaving  a  small  garrison  on  the  island  of 
Goretti  ;  and  sailing  up  the  river  landed  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  1 6th  in  a  little  bay,  west  of  the  Caretas  Jan.  16. 
rocks,  about  nine  miles  below  Monte  Video.  The 
Spaniards,  though  assembled  in  force  and  with  guns 
in  position,  made  little  attempt  to  oppose  the  dis- 
embarkation, few  being  bold  enough  to  face  the  fire 
of  the  ships.  Auchmuty  was  thus  able  to  post  his 
army  strongly  about  a  mile  from  the  shore  in  order 
to  cover  the  landing  of  supplies  and  stores  ;  and  on 
the  19th  he  advanced  upon  the  city.  A  force  of  Jan.  19. 
four  thousand  mounted  men  offered  a  feeble  resist- 
ance to  him,  but  was  speedily  brushed  away ;  and 
the  fugitives  seem  to  have  carried  panic  with  them, 
for  on  the  same  evening  the  suburbs  of  Monte  Video 
were  evacuated.  Auchmuty,  while  halting  his  main 
body  for  the  night  two  miles  from  the  citadel,  pushed 
his  advanced  posts  forward  almost  to  the  walls.  In 