


388 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


1807.  least  of  the  Cabinet  would  have  been  content  to  leave 
Auchmuty  in  charge  of  the  entire  army  ; 1  but  it  was 
always  possible  that  Beresford  might  have  been  released 
through  Auchmuty's  operations,  in  which  case  the 
supreme  direction  would  have  fallen  to  him.  Upon  the 
whole,  therefore,  Windham  was  probably  right  to  send 
out  a  new  commander-in-chief ;  for  Beresford,  whether 
or  not  through  his  own  fault,  had  not  been  very  success- 
ful, and  nothing  was  yet  known  of  Auchmuty's  acquittal 
of  himself  in  this  his  first  independent  command.  The 
choice  fell  upon  Lieutenant-general  John  Whitelocke, 
an  officer  who  was  last  seen  by  us  at  St.  Domingo  in 
1794,  and  who  had  since  been  Inspector-general  of 
Recruiting.  The  reasons  for  this  selection  are  not  very 
obvious.  Windham  personally  wished  to  appoint  either 
Sir  John  Stuart,  who  was  just  returned  clothed  in  the 
glory  of  Maida,  or  Robert  Craufurd  ;  but  the  Duke  of 
York  very  properly  objected  to  both,  Stuart  being  such 
a  man  as  we  know,  and  Craufurd  so  junior  an  officer 
that  he  could  not  have  passed  over  Auchmuty's  head. 
Lord  Grenville  proposed  Sir  George  Prevost,  who  had 
shown  most  admirable  spirit  and  resowce  in  Dominica 
on  the  occasion  of  Villeneuve's  raid  in  1805.  Finally 
Lord  Granville  Leveson-Gower,  who  was  not  in  the 
Cabinet,  suggested  Whitelocke,2  possibly  with  a  view  to 
gaining  the  appointment  of  a  kinsman  as  his  second  in 
command  ;  and  Whitelocke  was  finally  chosen.  It  is 
not  easy,  after  the  misfortunes  that  subsequently  befell  the 
man,  to  form  an  opinion  as  to  Whitelocke's  ability ;  but 
he  had  certainly  done  good  service  in  the  West  Indies, 
and  was  not  without  knowledge  of  his  profession.  His 
most  objectionable  characteristic  seems  to  have  been 
arrogant  but  spasmodic  self-confidence,  with  an  affecta- 
tion of  coarse  speech  and  manners  which  he  conceived 
to  be  soldier-like  bluntness,  but  which  often  degenerated 
into  mere  rudeness  towards  some  of  his  inferiors  and 
familiar  obscenity  of  language  towards  others.  He 

1  Courts  and  Cabinets  of  Geo.  III.,  iv.  123. 
2  Windham's  Diary,  p.  497. 


ch.  xii       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  389 

stooped  to  court  the  favour  of  the  rank  and  file  by  1807. 
affected  use  of  their  phrases,  with  the  inevitable  result 
that  he  earned  only  their  thorough  contempt.1  The 
inference  is  that  he  sought  popularity  with  the  lower 
ranks  of  the  Army  because  he  was  unable  to  gain  the 
respect  of  the  higher.  Such  an  officer  is  wholly  unfit 
for  any  command. 

The  only  additional  force  sent  out  with  Whitelocke 
was  a  single  battalion — the  Eighty-ninth — a  draft  of 
five  hundred  recruits,  and  one  battery  of  Horse-Artillery, 
altogether  about  eighteen  hundred  men  of  all  ranks. 
His  instructions  directed  him  simply  to  reduce  the 
province  of  Buenos  Ayres  ;  but  the  object  of  his  enter- 
prise was  defined  to  be,  not  so  much  to  annoy  or 
distress  the  enemy,  as  to  occupy  such  stations  or 
territory  as  could  most  easily  be  captured  and  would 
not  require  a  larger  garrison  than  eight  thousand  men. 
It  was  still  uncertain  whether  Craufurd  had  received  his 
orders  to  sail  to  Rio  de  la  Plata  ;  but  Auchmuty's  troops, 
added  to  the  eighteen  hundred  men  now  dispatched 
with  Whitelocke,  were  considered  sufficient  to  capture 
Buenos  Ayres  and  to  enforce  the  recovery  of  Beresford 
and  of  his  fellow-prisoners.  Finally  it  was  intimated  to 
Whitelocke  that  he  might  raise  native  troops,  if  he 
thought  proper,  and  that  if  Buenos  Ayres  were  mastered, 
he  was  to  be  civil  Governor  of  the  province,  with  a 
salary  of  £4000  a  year  from  the  provincial  revenues.2 