


ch.  xii       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


could  be  caught  by  the  native  lasso-men,  but  there  1807. 
could  be  no  certainty  of  finding  bread-stuffs  in  any 
quantity  until  Buenos  Ayres  was  reached.  Such  details 
as  the  extent  and  condition  of  the  swamps  behind 
Ensenada  and  the  obstacles,  excepting  the  Chuelo,  that 
lay  on  the  road,  were  utterly  unknown.  It  may  be 
urged  that  Whitelocke  should  have  sent  an  officer  to 
explore  the  route  ;  but  it  is  extremely  doubtful  whether 
this  would  have  been  possible.  The  population  was 
bitterly  hostile.  There  were  indeed  a  few  British 
officers  who  could  speak  Spanish,  but  probably  not 
one  who  could  have  successfully  disguised  himself. 
Had  such  an  one  travelled  alone  the  country,  the  people 
would  have  made  little  of  cutting  his  throat  ; 1  had 
he  taken  an  escort,  it  would  have  been  quickly  sur- 
rounded by  superior  numbers  and  overpowered.  Pos- 
sibly it  might  have  been  practicable  to  bribe  a  priest 
to  go  as  travelling  companion  with  a  reconnoitring 
officer,  but  even  then  it  would  not  have  been  safe  to 
trust  the  priest.  At  any  rate  no  such  thing  was  done, 
and  no  reconnaissance  of  the  landing-place  or  line  of 
march  was  made. 

Then  came  the  question  of  transport.  Horses,  as 
has  been  told,  were  difficult  to  procure  ;  and  those  that 
had  been  obtained  were  for  the  most  part  unbroken  and 
in  any  case  too  weak  for  any  but  the  lightest  work.  In 
a  campaign  where  cavalry  was  all  important  and  where 
the  equivalent  of  three  strong  regiments  of  British 
dragoons  was  on  the  spot,  Whitelocke  found  it 
impossible  to  mount  more  than  two  squadrons.  It  was 
therefore  evident  that  the  men  must  carry  rations  for 

I three  days  upon  their  backs,   and  that,   upon  the 
occupation  of  Reduction,  communication  with  the  fleet 
must  be  opened  at  Point  Quilmes  in  order  to  draw  fresh 
supplies  from  the  ships.    So  entirely  was  this  necessity 
(accepted  by  Whitelocke  that  he  gave  no  orders  to  the 
i  commissariat  to  provide  animals  for  purposes  of  trans- 
port.   The  only  means  of  carriage  that  were  provided, 
1  An  Authentic  Narrative,  p.  189. 


394  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 

1807.  therefore,  consisted  of  half  a  dozen  small  mule-carts  to 
bear  supplies  from  the  water's  edge  to  any  chosen  depot ; 
and  it  was  not  until  the  ships  actually  anchored  before 
Ensenada  that  the  Commissary,  according  to  his  own 
account,  realised  that  the  army  was  to  be  landed  not  five 
miles,  but  more  nearly  thirty  miles  from  Buenos  Ayres. 

Next  arose  the  question  of  the  time  for  the  attack,  - 
which  was  most  difficult  to  decide.  The  rainy  season 
was  immediately  at  hand  and,  though  implying  no  such  '> 
deluge  as  the  monsoon  in  India,  signified  none  the  less 
a  heavy  though  intermittent  rainfall,  which  would  I 
cause  much  sickness  among  the  men  if  they  were  long  * 
exposed  to  the  weather,  with  great  gales  which  would  3: 
impede  the  operations  of  small  craft  in  the  river. 
Good  fortune  might  or  might  not  delay  the  rains 
until  the  army  reached  Buenos  Ayres  ;  but  it  was 
only  reasonable  to  expect  that,  if  Whitelocke  deferred 
his  operations  until  the  rains  ceased,  the  enemy  would 
take  advantage  of  the  respite  to  convert  Buenos  Ayres 
from  an  open  into  a  fortified  town.  On  the  other 
hand,  Craufurd's  detachment,  which  constituted  fully 
one-half  of  the  effective  force,  had  betn  on  board  ship 
for  quite  nine  months,  and  some  of  the  corps  for  even 
longer  ;  and  it  was  certain  that  these  men,  after  being 
cooped  up  and  lowered  by  marine  diet  and  lime-juice, 
would  be  weak,  an  easy  prey  to  sickness,  and  wholly 
unfit  to  undergo  immediately  the  hardships  of  a 
campaign.  Colonel  Denis  Pack,  who  had  been  in  the 
country  for  a  year,  was  strongly  of  opinion  that  the 
operations  should  be  delayed,  but  Whitelocke  never 
consulted  him  upon  the  point,  and  Pack  therefore  kept 
his  ideas  to  himself.1  If,  however,  the  army  remained  on 
the  left  bank  of  the  river,  Whitelocke  was  apprehensive 
lest  he  should  be  unable  to  feed  during  the  winter  so 
large  a  force  as  that  which  he  commanded  ;  and  for  this 
and  other  reasons  he  decided  to  open  the  attack  at 
once.2  In  support  of  this  view  of  Whitelocke's, 
Leveson-Gower  wrote  to  Windham  on  July  9  that 
1  C.-M.,  p.  423.  2  Ibid.  p.  23. 