

:hat,  having  observed  a  large  fire  at  some  distance  away, 
lie  imagined  that   the  bridge  had  been  destroyed. 

Meanwhile  at  a  little  before  sunset  the  main  body 
jnoved  up  to  the  village  of  Reduction  itself,  and  there 
I  lalted  for  the  night. 

At  last  therefore  the  coveted  goal  was  reached. 
'Communication  could  be  resumed  with  the  fleet;  but 

I  here  were  still  two  miles  of  morass  between  the  village 
<nd  Point  Quilmes  over  which  every  ounce  of  provisions 

3  nust  be  carried.  Whitelocke  in  the  course  of  the 
[  .vening  decided  to  halt  during  the  next  day,  with  the 
E  >bject  at  once  of  making  a  personal  reconnaissance  of 
:  he  fords  of  the  Chuelo,  of  procuring  bread  and 
pirits  from  the  fleet,  and  of  allowing  Mahon  to  bring 
k  brward  the   artillery  which  was    still  in   the  rear. 

II  Thereupon  parties  were  actually  directed  to  go  down 
'!  0  Point  Quilmes  to  bring  up  supplies.  A  rest  would 
er  ave  been  very  welcome,  for  the  troops  were  much 
er  xhausted,  not  so  much  by  the  distance  which  they  had 
!'  raversed  as  by  want  of  food  and  by  unnecessary  and 
e^  ljudicious  halts  during  the  march.    At  2  o'clock  on 

3  he  morning  of  the  2nd,  however,  Whitelocke  altered  July  2 
His  mind  and  dictated  a  letter  to  Gower,  ordering  him 
lVip  proceed  with  the  advanced  corps,  pass  the  Chuelo  at 
at"|tie  first  ford  which  he  should  find  practicable  above 
t( ;  lit  bridge,  take  up  a  position  on  the  northern 1  suburbs 
i°:  f  Buenos  Ayres,  open  communication  with  the  fleet, 
&  l  nd  send  a  summons  to  the  Spanish  commander  to 
iol 

ft.  j  1  He  called  it  the  western  side,  but  he  meant  the  northern  ;  the 
,  'ientation  of  Buenos  Ayres  being  incorrectly  given  in  the 
ll  mtemporary  maps. 


4o4  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 

1807.  surrender.  The  reason  given  by  Whitelocke  for  this 
July  2.  sudden  change  of  plan  was  that  he  was  anxious  to  put 
his  troops  into  cantonments,  a  consideration  which  was 
perhaps  pressed  upon  him  by  a  heavy  fall  of  rain 
during  the  night  of  the  1st.  Bourke,  his  Quarter- 
master-general, protested  against  the  decision,  urging 
his  extreme  ignorance  of  the  country  and  the  necessity 
for  reconnoitring  the  river ;  but  Whitelocke  was 
peremptory,  and  Bourke  rode  forward  with  the  letter 
himself. 

On  receipt  of  the  order  Gower  showed  dissatisfaction, 
and  not  without  reason.    The  Thirty-sixth  was  much 
fatigued  and  the  Eighty-eighth,  as  he  alleged,  not  only 
exhausted  but  unsteady.    In  fact  the  horsemen,  which 
had  hovered  around  him  throughout  his  march,  had 
become  bolder  than  usual  on  the  previous  day,  and  had 
annoyed  him  much  during  the  night.    Bourke  advised 
him  to  ride  back  and  to  state  his  objections  to  White 
locke  in  person  ;  but  Gower  answered  that  he  had 
received  a  peremptory  order  and  should  obey  it,  though 
he  still  evinced  great  uneasiness  as  to  the  consequences. 
Bourke  promised  to  report  his  misgivings  to  Whitelocke 
adding  that  probably  the  advanced  corps  would  be 
supported  by  the  entire  army,  and  thereupon  rode  back  ik 
towards  Reduction.    Auchmuty  had  already  approached  b 
Whitelocke  that  morning  to  represent  the  necessity  of  ad 
allowing  the  troops  to  rest  at  least  for  the  day,  point 
ing  out  that  his  own  brigade  was  much  fatigued,  and  Ike 
that  the  advanced  guard,  judging  by  the  number  oi 
stragglers  left  by  Lumley's  battalions  in  Reduction,  was 
in  a  still  worse  plight.    The  General  replied  that  his 
decision  would  depend  upon  a  letter  from  Gower 
Bourke  in  due  time  appeared  and  was  greeted  by  the 
General  with  the  question,  "  Well,  does  General  Gower 
seem  pleased  with  his  orders  ? "    Bourke  presented 
Gower's  letter,  the  chief  point  of  which  was  an  intima- 
tion of  his  resolve  to  keep  to  the  high  ground  and 
cross  the  Chuelo  either  by  marching  round  its  source 
or  by  some  practicable  ford  high  up  the  stream  ;  since  jj' 