


ch.  xii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


395 


the  army  on  arrival,  though  not  positively  pressed  for  1807. 
victuals,  was  so  short  of  flour  that,  in  order  to 
provide  twenty-one  days'  bread,  it  was  necessary  to 
use  a  ship-load  of  flour  sent  from  the  Cape  at  Auch- 
muty's  request.  This  difficulty,  however,  could  probably 
have  been  overcome  ;  for  Auchmuty  had  twice  written 
to  England  for  flour,  on  the  7th  of  February  and  20th  of 
March,  so  that  a  supply  was  to  be  expected  from  thence 
very  shortly. 

There  remained  one  minor  point  to  be  settled  before 
the  campaign  was  opened.  Should  Colonia  be  held  as 
well  as  Monte  Video,  and  converted  into  an  advanced 
base  of  operations  and  a  second  fortified  station  upon 
the  river  La  Plata  ;  or  should  it  be  abandoned  ? 
Whitelocke  seems  to  have  left  the  determination  of  this 
matter  to  Leveson-Gower,  who  was  sent  to  Colonia 
with  discretionary  orders  to  hold  the  place,  if  it  could  be 
safely  retained  with  a  diminished  garrison,  or  to  evacuate 
it.  Auchmuty  and  Pack  were  in  favour  of  keeping  a 
garrison  in  Colonia  since,  among  other  advantages,  it 
would  have  facilitated  the  collection  of  a  supply  of 
cattle  for  the  army  ;  but  they  were  not  consulted.1 
Leveson-Gower,  after  a  short  survey,  destroyed  the  guns 
of  the  place  and  withdrew  the  troops  from  it  to  the 
main  army.  It  seems  that  Whitelocke  had  some  idea 
of  transporting  his  main  body  to  Colonia  and  keeping 
it  there  embarked  until  an  advanced  column  should 
have  occupied  Reduction,  and  enabled  Point  Quilmes  to 
be  used  as  a  place  of  disembarkation.  This  would  have 
been  a  sensible  plan  ;  but  it  was  promptly  negatived  by 
Leveson-Gower. 

Meanwhile  the  army  was  formed  into  four  brigades 2 
under  Auchmuty,  Lumley,  Craufurd,  and  Mahon  ;  and 
a  garrison  of  thirteen  hundred  rank  and  file  was  set 

1  C.-M.,  pp.  198,  205. 

2  Brig.-Gen.  Sir  S.  Auchmuty' s  brigade  :  5th,  38th,  87th. 
Brig.-Gen.  Craufurd's  brigade  :  9  cos.  L.I.,  95th  (8  cos.). 
Brig.-Gen.  Lumley's  brigade  :  17th  L.D.,  36th,  88th. 

Col.  Marion's  brigade :  2  sq.  6th  D.G.,  9th  L.D.  (both  dis- 
mounted), 40th,  45th. 


39^ 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1807.  apart  for  Monte  Video,  consisting  of  two  companies  of 
the  Thirty-eighth,  the  Forty-seventh,  the  detachments 
of  the  Twentieth  and  Twenty-first  Light  Dragoons, 
some  Marines  and  a  Local  Militia.  Here  may  be  seen 
the  signs  of  an  unpractical  mind  in  the  Commander-in- 
chief.  The  Forty-seventh,  as  Auchmuty  had  reported, 
was  not  in  the  best  order,  and  its  commander  not  the 
most  brilliant  of  officers,  but  at  least  it  was  in  condition 
for  marching  and  had  experience  of  active  service.  The 
Thirty-eighth,  again,  was  an  admirable  corps  ;  and  it 
was  mere  waste  of  good  material  to  relegate  two  of  its 
companies  to  idleness  ;  indeed,  the  proceeding  was  at 
the  time  ascribed  to  the  Commander-in-chief's  spite 
against  an  officer  of  that  regiment.1  The  Twentieth 
and  Twenty-first  Light  Dragoons  had  also  been  for  some 
time  in  the  country  and  were  ready  for  work.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  rank  and  file  of  the  Eighty-eighth, 
though  good,  were  very  young  ;  and  this  regiment,  with 
its  travelling  companions  the  Thirty-sixth  and  the  four 
troops  of  Carabiniers,  was  certain  to  suffer  greatly  from 
fatigue  after  nine  months  on  board  ship.  Nevertheless 
these  were  chosen  for  the  attack  on  B*enos  Ayres  ;  and 
the  Carabiniers,  encumbered  with  their  white  leather 
breeches  and  jack-boots,  were  provided  with  muskets  to 
convert  them  into  infantry,  while  the  seasoned  and 
hardened  corps  which  had  been  for  months  in  the 
country  were  left  to  walk  about  Monte  Video.  Lastly, 
Leveson-Gower  had  contrived  to  quarrel  bitterly 
with  the  cavalry  by  ordering  wholesale  and  quite 
unnecessary  destruction  of  all  the  spare  clothes  and 
equipment  that  the  regiments  had  in  store ; 2  and 
altogether  the  force  was  not  in  the  best  of  tempers  when 
it  started  upon  its  campaign. 