

1  This  officer,  Lord  Muskerry,  was  the  one  person  in  the  army 
who  knew  something  of  the  country  between  Ensenada  and  Buenos 
Ayres  ;  and  he  had  declared  that  no  one  but  a  madman  would  land 
at  Ensenada  in  midwinter.  Whitelocke,  therefore,  left  two  com- 
panies of  his  regiment  at  Monte  Video,  and  put  Lord  Muskerry  in 
command  of  them.  Colburne's  Military  Magazine,  October,  1836, 
p.  213.  2  C.-M.,  pp.  162,  165. 


CHAPTER  XIII 


Contrary  winds  delayed  the  departure  of  the  troops  1807. 
from  Monte  Video  ;  and  the  first  division  was  not  under 
way  until  the  17th  of  June,  nor  anchored  off  Colonia 
until  the  24th.    Gower  joined  this  corps  in  the  evening  June  24 
and  hurried  Pack's  garrison  on  board  its  transports  ; 
but  fog  prevented  the  convoy  from  sailing  until  the  26th,  June  26 
when  it  met  the  remainder  of  the  army  standing  up  the 
river  for  Ensenada.    On  the  following  day  the  gunboats  June  27 
of  the  fleet  were  each  of  them  armed  with  an  eighteen- 
pounder  at  the  bows  ;  the  Light  Brigade  under  Craufurd 
was  transferred  to  vessels  of  light  draught ;  and  orders 
were  issued  verbally,  but  not  in  writing,  for  the  troops 
to  be  ready  to  disembark  on  the  next  morning,  every 
man  with  cooked  rations  for  three  days.    Accordingly  June  28 
at  daylight  on  Sunday  the  28  th  of  June  the  disem- 
barkation began.    A  long  bar  of  sand  obstructed  the 
approach  to  the  shore,  and  the  Light  Brigade  was  com- 

\  pelled  to  wade  for  some  distance  to  reach  it ;  but  later 
on  a  passage  through  the  bar  was  found,  which  enabled 

!  the  rest  of  the  troops  to  be  landed  perfectly  dry.  No 
resistance  was  made  to  the  disembarkation  which,  owing 
to  the  narrowness  of  the  channel  of  access,  was  not 
completed  until  dark  ;  and  no  sign  of  an  enemy  was 
seen.  Gower  had  received  orders  to  push  inland,  with 
an  advanced  corps  consisting  of  Craufurd's  brigade, 
the  Thirty-eighth  and  Eighty-seventh,  to  the  heights 
about  four  miles  distant,  which  he  duly  did,  arriving 
on  his  ground  at  one  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  This, 

1  it  may  be  added,  was  the  beginning  of  a  general 

397 


398  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 

1807.  derangement  of  all  the  organisation  prescribed  a  few- 
days  before.  Four  of  the  eight  companies  of  the 
Ninety-fifth  were  taken  from  Craufurd  and  transferred 
to  the  main  body  under  Whitelocke;  and  Auchmuty 
was  left  disconsolate  on  the  shore  with  one  battalion 
only  of  his  brigade,  namely,  the  Fifth,  which  though  in 
excellent  order  had,  even  as  the  four1  companies  of 
the  Ninety-fifth,  only  just  been  released  from  three- 
quarters  of  a  year  on  board  ship. 
June  29.  On  the  following  day  the  main  body  advanced  from 
the  shore,  and  then  the  chapter  of  surprises  was  opened 
in  earnest.  Between  the  strand  and  the  heights  lay  a 
swamp,  nowhere  less  than  two  feet  deep  in  water,  which 
extended  for  a  distance  of  fully  two  miles.  Gower  on 
the  previous  day  had  found  what  was  pointed  out  to 
him  as  the  usual  road  through  it,  and  in  attempting  to 
discover  a  better  track  had  several  times  experienced  c 
the  greatest  difficulty  in  extricating  his  horse  from  the 
slough.  Moreover,  the  foundation,  being  not  of  sand 
but  of  earth,  grew  steadily  worse  with  the  trampling  of 
many  feet ;  and  the  passage  was  far  more  difficult  for  the 
rear  of  his  column  than  it  had  been  for  the  van.  Into 
this  sea  of  black  liquid  mud  the  six  thousand  men  of 
the  main  body  now  plunged  in  a  narrow  column,  and 
floundered  forward,  tripping  over  reeds  and  aquatic 
plants,  and  reeling  over  the  treacherous  bottom  as  best 
they  could.  It  was  trying  and  fatiguing  work  ;  but  all 
ranks  seem  to  have  accepted  it  as  a  good  joke,  and  to 
have  taken  care  by  judicious  splashing  that  no  man  should 
emerge  in  a  less  filthy  condition  than  his  neighbour. 
But  a  great  deal  of  the  food  carried  by  the  men  was 
rendered  uneatable  by  water  ;  the  guns  stuck  fast ;  and 
the  defects  of  the  commissariat  were  found  out  within 
an  hour. 