


408  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 

1807.  Craufurd  himself  was  of  opinion  that  if  he  had  been 
July  2.  left  alone  he  would  have  captured  the  town  then  and  there. 
The  enemy  was  in  fact  completely  surprised.  Their 
leaders  had  in  the  first  place  massed  nine  thousand  men 
with  over  fifty  guns  to  guard  the  bridge  over  the 
Chuelo,  but,  finding  that  Gower  was  avoiding  the  bridge, 
had  sent  about  three  thousand  men  to  hold  a  ford  below 
the  Paso  Chico,  and  a  second  column  to  observe  the 
Paso  Chico  itself.  Upon  discovering  that  the  British 
had  crossed  the  river,  the  first  column,  led  by  General 
Liniers  in  person,  was  ordered  to  retire  to  the  Corral, 
where  it  was  routed  by  Craufurd  ;  the  second,  afraid 
of  being  cut  off,  took  a  circuitous  route  to  the  south- 
western angle  of  the  town  ;  and  the  remainder,  which 
had  been  left  at  the  bridge,  were  subsequently  called  in, 
after  spiking  or  destroying  several  guns  which  they 
were  unable  to  bring  away  with  them.  Moreover,  any 
preparations  which  had  been  made  for  defence  of  the 
town  had  been  designed  to  meet  an  attack  upon  the 
northern  face.  From  this  it  is  evident  that  White- 
locke's  plans  were  known  to  the  Spaniards  ;  for  it  will 
be  remembered  that  he  had  given  -Gower  orders  to 
occupy  the  northern  suburbs,  intending  himself  to 
march  round  the  northern  side  of  the  town  and  resume 
his  communication  with  the  fleet.  Gower,  however, 
was  not  without  justification  for  his  caution,  quite  apart 
from  his  rather  absurd  plea  concerning  the  wounded 
men  ;  for  Lumley's  brigade,  which  should  have  been 
close  at  hand,  had  vanished  and  was  nowhere  to  be 
found. 

Very  soon  after  crossing  the  ford  Lumley  lost  sight  of 
the  Light  Brigade,  and  was  obliged  to  follow  it  as  best  he 
could  by  conjecture.  The  men  were  lagging  terribly, 
and,  when  the  sound  of  firing  was  heard,  they  were 
unable  to  respond  to  their  Brigadier's  appeal  to  hurry 
on.  Many  dropped  down  on  the  road  ;  and  Lumley, 
seeing  that  he  must  leave  half  of  his  force  behind  him, 
hardened  his  heart  and  pushed  on  with  as  many  men 
as  could  keep  up.    For  a  time  he  guided  himself  by  the 


ch.xiii     HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  409 

footprints  of  Craufurd's  companies  and  by  the  sound  of  1807. 

the  firing  ;  but  the  light  began  to  fail,  and  presently  he  July  2- 
i  lost  all  trace  of  them.  For  an  hour  he  wandered 
n  about,  without  an  idea  where  to  find  his  comrades, 
e  until,  growing  apprehensive  of  the  danger  that  might 
i  await  a  crowd  of  weary  men  in  a  maze  of  narrow  lanes, 
ff  he  wheeled  his  two  regiments  northward  and  by  good 
e  fortune  stumbled  upon  Craufurd's  brigade  just  as  it  was 
li  about  to  retire.  He  then  left  outposts  on  the  ground 
1!  which  Craufurd  had  occupied,  and  withdrew  with  him 
1,  to  the  Corral,  where  both  brigades  bivouacked  for 
d    the  night. 