

Whitelocke  had  ordered  his  Commissary  to  land  three 
days'  rations  of  biscuit  and  spirits,  which  was  done  on 

1  Five  companies  of  the  95th  came  with  Craufurd.  They  had 
been  for  eleven  months  on  board  ship,  and  one  at  least  of  them 
must  have  remained  with  the  advanced  party. 


ch.xiii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  399 

the  same  day  ;  but  neither  General  nor  staff  had  taken  1807. 
the  trouble  to  inform  the  Commissary  that  sixty  pack- 
saddles  had  been  brought  forward  to  transport  these 
supplies,  and  that,  if  need  were,  sixty  men  of  the 
Seventeenth  Light  Dragoons  would  be  dismounted  to 
furnish  the  necessary  horses.  The  Commissary,  by  no 
means  in  an  unruffled  spirit,1  applied  to  Colonel  Bourke, 
the  Quartermaster-general,  for  means  of  carriage  ;  the 
pack-saddles  and  horses  were  landed  on  the  same  day  ;  June  30. 
and  on  the  morrow  the  work  of  loading  began.  At 
once  there  ensued  a  scene  of  wild  confusion.  The 
unbroken  horses  not  unnaturally  would  not  endure 
the  saddles,  but  kicked  and  plunged  in  all  directions. 
Several  broke  away  and  were  never  seen  again  ;  others 
dashed  off  with  their  saddles  only,  but  without  their 
load  ;  and,  altogether,  of  some  eight  tons  of  biscuit 
disembarked,  about  one  ton  was  forwarded  to  the  army, 
a  small  quantity  was  re-embarked,  but  the  greater  pro- 
portion was  lost  or  ruined  in  the  swamp.  Attempts 
to  bring  forward  the  rum  in  the  mule -carts  were 
equally  fruitless.  The  wheels  stuck  fast  and  could 
not  be  moved  ;  and  the  Commissary  was  fain  to  stave 
in  the  casks  where  they  lay,  and  to  abandon  their 
contents  also  to  the  all-devouring  swamp. 

Meanwhile  the  guns,  although  drawn  each  by  six 
instead  of  the  usual  team  of  four  horses,  had  remained 
in  the  swamp  until  late  on  the  29  th,  when  most  of  them 
were  extricated  by  some  hundreds  of  seamen  and 
soldiers.  Sixteen  in  all  had  been  landed,  and  of  these 
five  light  pieces  captured  from  the  Spaniards  were  spiked 
and  abandoned.  Whitelocke,  on  joining  Gower  that  June  29. 
morning,  gave  him  the  Thirty -sixth  and  Eighty - 
eighth,  which  had  just  struggled  through  the  swamp, 
in  lieu  of  the  Thirty-eighth  and  Eighty-seventh.2  He 
then  sent  him  forward  for  a  few  miles  with  these  regi- 
ments, added  to  Craufurd's  brigade,  four  six-pounders, 

1  The  bitterness  of  Commissary  Bullock  against  Whitelocke  can 
be  read  between  the  lines  of  his  evidence. 

2  C.-M.,  pp.  168,  192. 


4oo  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 

1807.  two  three-pounders,  and  a  handful  of  mounted  men  of 
the  Seventeenth  Light  Dragoons ;  while  the  main 
body  halted  on  the  ground  that  Gower  had  occupied 
on  the  preceding  night.  Gower  for  his  part  so  arranged 
his  order  of  march  that  Lumley's  brigade  should 
always  be  three  or  four  miles  in  rear  of  Craufurd's  ; 
the  object  being  that  the  troops  should  find  fuel 
and,  to  some  extent,  shelter  at  the  few  farm-houses 
that  lay  on  the  route  to  Buenos  Ayres.  The  enemy, 
after  the  first  day,  hovered  about  the  columns  un- 
ceasingly, not  daring  to  attack,  but  pouncing  constantly 
upon  every  isolated  man  ;  and  the  mounted  troops 
with  the  British  force  were  so  few,  and  grew  daily  so 
much  fewer,  owing  to  the  collapse  and  escape  of  the 
native  horses,  that  communication  between  the  different 
bodies  was  impossible.  What  Leveson-Gower  did  in 
detail  for  his  own  division,  Whitelocke,  doubtless  under 
his  subordinate's  advice,  did  for  the  whole  army,  with 
the  result  that  the  advanced  corps  led  the  way  in  two 
distinct  bodies,  and  the  main  body  followed  likewise  in 
two  or  three  distinct  corps,  all  without  cohesion  and 
without  communication,  and  of  coucge  without  power 
of  mutual  support.  Strangely  enough,  though  Popham, 
the  greatest  authority  upon  signalling  in  the  Navy,  had 
worked  so  long  with  the  Army,  no  military  officer  had 
bethought  him  of  introducing  a  code  of  visual  signals 
for  service  in  the  field. 