side  of  the  Chuelo,  and,  after  two  or  three  hours,  r 

Whitelocke's  division  was  also  visible  in  the  rear,  c: 

apparently  pursuing  the  same  route  as  the  advanced  1: 

corps.    The  question  of  a  ford  by  which  to  pass  the  he 

Chuelo  was,  however,  not  so  easily  decided.     The  t.. 

nearest  was  known  as  the  Paso  Chico,  but  this  was  k 

represented  to  be  very  difficult ;  and  Gower,  as  we  oe 

have  seen,  had  intimated  to  Bourke  that  he  should  a: 

seek  another  ford  higher  up  the  stream.    Craufurd,  or 

whose  brigade  was  as  usual  far  ahead  of  Lumley's,  in 

after  passing  a  brook  called  the  Masiel,  saw  in  his  n 

front  a  body  of  the  enemy's  horse  which  retired  before  f 

him,  and  in  its  retirement  appeared  to  have  crossed  the  1 

Chuelo.    Gower  therefore  decided  to-follow  them  and  r: 

found  the  Paso  Chico  open  to  him.    The  water  was  ti 

indeed  more  than  waist-deep  for  the  tallest  man,  but  a 

having  a  sound  bottom,  presented  no  difficulties  which  i: 

could  not  be  overcome  by  care.    Thus  the  principal  fs 

obstacle  in  the  way  of  the  march  to  Buenos  Ayres  a 
was  passed  with  ease  and  safety. 

Lumley's  brigade  reached  the  ford  between  two  and  1 

three  o'clock,  just  as  Craufurd's  left  it.     His  two  |j 

regiments  were  in  a  miserable  state.    The  men  had  & 

shewn  signs  of  exhaustion   very  shortly  after  they  j  (j 

marched,  and  soon  they  were  straggling  in  all  directions,  ] 

unable  to  keep  up  ;  yet  even  so  Gower  assigned  to  i: 

them  the  heavy  work  of  taking  four  guns  across  the  t 

ford.    Craufurd  presently  observing  a  body  of  the  r 

enemy  in  motion  as  if  to  take  up  a  position  upon  the  t 

heights  opposite  the  ford,  asked  Gower's  permission  to  j 

forestall  them.    He  received  for  answer  that  he  might  j  ; 


ch.xiii     HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  407 

■ 

he 


go  on  and  act  as  he  thought  best,  and  that  Gower  1807. 
would  support  him  with  Lumley's  brigade.  Craufurd  July  2 
advanced  accordingly,  gained  the  heights  unopposed, 
and  marking  signs  of  wavering  in  the  enemy,  decided 
to  take  advantage  of  their  hesitation  and  move  straight 
upon  the  town.  Twice  Gower  sent  him  orders  to  halt, 
but  Craufurd  answered  that  in  his  opinion  it  was  very 
desirable  to  proceed  ;  and  proceed  he  did.  He  had 
arrived  at  a  house,  known  to  those  concerned  in  the 
operations  as  White's  house,  about  a  mile  outside  the 
town  on  the  west  side,  when  Gower  came  in  person  to  the 
head  of  the  Light  Brigade.  The  ground  was  extremely 
blind  and  intricate,  covered  with  gardens,  orchards,  and 
high  fences,  so  that  the  enemy,  though  suspected  to  be 
near  at  hand,  was  invisible.  The  brigade  entered  the 
Id  I  angle  of  a  large  space,  which  was  in  fact  the  Corral 
djor  slaughter-yard  of  Buenos  Ayres,  and  halted  to  allow 
sjits  few  field-pieces  to  come  up.  Many  of  the  men 
lis  were  resting  themselves  by  leaning  against  the  house, 
re  when  suddenly  they  were  startled  by  the  report  of  a 
ie|  single  gun,  followed  by  a  heavy  discharge  of  grape  and 
id  I  round  shot  from  all  parts  of  the  yard.  For  a  moment 
as  I  the  troops  huddled  themselves  together.  Gower  spoke 
a  few  words  to  Craufurd,  who,  whatever  their  intent, 
interpreted  them  as  an  order  to  attack  ;  and  the  Light 
Brigade  rushed  forward  with  a  cheer,  in  the  form  of 
a  crescent,  straight  upon  the  guns.  The  Spaniards  in 
dismay  left  their  batteries  and  fled.  Their  infantry, 
which  was  lining  the  hedges,  fled  likewise,  and  the 
brigade  pursued  them  hotly  into  the  town,  bayonetting 
several  of  the  fugitives,  until  an  order  arrived  from 
Gower,  directing  Craufurd  to  return  to  the  Corral. 
The  Brigadier  answered  by  a  message  that  he  thought 
it  would  be  advantageous  to  continue  the  pursuit  into 
the  town,  and  begged  permission  to  do  so.  Gower 
replied  by  a  second  and  peremptory  order  to  return  to 
the  Corral,  adding  that  the  wounded  men,  who  did  not 
exceed  forty,  were  liable  to  be  cut  ofT  by  straggling 
parties  of  the  enemy.    Reluctantly  Craufurd  obeyed. 