

But  the  disappearance  of  Lumley's  brigade  affected 
h  Gower  far  less  than  the  fact  that  there  was  no  sign 
i,  of  the  main  body  of  the  army.  Considering  that  he 
j  stood  upon  not  the  best  of  terms  with  Whitelocke,  it 
j  is  likely  enough  that  Gower  imputed  to  his  chief  that 
e  night  a  deliberate  design  to  entangle  him  in  difficulties, 
e  The  suspicion  was  doubtless  undeserved,  though  circum- 
•  stances  might  seem  to  colour  it.  Whitelocke  had 
I  duly  marched  at  ten  o'clock  ;  he  had  sent  a  message  to 
0    the  Admiral  to  take  the  fleet  as  close  as  he  could  to  the 

0  northern  end  of  the  town  ;  and  he  had  despatched 
e  orders  to  Mahon,  who  was  on  his  way  to  Reduction,  to 
ij    follow  him  early  on  the  next  day.    His  guide  had  told 

1  him  that  he  would  find  a  good  ford  over  the  Chuelo  six 
4  miles  to  south-westward,  and  had  provided  him  with  a 
n  peasant  to  show  him  the  way,  so  that  he  felt  easy  and 
e    confident.    Towards  noon  Gower's  column  was  in  sight 

about  three  miles  away,  moving  in  a  direction  at  right 
angles  to  the  march  of  the  main  body  ;  but  the  guide, 
being  consulted,  declared  that  Whitelocke's  column 
would  take  the  same  direction  as  soon  as  it  had  crossed 
the  Masiel,  and  indicated  the  landmarks  which  showed 
the  position  of  the  ford.  Whitelocke's  troops  accord- 
ingly passed  the  Masiel,  and  arrived  between  half-past 
two  and  three  at  two  farm-houses.  The  advanced 
column  was  now  out  of  sight.  Whitelocke  afterwards 
1  explained  that,  reckoning  upon  Gower's  avoidance  of 


4io 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


1807.  the  Paso  Chico,  he  had  made  sure  of  overtaking  the 
July  2.  rear  of  his  column  ;  but  that,  having  lost  all  trace  of 
it  and  seeing  no  possibility  of  crossing  the  river  that 
night,  he  turned  to  his  Quartermaster -general  and 
proposed  to  halt  where  he  stood  for  the  day.  Bourke 
demurred,  stating  that  unless  orders  were  sent  to 
Gower  to  halt  also,  the  advanced  corps  would  certainly 
proceed,  pursuant  to  its  instructions,  to  the  northern 
suburbs  of  Buenos  Ayres.  Whitelocke  hesitated  and, 
as  soon  as  Auchmuty  came  up,  referred  the  question 
to  him.  Auchmuty,  who  wished  to  give  his  men 
food  and  rest,  and  for  that  reason  had  opposed  the 
march  of  the  morning,  strongly  advised  a  halt,  pointing 
out  that  there  were  plenty  of  sheep  close  by  and  fuel 
wherewith  to  cook  the  meat.  He  was,  it  should  be 
added,  under  the  impression,  which  seems  to  have  been 
shared  by  the  army  generally,  that  Gower's  mission 
extended  no  further  than  to  win  the  passage  of  the 
Chuelo  ; 1  and  he  knew  nothing  of  Colonel  Bourke's 
protest  against  leaving  him  unsupported.  Whitelocke 
therefore  sent  a  message  back  to  Mahon,  directing 
him  to  remain  with  the  rear-guard  a*  Reduction,  and 
halted  for  the  day.  Towards  evening  he  heard  the 
sound  of  a  cannonade  near  the  city,  but  took  no 
notice  of  it  ;  and  the  army,  which  had  been 
exhausted  rather  by  bad  management  than  by  hard 
work,  was  left  to  enjoy  the  comforts  of  an  early  halt 
and  a  sufficiency  of  meat  and  fuel. 
July  3.  A  little  before  daybreak  on  the  3rd  Whitelocke's 
division  moved  off,  and  reached  a  safe  but  exceedingly 
narrow  ford  over  the  Chuelo  between  nine  and  ten 
o'clock.  The  water  being  armpit- deep,  it  was  one 
o'clock  before  every  man  had  made  the  passage  ;  but  a 
mile  and  a  half  beyond  the  ford  an  officer  from  Gower 
met  Whitelocke  ;  and  in  another  hour  the  entire  force, 
with  the  exception  of  Mahon's  detachment,  was  united 
on  the  west  side  of  the  town.  Gower,  in  the  morning, 
had  sent  a  summons  to  Liniers  to  surrender  Buenos 
1  C.-M.,  p.  202. 