


it: 


ch.  xiii     HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  405 

by  all  reports  the  Paso  Chico,  which  was  the  ford  1807. 
indicated  by  Whitelocke,  was  impracticable.  Bourke  July  2. 
then  urged  that,  looking  to  the  condition  of  the 
Eighty-eighth,  some  support  should  be  given  to  the 
advanced  corps,  whereupon  Whitelocke  agreed  to  send 
Gower  a  battalion.  Shortly  afterwards,  to  the  general 
astonishment,  he  ordered  the  entire  army  to  march  at 
once.  Some  oxen  had  been  procured  and  slaughtered, 
ei|and  the  meat  was  about  to  be  cut  up  and  distributed  ; 
but  the  men  were  commanded  to  leave  it  on  the  ground, 
and  were  not  allowed  to  carry  the  pieces  in  their 
haversacks.  Auchmuty  remarked  to  the  General  that 
the  troops  had  no  provisions.  "  Don't  you  see  that 
it  is  going  to  rain  ?  "  was  the  only  reply  ;  and  at  ten 
□'clock  the  starving  army  moved  away. 

Gower,  for  his  part,  had  marched  an  hour  earlier, 
so  that  his  rear  must  have  been  at  least  four  miles 
ahead  of  the  main  body.  By  this  time  his  force  was 
seriously  diminished.  The  Light  Battalion  numbered 
under  nine  hundred  men,  and  the  Thirty-sixth  and 
Eighty-eighth  were  reduced,  owing  to  the  multitude 
of  men  unable  to  march,  to  no  more  than  one  thousand 
bayonets  jointly.  The  mounted  troopers  with  him, 
who  had  never  exceeded  sixty,  had  shrunk  to  a  mere 
handful  in  consequence  of  the  break-down  of  the  horses  ; 
and  Gower  was  obliged  to  mount  his  two  orderlies  upon 
lis  own  spare  chargers.  Experience  had  shown  that,  in 
:he  midst  of  the  enemy's  irregular  horsemen,  communi- 
cation between  the  different  divisions  of  the  army  was 
alansafe  unless  ensured  by  a  force  of  the  strength  of  a 
:ompany.  One  of  Gower 's  aide-de-camps  had  been 
raptured  while  carrying  his  orders  between  the  two 
idvanced  brigades,  and  another  had  been  stabbed 
Within  three  hundred  yards  of  the  line.1  Gower  had 
10  information  of  the  enemy's  dispositions,  except  that 
;hey  had  erected  powerful  batteries  to  defend  the 

1  Gower  to  Windham,  9th  July  1807.  Gower,  however, 
[pmitted  to  mention  that  his  two  brigades  were  habitually  four  or 
live  miles  apart. 


406  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 

1807.  passage  of  the  bridge  on  the  Chuelo  ;  and  it  was  pretty  2 

July  2.  evident  that  Whitelocke  intended  him  to  turn  the  « 

defences  of  the  river.    But  where  he  should  discover  a  t 

ford,  what  forces  he  might  find  opposed  to  him  as  he  t 

approached  Buenos  Ayres,  and  whether  the  main  body  : 

was  to  remain  halted  or  follow  to  support  him — all  t 

these  things  were  hidden  from  him.    After  a  short  k 

time  signs  of  the  enemy  could  be  seen  on  the  other  Qt 

