

Gower,  then,  plodded  forward  to  his  appointed 
place,  with  directions  not  to  advance  further  until  the 
main  body  should  come  up ;  and  Whitelocke,  the 
swamp  having  been  passed,  gave  orders  for  his  own 
division  to  march  at  nine  o'clock  on  the  morning  of 
June  30.  the  30th.  But  now  arose  the  awkward  question  of  i 
victuals.  Owing  to  the  procrastination  of  the  General 
and  the  faulty  work  of  his  staff",  many  of  the  troops 
had  never  received  the  order  to  carry  three  days' 
provisions  with  them  ;  owing  to  the  march  waist-deep  I 
through  the  swamp,  much  that  the  men  had  with  them 
had  been  destroyed  ;  and  in  any  case  the  village  of  i 


ch.  xiii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


401 


f  Reduction,  where  supplies  could  be  again  obtained  1807. 

a  from   the  fleet,  was  still  two  days'  march  distant.  June  3°- 

J  There  was  therefore  every  prospect  that  the  force  would 

i  be  without  food  for  at  least  one  day,  and  if  overtaken 

i  by  any  mishap,  would  be  in  a  state  of  starvation. 

;  Auchmuty  imparted  his  anxiety  upon  this  head  to 

:1  Whitelocke  who,  after  anathematising  his  chief  supply- 

s  officer,  complained  that  he  was  obliged  to  do  the  work 

I  of  commissary  and  store-keeper  as  well  as  of  General. 

-  "If  a  General  does  not  himself  attend  to  the  supply  of 

y  his  troops,  Sir,"  said  Auchmuty,  "  they  will  often 

is  want  provisions." 

0  As  it  happened,  a  flock  of  sheep  was  discovered  and 
e  driven  in  that  morning  ;  and  Whitelocke  delayed  the 
it  time  of  marching,  already  fixed  for  the  late  hour  of 
ti  nine,  in  order  that  the  men  might  take  advantage  of 

1  this  windfall.  But  there  was  confusion  and  delay  in 
I  the  distribution.  Many  of  the  men  received  no 
0  meat ;  none  had  time  to  cook  it ;  and  the  only  real 
n  advantage  of  the  delay  was,  that  it  enabled  half  a 
d  ration  of  biscuit  to  be  served  out  from  the  scanty 
:r  remnant  which  had  been  saved  by  the  Commissary 
i,  from  the  swamp.  Then  at  last  the  army  marched, 
d!  leaving  Mahon  with  a  very  few  mounted  and  a 
d  great  many  dismounted  men  of  the  Seventeenth  Light 
Is  Dragoons,  besides  four  companies  of  the  Fortieth,  to 

form  a  rear-guard  and  an  escort  for  the  artillery, 
d  Auchmuty's  brigade  led  the  main  body,  which  halted 
ie  at  a  farm  a  little  before  sunset ;  and  Auchmuty  was 
ie  then  sent  forward  for  three  or  four  miles,  according  to 
nlthe  fashion  approved  by  Gower,  with  the  Forty-fifth, 
)f  Ninth  Light  Dragoons,  Carabiniers,  and  four  companies 
Jof  the  Ninety-fifth.    These  last  two  corps,  it  will  be 
alremembered,  had  arrived  with  Craufurd,  so  that  there 
Jwas  every  necessity  to  spare  them  any  additional  exertion. 
slBut  such  reasoning  did  not  appeal  to  Whitelocke.  He 
would  dismount  and  march  with  the  men,  trying  to 
exchange  the  slang  of  the  barrack-room  with  them  and 
receiving  little  response  ;  but  he  was  incapable  of  the 