

VOL.  v  2D 


4Q2  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


1807.  incessant  watchfulness  over  their  comfort  and  the 
June  30.  incessant  care  to  save  them  unnecessary  fatigue,  which 
really  endears  a  General  to  his  troops.  Had  he  given 
them  a  full  ration  that  morning  and  promised  them 
enough  to  eat  on  that  night,  the  men  would  have  known 
and  trusted  him  to  be  their  friend. 

On  overtaking  Gower  in  the  evening,  Whitelocke 
urged  him  to  make  an  effort  to  reach  Reduction  that 
night.  Gower  promised  to  do  his  best.  The  marches 
had  been  neither  long  nor  severe,  the  ground  on  the 
heights  being  firm,  with  the  exception  of  some  small 
but  deep  streams  with  boggy  bottoms,  which  from  time 
to  time  crossed  the  line  of  march  and  immersed  the 
men  waist-deep.  But  want  of  food,  and  still  more 
want  of  condition,  had  told  heavily  upon  Lumley's 
brigade  ;  and  the  folly  of  placing  these  unseasoned  and 
immature  troops  in  the  advanced  corps  was  now  apparent. 
Whitelocke  was  eager  to  occupy  Reduction  in  order  to 
obtain  supplies.  If,  in  the  first  instance,  he  had  given 
Lumley  the  troops  which  had  been  left  behind  at  Monte 
Video,  and  if  he  had  ordered  Gower  in  the  morning  to 
make  a  bold  push  for  Reduction  a^any  cost,  Gower 
would  probably  have  reached  it  without  difficulty,  and 
all  might  have  been  well.  But  starting  upon  a  night 
march,  unfed  after  a  long  halt,  Lumley's  brigade  simply 
collapsed  ;  and  after  traversing  three  or  four  miles  Gower 
halted,  reporting  to  Whitelocke  that  if  he  went  further 
he  should  be  obliged  to  leave  the  whole  of  the  Thirty- 
sixth  and  Eighty-eighth  behind.  Whitelocke  approved 
July  1.  of  his  action,  and  riding  forward  next  morning  was 
so  much  struck  with  the  exhausted  condition  of  the 
Eighty-eighth  that  he  ordered  the  whole  army  to  leave 
their  blankets  behind  and  to  march  on  with  their  great- 
coats only.  None  the  less  he  called  upon  them  to 
make  a  great  effort  in  order  to  go  beyond  Reduction 
towards  the  Chuelo,  presumably  with  the  object  of 
securing  the  bridge.  Lumley  had  taken  the  precaution 
to  bring  with  him  from  Monte  Video  native  lasso-men, 
who  produced  some  bullocks  on  the  morning  of  the 


ch.  xiii     HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


1 1  st  ;  but  the  men  had  no  time  to  cook  the  meat,  and  1807. 
i  they  had  received  no  bread,  so  that  the  young  soldiers  July  1 
\of  the  Eighty-eighth  started  in  greater  exhaustion  than 

ever.  Gower  had  hoped  to  pass  the  Chuelo  by  a  ford 
i  on  that  day,  but  found  it  impossible  ;  and  the  advanced 
*  :orps,  after  a  march  of  only  fifteen  miles,  halted  three 

miles  beyond  Reduction.  Gower  reported  that  he  believed 
jiimself  to  be  still  five  miles  away  from  the  river,  and 