

So  far,  then,  all  had  gone  fairly  well  on  the  northern 
side,  in  spite  of  Gower's  hasty  dispositions.  It  seems 
certain  that  both  the  Thirty-eighth  and  the  Eighty- 
seventh,  though  carefully  following  Gower's  orders, 
went  where  he  had  no  intention  that  they  should  go  ; 
but  at  any  rate  the  Plaza  de  Toros,  the  most  com- 
manding position  in  the  city,  had  been  taken  ;  and 
Auchmuty  had  also  captured  about  a  thousand  prisoners 
and  thirty-two  guns.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Thirty- 
eighth  and  Eighty-seventh  had  suffered  so  severely  that 
Auchmuty  dared  not  reckon  his  brigade  that  night  above 
the  strength  of  twelve  hundred  men.  The  Eighty- 
seventh  alone,  out  of  fewer  than  seven  hundred  of  all 
ranks,  had  lost  fourteen  officers  and  one  hundred  and 
seventy-one  men  killed  and  wounded. 

To  southward  of  Auchmuty,  Lumley 's  brigade  of  the 
Thirty-sixth  and  Eighty-eighth  was  more  hardly  tried. 
The  Thirty-sixth  took  the  two  streets  next  adjoining 
those  traversed  by  the  Fifth,  Lumley  himself  accom- 
panying the  right  half-battalion.  The  roads  had  been 
broken  up,  which  made  progress  slow ;  and  firing 
began  from  various  directions  upon  the  columns  almost 
as  soon  as  they  entered  the  town.  None  the  less  the 
regiment  penetrated  to  the  cross-street  next  adjoining 
the  river,  and  forcing  open  some  houses  in  the  last 
two  blocks  to  eastward,  hoisted  its  colours  upon  a  tall 
building  that  overlooked  the  beach.  The  enemy 
in  the  fort  and  in  the  Great  Square  thereupon  opened 
fire  from  seven  guns,  with  great  precision,  upon 
the  house  whereon  the  colours  were  flying,  at  the  same 
time  sweeping  the  cross-streets  with  showers  of  grape. 
Simultaneously  a  hail  of  bullets  poured  upon  the 
Thirty-sixth  from  marksmen  concealed  behind  the 
parapets  of  adjoining  houses  ;  and  Lumley,  though  he 


422 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1807.  could  maintain  his  position,  was  absolutely  powerless  to 
July  5-  do  more.  The  Eighty-eighth  fared  even  worse.  The 
left-hand  column  under  Major  Vandeleur  had  not 
marched  one-third  of  the  distance  to  the  beach  when 
fire  was  opened  upon  it  from  windows  and  house-tops 
on  every  side.  Vandeleur  ordered  his  men  to  advance 
at  the  double,  which  they  did  with  cheers,  under  an 
increasing  shower  of  musketry,  hand-grenades,  stink- 
pots, brickbats,  and  every  description  of  missile.  Two 
guns  opened  upon  them  from  the  bottom  of  the  street, 
and  two  more  enfiladed  them  from  the  Great  Square,  as 
they  passed  by  the  cross-streets  which  led  into  it ;  but 
none  the  less  the  men  pressed  on  to  the  very  end  of  the 
road,  scrambled  over  a  breastwork  of  sand-bags  and  a 
ditch  beyond  it,  and  found  to  their  dismay  that  they 
were  in  a  trap.  There  was  no  outlet  from  the  street  to 
the  beach  but  by  a  narrow  ramp,  which  was  enfiladed 
by  the  guns  of  the  fort  at  a  range  of  two  hundred 
yards.  Vandeleur  with  great  difficulty  forced  his  way 
into  the  nearest  house,  but  found  it  impossible  to 
occupy  the  roof,  because  every  man  was  at  once  shot 
down.  He  tried  next  to  hold  another  house  over 
against  the  first ;  but  his  men  were  immediately  driven 
from  the  roof  by  the  guns  of  the  fort.  The  hours 
passed  away  without  a  sign  of  support  from  any  side  ; 
and  at  a  quarter  past  eleven  Vandeleur,  having  lost 
great  numbers  of  his  men  killed  or  wounded,  hoisted 
the  white  flag,  and  was  escorted  with  his  few  surviving 
soldiers  into  the  fort. 