

There  was  indeed  good  reason  why  it  should  cease. 
On  the  extreme  left  the  Thirty-eighth  under  Colonel 
Nugent,  after  about  twenty  minutes'  march,  found  itself 
in  a  narrow  lane  leading  to  the  Plaza  de  Toros,  at  the 
head  of  which  was  a  large  house  occupied  by  the  enemy. 
The  lane  was  so  deep  in  mire  that  many  both  of  the 
officers  and  the  men  had  their  shoes  drawn  off  their 


420 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1807.  feet ;  but  the  regiment  hurried  on,  leaving  a  party  to 
July  5-  force  the  doors  of  the  house,  and  found  itself  exposed  to 
a  concentric  fire  of  artillery  from  several  guns  stationed 
at  different  points  in  the  open  ground  round  the  Bull- 
ring. The  Ring  itself,  a  brick  building  of  twelve  sides, 
presented  nothing  but  a  blank  wall  with  a  gallery  above, 
from  which  the  Spanish  sharp-shooters  could  fire  without 
danger  to  themselves.  Nugent,  after  losing  several  men 
in  a  vain  attempt  to  storm  the  batteries,  withdrew  his 
battalion  and  sent  two  companies  round  to  his  left  to 
occupy  a  house  on  the  cliff  by  the  enemy's  extreme 
right,  in  the  hope  of  turning  their  flank.  The  house 
at  the  end  of  the  lane  was  first  forced,  and  a  single 
grenadier  of  the  Thirty- eighth,  one  of  the  worst 
characters  in  the  regiment,  dashed  in  by  himself  and 
made  his  way  straight  to  the  roof.  There  he  en- 
countered fifteen  men,  of  whom  he  bayonetted  two 
instantly  ;  whereupon  several  of  the  rest  feigned  death, 
but  a  group  of  four  retired  into  a  corner  to  make  a 
concerted  attack  upon  him.  Still  single-handed,  he 
rushed  at  these,  bayonetted  one,  and  had  driven  another 
to  leap  from  the  house,  when  his  comrades  arrived  and 
made  a  speedy  end  of  the  survivors.  Shortly  after- 
wards the  second  house  by  the  cliff  was  forced,  and  the 
British  opened  a  galling  fire  from  the  roof  upon  the 
enemy's  gunners.  These  presently  spiked  their  guns 
and  retreated  into  the  Bull-ring  ;  but  there  remained 
still  a  closed  battery  to  be  dealt  with,  and  this  was 
captured  by  a  sudden  and  unexpected  rush  of  the 
Thirty-eighth  from  the  back  door  of  the  house.  The 
gunners,  some  sixty  in  number,  unable  to  reach  the 
Bull-ring,  took  refuge  in  a  barrack,  but  were  so  closely 
pursued  that  the  British  entered  with  them,  and  after  a 
short  but  savage  encounter  in  the  barrack-rooms,  put 
every  one  of  the  sixty  to  death.1  The  rest  of  the 
Thirty-eighth  meanwhile  seized  the  guns,  and  finding 
a  twelve-pounder  unspiked,  turned  it  upon  the  Bull- 
ring. At  this  stage  Auchmuty  appeared  on  the  scene 
1  Colburne's  Military  Magazine,  Dec.  1836. 


ch.  xiii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


421 


with  some  of  the  Eighty-seventh,  and  surrounded  the  1807. 
building  completely.    After  a  few  shots,  parties  of  the  July  5. 
enemy  came  rushing  out,  only  to  find  their  retreat  cut 
off ;  and  presently  those  that  remained  in  the  building 
hung  out  the  white  flag  and  surrendered  at  discretion. 