

Pack  had  guessed  aright.  Upon  his  first  arrival  at 
Monte  Video  Whitelocke  had  pointed  out  to  Craufurd 
the  peculiar  construction  of  the  houses,  their  flat  roofs 
surrounded  by  parapets,  and  other  circumstances  which 
adapted  them  admirably  for  purposes  of  defence.  He 
had  added  that  he  would  never  expose  his  troops  to  so 
unfair  a  trial  as  a  fight  in  the  streets  of  a  large  town 
like  Buenos  Ayres,  composed  entirely  of  such  houses  ; 
and  Craufurd  had  heartily  agreed  with«tiim.  So  strong 
indeed  was  the  General's  feeling  upon  the  subject  that 
he  seems  to  have  set  down  his  opinions  in  writing,  with 
a  corollary  that  such  a  mode  of  attack  as  he  had  just 
accepted  from  Gower  would  not  be  resorted  to,  even 
under  more  favourable  conditions  than  the  present. 
Moreover,  his  own  plan  was  known,  in  general  terms, 
to  be  that  he  should  rest  the  left  of  his  army  upon  the 
La  Plata,  land  his  heavy  guns,  and  in  conjunction  with 
the  gunboats  of  the  fleet  batter  the  town  till  it  sur- 
rendered. The  reasons  which  he  alleged  for  the 
necessity  of  an  immediate  assault  were  the  fatigue  of 
the  troops,  the  inclemency  of  the  weather,  and  the  want 
of  provisions.2  The  difficulty  of  feeding  his  army  was 
in  fact  the  source  of  all  his  troubles  during  his  brief 
campaign  ;  and  it  is  evident  that,  whether  through 
incapacity  or  neglect,  he  had  never  set  himself  from 
1  C.-M.,  p.  410.  2  Ibid.  p.  170. 


ch.xiii     HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  413 

the  first  to  grapple  with  it.  With  a  general  sense  of  1807. 
his  own  incompetence  and  of  the  awkward  situation  in  July  4- 
which  it  had  placed  him,  he  appealed  to  Gower  on  the 
afternoon  of  the  4th  to  testify  to  the  soundness  of  his 
orders  and  dispositions  throughout.  Gower  pleaded 
the  inability  of  an  inferior  officer  to  judge  of  the 
acts  of  his  superior,  whereupon  Whitelocke  declared 
that  he  regarded  his  second  in  command  as  an 
avowed  enemy  and  would  supersede  him  in  his  appoint- 
ment. 

Meanwhile  the  Quartermaster-general  in  the  course 
of  the  afternoon  endeavoured  to  point  out  to  the 
Brigadiers  the  streets  which  were  to  be  followed  by  the 
troops  of  each  brigade.  He  found  the  task  to  be  no 
easy  one.  Gower  had  made  all  his  dispositions  in 
reliance  upon  a  Spanish  map  of  the  city,  but  this  was 
found  to  differ  considerably  from  the  actual  conforma- 
tion of  the  ground  ;  and  Bourke  reported  to  Gower 
that  the  columns  could  not  be  placed  as  he  wished  and 
expected.  He  indicated  further  that  if  the  troops 
advanced,  as  Gower  had  ordered,  from  west  to  east 
direct  upon  the  river,  the  enemy  would  probably  retire 
into  the  streets  north  and  south,  close  in  upon  the 
columns,  and  cut  them  off  from  any  support  outside 
the  town.  Gower  made  light  of  these  objections  ;  and 
the  plan  was  left  unaltered.  Efforts  were  made  to 
collect  crowbars  and  other  tools  to  break  in  the 
doors  of  houses  that  might  be  barricaded  ;  and  a  few, 
though  not  nearly  sufficient,  were  brought  together  and 
distributed  chiefly  to  Craufurd's  brigade.  The  reason 
for  this  allotment  of  the  tools  will  be  made  clear  by  a 
detailed  account  of  Gower's  dispositions. 