


4^4 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


1807.  one  of  Lumley's  officers  had  contrived  to  make  his 
July  5.  way  to  Auchmuty,  and  to  send  back  a  message  from 
that  General,  recommending  that  the  Thirty -sixth 
should  join  him  at  the  Plaza  de  Toros.  Lumley 
answered  by  a  request  for  support ;  but  his  message 
never  reached  its  destination.  However,  at  two  o'clock 
the  Brigadier  collected  his  men,  including  a  party  of  the 
Fifth  which  had  opened  communication  with  him,  and 
retiring  along  the  beach  under  a  heavy  fire  from  the 
fort,  joined  Auchmuty,  not  without  some  additional 
loss,  before  three  o'clock.  His  brigade  had  been 
sacrificed  to  no  purpose  whatsoever. 

Such  were  the  fortunes  of  the  left  wing,  to  north- 
ward of  the  four  central  streets  :  it  remains  now  to 
follow  those  of  the  right  wing  to  south  of  them.  On 
the  extreme  right,  the  Forty-fifth  advanced  in  two 
columns,  the  right  under  Colonel  Guard,  the  left  under 
Major  Nichols,  upon  the  Residencia,  which  had 
been  prescribed  by  word  of  mouth  as  the  object  of  its 
attack.  This  was  evidently  a  verbal  variation  from  the 
written  orders  ;  and  the  result  was  that  the  Forty-fifth 
moved  by  two  streets  a  long  way  to  soufck  of  those  origin- 
ally assigned  to  them.  The  place  was  reached,  taken, 
and  occupied  with  trifling  loss  within  an  hour  ;  and 
thus  a  very  strong  position  on  the  south-eastern  flank  of 
the  city  was  secured,  assuring  easy  communication  with 
the  fleet.  Some  distance  to  the  left  of  Nichols,  the 
Light  Brigade  moved  ofF  in  two  columns  ;  the  left 
column  consisting  of  four  companies  of  the  Ninety- 
fifth  and  five  light  companies — in  all  about  six  hundred 
bayonets — under  the  independent  command  of  Colonel 
Pack ;  the  right  column  of  four  more  companies 
of  the  Ninety-fifth  and  four  light  companies,  under 
the  personal  direction  of  Craufurd.  Both  columns 
passed  through  the  town  to  the  beach  unmolested 
except  by  a  few  cannon-shot  from  the  Great  Square  ; 
and  Craufurd,  finding  the  fort  to  be  within  five  hundred 
yards  of  him,  determined  to  advance  upon  it  by  the 
beach,  sending  orders  to  Guard  to  follow  him  with  the 


ch.  xiii     HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


425 


Forty -fifth  in  support.    No  intimation,  it  must  be  1807. 
observed,  had  been  given  to  Craufurd  that  Guard  wasJulY  5- 
to  occupy  the  Residencia,  nor  had  any  hint  of  this 
intention  appeared  in  general  orders. 

Meanwhile  Pack,  having  divided  his  column  into 
two  and  given  the  command  of  half  of  it  to  Colonel 
Cadogan,  turned  northward,  along  two  parallel  streets, 
two  blocks  apart,  conceiving,  as  had  Craufurd,  that  the 
Great  Square  and  the  fort  were  the  points  where  he  was 
intended  to  attack.  This  movement  brought  him  near 
the  Franciscan  Church,  where  in  a  moment  half  of  his 
men  were  struck  down,  and  he  himself  was  wounded  by 
the  fire  of  an  invisible  enemy.  Hastily  retreating  to  the 
street  along  which  he  had  originally  advanced,  he  found 
Cadogan's  party  also  retiring,  having  suffered  the  like 
maltreatment.  Cadogan  had  led  his  men  with  little 
loss  to  the  gateway  of  the  Jesuits'  College,  when  every 
man  of  his  leading  company  and  every  horse  and  man 
attached  to  his  single  field-gun  had  been  in  an  instant 
shot  down.  About  half  of  his  men  had  followed  him 
into  one  house  ;  the  rest  had  dispersed  themselves  to 
seek  shelter  wherever  they  could  find  an  open  door. 
Cadogan  himself  was  in  great  distress,  declaring  that 
he  and  his  men  had  done  their  duty,  but  that  success 
was  impossible. 