

The  town  of  Buenos  Ayres  was  laid  out  in  regular 
rectangular  blocks,  each  about  one  hundred  and  thirty 
yards  square,  its  eastern  face  abutting  upon  the  river. 
It  measured,  roughly  speaking,  about  two  miles  from 
north  to  south  by  one  mile  from  east  to  west,  the 
ground  sloping  gently  upwards  from  the  river  inland, 
so  that  the  Corral,  upon  which  the  British  army  was 


4H 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1807.  encamped,  overlooked  the  whole  of  the  buildings  down 
July  4.  t0  tne  water's  edge.  As  was  natural,  the  principal 
edifices  were  all  close  to  the  shore  ;  the  fort  forming 
the  centre  of  those  along  the  eastern  front.  This  was 
described  as  a  "square  work  of  about  one  hundred 
paces  on  the  exterior  polygon,  and  flanked  with  small 
bastions/'  The  walls  were  about  fifteen  feet  high 
from  the  level  of  the  interior  to  the  top  of  the  parapet, 
which  rose  not  more  than  four  feet  above  the  rampart, 
the  guns  being  mounted  en  barbette  upon  field-carriages  ; 
and  there  was  no  ditch  except  on  the  side  that  faced 
the  town.  It  was  commanded,  as  Beresford  had  dis- 
covered to  his  cost,  by  several  houses  in  the  vicinity, 
and  altogether  was  wholly  insignificant.  Its  western 
face  abutted  on  the  Plaza  Mayor,  or  Great  Square,  the 
scene  of  Beresford's  unsuccessful  defence,  divided,  as 
will  be  remembered,  by  an  arcade,  with  a  parapetted 
roof.  On  the  north-western  face  of  the  square  stood 
the  Cathedral,  with  a  lofty  dome  and  parapet.  Nearly 
a  mile  to  northward  of  the  Great  Square  lay  another 
and  more  important  open  space,  situated  on  rising 
ground  close  to  the  river  at  the  northeastern  angle  of 
the  town.  This  was  the  Plaza  de  Toros,  in  which 
stood  the  amphitheatre  for  the  exhibition  of  bull-fights, 
with  the  artillery-barracks  and  arsenal  lying  beyond  it. 
It  was  separated  from  the  town  by  a  little  ravine,  of 
which  it  occupied  the  higher  side.  Below  it  towards 
the  river  there  was  a  flat  unoccupied  space,  where  an 
enclosed  battery  had  lately  been  erected  to  flank  any 
approach  to  the  eastern  face  of  the  town  along  the 
beach.  Southward  of  the  Great  Square,  and  four 
blocks  distant  from  it,  was  another  small  open  space, 
having  on  the  west  side  the  convent  of  St.  Domingo, 
the  largest  ecclesiastical  building  in  Buenos  Ayres  next 
to  the  Cathedral.  Yet  further  south,  almost  at  the 
south-eastern  angle  of  the  town,  stood  a  large  building, 
originally  designed  for  a  royal  hospital,  called  the 
Residencia,  standing  within  an  irregular  quadrilateral 
space   of  which  one-third  was  open  and    the  rest 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  415 

occupied  by  buildings.  This  space  was  enclosed  partly  1807. 
by  the  buildings  themselves,  which  presented  a  lofty  July  4- 
blind  wall  to  the  streets  on  both  sides,  partly  by  a 
slighter  wall  some  ten  feet  high  ;  and  the  Residencia 
as  a  whole  offered  the  advantage  that  its  roof  was 
not  commanded  by  the  top  of  any  adjacent  houses. 
It  stood  back  about  two  or  three  hundred  yards  from 
the  river ;  and  if  this  building,  the  fort,  and  the 
Plaza  de  Toros  were  occupied,  there  was  free  communi- 
cation between  them,  unimpeded  by  any  houses  along 
the  shore.  On  the  other  hand,  in  advancing  from 
west  to  east  the  troops  would  descend  steadily  from 
higher  to  lower  ground  ;  and  all  the  loftiest  buildings 
in  the  town  stood  at  the  eastern  extremity  near  the 
river. 