


ch.  xiii     HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


411 


Ayres,  which  had  been  defiantly  rejected ;  and  the  1807. 
British  outposts  had  been  engaged  for  most  of  the  day,  July  3 
though  with  no  incidents  of  any  importance.  It  was 
true  that  the  advanced  corps  had  not  taken  up  its 
position  in  the  northern  suburbs,  as  Whitelocke  had 
directed,  in  order  to  open  communication  with  the 
fleet ;  but  it  was  too  late  to  correct  this  fault  at  so  late 
an  hour  of  the  afternoon.  Rain  fell  in  torrents  as  soon 
as  the  main  body  came  in  ;  and  Whitelocke  simply- 
aligned  his  troops  upon  Gower's,  further  directing  the 
whole  line  to  fall  back  in  rear  of  the  Corral,  in  the  hope 
of  drawing  the  enemy,  who  had  never  ceased  firing  at  the 
picquets,  into  the  open  ground.  The  movement,  how- 
ever, failed  of  its  object,  and  the  troops  took  shelter  in 
houses  for  the  night,  receiving  rations  both  of  bread 
and  liquor,  which  Gower  had  collected  in  the  suburbs. 

In  the  evening  Whitelocke  asked  Gower  whether, 
having  been  in  the  suburbs  for  twenty-four  hours,  he 
had  thought  of  any  design  for  the  attack  of  the  town. 
Gower  answered  in  the  affirmative,  and  produced  his 
plan;  whereupon,  after  further  consideration,  Whitelocke 
decided  to  abandon  his  own  idea  of  attack  and  adopt 
that  of  his  subordinate.  The  officers  commanding 
regiments  and  brigades  were  accordingly  summoned 
to  headquarters  at  nine  the  next  morning,  where  July  4 
Gower  was  ready  to  expound  his  scheme  to  them.  It 
was  abundantly  simple.  The  army  was  to  enter  the 
town  in  thirteen  different  columns  along  as  many 
different  streets.  One  of  these  was  to  seize  the  Plaza 
de  Toros,  a  fairly  commanding  position  at  the  north- 
east angle  of  the  city  ;  the  remainder  were  to  push  on 
to  the  last  row  of  houses  overlooking  the  river,  capture 
them,  and  form  up  on  the  roofs.  After  this  explanation 
Whitelocke  dismissed  all  but  the  Brigadiers,  and 
announced  his  intention  of  attacking  at  noon.  Auch- 
muty,  who  had  arrived  late  at  the  conference,  remarked 
that  his  officers  were  wholly  unacquainted  with  the  in- 
tended attack,  that  they  would  hardly  have  time  to 
examine  their  ground  in  order  to  make  the  necessary 


4i2  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  bookxiii 


1807.  arrangements,  and  that  broad  noon  was  not  the  best 
July  4.  time  for  a  hostile  advance  into  a  populous  city.  Gower 
concurred  in  this  reasoning,  and  the  attack  was  deferred 
until  daylight  of  the  following  morning.  It  does  not 
appear  that  any  of  the  officers  present  brought  forward 
any  objection  to  the  plan,  though  Colonel  Pack,  who 
by  reason  of  his  acquaintance  with  the  town  of  Buenos 
Ayres  was  admitted  to  the  conference  of  Generals, 
hinted  at  strong  disapprobation  of  it.  Whitelocke, 
however,  evaded  further  discussion  with  him  ;  and 
Pack  said  no  more,  though  he  noted  that  the 
Commander-in-chief  had  the  air  of  a  man  who  was 
acting  against  his  better  judgment.1 