

The  dispositions  for  the  attack  were  as  follows.  On 
the  left  or  northern  side  Auchmuty  was  to  detach  the 
Thirty-eighth,  complete,  to  seize  the  Plaza  de  Toros 
with  the  ground  adjacent  to  it,  and  there  to  take  post. 
Next  to  the  Thirty -eighth,  in  succession  came  the 
Eighty-seventh,  the  Fifth,  the  Thirty-sixth,  and  Eighty- 
eighth  ;  which,  each  of  them  divided  into  two  wings, 
were  appointed  to  advance  down  eight  parallel  streets  to 
southward  of  the  Thirty-eighth.  Auchmuty  accom- 
panied the  right  wing  of  the  Eighty-seventh  ;  Lumley 
the  right  wing  of  the  Thirty-sixth.  Next  to  these 
came  the  Eighty-eighth  in  two  wings,  this  battalion 
forming  the  extreme  right  of  the  left  attack.  The  four 
central  streets  were  left  vacant,1  except  that  the  street 
which  ran  directly  from  Whitelocke's  headquarters  to 
the  fort  was  to  be  occupied,  but  not  traversed,  by  the 
Carabiniers  with  two  guns,  who  were  to  make  a  false 
attack.2  The  first  street  to  southward  of  the  four 
central  streets  was  assigned  to  a  part  of  the  Light 
Brigade  under  Pack,  the  second  to  the  remainder  of 
that  brigade  under  Craufurd,  each  column  taking  with 
it  one  three-pounder.  The  two  wings  of  the  Forty- 
fifth  were  to  move  parallel  with  them  down  the  two 
1  C.-M.,  p.  550.  2  Ibid.  p.  77. 


4i6 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xm 


1807.  next  streets.    The  whole  were  to  march  to  the  last 

July 

4-  square  of  houses  on  the  river,  as  has  been  said,  and  to  |r 
form  on  the  tops  of  the  buildings.1    If  any  failed  to  j 
penetrate  so  far,  they  were  to  lodge  themselves  at  the  L 
furthest  point  to  which  they  were  able  to  advance.  As 
a  general  instruction,  it  was  ordained  that  in  all  cases  of 
doubt  the  detachments  were  to  incline  outwards  ;  that  1 
is  to  say,  Auchmuty's  and  Lumley's  brigades,  which  f. 
formed  the  left  wing,  were  to  bear  to  their  left,  the  I 
remainder,  which  formed  the  right  wing,  to  their  right  ;  I 
but  the   command  to  this  effect  was  conveyed  in  cc 
language  so  loose  and  obscure  that  Craufurd's  staff- 
officer,  in  making  his  transcript  of  the  orders,  very 
pardonably  omitted  it.2    This  initial  mistake  augured 
no  good  for  the  success  of  the  attack. 

1  In  the  plan  I  have  attempted,  as  I  trust  with  success,  to  show 
the  street  traversed  by  each  party  of  troops,  by  the  light  not  of  c 
Gower's  orders  but  of  sundry  hints  which  appear  in  the  evidence 
given  at  Whitelocke's  court-martial.    But  the  task  has  been  one  of 
great  difficulty. 

2  The  order  ran  thus  : — "  Each  officer  commanding  a  division 
of  the  left  wing,  which  is  from  the  88th  to  the  87th  inclusively,  to  " 
take  care  that  he  does  not  incline  to  his  rigitf  of  the  right  wing,  p 
that  is  Light  Brigade  and  45  th  to  the  left."    The  order  is  printed  jj 
thus  both  in  Military  Transactions  and  in  the  Minutes  of  the  Court- 
Martial,  and  as  it  stands  is  mere  gibberish.    If  it  be  punctuated  as 
follows  : — "  Each  officer  commanding  a  division  of  the  left  wing, 
which  is  from  the  88th  to  the  87th  inclusively,  to  take  care  that 
he  does  not  incline  to  his  right  ;   of  the  right  wing,  that  is  Light 
Brigade  and  45th,  to  the  left,"  it  can,  by  considerable  effort,  be 
construed  into  sense.    Its  true  meaning,  judging  by  Whitelocke's 
defence,  is  that  which  I  have  given  in  the  text,  viz.  the  columns  of 
the  left  wing  if  they  could  not  follow  the  streets  assigned  to  them, 
were  to  bear  to  their  left ;  the  columns  of  the  right  wing,  namely, 
the  Light  Brigade  and  45th,  in  the  like  case  were  to  bear  to  their 
right  ;  and  the  reason  was  that,  by  converging  on  the  centre,  they 
might  come  under  the  fire  of  the  guns  in  charge  of  the  Carabiniers.  1 
Strangely  enough,  no  member  of  the  court-martial  seems  to  have  \ 
taken  exception  to  the  wording  of  this  ridiculous  clause,  so  it  is  j 
possible  that  the  orders  were  written  in  two  parallel  lines,  and  the  ^ 
missing  verbs  and  particles  filled  up  by  the  words  ditto  ditto,  etc. 
The  credit  for  the  discovery  that  this  clause  was  not  transcribed 
by  Craufurd's  staff-officer  belongs  to  Capt.  Lewis  Butler,  U.  S. 
Magazine,  Aug.  1905. 