

The  right  wing  of  the  Eighty-eighth,  under  Colonel 
DufF,  was  so  weak  when  it  paraded  for  the  attack  that 
the  commanding  officer  left  the  colours  behind  and  sent 
a  message  to  request  that  two  companies,  which  were 
detained  at  headquarters,  might  be  allowed  to  join  him. 
The  companies  arrived  in  due  time  with  their  muskets 
unfit  for  service.  General  Gower  having  directed  the 
flints  to  be  removed.  There  was  some  delay  while 
spare  flints  were  collecting  from  such  men  as  could  give 
them  ;  and  the  right  half-battalion  then  advanced  to  a 


ch.xiii     HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  423 

church  which  had  been  pointed  out  to  Duff  by  Lumley  1807. 
as  his  objective — apparently  the  church  of  La  Merced  J uly  5 
in  the  second  block  of  buildings  westward  from  the 
beach.  Strangely  enough  not  a  shot  was  discharged 
at  the  column  until  it  reached  the  gateway  of  this 
building,  when  a  tremendous  fire  of  musketry  was  poured 
upon  it  from  the  adjacent  houses.  The  door  of  the 
church  was  strongly  barricaded ;  it  was  found  im- 
possible to  break  it  down  ;  and  Duff,  after  losing  many 
men,  was  fain  to  abandon  the  attempt  and  plunge 
further  into  the  city  towards  the  citadel.  The  firing 
pursued  him  wherever  he  went,  and  finding  that  half 
of  his  men  had  fallen,  he  turned  back,  took  possession 
of  three  houses,  and  formed  on  the  roof  such  soldiers 
as  were  left  to  him.  Here  he  held  out  for  some  hours, 
but  his  men  dropped  fast  under  the  enemy's  fire  ;  and 
at  a  quarter  before  noon,  seeing  no  prospect  of  support 
from  any  side,  he  too  hoisted  the  white  flag  and  was 
escorted  into  the  citadel. 

Here  he  met  Vandeleur,  his  companion  in  mis- 
fortune, who  had  surrendered  half  an  hour  earlier. 
Duff's  battalion  had  gone  into  action  about  five  hundred 
strong,  and  had  lost  fifteen  officers  and  one  hundred 
and  eighty-three  men  killed  and  wounded.  A  few 
men  of  the  Eighty -eighth  escaped  over  the  house- 
tops and  reported  to  Lumley  the  disaster  which 
had  overtaken  their  regiment  ;  but  the  Spaniards 
had  already  revealed  the  fact  by  turning  all  their 
strength  against  the  Thirty-sixth.  Twice  they  sum- 
moned Lumley  to  surrender,  and  twice  he  refused  ; 
whereupon  they  brought  forward  their  guns  on  the 
beach,  escorted  by  some  seven  hundred  men,  in  order 
I  to  shatter  the  houses  held  by  the  British  to  pieces 
1  about  their  ears.  It  was  a  rash  movement.  Colonel 
Burne  of  the  Thirty-sixth  with  fifty  men  flew  at  this 
escort  at  once,  drove  it  headlong  before  him  under  the 
walls  of  the  fort,  spiked  the  guns,  and  hurried  his 
gallant  little  party  under  shelter  of  a  wall  before  the 
j  cannon  of  the  fort  could  open  upon  them.  Meanwhile, 