


ch.  xiii     HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  417 


Meanwhile  the  enemy  had  recovered  themselves  and  1807 
made  every  preparation  for  a  stubborn  defence  ;  for 
the  Spaniards,  as  they  had  proved  at  Numantia  and 
were  shortly  to  prove  again  at  Saragoza,  are  never  so 
formidable  as  in  street  fighting.    On  the  evening  of 
the  2nd  their  troops  had  been  utterly  demoralised. 
Their  leader  Liniers  was  missing,  and  for  some  time  he 
was  actually  within  the  line  of  the  British  outposts,  his 
retreat  having  been  intercepted  by  the  rapid  advance  of 
the  Light  Brigade.     He  escaped,  however,  in  the 
course  of  the  night,  and  taking  advantage  of  White- 
locke's  inactivity  on  the  3rd,  vigorously  incited  the 
people  to  resistance.     Cannon  were  stationed  at  the 
outlets  of  the  streets  whose  westward  end  was  held  by 
the  British,  and  additional  ordnance  was  brought  to  the 
fort  to  cover  the  approach  by  river.    Trenches  were 
ut  in  the  principal  streets  near  the  Great  Square,  and 
guns  were  placed  to  flank  them.    The  houses  were 
stoutly  barricaded  and  provided  with  every  description 
of  missile  to  be  hurled  upon  the  British  columns.  The 
:lergy  had  used  all  their  influence  and  oratory  to  rouse 
patriotic  enthusiasm  ;  and  every  soul,  men,  women,  and 
hildren,  was  ready  to  play  his  part,  the  very  slaves 
Deing  armed  with  rude  pikes.     In  all,  the  defenders 
seem  to  have  consisted  of  some  nine  thousand  men, 
•egulars,  militia,  and  volunteers,  with  more  or  less  of 
iiscipline  and  organisation,  and  some   six  thousand 
Dthers  in  irregular  but  not  leaderless  groups.    Of  these 
ibout  five  thousand,  including  all  the  best  marksmen, 
occupied  the  houses,  with  a  store  of  provisions  and  an 
imple  supply  of  ammunition  ;    about  two  thousand 
nore  occupied  the  Bull-ring  and  its  neighbourhood, 
vhile  others  were  distributed  in  and  about  the  fort  to 
)e  employed  as  circumstances  should  require.  The 
est  of  the  population  seconded  them  as  best  they  could, 
vhich  they  might  do  effectively  in  a  city  where  every 
louse  was  a  fortress. 

Before  dawn  on  the  5th  the  British  troops  took  up  July  5 
heir  positions  for  the  attack,  in  all  about  forty-five 
vol.  v  2  E 


4i 8  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xm 


1807.  hundred  bayonets.1  Mahon's  detachment  was  still  in 
Jul7  5-  Reduction  ;  scores  and  indeed  hundreds  of  exhausted 
soldiers  had  also  been  left  there  ;  and,  through  foolish 
and  unnecessary  exposure  of  the  men  at  the  advanced 
posts  during  some  sharp  skirmishing  on  the  4th,  a  good 
many,  both  officers  and  privates,  had  fallen.  Punctually 
at  half-past  six  the  firing  of  a  cannon  gave  the  signal 
to  advance,  and  the  columns  entered  their  appointed 
streets.  Every  British  officer  noticed  the  deathlike 
stillness  of  the  town,  for  the  very  dogs  in  the  houses 
had  been  tied  up  ;  and  it  was  not  until  the  columns 
had  advanced  for  some  distance  that  any  of  them 
met  with  opposition.  But,  as  Whitelocke  had  decreed 
that  his  army  should  be  divided  into  tiny  isolated  detach- 
ments, it  will  be  necessary  to  follow  the  fortunes  of 
each  one  of  them  separately. 