

Auchmuty  on  the  left  with  the  two  wings  of  the 
Eighty-seventh  was  the  first  to  come  into  action.  He 
had  advanced  for  more  than  a  mile  without  meeting  the 
slightest  resistance,  when  suddenly  two  guns  opened  a 
destructive  fire  of  grape  directly  before  his  front.  The 
regiment  pushed  on,  and  presently  the  cannonade  was 
supplemented  by  a  heavy  fire  of  musketry  upon  his  left 
front.  The  head  of  the  right  wing  came  to  a  halt  ; 
the  rear  loaded  and  began  to  fire  wildly  ;  and  soon  the 
whole  of  the  column  wavered  and  ran  back.  The 
Colonel,  Sir  Edward  Butler,  and  the  officers  rallied 
the  men  ;  and  Auchmuty  ordered  them  to  break  into 
a  garden  on  his  right,  in  order  to  find  a  way  into  the  next 
street  to  southward.  They  succeeded  in  doing  so,  and 
discovering  a  deep  water-course  in  the  centre  of  the  street, 
which  sheltered  them  from  the  fire,  followed  it  down  to 


1  Returns  from  Milit.  Trans. 


R.A. 

Light  Brigade 

1st  . 

2nd 

3rd 


190 
1 160 
1950 
1060 
1320 

5680  r.  and  f. 


But  of  these  1100  men  were 
held  in  reserve,  600  of  them  to 
act  if  need  were,  and  the  re- 
mainder to  guard  the  sick  and 
prisoners.  The  force  which 
penetrated  into  the  town  was 
about  4500  bayonets,  say  5000 
of  all  ranks.    C.-M.,  p.  504. 


ch.  xiii     HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  419 

the  river,  where  Auchmuty  occupied  a  large  house  and  1807. 
collected  the  remains  of  his  column.  The  left  wing  July  5. 
of  the  Eighty -seventh  presently  joined  him,  having 
suffered  as  severely  as  the  right,  and  having  been  like- 
wise driven  out  of  its  course.  In  spite  of  its  temporary 
unsteadiness  the  Eighty-seventh  had  done  well,  having 
killed  several  of  the  enemy,  and  captured  about  one 
hundred  prisoners  and  three  guns. 

There  then  Auchmuty  waited,  learning  to  his 
surprise  that  the  fire  of  musketry  which  had  checked 
his  advance  had  issued  from  the  Plaza  de  Toros  which, 
according  to  the  map  given  him  by  Gower,  ought  to 
have  been  three  streets  to  his  left  instead  of  directly  to 
his  front.  But  meanwhile  the  Fifth  Foot,  next  to  south- 
ward of  him,  had  also  advanced.  The  right  wing 
reached  the  banks  of  the  river  at  a  quarter  past  seven 
without  encountering  the  slightest  opposition,  hoisted 
the  King's  colours  on  the  top  of  a  house,  and  occupied 
a  neighbouring  church.  The  left  wing  under  Major 
King  charged  bayonets  as  soon  as  it  entered  the  town, 
moved  rapidly  down  the  street  and  came  upon  four 
Spanish  guns  retiring  from  its  left.  The  Spanish 
gunners  promptly  shot  their  teams,  spiked  the  cannon 
and  ran  away,  leaving  King  to  pursue  his  path  to  the 
river  unmolested.  Arrived  there,  the  Major  took 
possession  of  a  house,  and  displayed  the  regimental 
colours  on  the  roof,  which  assured  Auchmuty  that  his 
eastern  flank  was  safe.  Very  soon,  however,  a  galling 
fire  was  opened  from  the  Plaza  de  Toros,  which  com- 
manded the  house  that  King  occupied  ;  but  he  main- 
tained his  position  until,  between  half-past  nine  and  ten 
o'clock,  the  firing  from  the  Plaza  ceased. 