

rightly  called  the  evil  genius  of  the  expedition  ;  but  t 

a  strong  and  able  Commander-in-chief  would  have  left  0 

him  at  Monte  Video,  in  defiance  of  the  fact  that  he  t 

had  been  specially  appointed  by  the  Secretary  of  State  t 

for  War.1    Far  from  that,  Whitelocke  seems  to  have  t 

been  torn  by  doubts  whether  to  bully  or  to  court  him,  t 

with  the  result  that  Gower  obtained  his  own  way  on  t 

every  point,  and  mismanaged  everything.    The  marches  t 

were  contrived  so  as  to  harass  the  men  to  the  utmost,  1 

and  the  final  attack  upon  Buenos  Ayres  was  simply  ( 

fatuous.     The  avowed  intention  was  to  seize   two  1 

strong  positions  upon  the  flank  of  the  city,  which  ] 
indeed  was  actually  effected  ;  but  why  the  men  should 

have  been  marched  through  the  sheets  in  thirteen  1 

small  columns  upon  these  two  points  is  absolutely  1 

inexplicable.    Whitelocke  was  sensible  enough  to  see  1 

the  danger  of  such  a  proceeding,  but  not  strong  enough  1 

to  steer  clear  of  it.    For  reasons  best  known  to  him-  i 

self,  he  yielded  to  Gower  ;  and  Gower,  as  usual,  did  his  i 

worst  for  his  chief.  Great  outcry  was  raised  against  i 
Whitelocke  for  not  accompanying  his  army  in  the 
attack  and  for  renouncing  all  control  of  it.  He 
replied  that  at  his  headquarters  he  was  as  accessible  to 
the  army  at  large  as  at  any  other  place  ;  and  this  was 
undeniable,  for  if  a  commander  deliberately  divides  his 
force  into  thirteen  parts,  and  thrusts  each  of  these  into 
a  blind  alley  from  which  its  retreat  can  easily  be  cut 
off,  the  chances  are  decidedly  in  favour  of  his  losing 

1  Gower  thought  himself  specially  beholden  to  Windham  for 
his  appointment,  and  went  so  far  as  to  write  to  him  an  apology  for 
the  failure  of  the  campaign.    Gower  to  Windham,  9th  July  1807. 


ch.xiii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  433 


all  communication  with  at  least  twelve  of  them.  This  1807. 
might  have  been  foreseen,  and  provision  might  have 
been  made  in  orders  for  the  contingency.  Some  code 
of  signals  could  have  been  arranged ;  and,  above  all, 
Mahon's  reserve  might  have  been  brought  up  under 
the  Commander-in-chief  s  hand  to  act  at  any  point 
where  its  assistance  was  needed.  But  Gower  was 
purblind  and  incapable,  and  Whitelocke  was  helpless 
to  correct  him.  The  written  orders  were  meagre  and 
obscure  ;  and  Gower  worse  confounded  the  confusion 
that  he  made,  by  issuing  supplementary  verbal  orders 
to  certain  individual  leaders  without  imparting  them  to 
the  rest.  The  comment  of  a  Spanish  General  upon 
the  assault  and  the  defence  is  the  hardest  condemna- 
tion to  be  found  of  Whitelocke's  conduct.  "  Half 
the  number  of  troops  which  attacked  this  capital  would 
make  themselves  masters  of  it,  supposing  the  same 
defenders,  equally  armed  and  disciplined.  ...  I  will 
rather  say  that  ten  thousand  English  sheep  came  to 
present  their  throats  to  the  knife."  1 