

There  the  three  Generals  consulted  together  upon 
the  situation.    Whitelocke  reckoned  his  losses  in  killed, 


ch.xiii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


429 


wounded,  and  prisoners  at  twenty-five  hundred  men  ;  1807. 
but  he  was  below  the  mark.  The  killed  numbered  JulY  6. 
four  hundred  and  one  of  all  ranks  ;  the  wounded  six 
hundred  and  forty  -  nine  ;  the  prisoners,  several  of 
whom  were  hurt,  nineteen  hundred  and  twenty-four, 
making  a  total  of  very  nearly  three  thousand  casualties,1 
or  more  than  half  of  the  force  engaged.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  British  had  captured  over  a  thousand  prisoners 
and  more  than  thirty  guns  ;  they  were  in  occupation 
of  strong  posts  on  each  flank  of  the  city  ;  and  they  had 
still  an  effective  force  of  over  six  thousand  of  all  ranks 
ready  for  further  operations.  But  the  troops  had  lost 
confidence  in  their  commander  ;  and,  apart  from  this 
significant  fact,  it  was  evident  alike  to  Whitelocke, 
Gower,  and  Auchmuty  that  the  conquest  of  the 
province  was  impossible.  Moreover,  even  if  Buenos 
Ayres  were  captured,  it  could  only  be  held  by  a 
garrison  of  such  strength  as  England  could  not  dream 
of  sparing.  Gower  was  therefore  sent  to  Liniers  with 
instructions  to  obtain,  if  possible,  an  extension  of  time 
for  the  evacuation,  and  facilities  for  the  British  traders 
to  dispose  of  their  goods.  A  suspension  of  hostilities 
was  proclaimed  in  the  course  of  the  afternoon  ;  and  on 
the  7th  a  definite  agreement  was  signed,  to  the  effect  July  7. 
that  all  prisoners  on  both  sides  were  to  be  restored,  and 
that  the  British  should  evacuate  the  province  within 
ten  days.  Monte  Video  was  excepted  from  this  last 
provision,  it  being  arranged  that  the  place  should  be 
held  by  the  British  for  two  months,  and  then  given 
back  to  the  Spaniards  uninjured  and  with  its  artillery 
intact.  A  proposal  that  liberty  of  commerce  should 
be  granted  to  British  traders  for  four  months  was 
utterly  rejected. 

Beyond  all  question  the  decision  of  Whitelocke  was 
wise,  the  one  instance  indeed  of  wisdom  that  he  had 

1  Killed       .     15  officers,      386     n.c.o.  and  men. 
Wounded  .    57     „           592  „ 
Taken       .94     „         183 1        „  „ 
About  250  of  the  prisoners  were  wounded. 


430  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 

1807.  manifested  during  the  campaign.    But  the  troops,  sore  • 
at  their  maltreatment  by  an  enemy  whom  they  knew  '• 
to  be  contemptible  in  the  field,  were  furious  with  rage. 
"  General  Whitelocke  is  a  coward  or  a  traitor  or  both,"  [ 
were  the  words  in  which  they  wrote  their  opinion  of  : 
him  on  the  walls  of  Buenos  Ayres  ;  and  the  harsh  : 
phrase  was  eagerly  caught  up  by  the  multitude  when  r 
the  bad  news  reached  London.    The  English  at  home  1 
indeed  had  more  than  usual  cause  for  exasperation.  So 
humiliating  a  defeat,  following  so  close  upon  the  victory  c 
of  Maida,  was  in  itself  hard  to  bear  ;  but  the  pecuniary  i 
loss  which  accompanied  it  was  unendurable.    There  1 
had  been  frantic  speculation  in  the  new  market  which 
Popham,  in  his  vanity,  had  proclaimed  to  be  open  in  * 
South  America.    Not  prosperous  merchants  only,  but 
large  numbers  of  the  needy,  the  rapacious,  and  the  impe- 
cunious had  staked  their  all,  or  their  neighbours*  all,  in  J 
the  great  venture  ;  and,  as  is  usual  in  such  cases,  tons  of  1 
rubbish,  which  could  find  no  sale  in  any  other  quarter, 
had  been  shipped  over  to  Buenos  Ayres.    Now  it  was  ! 
seen  that  the  long  and  perilous  voyage  had  been 
undertaken  in  vain,  and  that  the  whijle  of  the  goods 
exported,  whether  valuable  or  worthless,  would  be 
returned  upon  their  owners'  hands.    There  were  loud 
calls  for  an  inquiry,  and  Whitelocke  was  put  on  his 
trial  by  court-martial.    The  Court  was  a  strong  one. 
General  Medows  of  East  Indian  fame  was  President  ; 
and  among   the  nineteen  remaining   members  were 
Lake,  Harris,  Moore,  Cathcart,  David  Dundas,  and 
Henry  Fox.    It  sat  for  thirty-one  days.    The  charges 
were  four  in  number :    First,  that  Whitelocke  had 
exasperated  the  spirit  of  resistance  in  the  people  of 
Buenos  Ayres,  by  making  excessive  demands  upon  them 
when  they  seemed  likely  to  come  to  terms  ;  secondly, 
that  he  had  mishandled  the  whole  of  the  military 
operations,  particularly  in  attacking  Buenos  Ayres  with 
unloaded  arms  ;  thirdly,  that  he  had  made  no  effectual 
attempt  to  control  or  support  the  different  columns 
during  the  attack  ;  and  fourthly,  that,  when  still  in 