

Again,  if  Ministers  were  resolved  to  play  a  game  in 
which  the  chances,  on  the  mere  showing  of  common  sense, 
lay  very  heavily  on  the  side  of  failure,  they  might  at  least 
have  shunned  the  additional  risk  of  appointing  an 
untried  commander.  Far  from  doing  so,  they  actually 
displaced  the  capable  Auchmuty  in  favour  of  the 
incapable  Whitelocke  ;  thus  proving  themselves  to  be 
not  only  bad  administrators  but  bad  gamblers.  Never- 
theless, by  the  irony  of  fate,  their  mismanagement  was 
the  salvation  of  England.  It  was  worth  the  humilia- 
tion, the  loss  of  brave  men  and  the  expense  of  money 
to  be  freed  once  for  all  from  the  fatal  entanglement  of 
a  permanent  and  precarious  occupation  on  the  Rio  de 
la  Plata.  If  the  indignant  shade  of  Whitelocke  still 
broods  over  the  fortune  of  many  British  Generals  who, 
though  no  less  deserving  of  disgrace  than  himself,  have 
escaped  court-martial  and  cashierment,  it  may  at  least 


ch.  xiii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  437 

find  consolation  in  the  thought  that  the  evacuation  of  1807. 
South  America  after  his  defeat  was  a  wise,  true,  and 
courageous  service  to  his  country,  worthy  to  rank  with 
Thomas  Maitland's  happy  evacuation  of  St.  Domingo. 

Authorities. — The  reports  of  Whitelocke's  court-martial  con- 
stitute the  principal  authority  for  the  expedition  to  Buenos  Ayres  ; 
that  of  Gurney  (2  vols.  1808)  is  preferable  to  that  of  Blanchard, 
and  Ramsay  (1  vol.  1808),  being  rather  fuller  and  containing  far 
better  maps.  Any  statement  for  which  I  have  quoted  no  authority 
may  be  accepted  as  based  upon  these  reports.  My  references  are 
to  Blanchard's  edition,  which  is  the  more  easily  accessible,  and 
are  indicated  by  the  letters  C.  M.  The  official  despatches  (W.  O. 
Orig.  Corres.  161,  162)  contain  little  of  importance  that  is  un- 
printed.  There  is  useful  material  in  An  Authentic  Narrative  of 
the  Proceedings  of  the  Expedition  under  Brig.-Gen.  Craufurd  (1  vol. 
1 808,  Lond.),  and  in  the  numbers  of  Colburne's  Military  Magazine, 
April  to  December,  1836.  There  are  also  a  few  details  in  the  Life 
of  Sir  Samuel  Whittingham,  and  in  the  Journal  of  a  Soldier  of  the 
Seventy-first  (Edinburgh,  18 19).  The  best  extant  account  of  the 
expedition  as  a  whole  is  to  be  found  in  Captain  Lewis  Butler's 
article  in  the  United  Service  Magazine  for  June,  July,  and  August 
1905.  Though  I  do  not  always  endorse  the  opinions  therein 
advanced,  I  have  found  the  narrative  to  be  of  great  value  ;  and 
I  must  gratefully  acknowledge  also  the  advantage  which  I  have 
derived  from  oral  discussion  of  the  campaign  with  the  author. 


END   OF  VOL.  V 


Printed  by  R.  &  R.  Clark,  Limited,  Edinburgh. 