


ch.xiii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


435 


hazardous,  for  no  channels  or  docks  had  been  dredged  i 
out  for  Buenos  Ayres  in  those  days,  and  consequently 
there  were  no  quays.  The  troops  must  therefore  have 
evacuated  the  city  in  boats  ;  and  those  boats  could  not 
have  been  covered  by  the  guns  of  the  fleet,  for  the 
men-of-war  could  not  safely  lie  nearer  than  four  or 
five  miles  from  the  shore.  A  re-embarkation  from 
Point  Quilmes  would  have  been  still  more  difficult, 
and  the  retreat  thither  from  the  city  most  dangerous. 
Beyond  all  doubt,  therefore,  Whitelocke  did  right  to 
come  early  to  terms  with  Liniers  ;  and,  though  it  may 
well  be  that  his  sagacity  in  coming  to  this  decision  was 
quickened  by  discouragement,  it  must  be  remembered 
that  he  had  served  for  long  in  St.  Domingo,  and  had 
observed  the  failure  of  an  expedition,  conducted  upon 
much  the  same  principles,  in  that  quarter.  From  the 
military  point  of  view,  the  only  satisfactory  feature  in 
the  campaign  was  the  good  behaviour  of  the  troops 
in  the  assault. 

It  remains  to  pass  judgment  upon  the  Ministers 
who  sent  Whitelocke  away  upon  his  mad  and  im- 
possible errand.  Enough  has  already  been  said  to  show 
that  they  acted  in  complete  ignorance  or  misconception 
of  the  true  condition  of  affairs  on  the  Rio  de  la  Plata. 
No  ignorance  or  misconception,  however,  can  excuse 
the  absurdity  of  the  orders  originally  given  to  Craufurd, 
nor  the  contradictory  injunctions  addressed  to  White- 
locke. He  was  to  reduce  the  province  of  Buenos  Ayres 
by  force  of  arms  and  exile  the  authors  of  the  insurrection 
which  had  overthrown  Beresford ;  and  yet  he  was 
to  consider  that  his  main  object  was  not  to  distress  or 
annoy  the  enemy  but  only  to  occupy  a  portion  of  his 
territory.  Again,  he  was  to  attach  the  inhabitants 
to  British  rule,  but  was  forbidden  to  give  them  assurance 
of  British  protection  against  the  vengeance  of  Old  Spain 
after  the  conclusion  of  peace.  These  astonishing 
orders  emanated  from  the  Ministry  of  all  the  Talents  ; 
and  one  is  tempted  to  imagine  the  wit  and  sarcasm 
with  which  they  would  have  been  criticised  by  Windham 


436  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


i  807.  if  they  had  been  addressed  to  him  by  Whitelocke 
instead  of  to  Whitelocke  by  his  accomplished  self. 
Nevertheless,  the  extreme  difficulties  of  Ministers  must 
not  be  overlooked.  It  should  be  remembered  that 
Popham  had  committed  them,  without  their  know- 
ledge or  consent,  to  the  extravagant  venture  against 
Buenos  Ayres.  They  duly  recalled  Popham  in  dis- 
grace, as  we  have  seen,  and  tried  him  by  court-martial  ; 
but  the  Commodore  escaped  with  a  severe  reprimand, 
and  was  almost  immediately  employed  again  upon  an 
important  service.  This  was  utterly  wrong,  for  he 
ought  to  have  been  dismissed  the  Navy.  But 
Popham  had  succeeded  in  enlisting  the  cupidity  of 
England  in  his  favour  ;  the  pressure  of  public  opinion 
was  difficult  to  resist ;  and,  as  has  already  been  said, 
the  temptation  to  neutralise  Napoleon's  Continental 
blockade  by  opening  new  markets  in  South  America 
was  extremely  strong.  Glory,  popularity,  and  pros- 
perity all  seemed  bound  to  follow  upon  success  ;  and 
the  enterprise  commended  itself  heartily  to  the  gambling 
spirit  of  the  nation.  But  gambling  should  not  have 
been  confounded  with  statesmanship. 