


ii  ch.xiii     HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  431 

e  a  position  to  have  taken  Buenos  Ayres,  in  spite  of  1807. 
?  the  heavy  losses  in  the  assault,  he  had  deliberately 
preferred  to  evacuate  the  country.  He  was  found 
"  guilty  upon  all  the  charges,  except  that  of  prohibit- 
if  ing  all  firing  during  the  attack,  and  was  sentenced 
h  to  be  "  cashiered  and  declared  totally  unfit  and  un- 
n  worthy  to  serve  His  Majesty  in  any  military  capacity 
e  whatever." 

0  The  finding  shows  the  strength  of  public  feeling  at  the 
jf  moment.  The  first  charge  may  be  dismissed  as  absurd  : 
y  the  Spanish  colonies  on  the  Plate  would  have  accepted 
e  a  British  occupation  on  no  terms  except  those  which 
\  Whitelocke  was  expressly  instructed  to  decline — in- 
dependence under  British  protection.  The  remaining 
charges  cannot  so  lightly  be  passed  over,  but  it  must 
be  admitted  that  the  General's  difficulties  were  enormous. 
Attention  has  already  been  called  to  the  initial  problem 
which  was  presented  to  him  for  solution,  namely, 
whether  he  should  attack  at  once  or  wait  until 
September,  as  also  to  the  unfortunate  but  inevitable 
delay  in  the  ascent  of  the  river  by  the  transports  of 
Craufurd's  division.  Allusion  has  also  been  made  to 
the  virtual  impossibility  of  reconnoitring  the  country 
and  obtaining  intelligence,  and  especially  to  the 
obstacles  which  beset  all  arrangements  for  transport 
and  supply.  Whitelocke  was  fortunate  in  effecting 
his  debarkation  unmolested  ;  but  the  risk  which  he 
encountered  was  so  great  as  to  be  justifiable  only  by 
the  result.  Had  he  refused,  as  very  reasonably  he 
might  have  done,  to  incur  the  hazard,  the  alternative 
was  to  disembark  far  away  from  the  city  and  to  make 
a  long  march  by  land,  in  which  case  it  is  hard  to  see 
how  he  could  have  fed  his  army.  The  fleet  was  indeed 
in  the  river,  but  the  river  was  practically  an  inland  sea, 
very  shallow  near  the  shore,  yet  dangerous  for  small 
craft  in  rough  weather,  and  with  few  safe  inlets  to 
shelter  them.  No  operation  could  seem  simpler  upon 
paper  than  that  the  Army  should  have  marched  parallel 
to  the  shore,  drawing  its  supplies  from  the  fleet,  which 


432 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


1807.  should  have  moved  on  a  level  with  it;  but  none  was 
in  actual  fact  more  impracticable. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  must  also  be  admitted  that  the  I 

man  did  not  make  the  best  of  his  very  difficult  task.   He  - 

seems  on  this  occasion  to  have  had  no  self-reliance,  and  I 

to  have  leaned  wholly  upon  Gower  who,  it  is  abundantly  fl 

evident,  was  as  conceited  as  he  was  unpractical,  and  as  ■ 

overbearing  as  he  was  incompetent.    Gower  has  been  \ 