

Profoundly  impressed  with  the  hopelessness  of  the 
enterprise,  Pack  made  known  to.  Cadogan  his  intention 
of  withdrawing  to  the  Residencia.  Cadogan  deprecated 
this  idea  ;  and  Pack  agreed  to  stay  where  he  was  until 
he  should  see  Craufurd.  That  General  soon  appeared 
at  the  back  of  the  Convent  of  St.  Domingo,  and 
was  presently  joined  by  Guard,  who  had  come  with  his 
grenadier-company  from  the  Residencia  to  open  com- 
munication with  the  Light  Brigade.  Pack  urged  upon 
Craufurd  the  impracticability  of  the  task  entrusted  to  him, 
and  pressed  him  strongly  to  retire  to  the  Residencia. 
Craufurd  hesitated,  representing  the  expediency  of 
occupying  the  Convent  of  St.  Domingo  ;  and  Pack 
reluctantly  gave  way.    The  door  of  the  convent  was 


426  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 

1807.  blown  open  by  the  second  field-gun  attached  to  the  ;. 
JulY  5-  Light  Brigade  ;  the  building  was  occupied  ;  and  the  I 
captured  colours  of  the  Seventy  -  first,  being  found  I 
within,  were  hoisted  above  it.     No  sooner  did  the  r 
British  troops  appear  on  the  roof  than  a  considerable  i 
fire  was  opened  upon  them  from  the  adjoining  houses  ;  0: 
but  there  was  no  reason  for  anxiety  until  noon,  when  a  1 
Spanish  officer  appeared  with  a  flag  of  truce.     Not  t 
doubting  but  that  the  messenger  bore  a  proposal  from  ai 
Liniers  to  capitulate,  Craufurd  was  staggered  when  he  t 
was  met  on  the  contrary  by  the  news  that  the  Eighty-  G 
eighth  had  surrendered,  and  that  Liniers  called  upon  ir 
him  also  to  surrender.     Craufurd  dismissed  the  flag  a: 
at  once  with  a  curt  refusal  ;  but,  shortly  afterwards,  a  a 
large  body  of  the  enemy  marched  into  the  street  by  c 
the  entrance  to  the  convent  and  prepared  to  seize  the  c 
field-gun,  which,  being  too  wide  to  be  brought  into  the  [ 
building,  had  been  left  outside.    Then  realising  how  t 
critical  was  his  position,  Craufurd  hauled  down  the  r 
colours  which  he  had  hoisted,  and  made  ready  to  retire 
to  the  Residencia.    Guard  with  his  grenadier-company 
made  a  rush  at  the  gun,  and  swept  -away  the  hostile  1 
column  which  threatened  it ;   but   in   three  minutes  I 
forty  of  his  men  were  killed  or  wounded  by  the  fire 
from  the  adjacent  houses  ;  and  Craufurd,  seeing  that  1 
the  evacuation  of  the  convent  was  impossible,  ordered  i 
the  men  back  to  their  posts  and  resumed  the  defence. 
Presently  all  firing  ceased  except  in  his  own  immediate 
neighbourhood,  which  sign  he  interpreted  to  mean  that 
the  attack  had  failed  at  all  points  ;  and  at  half  past 
three,  judging  that  assistance  or  relief  was  hopeless,  he 
surrendered.    Cadogan,  having  lost  ninety-seven  men  \ 
out  of  one  hundred  and  forty,  besides  five  officers,  had 
surrendered  some  time  before. 