

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  Whitelocke  threw  the 
blame  of  the  main  disaster  upon  Craufurd  and  Pack, 
who,  instead  of  wheeling  outwards  in  pursuance  of  their 
orders,  deliberately  wheeled  inward  upon  the  fort. 
Craufurd,  for  his  part,  retorted  upon  Whitelocke  the 
accusation  that  the  Commander-in-chief  had  abandoned 
him.  There  was  some  ground  for  complaint  on  both 
sides.  Mention  has  already  been  made  of  the  omission 
of  an  important  but  unintelligible  clause  from 
Craufurd's  copy  of  the  orders  ;  but,  apart  from  this, 
Robert  Craufurd  was  not  remarkable  at  any  period  of 
his  career  for  excessive  deference  to  the  commands  of 
his  superiors.  Again,  his  rejection  of  Pack's  advice 
to  retire  to  the  Residencia,  after  the  failure  of  Pack's 
own  preliminary  attack,  was  extremely  characteristic  of 
the  man.  On  the  other  hand,  Auchmuty  had  equally 
disobeyed  the  written  orders  ;  and,  since  Craufurd  had 
penetrated  to  the  river  unopposed,  it  was  reasonable 
1  Castlereagh  Desp.  vii.  402. 
VOL.  V  2  F 


434  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


i  807.  for  him  to  assume  that  Whitelocke  required  more  of 
him  than  merely  to  take  refuge  at  the  Residencia. 
The  enemy's  force  was  supposed  to  be  concentrated  about 
the  Great  Square.  Presumably  Whitelocke  intended  to 
attack  it  from  both  flanks  ;  otherwise  why  had  columns 
been  sent  through  all  the  streets,  and  why  had  not 
the  Light  Brigade  been  sent  direct  together  with  the 
Forty-fifth  to  the  Residencia  ?  If  the  British  gunboats 
were  intended  to  co-operate  in  the  final  attack,  the 
guns  of  the  fort  must  first  have  been  silenced  by  the 
army,  for  they  could  not  be  reached,  owing  to  shallow 
water,  by  the  cannon  of  the  fleet.  Craufurd  in  fact 
argued  as  if  Whitelocke,  or  Gower  in  Whitelocke's 
stead,  had  actually  formed  a  plan  of  operations  ; 
whereas,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  they  had  formed  none. 
They  simply  directed  the  columns  to  enter  the  town, 
expecting  little  resistance,  and  left  the  rest  to  chance. 
In  brief,  they  made  the  mistake  which,  though  old  as 
human  nature,  seems  unhappily  to  enjoy  perpetual 
youth,  of  undervaluing  their  enemy. 

As  to  the  question  of  renewing  the  attack  on  the 
6th  or  7th,  in  conjunction  with  the  fle^t  and  with  the 
help  of  guns  landed  from  it,  there  seems  to,  be  no 
reasonable  doubt  that  the  operation  was  feasible  and 
would  have  ensured  the  capture  of  Buenos  Ayres. 
Indeed,  according  to  the  Spanish  General  already  quoted, 
if  the  British  had  merely  maintained  and  fortified  them- 
selves in  the  positions  which  they  had  already  mastered, 
the  inhabitants  must  have  laid  down  their  arms  within 
four  days  from  lack  of  provisions.1  But,  even  if  the  city 
had  been  taken,  either  by  bombardment  or  by  blockade, 
the  fact  would  hardly  have  reconciled  the  Spaniards  to 
British  rule.  Moreover,  even  when  captured,  it  would 
have  been,  at  best,  difficult  of  defence  against  a  hostile 
population.  All  supplies  except  from  the  river  would 
have  been  cut  off ;  the  entire  country  would  have  been 
closed  to  the  British  ;  and,  in  case  of  a  retreat,  re- 
embarkation  would  have  been  extremely  difficult  and 
1  Castkreagh  Desp.  vii.  400. 