

Thus  this  curious  and  disjointed  action  came  to  an  I 
end.    Throughout  its  duration  Whitelocke  had  been 
pacing  up  and  down  near  his  headquarters  in  deep 
anxiety.    No  reports  reached  him.    So  slovenly  was 
the  work  of  his  staff  that,  though  he  never  changed 


ch.xiii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  427 

his  position  throughout  the  day,  not  one  of  his  Generals  1807. 
knew,  except  by  conjecture,  where  he  was  to  be  found.  July  5- 
But  this  was  of  small  importance,  for  no  messenger 
from  any  one  of  the  columns  could  have  reached  him 
alive.  At  nine  o'clock  he  sent  a  stafF-officer  down 
one  of  the  central  streets  to  ascertain  what  was  going 
forward  ;  but  the  morning  was  too  hazy  to  allow  any- 
thing to  be  distinctly  seen  even  from  the  house-tops ; 
and  he  therefore  directed  the  column  of  the  Carabiniers 
and  Ninth  Light  Dragoons  to  advance  towards  the 
Great  Square.  The  Dragoons  moved  forward  accord- 
ingly, but  were  presently  checked  by  a  destructive  fire, 
and  after  heavy  losses  fell  back  to  a  place  of  safety, 
and  halted.  Whitelocke  then  sent  one  of  his  aide-de- 
camps to  try  to  find  out  the  position  of  the  attacking 
columns  ;  and  he,  after  climbing  to  the  top  of  the  highest 
house  open  to  him,  was  able  to  report  at  half-past  eleven 
that  British  colours  were  flying  on  the  left  and  on  the 
right  centre.  Subsequent  attempts  of  this  officer  to 
penetrate  further  into  the  town  were  fruitless  ;  and  the 
endeavours  of  another  officer  to  make  his  way  towards 
the  Residencia  with  a  few  mounted  dragoons  were 
likewise  foiled.  At  last,  between  two  and  three  o'clock, 
Whitelocke  asked  if  any  officer  would  volunteer  to  obtain 
news  of  Auchmuty.  Thereupon  Captain  Whittingham, 
afterwards  well  known  as  one  of  our  military  agents  in 
Spain,  took  an  escort  of  about  fifty  mounted  and  dis- 
mounted men  and,  after  much  skirmishing  with  scattered 
bodies  of  the  enemy,  made  his  way  to  the  Plaza  de  Toros. 
Having  heard  Auchmuty's  report,  he  galloped  back  with 
the  dragoons  alone,  and  at  half  past  four  was  able  to 
give  the  General  the  first  information  that  he  had  received 
of  the  day's  work,  namely,  that  Auchmuty  had  been 
successful,  and  that  the  Eighty-eighth  had  been  captured. 
Of  the  fate  of  Craufurd  nothing  was  known.  In  fact, 
with  the  exception  of  some  motley  bands  of  Spaniards 
which  attempted  a  feeble  attack  upon  the  baggage-guard 
from  the  rear,  Whitelocke  had  seen  nothing  either  of 
the  enemy  or  of  his  own  troops  during  the  day. 


428  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 

1807.  Auchmuty  had  asked  him  through  Whittingham  to 
shift  his  headquarters  to  the  Plaza  de  Toros  at  once  ;  ' 
but  the  General  decided  not  to  move,  hoping  that  [ 
further  intelligence  might  reach  him  during  the  night.  I 
July  6.      At  half-past  six  on  the  following  morning  Whitting-  t 
ham  was  dispatched  with  an  escort  of  forty  mounted 
and  dismounted   men  to   find    the   Reserve  under 
Colonel  Mahon,  and  to  order  him  to  move  at  once  to 
the  Corral.    Mahon,  pursuant  to  his  directions,  had 
marched  from  Reduction  on  the  previous  day,  and 
finding  the  bridge  over  the  Chuelo  intact,  had  crossed  ' 
that  river  at  five  in  the  evening,  and  encamped  on  the  1 
northern  bank  within  two  miles  of  the  Residencia. 
Having  delivered  the  message  to  him,  Whittingham 
turned  next  to  the  Residencia  itself,  where  he  found 
Major  Nichols  of  the  Forty-fifth  entirely  confident  of 
his  power  to  hold  his  own,  but  unable  to  give  any 
news  of  Craufurd.    As  if  to  verify  Nichols's  words, 
the  Spaniards  actually  brought  up  cannon  to  batter  the 
Residencia  while  Whittingham  was  there,  whereupon 
the  Major  sallied  out  with  a  party  of  the  Forty-fifth, 
drove  them  away  with  a  single  charge?  and  brought  off 
two  howitzers  in  triumph.    But  meanwhile,  very  soon 
after  daylight,  a  letter  had  reached  Whitelocke  from 
General    Liniers.     The   Spanish    commander,  after 
stating  that  he  had  captured  General  Craufurd  and 
considerably  over  a  thousand   prisoners,  offered  to 
restore  them  and  all  the  British  soldiers  captured  since 
Beresford's  first  embarkation,  if  Whitelocke  would 
withdraw  all  his  troops  from  the  province  ;  adding  that 
if  the  offer  were  refused  he  would  not,  in  view  of  the 
exasperation  of  the  populace,  be  answerable  for  the  !| 
safety  of  the  prisoners.     Whitelocke   rejected  the 
proposal,  but  suggested  a  truce  of  twenty-four  hours 
for  collection  of  the  wounded  :  after  which  he  and  ! 
Gower  rode  down  to  join  Auchmuty  at  the  Plaza  j 
de  Toros. 