                                          Satomi TAKAOKA / UrbanScope Vol.12 (2021) 17-25


      These contributions were mentioned as ‘voluntary contributions59’ in the records of the council of Berlin and the
Berliner Landwehr organisation commission. The ‘voluntary contributions’ were paid by the inhabitants exempted
by councillors from military service in the Berliner Landwehr60. In the records of the council and commission,
the details of these voluntary contributions were not written. In contrast, the contribution notices for the Berliner
Landwehr in the Berlinische Nachrichten provide a numerical and realistic picture of such voluntary contributions.
Eventually, wealthy inhabitants of Berlin evidently paid many ‘voluntary contributions’ to the municipal fund of
Berlin that only their own district councillor knew about, and thereby obtained exemption from military service,
as before the reforms. After many voluntary contributions were collected at the end of June 1813, the council of
Berlin and the Berliner Landwehr organisation commission permitted Germans outside Prussia to join the Berliner
Landwehr and paid their fees using the budget already set aside for the Berliner Landwehr and these contributions
to the municipal fund of Berlin61. Prussian military reforms introduced the Landwehr as a new military system based
on the participation of all inhabitants; however, ironically, the wealthy inhabitants only became funders, not actual
soldiers, of the new military system.

Conclusion

     As part of the Prussian military reforms, from 1807 Prussia introduced the Landwehr and universal conscrip-
tion system, which aimed to draft all able inhabitants into the military, and officially abolished mercenaries and
exemption from military service. These reforms have often been discussed as one of the most important factors in
the victory that resulted in the unification of Germany. Such claims are based on major historical materials related
to the Prussian government and the reformers. In contrast, this study reviewed the local Landwehr through a survey
of articles in a local newspaper, the Berlinische Nachrichten. This newspaper printed several articles related to the
Berliner Landwehr during the Wars of Liberation. In particular, this study analysed the recruiting notices, financial
reports, and contribution notices for the Berliner Landwehr in the Berlinische Nachrichten.
     Considering the recruiting notices and financial reports on the Berliner Landwehr published in the Berlinische
Nachrichten, the number of recruits from Berlin and the budgets for the Berliner Landwehr were insufficient. The
contributions to the Berliner Landwehr helped to compensate for the lack of recruiting and the insufficient budget.
These contributions, which were collected from the municipal fund of Berlin, were different to other contributions
published in the Berlinische Nachrichten. Whereas most other major contributors were private, the contributions
collected by city councillors from each district in Berlin accounted for more than half of the total amount of contri-
butions. In addition, the contributions from each district were highly anonymous and only district councillors knew
who donated and how much. According to the records of the municipal council of Berlin and the Berliner Landwehr
organisation commission, a portion of these contributions to the Berliner Landwehr were recorded as ‘voluntary
contributions’ and the city councillors were qualified to exempt the inhabitants of their districts from military ser-
vice. Such exempted inhabitants had to pay voluntary contributions to the municipal fund of Berlin. The inhabitants
of Berlin paid a few thalers to obtain military exemption and citizenship before 181362 and could readily pay the
voluntary contributions. In addition, the council and commission allowed Germans to join the Berliner Landwehr to
cover the lack of recruits from among inhabitants of Berlin, and paid them using funds that included contributions
collected for the Berliner Landwehr, according to the records of the council and commission. As a result, the council
and commission unequally called up inhabitants of Berlin to the Berliner Landwehr, suggesting that the Prussian
military reforms were not fully implemented in Berlin.
     Assuredly, the Prussian military reforms created foundations for the new military systems to mobilise the full
potential of the people without exemption from military service, such as the Landwehr, and many historians have ex-

59. Landesarchiv Berlin, A Rep. 000-02-01. Nr. 2184, Bl. 105-107.
60. Landesarchiv Berlin, A Rep. 000-02-01. Nr. 2184, Bl. 106.
61. Landesarchiv Berlin, A Rep. 000-02-01. Nr. 2184, Bl. 150-151.
62. Canton-Verfassung, in Gädicke, Lexicon von Berlin, S. 99-100.

                                                                    24
