                                                     UrbanScope Vol.12 (2021) 17-25




Article 1.
Prussian Military Reforms and the Berliner Landwehr in Local
News during the Wars of Liberation, 1813-1815
Satomi TAKAOKA*
Keywords: Prussian military reforms, Landwehr, Wars of Liberation, Berlinische Nachrichten



   Abstract


         The Prussian military reforms introduced two new military systems—the Landwehr (1813) and a universal conscription
   system (1814)—with the principle that all able-bodied adult men were obligated to perform military service, which continued
   until the end of World War I. Before the Prussian military reforms, the Canton system called inhabitants of Prussia into military
   service from 1733 to 1813, while the inhabitants of many cities, including citizens, were exempted from military service. In
   addition, nobles obtained exemption from military service but joined the military as officers. Eventually, the Prussian army
   by and large mixed peasants and nobles in the late 18th century. The Prussians’ defeat of Napoleon and the French army in
   1806 allowed noble military reformers to transform the Canton system. Consequently, the King of Prussia abolished exemp-
   tion from military service and introduced two new military systems, based on participation by all inhabitants. These top-down
   military reforms by the noble officers were often considered ‘reforms from above’ and were one of the important factors in
   victory and the unification of Germany, according to major historical materials, such as Prussian government records and the
   memoranda of reformers. However, this study reviews the local Landwehr through a survey of articles in a local municipal
   newspaper, the Berlinische Nachrichten. During the Wars of Liberation (1813–1815), the municipalities of each city and Kreis
   were bound by duty to recruit their inhabitants for the Landwehr without exemption from military service and to obtain a
   budget for their Landwehr. Therefore, the Berlinische Nachrichten printed several articles related to the Landwehr in Berlin.
   In particular, this study focuses on recruiting notices, financial reports, and contributions notices for the Berliner Landwehr
   published in this newspaper, and it discusses the local Landwehr as one part of the Prussian military reforms.


Introduction

      In 1807, Prussia began implementing top-down military reforms by the noble officers. These reforms aimed
to create a new military system based on participation by all inhabitants in Prussia. Before the Prussian military
reforms, the Canton system conscripted Prussian inhabitants. Recruiting inhabitants was important to maintain a
standing army. Nobles enlisted as officers in the army although they were exempted from military service. Mean-
while, inhabitants of many cities, including citizens, were exempted from military service. Therefore, by and large,
the Prussian military consisted of peasants and noble officers until the reforms. In 1806, Prussia’s momentous defeat
of Napoleon and the French army led noble military reformers to make changes to the military system. Scharnhorst,
one of the most significant military reformers in Prussia, announced in 1807 that ‘all inhabitants of the state [were]
its born defenders1’. Military reformers, following Scharnhorst’s ideal, aimed to create a new military system with-
out exemptions. Accordingly, Frederick William III, the King of Prussia, first ordered all cities and Kreise (govern-
mental rural districts) to recruit about 3% of inhabitants into the Prussian Landwehr, and abolished exemption from



1. Marion Schulte, Preußische Offiziere über Judentum und Emanzipation (1762-1815), Berlin/ Boston 2018, S. 217.

* Doctoral Student, Department of World History, Graduate School of Letters, Kansai University.
  E-mail: satomilweis@gmail.com
