

said, that as the affairs of the East India Company were already under the consideration of a committee of that house, which was then employed in investigating them, he would move, That the Petition be referred to the said committee.

said, although he should be inclined to bow to any recommendation of that committee, yet he could not help thinking the most fair way would be to refer this Petition to a special committee, as it appeared to be a question of very great importance, in order to ascertain whether the East India Company were preferring a claim or a demand. He thought that as such a full investigation was necessary, the hon. gent. who presented this petition ought to have given the house a regular notice of his intention to refer it to the consideration and investigation of a committee. He did not wish to enter into any discussion of East India affairs at present, but he thought that when the house were to be induced to agree that such a sum should be given away, the case ought not to be submitted to them in such a thin house. In the most common cases such notices had uniformly been given, and was it not absurd to endeavour, under other circumstances, to make the house sanction and encourage a demand to that extent upon the public? He hoped, therefore, that a regular notice would yet be given, for he could not so permit one shilling of his constituents to go towards the East India company. He had been formerly one of the East India committee, and then thought, as he still did think, that that company was a monopoly that ought not long to exist. This was a question which would 73 yet come to be discussed; but he could not permit any question of this kind to go on without reminding the house of the fallacious hopes that had been held out, that the East India Company would be able to assist the funds of this country upon a future occasion. In what way, he would ask the house, were they to do it r Had they any means of doing so when such claims were submitted? The Committee now silting would, no doubt, make out their Report in the most judicious manner; but unless he should sec vouchers and accounts laid before the public, in the same manner as private merchants would do were they submitting similar claims, and not the mere statement that they had resources here and resources in India, he for one could not be convinced of their actual capability. Having had access to their papers, he could not help thinking this monopoly was a drawback to the general trade of the country, by affording the Americans to draw off one half of our trade, and tended to prevent it in future; from becoming more extensive. He thought it was, therefore, the indispensable duty of ministers to inquire, whether, under such circumstances, they should propose to parliament to renew the company's charter, which would expire in 1811? He was one of those who would never consent to the renewal of that charter for another three years after, that year, provided he had then a scat in that house.