

thought the house under obligations to his hon. friend, for the manner in which he had brought this subject forward. Being a member of the committee for inquiring into the affairs of the India company, he had an opportunity of seeing documents which enabled him to form an opinion, that the Company never would be able to repay the loan they were now calling on parliament to grant. There was a deficit in the present year's account of no less than three millions; and what reason was there to suppose that the Company would not come next year and call for another loan? If the money they called for now was granted, it must be considered as a gift, and not as a loan. It, therefore, was necessary immediately to consider whether the monopoly ought to be renewed. The Company was now carrying on a trade without any surplus revenue, by borrowing money at a high interest. Their trade was daily decreasing, and the Americans had become their rivals in it. Some means should be devised to stop this Ame- 74 rican trade, in order that it might be transferred to British subjects. With an annual loss in trade, the company was obliged to borrow money annually to pay the dividends to the holders of stock. Therefore, until the monopoly was entirely put an end to, there ought to be a limitation of stock, and a stop put to the payment of dividends, unless the same could be paid out of the profits.

considered the sum now demanded as nothing less than a gift; and as Ireland must be obliged to contribute a part of it, he would now lay his claim on behalf of Ireland, to a revision of the act by which Ireland gave up her right to any part of the trade to India, in order that she might receive remuneration for her losses in consequence of this monopoly. This was the opinion of all the commercial bodies in Ireland, who felt that if they contributed anything towards relieving the East India company, they ought to have a share in the trade.

declared that he had no wish to take the house by surprise, or to pass any measure of importance in a thin house; but he conceived that many of the observations just made, had a tendency to prejudice the company in the eyes of the public, and therefore he would make a short reply to them. With respect to the trade of the Americans to India, the public laboured under a great mistake. The situation of Europe was such as necessarily to check the extent of our Indian trade; and the neutral state of the Americans enabled them to derive advantages from that trade, which it was not in the power of the company to prevent. Whenever this case should come to be fully discussed before the house, sufficient evidence would be shewn to remove every prejudice that might exist on the subject. None other could supply the continent of Europe with Indian produce, but the Americans; and it was not the fault of the company that they engrossed so great a share of the trade. With respect to the observations which fell from an hon. gent. (Mr. Creevey,) he did not know how far it was regular for a member of the committee to give an opinion from documents which, in that character, he had access to, and thus prejudice the judgment of the house, before any report was made. The company had the guarantee of parliament to expect that their present request would be granted. He denied that it was to be considered in the light of a gift; and he hoped 75 the house would be of opinion, that the petition ought to be referred to the committee up stairs, as the best qualified to consider the nature of it.