

said, that it was clear, that whatever the company might be able to do at a future period, they were now unable to pay their dividend, and called upon that house to enable them by a sum of money, to be raised upon the country, to supply their deficiency, and enable them to pay the dividend of their particular stock. He thought that before the house agreed to dispose of 2,400,000l. of the public money, the public should know the real state of the company, and be no longer imposed upon by the delusions that had prevailed so long and to such extent. It might be right, or it might be wrong, to comply with the prayer of the petition, but in either case the country had a right to expect that there would be no underhand dealings, and that everything would be carried on, fairly and openly, Whether the total suppression of the company would be a national injury was a very different question, and one he should think it rash for him to go into any opinion upon; but it was a question of no little moment to ascertain, whether even the lending or giving this sum would maintain the East India Company as a solvent company for the national benefit.

said, that there was at present no call for a determination whether it was fit to comply with the prayer of the petition or not. That question must depend upon the Report of the Committee With regard to the complaint of an hon. gent. that no notice had been given, he conceived that it was not customary to require a notice of an intention to present a petition. If indeed there had been any doubt or difficulty with respect to the motion, founded upon it, that might be a good reason for a delay in the proceeding. But the whole that was now proposed was, to put the petition in a state of enquiry, and for that purpose nothing could be so proper as to refer it to the committee actually employed in the investigation of the subject to which it related; and there was no occasion therefore for any notice. The right hon. gent. who spoke last had begged that he might not be considered as pledging himself to any assent to the prayer of the petition by not objecting to this reference. This caution was unnecessary, because nobody could be pledged till the result of 76 the inquiry was known. He did not take notice of this merely to observe that it was unnecessary, but he thought it right to advert to it because the right hon. gent. had given it as his opinion, that it ought to be assumed that this was not a loan but a gift, and that this gift was asked in order to enable the company to make a dividend of 10 per cent. to the holders of their stock from the public money. This, however, was exciting a prejudice against the Company, without any real foundation for it. It was expressly denied that the sum was requested as a gift; but, at all events, facts were stated that required examination. The Company offered to make out that they were to a certain extent creditors of the public; and nobody seemed to deny that some hundreds of thousands were due to them from the country. If we chose to refuse any assistance to the Company in their distress, we ought at least to take care not to contribute to that distress, by withholding from them what of right belonged to them. Whether something more ought not to be done for the Company in their present situation, was a point upon which it would be much better to reserve any opinion till the report of the committee was laid before the house. It was, certainly, a very grave question, even in a national point of view, whether, for want of some aid from the country, under a temporary pressure, the affairs of the Company should be suffered to fall into utter confusion. If they made out a case that called for this aid, and it should be judged adviseable to grant it, could we in justice attach conditions to the grant, which would render it no benefit, but the contrary?