

observed, that the East India company had not come, as some gentlemen imagined, to ask the house for any indulgence but such as had been granted to other mercantile companies, and on former occasions to themselves. They had, some years ago, applied for and obtained similar relief, which they had invariably returned to the public; and he could not see why they should now be refused assistance, when they shewed the same grounds for it, and had kept their faith so well on former occasions. He denied in strong terms that there had been any attempt on the part of the Company to delude the public, or to keep from them a fair state of their affairs, and deprecated the ingrafting on this subject the question of the policy of throwing open the East India trade. He trusted that when this question came to be discussed hereafter, it would not be canvassed in a mere commercial point of view, but that the whole political bearings of the case would be taken into consideration, both as relating to the welfare of that country, and, in his opinion, to the very existence of this. He would not, however ready he was to enter upon this investigation, trouble the house further on this occasion, than to express his doubts as to the practicability of the export trade to India being carried on by individual exertion, whatever facility opening the intercourse of private traders might afford to the importation of East India goods.

insisted, that there had of late been a total suppression of the East India Company's affairs, and the last budget had only brought them up to 1803–4, since which time not a document on the subject had been produced. Neither were there any documents in support of the petition, and he considered it only fair and reasonable, that before parliament granted any aid, a complete state of the Company's returns, sales, profits, and assets, should be laid before it.

replied, that it was not usual to produce documents in support of the allegations contained in a petition, but that the only reason none were offered in this case was, that they could not be prepared in time for the petition to be presented within the limits prescribed by the house. As to the deficiency of the East 79 India accounts, it was owing to no wish for concealment at home, but arose from their not having been received from India. In reply to the allusion that had been made to a noble lord in the other house, he said, however sanguine his views might have been on some occasions, he had always stated the grounds on which they were founded, and solicited investigation.

in explanation, said, that he meant no more than that the noble lords had been much too sanguine in their calculations.—The motion was then agreed to.

Back to IRISH CLERGY RESIDENCE BILL.

Noticed a typo?| Report other issues (data@parliament.uk)|
