

In this paper, we propose a history of the Paris financial market’s development based on such a broader theoretical framework. We consider the Parquet to be just one (important) element of the Paris securities market. We set out to understand the behavior of all the players involved, and we look into how this behavior gives rise to the existence of different markets in the Paris financial center. Our main hypothesis is that the relationship between the Parquet and the Coulisse was one of complementarity and ‘cooperative competition’ (or co opetition 18), based on the heterogeneity of their microstructures able to satisfy the varying preferences of heterogeneous investors and issuers. We even suggest that the government did not enforce the legal monopoly, which was just one of many organizational tools that shaped the structures of the Parisian financial center. Instead, the government imposed some specific rules on the Parquet, without impeding a dynamic adaptation of the two markets. The birth of the monopoly should then be seen in terms of market police in the light of the ‘legal origin’ of the French institutions 19 rather than as interventionist interference in actual market functioning: under Roman law, ‘public order’ took precedence over private contracts in the name of the general interest when government control and protection was needed. Our framework helps explaining why the regulation favored the official market without the unsatisfactory hypothesis that (captured) governments imposed an absurd organization for long periods, a hypothesis that seems at odds with an otherwise open economy, with the succession of extremely different governments (and even political systems), which all tolerated and often protected the Coulisse, and with the domination of laissez-faire economists. Moreover, this approach helps understand the statement to the formal Senate Finance Committee hearings by the head of the Parquet (the Syndic), Millon d’Ailly de Verneuil, in March 1898: ‘I am convinced that closing the Coulisse would be disastrous [for Paris as a financial center]’ 20.

17 Pirrong, ‘The organization’; idem, ‘A Theory of Financial Exchange’; Biais, Glosten, and Spatt, 
‘Market microstructure’; Madhavan, ‘Market microstructure’. 
18 In line with Brandenburger and Nalebuff, Co-opetition. 
19 La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, Vishny, ‘Law and Finance’. 
20 ‘Je suis convaincu que si l’on supprimait radicalement la Coulisse, on aboutirait à des résultats 
fâcheux’. Verneuil, Finance Committee hearings, March 18, 1898, Senate Finance Committee session minutes, 
Box SG 329, file A.211, CAC Archives. 

In order to examine our hypothesis, we focus on the interdependence between the different aspects of the market microstructures. We identify three categories of organizational changes: changes to the way operations were handled (trading systems, settlement and payment, price list publication); changes to investors’ guarantees; and changes to the listing policies. As we will show, the Parquet’s strength was very much due to obligations concerning pricing methods, restricted access, price publication and investors’ guarantees, which made it a ‘high quality’ market 21. The importance of these characteristics and their balance changed over time. Path dependency played a role. This merits a chronological description.