

problems. It was used for the first time during the 1830-1831 crisis (see Section 3). Although 
this was a move towards a more integrated organization of the CAC, it still took a while for 
change to really take hold: in the 1823 crisis, three agents filed for bankruptcy without 
receiving any help since the CAC was not in danger and it considered their behavior had been 
excessively risky 38. 
The CS was unable to lobby the government effectively enough to maximize monopoly 
profits or simply rule out hostile decisions. For example, it was unable to prevent the decision 
by the Royal Court of Paris in 1823, in a solemn hearing presided by the Justice Minister, to 
reject the previous jurisprudence under which forward contracts were enforced (and then rule 
the investors pay their debts in the event of losses). The Court upheld the ‘exception de jeu’ 
(plea of gambling debts) whereby a debtor was not required to pay on the grounds that he 
gambled. In doing so, it created huge uncertainty on the forward market. Another example of 
jurisprudence to the agents’ disadvantage was the refusal by the commercial courts to 
consider the Common Fund as the property of the CAC: when an agent defaulted, the courts 
included his share in the Common Fund in his assets while refusing to include his debts owed 
to other agents in his liabilities (see, for example, the Cléret bankruptcy in 1824). That 
decision increased the counterparty risk. This demonstrates that the CAC was still unable to 
impose its own rules on the stock market. 
During that initial period, the CS was therefore unable to organize the CAC to take advantage 
of the monopoly or to increase the security of transactions. In actual fact, agents continued to 
cooperate with coulissiers, conducted illegal transactions (either trading on their own account 
or on the forward market), and even disputed certain CS decisions in court. 
The Parquet did not provide any clearly superior organizational features such as strong 
guarantees, efficient settlement or a safe market. What then made it special? According to the 
theoretical literature, two markets can diverge and coexist if both issuers and investors have 
heterogeneous preferences about market quality 39. At the time, differences among issuers 
were neither here nor there, since public debt was almost the only traded asset and the French 
government clearly wrote into the legislation its preference for a transparent market. So at the 
time, a single market was enough. Nevertheless, the increasing diversity of investors after 
1820, with the spread of rentes ownership, justified the gradual differentiation among 
operators: demand from new, uninformed investors led the agents de change to increasingly 
38 To strengthen and step up control over defaulting brokers, the CS imposed common accounting on 
agents de change in the aftermath of the 1823 crash (CS, 14/11/1823). 
39 Schwartz, ed., Global Equity Markets; Seppi, ‘Liquidity Provision’; Coffee, ‘Racing towards the 
Top?’; Gehrig, ‘Competing Markets’. 