

official brokers) tried to maintain its monopoly on stock exchange transactions throughout the 
19 th century by capturing the government’s decisions, but it was so costly that independent 
brokers organized a parallel free market called the ‘Coulisse’. This market is usually seen as 
the most dynamic and innovative part of the financial center. 
Aside from a few (recent) exceptions 12, the historical literature on the Paris financial market 
suffers from two serious shortcomings. First, it relies on frequently flawed sources. There is a 
great deal of easily accessible information on the legal and institutional rules but, as we will 
show, they were not always enforced. Accounts by contemporaries are also easily accessible, 
but they were frequently published in a specific context by interested insiders trying to win a 
debate by writing their own version of history, standard practices and trading traditions. Since 
many of these accounts, in the French case, were produced around 1900 but argued that the 
market’s organization had not changed since the foundation of the Bourse, they painted an 
erroneous picture of the Paris Stock Exchange as a permanent organization lacking 
innovation 13. That literature makes little use of primary sources. However, the newly 
classified Compagnie des Agents de Change 14 archives provide an understanding of actual 
market players’ behavior and motivations, and explain how the organization of the Paris 
Bourse changed over the 19 th century. 
The second drawback with the historical literature on Paris stock exchanges is that it uses an 
oversimplified conceptual framework. In particular, it frequently focuses on competition 
among brokers in a specific organized exchange and overlooks competition among exchanges 
in a financial center 15. Even though the best studies overcome this shortcoming in the case of 
the New York Stock Exchange 16, the approach is still dominant, and clarification is needed for 
an understanding of the Parisian financial market. Furthermore, the literature still concentrates 
on one aspect of the services provided by exchanges, namely liquidity, and understates the 
importance of others, such as the fairness of prices, protection against broker defaulting, price 
11 Vidal, Traité; Quennouelle-Corre, ‘The Paris Bourse’; Romey, ‘La Bourse de Paris’; White, ‘The Paris 
Bourse, 1724-1814’. 
12 Mainly, Verley, ‘Organisation of National Financial Market’. 
13 See, for example, Aupetit, Brocard, Armagnac, Delamotte, and Aubert, Les grands marchés; Boissière, 
La Compagnie; Boudon, La Bourse; Gibson, The Stock Exchanges; Neymarck, De l’organisation des marchés; 
Robert-Milles, La Bourse de Paris; Vidal, Traité ; idem, The History. 
14 Lagneau-Ymonet and Riva, ‘Aux sources de l’histoire boursière’. 
15 Gehrig, ‘Competing Markets’. 
16 Davis, Neal, and White, ‘The Highest Price Ever’; Brown, Mulherin, and Weidenmeier, ‘Competing 
with the NYSE’; White, ‘Competition among the Exchanges’. 

manipulation and fraud; all characteristics alleged to deeply affect market quality by recent (mostly theoretical) financial literature 17.