

the crisis. The new powers granted to its successor, the CS, were to be exerted against agent Pillot on May 26, 1817. The mutual guarantee principle was discussed very early on as a solution to the interdependent risks borne by agents and to underpin the reputation of the market as a whole. Given that agents were responsible for payment (or delivering securities) to their clients and their fellow brokers 32, they were exposed to bankruptcy if their clients defaulted. This idiosyncratic risk threatened to trigger a systemic risk if a broker’s defaulting were to affect the solvency of his peers, setting off domino defaulting endangering the entire market. This risk was especially great on the Paris market because of the importance of forward operations 33. In the late 1810s, a collective action to introduce a mutual guarantee to ward off the domino effect was rejected by most agents on moral hazard grounds 34. In 1818, when a serious crisis provoked the bankruptcy of three agents and serious problems for many of their peer-creditors, the CAC obtained a 5 million francs loan from the Bank of France on the basis of a joint guarantee by all the agents 35. A group of bankers also agreed to buy rentes on the market (thus limiting bear pressures) only on the promise, guaranteed by all the agents’ wealth, that none of them would go bankrupt 36. The agents quickly reimbursed the Banque and the other creditors with advances of different amounts depending on their wealth and revenues 37 and became the final creditors of their defaulting peers. This crisis proved important since it was the first case of a collective guarantee (albeit short term) and because a Caisse d’Amortissement (sinking fund) was created to reimburse on a mutual basis the amounts the agents advanced to their failed colleagues. The fund was financed by the payment of a stamp duty on the operations of all agents. In 1822, the CAC chose to make this fund permanent under the name Caisse Commune (Joint Fund). The Joint Fund received the proceeds of a 10% stamp duty on brokerage commissions and paid a bi-annual sum of up to three million francs to the newly created Fonds Commun (Common Fund). The Joint Fund also provided for the CS’s expenses and gave it leverage in institutional development. In addition to the expenses for the CS and the payment to the Common Fund, the Joint Fund paid an equal dividend to all the agents. The Common Fund was later used to manage the counterparty risk by providing loans to agents with short-term liquidity and solvency

32 The ‘bonne fin’ of their operations. 
33 Riva and White, ‘Danger on the exchange’. 
34 See, for example, the discussions surrounding the Pillot bankruptcy at the CAC meetings in 1817. 
35 Only the Treasury agreed to lend without a collective guarantee on that occasion. 
36 Regarding that episode, see CS, 18/11/1818 and 23/11/1818; AG, 4/12/1822. 
37 The Treasury and three agents who initially lent to the CS. Gontard argues that the Fonds Commun 
(Common Fund) was created to pay back the loan the CAC received from the Ministry of Finance (Gontard, M., 
Le Bourse de Paris, p. 154). In fact, this loan was reimbursed as early as December 8, 1818 (CS, 8/12/1818). 