

(and with the agents de change) in a bilateral manner and frequently acted as dealers, their 
operations were neither public nor transparent, but allowed for more flexibility and 
immediacy. On the opposite, the Parquet’s transparency and pure brokerage represented an 
investment in reputation aimed at investors as well as public opinion and the political sphere. 
In order to compete in the provision of liquidity, the Parquet had the fixing followed every 
day, if necessary, by various in-pit open outcry auctions, which allowed for intra-day 
speculation by market-makers. Nevertheless, the main characteristic of the centralized price 
setting mechanism would never be modified. 
Another rule designed to protect the public was the direct management of the listing policy by 
the government (the Minister of the Interior through to 1816 and subsequently the Minister of 
Finance). The law prescribed that only French duly issued securities could be admitted to the 
official list. The Chambre Syndicale (now the CS, the new governing body of the Compagnie 
des Agents de Change from 1816) passed on each application to the Minister for a decision. 
These restrictions led to the publication of other lists by unofficial brokers, and to the 
emergence of the Coulisse as a ‘second class’ market. As early as 1814, some agents de 
change protested against these ‘illegal traders’ (courtiers illégaux) 26, and asked to be 
authorized to list foreign bonds. The Spanish government’s official request, the increase in 
transactions of some foreign (mostly Neapolitan and Spanish) government bonds, and the 
crisis they suffered because of unregulated speculation in 1823 led the government to agree to 
consider listing them on the official market in November of the same year 27. 
Three other solutions were discussed to strengthen the security of transactions and market 
stability: restrictions on the entry of new agents de change, improved selection of agents, and 
a mutual guarantee system for agents. 
The numerus clausus of agents de change had been revoked in 1791. In the early years of the 
re-established monopoly, the number of agents rose without any clear limit. In 1816, the 
numerus clausus was set at 60 and the agents obtained the property of their seats at the Paris 
Bourse (or ‘office’). It has frequently been argued that the numerus clausus and the agents’ 
property rights were created for budgetary reasons but the government never sold the rights to 
the agents. The ‘cautionnement’ – the guarantee deposited with the Treasury – was only set in 
1818 (Decree of January 9, 1818), and it actually paid interest to the agent, because its 
purpose was not to prevent entry but to limit moral hazard. In 1816, the number of seats was 
26 CS, 20/6/1814. 
27 By way of an exception, Neapolitan bonds had been listed earlier. 

considered too high by the agents to make a decent living from their trade, and some seats 
remained vacant 28. 
Actually, there were two main reasons for the numerus clausus: it was necessary for an 
efficient open outcry system and it was a condition for mutual control among the agents. 
First, for open outcry to produce truly fair prices, all the brokers had to be physically face to 
face to compare their order books. Consequently, their number had to be restricted, and this is 
still the case on all stock exchanges using an outcry process 29. 
Possibly more importantly, the numerus clausus was imposed soon after many agents had 
defaulted in the space of a few years, on the basis that mutual knowledge and control was a 
condition for solvency control and curbing risky behavior. The strict selection of candidates 
for the position of agent de change was also deemed necessary to limit moral hazards in a 
group whose reputation depended on the behavior of all its members. It was first organized by 
the government (assisted, in principle, by the Paris Chamber of Commerce). The failure of 
that solution was acknowledged in 1816 due to the high rate of bankruptcies among agents 
during the Empire. Selection was transferred to each individual agent in 1816 when 
ownership of their seats was guaranteed. Yet following a discord between Finance Minister 
Corvetto and the CS, selection was transferred to the latter in 1818 subject to ultimate 
approval by the Minister, even though each agent could still propose candidates for his own 
seat. Selection henceforth gradually improved and mutual social control developed throughout 
the century, under CS 30 supervision to ensure orderly market operations. 
The 1816-1818 change was crucial since it transferred key powers to the CAC and especially 
to the CS, which became responsible for the liquidity-security balance. The former 
Committee had been petitioning unsuccessfully for years for more power over the selection of 
agents, the definition of the Bourse’s in-house rules, policing operations 31, and confirmation 
of the monopoly and ownership rights of the agents over their seats. It obtained these 
guarantees and powers by convincing the government that it could efficiently supervise the 
agents. The Committee argued that the CAC had satisfactorily proved its efficiency by 
striking off an agent (Dufresne) in December 1815 and successfully reining in the spread of 
28 The existing agents de change wanted their number to be reduced to 50, and strongly opposed the 
subsequent appointments (CS, 22/9/1817 and 22/10/1817). 
29 Baker, ‘The Social Structure’. 
30 For example, the minutes of the CAC General Assembly (AG), CAC Archives, 29 Nov. 1841 (now 
quoted as AG, dd/mm/yyyy) state that the CS must watch over the private life of the agents. 
31 Policing came under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of the Interior, causing agents to fear interventions 
based on public order considerations. 