

unleashed competition among the agents, particularly in terms of commission fees and, in 
turn, it weakened the financial structure of both the CAC and the brokerage houses. 
In the immediate aftermath of the crisis, the long-standing (since 1861) head of the CAC 
(syndic), Moreau, was criticized for his handling of it and especially for trying to force all the 
agents into a position of solidarity to repay the 80 million franc loan. In actual fact, his 
actions had been perfectly consistent with his twenty-year active policy for the CAC to 
protect investors from losses in all crises (except the Leperche bankruptcy of 1868). Moreau’s 
detractors, who had constantly emphasized the moral hazard aspect of his policy 82, convinced 
the CAC general assembly not to follow Moreau and the CS anymore. They also made it clear 
that the 1882 bailout was the last one: ‘it [the CAC] solemnly protested against maintaining 
any principle of solidarity’ 83. Following that decision, Moreau resigned. Over the next few 
years, the CAC did indeed prove more reluctant to pay for its members’ problems and tougher 
in its negotiations with the banks, which had to accept their share of the losses (Vuaflart case 
in 1886). In the Bex case, in 1888, it refused to pay anything more than the spot transaction 
debts and let the agent go bankrupt. 
Our view is that the restriction on solidarity within the CAC may well have been rational from 
the point of view of some agents for whom solidarity was costly. However, it prompted the 
Parquet’s decline since the security resulting from that solidarity was one of its major 
competitive advantages over the Coulisse. The new policy, which led to increased 
competition and decreased cooperation within the CAC, was finally rejected in 1892 when 
Hart, the Syndic who had succeeded Moreau, was removed, and solidarity among agents was 
reinstated (as shown by the 1895 failures) 84. 
The reason for this return to full solidarity and the guarantee to investors is to be found in the 
interaction between the government and the Parquet. The government constantly made clear 
its preference for maintaining a market structure including a strictly organized and secure 
market, despite pressure from the dominant laissez-faire economists (such as P. Leroy 
Beaulieu) to abolish the monopoly. Its conviction was upheld by the 1889 Panama and 
Comptoir d'Escompte crises, which reawakened fears about speculation. More importantly, 
the government's position was the political upshot of the development – in a country where 
male universal suffrage was introduced in 1848 – of a middle class of investors who 
82 See, for example, AG, 28/7/1882, and 9/7/1883. 
83 AG, 9/7/1883. 
84 The change actually started back in 1890, when Verneuil, a nephew of Moreau and future Syndic (from 
1896 to 1913) entered the CS. From then on, Verneuil became the Syndic’s alter ego and took part in many 
negotiations. Bertaux, another long-standing member of the CS (and future Minister), was also an active 
supporter of the change. 