

prioritized keeping their retirement savings safe and feared the asymmetries of size and information they felt they would suffer on a less regulated market. This is also consistent with the limited development of collective management under investment funds or even life insurance 85. Before the re-establishment of the full guarantee by the Parquet, the government tried to adapt regulation to stabilize the market in a move that unwittingly favored the Coulisse. The first step was the legalization of forward operations in 1885. It was good news for the market as a whole since it ended the uncertainty recreated by the 1882 judges’ decisions. However, the advantage went to the Coulisse since, except for the 1882 crisis, the Parquet had already obtained a more favorable jurisprudential record 86. The second step was the legal recognition of Coulisse transactions on unlisted securities by a ruling of the French supreme court of appeal, also in 1885. This restricted the Parquet monopoly to officially listed securities. After the 1889 crisis, the government decided to step up the regulation of the Parquet. For the first time, a decree regulated the transactions and ratified the Parquet's new internal rules in 1890. The government also asked the Parquet to extend its list, which led to the creation of a second list of medium-sized firms. In exchange for their stricter regulation and extended service, the agents de change could ask the courts for the enforcement of their rules, reducing uncertainty. This move supported the monopoly, but it also increased the regulatory burden that the Parquet faced and did not hinder the development of the Coulisse, which was taking advantage of the 1884-1885 regulations and developing forward and option contracts on many securities listed on the official list. Moreover, it kept trading many listed securities at the evening session it held in the lobby of Crédit Lyonnais 87 until the Parquet managed to get the police to close it. Beside the Crédit Lyonnais, most large banks strongly supported the Coulisse, among other things because of its key role on the primary market for the securities they issued (the coulissiers, as merchants, were entitled to buy huge blocks of securities on their own account from banks, an operation forbidden to the agents). Given the Parquet’s institutional weakness and these pressures, the government switched to the liberal view of a free market of open competition between the two organizations. That view was put into law by the 1893 Budget, which recognized the coulissiers' operations even on listed securities 88.

85 Hautcoeur, ‘Efficiency, competition and the development of life insurance’. 
86 Lagneau-Ymonet and Riva, ‘Les opérations à terme’. 
87 Crédit Lyonnais, a major operator on both the primary and secondary markets, set great store by the 
Coulisse’s evening session held in its lobby since it could extract valuable information from it for its own 
operations. 
88 Hautcoeur, Riva and Rezaee, ‘How to regulate a financial market?’ 