

The 1882 crisis and the high number of new agents de change entering the CAC in its wake 
also weakened the Parquet’s cohesion by unleashing competition among brokers, particularly 
in terms of commissions. The CS fixed the minimum commissions for official brokers, but the 
latter were able to circumvent the corporative order through the half-commissions they gave 
to the remisiers (intermediate brokers) and to banking operators who put business their way. 
The half-commissions became so huge that the net part of the commission retained by the 
official stock brokers was not sufficient for them to build the wealth and the reserves they 
need in the event of a crisis, as an important part of the guarantee the agents gave to both 
clients and colleagues. Furthermore, the liquid reserves were employed in contangos (short 
term credit to forward market speculators wanting to postpone their positions) and hence lent 
flexibility to the functioning of the Bourse. The enforcement of the minimum commissions 
fixed by the CS was a priority of the new Syndic de Verneil. From 1894 onwards, he upheld 
that maintaining these minimum commissions was a prerequisite for the CAC’s ‘revival’ 
following the 1893 defeat and for ‘the action for the consolidation and the reorganization of 
the monopoly’ 89 to the extent that it would enable the re-establishment of the full common 
guarantees over the transactions. 
The attempts at extensively changing the rules during the period point to how complex and 
intense competition among Parisian exchanges was. The bipolar organization relied not so 
much on the Parquet’s legal monopoly of a market segment as on well-differentiated markets 
whose microstructures provided services tailored to different clienteles. Any change in one 
market’s microstructures changed the market shares. When the Parquet, hit by the 1882 crash, 
decided to stop providing as generous a guarantee as before, it forsook a key element of its 
comparative advantage. This prompted a shift by investors towards the Coulisse and 
regulatory moves by the government, which increased the Parquet’s regulatory burden (1890) 
and deprived it of its legal advantages (1885 and 1893). The 1893 tax revenues showed that 
the Coulisse had two-thirds of Parisian market share in traded volumes, hardly the position of 
a competitor hurt by a dominant monopoly. 
The 1893 regulation would probably have seen the Parquet slip further, since its stricter 
regulation put it at a competitive disadvantage. But another shock caused a swing in the 
opposite direction: the ‘gold mines’ crash of 1895. In previous years, the Coulisse had listed a 
great number of new gold mines operating in the recently colonized Transvaal, which did not 
meet the Parquet listing criteria. That period of intense speculation ended with a sharp drop 

89 Cf. AG, 16/12/1895.

and with the failure of a high number of investors and coulissiers. This reopened the regulatory debate.

### 6. 1898-1914: The monopoly strengthened and challenged