

41 In 1834, for example, 42 agents asked for increased guarantee deposits to be made in the Joint Fund by 
those conducting forward transactions on the Spanish rente, the main speculative security on the market (AG, 
6/10/1834). The CS asked for similar protection during the canals and limited equity partnership bubbles in 
following years, signaling its efforts to the government. In 1844, the CS switched from a monthly to a bi 
monthly settlement to reduce the risks of forward operations at each settlement date. In 1851-1852, it cooperated 
with the Bank of France against the bull market and required from agents de change a guarantee deposit of 150 
francs per share (around one-third of their nominal value) for forward transactions, a decision it was soon proud 
of (AG, 15/12/1852). 
42 Nevertheless, CAC general assembly debates on that bankruptcy show that the CAC was still divided 
over a collective guarantee (e.g. AG, 18/11/1845). 

guidelines to the CS. It nevertheless recommended that the latter be ‘prudent’ in its decisions 43. When the limited equity partnership boom started in the mid-1830s, the CS was unable to admit their shares onto the official list given the absence of Ministry authorization, and forbade agents de change from trading them on the Parquet without its explicit approval. It then developed a body of legal and economic requirements that the partnerships had to satisfy to have their shares traded on the Parquet. Immediately, it published an unofficial list for them 44. In 1840, it adopted a definitive procedure for these shares 45. Moreover, the CS refused to list the promesses d'actions (promises of shares) that the railway companies had issued before obtaining the concessions they had asked for 46. That ‘prudence’ created the scope for an alternative market of limited equity partnership and railway securities on the Coulisse. In the late 1830s, the Coulisse started broadening the range of securities in which it traded. The agents de change still traded in unlisted securities in cooperation with coulissiers, and vice versa 47. However, in 1844, the Parquet organized a full second-tier market (the Rez de-Chaussée de la Cote) to contain the Coulisse’s competitive pressures and to quote riskier securities that were not admitted onto the official list 48. In the 1850s, a similar problem affected the listing of private foreign securities. Some were listed on the Parquet following approval by the CS and the Minister of Finance. When, in 1857, these securities became subject to the same taxes as French securities and the government asked the Parquet not to list foreign securities that had not paid the tax 49, many of these securities switched to the Coulisse. The Parquet had gradually developed its control of listing and trading decisions, but had lost out on transactions on unlisted securities.

A last change was more gradual and less visible, but played a major role in the separation of and subsequent competition between the Parquet and the Coulisse: the more efficient organization of settlements and payments. As early as in 1836, the CS set about organizing