

The ‘gold mines’ crash convinced the government that the Coulisse did not provide the 
stability required by a well-functioning market. It decided to reinstate the Parquet monopoly 
and impose new regulations on it. This move re-established the dual organization of the Paris 
financial market. 
The crash came at the worst time for the Coulisse. Its market had expanded rapidly in recent 
years and looked fragile. The political situation was one of growing friction between the 
increasingly socialist left and ultranationalists (cf. the Dreyfus affair). Xenophobic and anti 
Semitic attacks grew against the Coulisse, which had many Jews and foreign – worse, mostly 
German – members. In 1898, the Fleury-Ravarin law required the coulissiers to use the 
intermediation of the agents de change for all officially listed securities, re-establishing the 
monopoly on a stronger basis than ever before. In return, the Parquet had to improve its 
services: maximum commissions were slashed, minimum commissions were scrapped on 
small orders, delivery times were reduced, new pits were created (allowing for some former 
coulissiers to be hired), and the CAC had to provide funding for the Association Nationale 
des Porteurs Français de Valeurs Mobilières (an investors' lobby negotiating mostly with 
bankrupt foreign governments) and the enlargement of the stock exchange building. More 
importantly, ten new agents de change were appointed, solidarity among agents was made 
legally compulsory, and, from 1901, the price of agents de change seats was fixed by the 
government – and kept constant until World War I. 
The Coulisse reeled from the blow. A full 50 billion of its 70 billion franc turnover in 1897 
came from Parquet listed securities, business it would lose 90: its market share fell to one-third 
of Parisian traded volumes. It restructured into two organizations (syndicats), respectively for 
spot and forward transactions (the latter being by far the largest) on unlisted securities. The 
government convinced them to set up much more hierarchical organizational structures based 
on the Parquet model. 

90 AG, 30/4/1898.

Contrary to the ‘government capture’ argument, the Parquet did not view the stricter 
regulation of the Coulisse with satisfaction. Possibly in the light of the failed takeover of the 
1860s, the agents were convinced of the need for a free market as a complement to their own. 
They did not want to get rid of the Coulisse, only to control and dominate it. They accepted a 
modus vivendi in 1901, by which they authorized the Coulisse to continue trading listed 
securities, shared their commissions with the coulissiers and extended their guarantee to these 
transactions. The Parquet’s attitude comes through clearly in the following (privately made) 
statement by the CAC Syndic: 
‘Although our Corporation is an indispensable base for the market because of the 
security it represents, it is not and cannot be active enough to conduct a number of 
businesses’, such that, ‘The duty of the Chambre Syndicale was to search for a system 
which, while strictly respecting the law, would maintain the activity of the Coulisse and 
allow it to do business’ 91. 
But as the Coulisse became more regulated, other markets appeared in the early 20 th century 
providing the flexibility that was disappearing from the Coulisse. An informal and highly 
liquid market for French rentes operated with implicit government approval. Some former 
coulissiers who had moved (nominally) to Brussels kept operating on Parquet listed securities 
in Paris. Others took advantage of a ‘legal loophole’ that allowed them to deal in listed 
securities throughout ‘direct operations’. A new ‘free market’ also developed: not formally 
organized and publishing no list, it probably operated like an OTC and a start-up market. 
Together, these different competitors of the Parquet kept winning a substantial proportion of 
the transactions. Nevertheless, the Parquet’s market share held steady at two-thirds (as 
measured by the tax on stock market operations). The existence of various markets is 
perfectly consistent with our multi-polar framework, and it suggests that the strict regulatory 
framework of 1898 led not only to a Parquet monopoly but also to the development of new 
markets more opaque than the former Coulisse. 
So the 1898 law was not the end of the story, and it would be misleading to focus exclusively 
on it – as much of the literature does – since the Parquet’s competition did not come solely 
from the Coulisse. 
From then on, the main challenge to the Parquet was the growth in the banks’ role in security 
issues and trading. A number of medium-sized banks, loosely organized into the Syndicat des 
Banquiers de Province, circulated lists of bid and ask prices (on SME shares) amongst 
themselves, avoiding the intermediation of any organized market. Competition from deposit 