

government debt in the 1830s, and increased substantially with the transport and later banking revolutions of the 1840s and 1850s. The French stock exchange ended up financing the railroads almost entirely, which alone mobilized investments of around 2% of GDP every year from the 1840s to the 1860s 56. These changes are consistent with our theoretical framework 57. They led to an increase in the heterogeneity of securities traded (from small, innovative firms’ shares to the rente), which made a single market organization less efficient and strengthened the need for different operators. Although the legal monopoly was still in place, the Coulisse in practice developed as a separate market, and the Parquet forsook quoting certain securities in order to focus on the major new issues of the period, among the most important of which were the railways and new joint-stock banks. The Coulisse focused instead on specific products: shares in limited equity partnerships in the 1830s, promises of shares in the 1840s, and foreign private securities in the 1850s. It also competed with the Parquet on the rentes market, especially following the creation of bearer rentes certificates in 1831. That separation can be clearly seen in the business newspapers, which published security prices distinguishing between the Coulisse (the unofficial market) and the Parquet (the official market) as of the late 1820s.

### 4. 1859-1882 The failed ‘takeover’ of the Coulisse

The specialization between the Parquet and the Coulisse that emerged in the late 1830s was accepted by both markets until the end of the 1850s, and the markets looked to be complementary on the whole. Nevertheless, right from the start, the Parquet saw the relationship as a hierarchical one given its official nature. Furthermore, the Parquet’s trading mechanisms, with its special settlement and guarantee measures, led to a separation. The Parquet took advantage of its innovations and reputation to commandeer the high end of the market and extend the list of securities it handled. At the same time, traded volumes on the Parquet skyrocketed (see Figure 1). All these successes were driven by the Parquet’s highly effective and dynamic strategies, but they also prompted an attempt to monopolize the market and oust the Coulisse.

INSERT Figure 1 AROUND HERE

56 Verley P., Nouvelle histoire économique. 
57 See, in particular, Coffee, ‘Racing towards the Top?’. 

As the Paris financial market boomed, cooperation-competition between the Parquet and the Coulisse became increasingly antagonistic towards the end of the 1850s. After a number of coulissiers defaulted during the 1847-1848 crisis (without consequences on the Parquet), the Coulisse reorganized in a more formal structure 58 and also thrived. At the same time, the increasing volumes traded on the Parquet led to a sharp rise in seat prices 59. A number of agents de change took advantage of these high prices to sell their seats, a timely move since agent turnover in the 1850s was by far the highest of the 19 th century 60. The buyers – themselves not yet well established and wealthy bourgeoisie as agents were to become in the ‘Belle Epoque’ – needed high profits in order to earn a sufficient return on their investment, especially since they became highly indebted when buying their seats 61. This led them to indulge in riskier behavior and to petition for the reinforcement of the monopoly when the 1856-1857 crisis hit the market 62, as they felt strong enough to absorb the entire Parisian business. In the past, the Parquet had asked the courts to enforce its monopoly, but without much success (although some rulings were handed down against a few coulissiers, mostly when the government wanted to calm speculative behavior). In 1859, however, the Parquet agreed with the government on both a new regulation and a reinforcement of the monopoly, by which it essentially absorbed the Coulisse’s staff and business without any formal purchase of the Coulisse’s firms. The government had decided to step up financial regulation following the 1856-1857 crisis, and wanted to punish the Coulisse for allowing foreign firms to evade the new tax regulation and issuing requirements that were part of its regulatory drive 63. The CS obtained an extremely harsh ruling against all the leading, most reputable members of the Coulisse 64, just after passing the new internal rules allowing for the Parquet’s expansion 65. In order to run the entire market, the Parquet modified its own organization: new pits were created, new securities were listed (especially foreign private ones), minimum commissions were lowered, new contracts were introduced that existed previously only on the Coulisse (low-prime options in particular), and the monthly settlement was reintroduced (as in the