

In spite of its failure to absorb the entire market, the Parquet still formed an effective and secure segment of the Parisian market. Although it was unable to provide certain specific services, it still dominated the market for most investors and most securities. The reason for its relative decline over this period is found: a) in its avoidance – or neglect – of the period’s fastest growing segment of market, the stocks (especially foreign stocks), and b) in the internal wrangling over the suitable organization for the Parquet following the 1882 crash. The two issues are linked since the choice of an organization was directly related to the constraints on the individual agents’ pursuit of innovative business and the resulting risks. In the 1870s, a financial bubble formed due to speculation on government bonds, followed by a spurt of new banks and financial services firms that the Parquet listed rather too easily. The resulting 1882 Union Générale crash disrupted that financial sector. Union Générale, the most recent of the big banking corporations, went to the wall in the middle of the crash, mainly due to buying back its own shares on the forward market. The crash severely afflicted the Lyon Stock Exchange, where 14 agents de change filed for bankruptcy. In Paris, too, the crisis was serious. Six Parisian agents had to resign and eight more were so badly hit they had to ask for assistance from the CAC. More importantly, the CAC had to borrow 80 million francs from the Bank of France and a consortium of banks in order to meet the January settlement and avoid total collapse. In a recent paper, E. White considers this loan as a proof of the Parquet’s inability to provide the security it promised. We agree that the crash tarnished the Parquet’s reputation, but we do not think it proves it was unsecure or inefficient. First, the Parquet did not cave in, so it actually delivered the security that investors expected. Admittedly, it had to ask for a loan, but the loan was paid back within ten months from the personal wealth of the agents and their relatives. This proves that the only problem the Parquet had was one of liquidity, not solvency, and it bears out that the Parquet had a strong credit standing, a direct result of its integrated organization 76. Moreover, the Parquet dealt with the losses without obtaining a court ruling to make its clients pay for their debts. The agents wrongly believed that the

76 E. White argues that the security provided by the Parquet was indeed limited because the guarantees given by the agents de change had decreased compared to the transaction volumes. Nevertheless, he disregards the agents’ personal wealth, which was the main guarantee for these operations and explains the rapidity of the loan reimbursement as well as the fact that the banks agreed to lend without asking for interest (cf. White, ‘The Crash of 1882’).

previous jurisprudence would convince their debtors to pay. Some debtors did not pay, 
possibly because they were stalling for time, but maybe because some uncertainty lingered 
under the previous jurisprudence. The courts unexpectedly changed the jurisprudence, 
refusing to enforce forward operations and cancelling contracts when debtors entered a ‘plea 
of gambling debts’. The Parquet’s losses from cancelled contracts (including those taken out 
by Union Générale itself 77) amounted to 117 million francs, 84% of the total Parquet losses 
during the crisis. Importantly, this amount is higher than the loan the Parquet asked for, 
suggesting that the loan might not have been necessary had it not been for the uncertainty on 
the forward market 78. So it looks as if the Parquet became the chosen scapegoat because it 
could be blamed for the errors of the entire market and remained reputable enough to 
guarantee a secure end to the crisis. The losses on the Coulisse were doubtless huge, but they 
were not disclosed (although bankruptcies were many). Neither were the government’s 
shortcomings in regulating the financial industry 79. 
We conclude that the 1882 crash does not prove that the Parquet was inefficient. There was 
no sharp drop in the value of agents’ seats following the crash 80, suggesting that new buyers 
did not believe that future earnings would be affected much. Nevertheless, the Parquet’s 1882 
problems damaged investors’ confidence, a problem the Coulisse did not face since it did not 
claim to provide security. The Coulisse was actually able to take advantage of the new 1884 
law on legalizing the unions to organize more formally, allowing it to appear more as a 
structured market and improve the effectiveness of its transactions. 
We will argue here that the main reason for the continuing decline of the Parquet compared to 
the Coulisse in the 1880s was neither the dynamic behavior of the Coulisse nor the inherent 
failings in the Parquet’s organization nor the Parquet’s increasing conservatism (as argued by 
Verley 81). More important was the internal conflict that affected the CAC’s cohesion when 
faced with the crisis. The 1882 crisis affected the CAC’s cohesion in two ways. First, it drove 
the agents to limit the mutual guarantees in order to contain the moral hazard. Second, it 
77 The courts took the line that Union Générale’s forward contracts were not ‘serious’ while the CAC 
argued that the whole market was lending to Union Générale, a bank with a capital stock of 150 million francs. 
The Coulisse was also affected by the crash, although possibly comparatively less, first because its forward 
contracts were less generally deemed secure and also because the coulissiers unilaterally (as argued by the CAC) 
offset their losses against the debts they had with Union Générale (corresponding to the bank’s last shares issue). 
78 Lagneau-Ymonet and Riva, ‘Les opérations à terme’. 
79 The government repeatedly refused to legalize the forward markets in the run-up to 1882, believing that 
the risk of the courts accepting a ‘plea of gambling debts’ would keep speculative behavior in check. Actually, it 
merely created more uncertainty. 
80 The average price fell from 1,600,000 francs for the 1871-1880 period to 1,428,000 1881-1891 for the 
period. Nevertheless, the median price rose from 1,600,000 for the first period to 1,700,000 for the second 
period. Authors’ calculations based on data in box JZ 3, file B. 614, CAC archives. 
81 Verley, ‘Les opérateurs du marché financier’. 