

97 Verley, ‘Les opérateurs du marché financier’. 
98 As Baker shows for the US options market (Baker, ‘The Social Structure’). 

The plan was supported by the CS and the leading agents de change, but was rejected by a 
CAC majority in 1913, save for the transfer of the Parquet to the Palais Royal. Had this 
radical reform gone through, it would probably have extended the transactions conducted by 
agents to security dealership and increased the necessary capital stock held by all agents to 
offset the greater risk (itself a result of greater competition, more risky positions as dealers, 
and the end of solidarity among brokers). This would have threatened the control of small 
agents over their brokerage house and their social position, and they would have lost the 
benefits of the Common Fund’s egalitarian solidarity organization. 
Whatever the government’s attitude might have been had the plan been approved, the very 
debate suggests the agents de change were not in so much of a profitable monopoly situation 
as to protect it against any move, and that the solidarity that the government and investors 
valued so much was actually a substantial liability to many agents. Had World War I not 
broken out soon after, the pressure of the banks and the leading agents de change may well 
have led to the end of the monopoly a few years later. 
Paradoxically, just as Parisian agents de change were considering the advisability of creating 
a new broad-based, private and less regulated market based on the London model, London 
brokers were discussing setting up a new market without jobbers because they were suffering 
from the jobbers’ strong position following the 1909 axing of dual capacity. They ended up 
fixing minimum commissions in 1912 99. These developments were stopped in their tracks by 
World War I, which froze the 1913 positions and gave them the status of ‘Belle Epoque’ 
symbols for generations of brokers and economists. Bear in mind they were only a step in a 
complex transformation. 
Considered from the point of view of our theoretical framework, this period confirms that the 
Parquet remained under pressure from competitors even when it had the benefit of a strict 
legal monopoly. The narrowing in the differences in microstructures between the Parquet and 
the Coulisse led to the emergence of new actors (banks and the ‘free market’). This leads us to 
observe the asymmetry between this period, with less organizational diversity due to the 
regulation of the Coulisse, and the 1880s, when it resulted from a reduction of the Parquet’s 
guarantees affecting mainly small investors. New markets emerged in the 1900s due to a swift 
response by professional investors to a move that affected their operations, something not so 
likely in the other case. 

99 Michie, The London Stock Exchange.

### 7. Conclusion

The Parquet was the center of the Paris securities market in the 19 th century. Its legal 
monopoly is a distinctive feature of the French exchange regulation, but it is not a key 
element of the financial market, as it did not prevent other operators from organizing private 
exchanges or dealing privately in securities. Archives show that the crucial factor in the 
differentiation of the exchanges was their attempts to satisfy the heterogeneous demands of 
investors and issuers. This is in line with recent theories that suggest that the existence of 
different exchanges can emerge as a stable equilibrium in which efficient services are 
provided to market participants. 
Our paper does not set out to measure market efficiency. It analyzes the changes in the market 
microstructures and shows that these changes and the resulting transformations can be 
understood in terms of the above theoretical framework. We describe these transformations as 
the result of ongoing interaction between the government, the Compagnie des Agents de 
Change and its competitors, bankers and coulissiers. That interaction led during most of the 
period to the juxtaposition of two exchanges, whose relationship was one of both cooperation 
and competition, involving the substantial specialization of each market. 
In its early decades, many of the government rules were not enforced and there was little to 
tell official and unofficial brokers apart. It is only when heterogeneousness increased among 
investors that the two groups diverged. After 1830, the monopoly did not stop the Parquet 
from innovating. It introduced major organizational changes, enhancing investors’ guarantees 
and reducing transaction costs. Following a very successful development in the 1850s, it 
attempted to swallow up the Coulisse’s business and establish a true monopoly, but failed 
because of the contradiction between its internal organization and the demand of the 
Coulisse’s clientele. In the wake of the 1882 crisis, the Parquet suffered a substantial decline 
due to its refusal to maintain the guarantees it had previously provided to investors, the 
emergence of new challenges from the deposit banks, and the regulations introduced 
following the crisis, of which the Coulisse took advantage. The Parquet re-emerged at the 
end of the century as the dominant exchange not only because its monopoly was strengthened, 
but also because its very low commissions and highly secure transaction process made it an 
ideal market for a large proportion of investors, and because it was able to re-establish 
complementary relations with the other markets and players. 
The co-existence of different exchanges in the same financial center was actually not unique 
to Paris: in New York, the New York Stock Exchange, the Curb and other exchanges 