

91 AG, 30/4/1898.

banks was even greater since they aspired to supplant the agents de change as advisers (a role 
the agents de change were legally barred from) to middle-class investors and even as 
intermediaries. Although the extent of the (illegal) practice is unknown, it seems that they 
sometimes directly matched buy and sell orders from their clients, avoiding the Parquet 
intermediation (but using its prices). 
On the primary market, the large deposit banks started organizing issues of new securities in 
the 1890s without immediately introducing them on the stock exchange via IPOs as they had 
done previously: they took advantage of their networks to sell the securities directly to 
individual investors 92. Admission to the list was requested only at a later stage, meaning that 
the Parquet lost out on a period of highly active trading. This was very different from the 
London situation where issues were organized by brokers and were held by speculators 
making frequent operations for a long period before they were sold to long-term holders, and 
where the presence of investment funds that regularly rebalanced their portfolios guaranteed 
more liquidity. This may explain a more dynamic spot market in London and the lesser 
volatility of the Paris market during the gold standard period 93. 
The CAC responded quickly to this competition. As early as 1880, the Parquet started 
offering services similar to the banks such as the payment of coupons and safe custodian 
services in cooperation with the Bank of France 94. On the secondary market, the agents de 
change and the banks agreed on the ‘par contre’ in 1895, an agreement by which a bank paid 
commission only on the largest of two matching orders passed to an agent during the same 
session. The Parquet also maintained high half-commissions for banks that provided them 
with orders 95. On the primary market, where no monopoly existed, the agents de change 
organized in the mid-1890s to be able to participate in the most important issues as a group on 
behalf of their clients. In 1894, the CAC general assembly dubbed this participation an 
‘important innovation (…) [that would help to] increase the reputation of our Company and 
(…) help it to rise from the inconsequential situation bankers want to impose on it’. After a 
few years, the CAC was well established in underwriters’ consortiums and it obtained 
conditions similar to those of the largest banks 96. 
These moves suggest that the Parquet was not living on monopoly rents, but had to innovate 
and improve its services in order to maintain its position. Nevertheless, the Parquet also 

92 Bouvier, Le Crédit Lyonnais; Lévy-Leboyer, ‘La spécialisation des établissements bancaires’. 
93 Aupetit, Brocard, Armagnac, Delamotte, and Aubert, Les grands marchés financiers; Hautcoeur and 
Riva, ‘The Paris financial market’. 
94 AG, 18/12/1882. 
95 See CAC general assembly of 1908 and 1910. 
96 AG, 17/12/1894 and 19/12/1904. 

suffered from low profitability. This was the result of the constraints it faced, the decrease in its commissions and the rise in risks. It was not profitable to control almost the entire market for spot transactions: the number of small transactions was very high and commissions were low. Forward operations were potentially more profitable, but they also passed by and through a large number of intermediaries and were spread among a large number of securities, both of which increased costs. Huge positions were accumulated every liquidation period (1 to 1.5 billion francs), creating high risk. One major problem for the agents de change was that the positions accumulated on their market could not be offset on other markets, since Paris was the only or the dominant market for most of the securities, and the new 1898 rules excluded any risk-sharing with the Coulisse. Many agents de change also believed that the monopoly was not profitable because of the strict regulation and the solidarity it imposed on them. Even more important was the incentive problem resulting from the 1901 reform: the fixing of a single, constant price for the agents de change seats pushed the collective, corporative approach to its limits. Previously, the CS had set the price partly on the basis of the brokerage house’s clientele and business. This created incentives for the agents to develop their business. With the 1901 law, however, that incentive disappeared. As it was certainly difficult to get side-payments for such important and official transactions, this may explain why the brokerage houses increasingly became family assets, handed down to the sons or in-laws of existing agents de change, something which contributed to growing conservatism and a lack of entrepreneurship at the Parquet 97. When increased volumes imposed capacity investment, the CS raised the number of pits while maintaining strict control over pricing to prevent a rise in volatility 98. The Parquet did not suffer during the 1904, 1907 and 1911 crises, contrary to other European exchanges and the Coulisse. But the leading agents were keen to take advantage of the need for capacity investment to change the market rules and increase their profitability: the CS proposed transferring the Bourse (Parquet and Coulisse together) from the Palais Brongniart to the Palais Royal (a much larger place) and incorporating it. The idea was for a large bank to be created from the reimbursement of the seat prices and cautionnements by the government. This bank would participate in the primary market. The agents de change would become private brokers and would compete with the coulissiers and other bankers on a free securities market in which the constraints imposed on the Parquet would no longer exist.