

Mr. Yorke

believed the hon. gentleman to be misinformed with respect to the state of The French navy. The hon. gentleman had referred, in proof of this, to the French public accounts. He was himself sufficiently acquainted with the French accounts, to know that it was extremely difficult to obtain from them a satisfactory idea of the amount of any branch of public expenditure. But he could tell the hon. gentleman, that the French had been lately labouring inconceivably to augment their navy; that every month added considerably to it; that at present there were not fewer than twenty-five sail of the line in the Scheldt, and thirty-five ships of the line in the different ports of Holland. At Toulon, Venice, and Genoa they were also building ships to a considerable extent; and he believed their naval force was, upon the whole, little short in the Mediterranean of what it was in the North Sea. If the French were exerting themselves to such an extent, surely we ought to be sufficiently prepared to meet them at all points; if once the naval force was to be lowered, and an exigency arose, it would be difficult to increase it. We ought to be fully pre pared to meet them in all parts of the world. An inferior navy would be a great detriment to this country.

[§](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1812/feb/22/navy-estimates#S1V0021P0_18120222_HOC_28) [Lord Cochrane](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/people/mr-george-cochrane)

hoped, that, as a deviation from mere detail was allowed when

[889](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1812/feb/22/navy-estimates#column_889)
the Army Estimates were in a committee, it would not be entirely out of course to offer a few general remarks while the supply of the Navy was before the House, not with a view to oppose the supply for the ordinary establishment of the navy, but as to the proper application of the enormous sums granted for that service generally, to which nothing could in his opinion, contribute more than that the Board of Admiralty should not be considered as a mere appendage to the minister of the day, and be displaced by every agitation of the political system—thus misapplication of means was rendered perpetual; for, just as the members acquired some knowledge of their complicated duties and of the powers they ought to direct against the enemy, then they were displaced to make room for others of no experience. The observations which he had to address to the chairman, related chiefly to the means of annoying the enemy which the government possessed in a right disposal of the naval force of the country, which at present was totally useless except for the purpose of passive blockades. Had 5,000 men with attendant naval transports been kept in readiness in such a central situation as Minorca, for instance, it would have been impossible for the French to have made any progress on the eastern side of the peninsula; for no sooner should the enemy have laid siege to Tarragona, Valencia, Alicant, or any other place, than their affairs might have been reversed at the other extremity. Rosas, for instance, was within twelve hours sail of Minorca and about eighteen from Alicant, whereas on the other hand it was a twenty-five days march at least from Alicant to Rosas. Comparing the respective populations of Britain and France, it was impossible to think of carrying on an equal warfare in the peninsula. A greater number of men than all the British who were at present there, must perish before it could be possible to drive out the French. The desultory nature of naval warfare was, in his opinion, the best calculated for that purpose, and for this we had the highest authorities in ancient and modern times. If the French, with a contemptible flotilla, could keep this country in alarm, what was our gigantic navy not capable of doing? The whole of France lay at the mercy of the British ministry. Had the enemy a naval superiority and only 10,000 disposable troops,
[890](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1812/feb/22/navy-estimates#column_890)
on what part of the shores of England could people repose in tranquillity? The war as at present conducted could not possibly have a successful termination. It was a great misfortune that the House of Commons listened to nothing which was beyond the sphere of their own knowledge; and when any professional man, like himself, rose up to give information, party was immediately thrown in his teeth; factious motives were instantly imputed, however pure his wishes for the good of his country. He put it to the committee, whether the whole force of this country was not on the alert, and almost concentrated on the coasts of Kent and Sussex, when an invasion was threatened by a contemptible flotilla of the enemy; and if so, what might not be done, if the gigantic naval power of England was to threaten the enemy's shores? It was his sincere opinion, that the whole coast of France was completely at the mercy of his Majesty's ministers. The noble lord next adverted to the coasting trade carried on by France, and which it was in our power to destroy. That trade existed to an extent almost incredible. It was in our power to dismantle their batteries,—to blow up their towers,—and, above all, to destroy that chain of signal-posts, by which a telegraphic communication was kept up from Flushing to Bayonne, and from the south-east point of Spain to Venice. Each of those signal posts could be successfully attacked by ten men, as except in a few situations they were exposed, and seldom had above two or three maimed soldiers to conduct them. He had no interest whatever in forcing those observations on the attention of the committee, and he hoped the right' hon. gentleman would not think them altogether unworthy of his consideration. He should not, he said, attempt at that time to say more; but he trusted that members who were far more capable to do justice to the subject than he could pretend to be, would turn it in their minds, and bring the subject forward, or that his Majesty's ministers would investigate the truth and act accordingly. In either case he was certain attention to the hints he had thus thrown out could not fail of being attended with the most beneficial results to the country. He did not think ministers, in not having attended to the subject, were so much to blame as the House, for they were, or ought to be, the guardians of the public purse; but he was