

[891](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1812/feb/22/navy-estimates#column_891)
sorry to say the practice of the House was to vote estimates to a very great amount without at all troubling themselves to enquire how those estimates were applied. Besides the signal posts he had mentioned, there were placed along the whole coast of Spain many small parties of soldiers in churches, convents, and other buildings, for the purpose of keeping the people of the maritime towns in awe, and passing along supplies to the armies, which supplies it was in our power to intercept, as the only practicable military road was within a pistol shot of the margin of the sea. The smallest assistance would encourage the people to rise upon them. But without such assistance they were afraid to do so, knowing that the French would burn their houses, violate their wives, and murder themselves. This he had seen them do. During all the time he was off Catalonia, the French had barely sufficient force to defend themselves against the natives; and in every enterprise which they undertook they were foiled. It was notorious, however, to all the world, that the attention of ministers was always engaged exclusively on one or two objects, and that they never took an extended view of things. If our commander on that coast had had discretionary powers to supply Figueras, which was the key of Catalonia, with provisions, it could not have been taken by force, for it was impregnable. If government would only act in a proper way, it was impossible that Buonaparte could go on a twelvemonth longer. The noble lord referred to the American war: had ministers during that war, instead of marching large armies through the country, only transported 10,000 men from one place to another, they would soon have laid waste the whole sea coast, and the country must have submitted. He wished the House to reflect on what he had already stated, respecting the reform of the Admiralty court laws; for if they would appropriate one million a year which was nearly the double of what was actually derived from the practices he wished to see abolished, there would be a saving of more than four millions a year to the country on the naval establishment, and the duty would be better performed.

Mr. Hutchinson

deprecated the species of warfare recommended by the noble lord, which he thought would not be productive of the effects he expected. He then adverted to the statement made by the right hon. gentleman (Mr. Yorke)
[892](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1812/feb/22/navy-estimates#column_892)
relative to the appointment of Chaplains and School-masters; and had no hesitation in saying that no qualified person would offer for the latter situation, on account of the smallness of the present salary. Very few ships were provided with schoolmasters, and in those that had them, they were paid by the captain and the young gentlemen. He thought, therefore, that there was no subject more worthy of attention, and he was happy to see that the right hon. gentleman had considered it in that light. The right hon. gentleman had stated the number of chaplains at 39, but he hoped the right hon. gentleman did not mean that that number was sufficient for the navy; and he also hoped that if they undertook the office of schoolmaster, that they might be found able to instruct in the practical parts of navigation, which was so essentially necessary: but he could not help entertaining apprehensions that some difficulty might occur in finding persons so qualified. The hon. gentleman then adverted to the situation of the marine corps, and expressed his regret, that the right hon. gent. had not made any mention of that highly meritorious corps, when he proposed a measure for the relief of the chaplains of the navy. The hon. gentleman said he had stated, on a former occasion, that the pay of the marines' might be increased, without creating any additional expence, by not filling up certain vacancies, which would create a saving equal to the purposes required. He would only add, as an in stance of the unequal footing on which the marine corps were placed, that the senior commandant was not on a footing with the field officers of the same rank in the army, instead of being entitled to look forward to the rank of a general, which, in justice, he ought to be. The marine corps was also deprived of the proportion of field officers; and he should like to know why the right hon. gentleman was not disposed to advise the ministry, or to recommend to the Prince Regent a more equal management. He was not speaking his own sentiments merely on the subject, but those of the whole body of the marines; and he defied the right hon. gentleman to say, with the Memorial from that corps on the table before him, that he was making any statement on behalf of any individual, or from any private view of his own, distinct from the sense and feeling of the entire of that meritorious body of men, on whose behalf he was