

§ MR. CRIPPS: I cannot deny that I did feel most strongly, and that I used every single word that fell from me with perfect sincerity. However, the observations which have just proceeded from the chair have placed me in a difficulty, because the words I used were not intended to offer any insult to the hon. Member for Nottingham, but were wrung from me, they being to the effect that I could place no more credence in his observations. I certainly did use those words, and if that language 298 were unbecoming a gentleman, I should feel bound to make atonement for it. No gentleman who knows me will say that that language arose from want of temper on my part, or that, if I saw reason to make an explanation for the use of it, I should be influenced by a wish to avoid those consequences which are supposed to be due from one hon. Gentleman to another. I should like to know what the opinion of the House generally is, for I have heard some hon. Members say that I used strong language, and others, that the language I used was justifiable under the circumstances. With respect to hostile intentions, I can assure the House that I entertain none towards the hon. Member for Nottingham.

§ VISCOUNT CASTLEREAGH: I hope the hon. Gentleman will explain to the satisfaction of the House the words he has used. I have no doubt that he has stated that which he believes to be perfectly true; but in so doing he has offended the feelings of an hon. Member of this House. I think the same facts might have been conveyed to the House in different and not such strong language. I am anxious to see the deliberations of this House carried on in a manner befitting its character, and so as to set an example to the legislative assemblies of other countries. Let it not go forth, so soon after recent occurrences, that on the consideration of this petition two hon. Members were not sufficiently special constables as to be able to take care of themselves. I hope the hon. Member for Cirencester will be able to explain the language he has used.

§ SIR DE LACY EVANS: I concur in what has just fallen from the noble Lord. I entirely admit the sincerity of the hon. Member for Cirencester. As a Member of the Committee, he has had to perform his duty in examining this petition; and I am not surprised at the strong feelings he entertained on discovering the character of the signatures to the petition, if signatures they could be called. But I am sure he will admit, on reflection, that it is entirely inconsistent with the good order and courtesy indispensable for the transaction of the business of any legislative assembly, to allow himself to use expressions such as have fallen from him, however strong the grounds might be, and strong they undoubtedly are, for such language. Therefore, not only in regard to the hon. Member for Nottingham, but from respect for this House, I am sure the hon. Member for Cirencester will think it his bounden 299 duty, without further delay, frankly to admit that he was borne away by the feelings of the moment.