

§ MR. O'CONNOR: There are three points on which I must give some explanation. I hope I shall do so without the excitement which the hon. Gentleman the Member for Cirencester has displayed. The first point has relation to the House; the second to the Committee; and the third to myself personally. I gated at the outset that I attributed not the slightest blame—not even a sinister intention—to the Committee; but I said it was impossible for the number of clerks employed to have got through the work in double the time they were employed. With regard to the petition itself, I could not be supposed to be accountable for anything written in it. Was it possible for me, in the nature of things, to examine the different sheets? I never saw one of them till I saw them rolled up here. I am now told I had no business to present any petition the character of which I did not know. If such were the rule, that petition would never have been presented at all. As to my having forfeited my title to credence, in having presented a petition for which I am not responsible, with all respect to the House and the Committee, I shall have that explained elsewhere.

§ The hon. Member immediately left the House.

§ MR. J. G. SMYTH: Having been present at the meeting on Kennington Common on Monday last, I am anxious that, as far as possible, the numbers present should be accurately stated. I saw both the arrival of the procession and the com- 293 mencement of the proceedings, and it is my deliberate conviction that at no time of the day were there more than 15,000 present. That I believe to be an excessive calculation. I have reason to know, that previous to the meeting means were taken to ascertain the whole number of persons which could be present if the Common were entirely covered. The whole space, closely packed, would not hold more than 90,000, and at no time was there more than a quarter of the space occupied. I have further to state, that I am convinced I exaggerate them when I put the numbers of the procession at 8,000. I will only add, that the hon. and learned Member for Nottingham, in my presence on Monday evening, stated the numbers present on Kennington Common as exceeding half a million.

§ COLONEL SIBTHORP: Sir, I rejoice that I happened to be in the House during this discussion. Most unexpectedly, God knows, I heard that my name was inserted among the signatures to that monstrous petition. I should hope that my conduct through life will be sufficient to satisfy every Member of this House, and everybody out of it, that I should be one of the last to disgrace my family, myself, and the constituency I have had the honour to represent for twenty years, by placing my name to a petition which could not fail to cast a stigma on all who were parties to it. On Monday night, when the hon. and learned Member for Nottingham, addressing me at the door of the House, said, "I am glad all went off peaceably;" I said, "I have only one regret that it did." "Why?" he asked. "Because," I replied, "if you had attempted to come over the bridge you would have got the damnedest hiding mortal man ever received."