

§ MR. R. YORKE: I can perfectly understand—nay, more, I can appreciate —the chivalry of the noble Lord. That the Member for Nottingham is not here is his own affair. I am not indulging in personalities. I am only attempting humbly to vindicate the honour and integrity of this House by reference to what should be the integrity and honour of its Members. The forms of Parliament do not allow me to say more than this, that while I have heard the Member for Nottingham assert that he was reprobated by those with whom he was associated for his adherence to monarchy and the existing institutions of this country as opposed to republicanism, six days before there appeared a long elaborate article in a paper called the Northern Star, recommending the substitution of a form of government totally different from that which happily exists in the United Kingdom, and that article was signed "Feargus O'Connor."

§ MR. LUSHINGTON: The hon. Member for Nottingham said he would explain two points with reference to the House and the Committee, but would explain what referred to himself personally elsewhere. My apprehension is, that from the unfortunate language which has been used, fatal consequences may ensue.

§ MR. DISRAELI: There seems to be an idea that a more serious meeting on Kennington Common may occur than has already taken place. It were highly ridiculous that this transaction should really terminate with an incident of that character. If any Gentleman in this House makes a statement which is, to say the least of it, grossly inaccurate, if it is the opinion of the House that that inaccuracy has a tendency to produce public mischief, and has been made with that intention —if the hon. Member for Nottingham has sinned in this respect, let the circumstances be placed before us in a proper manner, and I have not the slightest doubt the House will come to a right decision on the subject. At the same time, I must say I heard with pain the tone and language used by the hon. Member for Cirencester. I think it is highly inconvenient that an individual Member should express himself with respect to the conduct of another hon. Member not formally condemned by the House in the manner the hon. Member for Cirencester has done this evening. Still, I am bound to add, that we are indebted to the hon. Member for Cirencester for the pains he has taken on this subject; and, although 296 I cannot vindicate the tone which, from a surplusage of zeal, he has assumed, I think every one must be extremely anxious that the hon. Member for Cirencester should not be imperilled by personal consequences of the kind insinuated. I hope, therefore, that you, Sir, by the exercise of that authority to which all of us, present or absent, are ready at all times to bow, will prevent a conflict of a personal and painful character.

§ SIR G. GREY: I did not hear the expression attributed to the hon. Member, and I believe that expression did not reach the chair, or the Speaker would have taken notice of it. I quite agree that nothing could be more ridiculous than a personal conflict between two Gentlemen arising out of such circumstances. The hon. Member for Cirencester certainly spoke with some warmth, and might probably have been led away by the feelings of the moment; but, if he gave any ground for personal offence to the hon. Member for Nottingham, he would not refuse to give an explanation, though it certainly had not entered my mind that any personal conflict would emanate from these circumstances.