

§ LORD J. RUSSELL: I give the most implicit credit to the report of this Committee. I think it is entitled to our full confidence. We must remember, however, besides all the circumstances which they have mentioned, that they could not take into account the great number of idle people and passers by who, seeing a petition at the corner of the street, might have thought fit to sign it, without having any wish for the Charter, or at all concurring in the views of the hon. Gentleman. The hon. Gentleman, however, has made one suggestion, which I think is rather valuable, namely, that that proceeding of feigned names may be a part of a spy system of the Government. Now, I beg to suggest to the hon. Gentleman whether that spy system may not extend still further, and whether the Members of that Convention themselves are not parts of a spy system? Because, if they intended to promote peace and order, and were spies of the Government, I think they could have done nothing better than put forward such menacing declarations, and then have I acted in so orderly and peaceable a manner as they did.

§ The EARL of ARUNDEL and SURREY stated that, in a proclamation which had since been put forth by the Chartists, it was declared that a glorious demonstration had taken place, and that a quarter of a million were present on Kennington Common. From the highest and most unsuspected sources he had been assured that the number, spectators included, at no time exceeded 25,000. He believed there were not more than 15,000; but, in order to be quite safe, he would say 25,000. He asked why would the people longer be gulled by the leaders of that Convention, who bad so grossly deceived them with regard to their numbers, and had thus proved themselves false to the country, traitors to the Queen, and rebels to their God?

§ MR. J. O'CONNELL stated that he had been waited upon by the leading Repealers in London, who had informed him that the Repealers as a body had taken no part in the proceedings of Monday last, and that they would not ally themselves with any agitation which was accompanied by violence. There were not above 2,000 Repealers, including women and children present.

§ SIR R. H. INGLIS said, that there had been never such a gross exaggeration of numbers as in respect to the petition of the Chartists; except perhaps the exaggeration of numbers in respect to those who formed their meeting on Monday last. For weeks past it had been announced that this petition was signed by more than had ever joined in any address to this House or to the Crown; and the number of signatures was stated, in his hearing, on Monday last, when the petition itself was brought up, to be 5,706,000. He pledged himself that this account was formally and deliberately given in the face of the House of Commons by the hon. Member for Nottingham, who had the charge of the petition, and professed to be the leader of the petitioners. Now what was the fact? Why, that the absolute number of signatures professing to be names was 1,974,496. He did not deny, that this was an enormous and perhaps unprecedented mass of signatures; but, in the first place, and as to proportions, it was as if some one had asserted a fact as if more than 500, whereas it turned out to be, at the best, a fact of less than 200; in the next place, as to the real value of the signatures themselves as representing the mind and will of any body of men, it was obvious on a glance at the petition itself, that large strings of names, perhaps whole sheets, were written by one and the same man, without any explanation, profession, or allegation that he was authorised by any others to subscribe their names. In the next place, some of the names, as the special Report had already stated, were names of persons so eminent in position, and at the same time so notoriously hostile to the objects of the petition, that the bare enumeration of them would prove that they had not been attached by the parties themselves to any such prayer: In the last place, there were, among the so-called signatures, words such as "No Cheese, Pugnose, Flatnose," &. which no less obviously represented no real petitioner. Though he did not deny, that, after all, there were hundreds of thousands 289 of real signatures, however little many of them might have been bonâ fide cognisant of the object of the petition; yet all this proved, that the petition itself had been so got up as to be hardly worth the paper on which it was written; at least, he might say, that a petition with a tenth or twentieth part of the number of professed signatures would, under other circumstances, have been worth much more. He felt bound, therefore, to add, that the parties who made such exaggerations in the first instance, and committed such gross abuses in the next, were the real and the worst enemies of the right of petitioning. He did not mean to propose any formal resolution to the House on the subject at present; but he could not help submitting, whether it would not be a just and proper means of securing the House from similar impositions hereafter, and the right of petitioning from the contempt which the late abuses cast upon it, if the House were in future to require that the designations and the residences of all the parties who subscribed a petition should be attached to their names. This would prevent some of the abuses, and diminish the recurrence of others, which had thrown on the present petition a scorn and ridicule so deserved. So much for the matter of the petition of the Chartists: as to their meeting, he desired to add his hope, that Her Majesty's Government would state to the House what resolution, or what measure, they intended to propose—first, with a view of preventing such a disturbance of the public peace as had taken place last Monday; and, secondly, with a view of acknowledging the means by which its further and more serious violation had then been prevented. No exertions ought to be omitted to preserve the institutions which we enjoyed; and if we were to be threatened, week after week, with such a demonstration as the hon. and learned Member for Nottingham had made, or attempted to make, last Monday, he trusted that some measure would be taken to prevent its recurrence. It was true that, in the late instance, the physical force which was wielded by the hon. Member, was about in proportion to the moral-force value of the petition which he had presented. But the evil which, even by his failures, he could still accomplish, was too great to be tolerated by any Government in a healthy action. He hoped, too, that Her Majesty's Ministers would bring forward, or could state that they had already prepared, some proposition for 290 acknowledging the exertions made to preserve peace and good order by the almost unanimous energies of the people of this metropolis. It was not by a military force that this result had been obtained. He did not undervalue the disposition of the forces on that occasion—he did not underrate the indirect influence which the knowledge of their nearness and their readiness must have produced on the organised masses of the multitude whom the hon. Member for Nottingham had on that day brought together in London; but he could not forget that far larger military means than our own had lately failed utterly in Paris, in Berlin, and in Vienna, in preserving the institutions which they were appointed to defend. And in respect alike to the civil and to the military power, he felt assured, that both his noble Friend at the head of the Government, and his right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Home Department, on the one side, and his right hon. Friends the Members of the late Government, whom he saw on the other side of the House, would concur with equal cordiality in the acknowledgment that England owed its present safety, not to an arm of flesh, or to any human wisdom and firmness, but to the blessing of Almighty God; and, therefore, that all would gratefully ackowledge, that "unless the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain."