

§ MR. HUME: I am extremely sorry to have witnessed this scene. I submit the hon. Member for Cirencester has taken a most unusual and unfair course. No man respects the right of petition more than I do—no one would more readily express an opinion condemnatory of such proceedings as must have taken place in this case; but it would have been more consistent with the dignity of Parliament, and the fairness due to all parties, if notice had been given by the hon. Member for Cirencester that he would call the attention of the House to the circumstances connected with this petition to-morrow or some other day. There was no occasion for the hon. and 294 gallant Member to use an oath. It is unbecoming the character of this House that hon. Members should abuse each other, and say that this or that Member was not worthy of credence. It may be true or not. I place the utmost reliance on the statement of the hon. Member for Wolverhampton; I have no doubt the facts are as he states them; but in order to secure the House from imposition—and I cannot doubt that the grossest imposition has been practised here—it should go forth to the country that every Member is responsible for the petitions he presents. In contradiction to the hon. and learned Member for Nottingham, who has now left his seat, I assert that that is the rule; and every party endeavouring to impose on the House by such improper measures as have evidently been taken in this instance discredits the right of petition, and is liable to the severest reprehension. But while every Member should take the greatest care to ascertain that the petitions he presents are genuine, let us not condescend to call each other bad names by way of vindicating the character of this House.

§ MR. R. YORKE: With all respect for the former public services of the hon. Member who has just sat down, I am sorry to be obliged to differ from him on this occasion. Without the slightest hesitation I take on myself the odium of saying, that this House and the cause of truth are under eminent obligations to the hon. Member for Cirencester. That hon. Member has undoubtedly used language of strong import; but he was not only provoked but justified in what he has said. Truth in this House should be paramount. I am here to say, that everything the hon. Member for Cirencester has stated with reference to the Member for Nottingham is strictly true. As a matter of course the Member for Nottingham denied those statements.

§ VISCOUNT CASTLEREAGH: I rise to order. I appeal to you, Mr. Speaker, whether the House will consider it consistent with its dignity to hear hon. Members repudiating and giving decided contradiction to the statements of others, whether present or absent. My own notions of honour may be different from those of other Members; but I am perfectly sure of this, that if a friend of mine were subject to such imputations in this House, who was not here to defend himself, I should feel, if I had not your protection, that this House was no longer a place where I ought to remain.