

§ MR. R. PALMER: I think, as this subject has been mooted, that it is my duty to state what I know respecting it. The hon. Member for Nottingham adverted to three points, stating that with respect to two of those he would offer an explanation to the House, and that with respect to the other, which related to his own personal conduct, he should explain elsewhere. If the Speaker had caught that expression, undoubtedly he would have intimated that some explanation respecting it would be required. I certainly thought, from the manner of the hon. Member for Nottingham in leaving the House, that he intended to take some other notice of the words used by the hon. Member for Cirencester, which this House would be anxious to prevent. When I heard the expressions which fell from the hon. Member for Cirencester, I was not surprised that, under the circumstances of the case, his zeal might have carried him away from the use of what might appear the most discreet language; but it did strike me that the hon. Member was indeed going far when he made the imputation against the hon. Member for Nottingham that he was not entitled to credence. I am quite sure that if the hon. Member for Cirencester did make use of such strong expressions, he will take the opportunity of setting himself right.

§ LORD J. RUSSELL: In consequence of what has fallen from the hon. Gentleman, to the effect that the hon. Member for Nottingham stated that certain words must be explained elsewhere, I think it necessary to move that "Mr. O'Connor be ordered to attend in his place forthwith."

§ MR. SPEAKER: Before putting that question, I beg to state to the House that if what fell from the hon. Member for Nottingham had made the same impression on me as it appears to have done on the hon. Member (Mr. R. Palmer), I should have called on the hon. Member for Nottingham to make an explanation, and also on the hon. Member for Cirencester to assure the House that he did not intend any personal reflection. The greatest possible reliance is placed on what falls from a Member of Parliament; and in proportion to the great weight given to the words of an hon. Member, should be his caution that what he states is strictly accurate. The hon. Member for Nottingham, like every other Member, is responsible to the House for the petition he presents containing no disrespectful language, for its coming from the place whence it purports to emanate, and for the genuineness and propriety of the signatures to it. Of course, the hon. Member might be imposed upon with respect to names appended to the petition, as being the names of the parties signing it; but there are some points on which he could not be imposed upon if he took that proper precaution which he owed to the House. The hon. Member for Cirencester, certainly with some warmth, denied and contradicted the statement of the hon. Member for Nottingham; but it did not appear to me that he had exceeded the rules of the House. I hope, however, that the hon. Member for Cirencester will assure the House that be did not intend anything personally offensive. The Motion I have now to put is, that "Mr. O'Connor be ordered to attend in his place forthwith."