

§ MR. CRIPPS: I am afraid that I might have been betrayed into saying something unparliamentary; but I did mean to tell the hon. Member for Nottingham, and I cannot as a gentleman retract what I said, that I could not place further reliance on his words. But if I used language unparliamentary I deeply regret it, and I have no more hesitation in expressing that regret to the hon. Member for Nottingham, who is a Member of this House, than I have in expressing it to the whole House.

§ MR. SPEAKER: I understand the hon. Member for Cirencester to say that if he used any unparliamentary language he deeply regrets it. I am quite sure that the House will be satisfied with that explanation.

§ Mr. O'Connor was ordered to attend in his place forthwith.

§ At a later period of the evening, it was reported to the House that the order had been served on Mr. O'Connor, and he not having obeyed it, he was on the Motion of Sir George Grey ordered to be taken into custody. The hon. Member was afterwards reported in custody, discharged, and attended in his place.

§ MR. SPEAKER said: Mr. Feargus O'Connor, the House has been given to understand that an expression fell from you before you quitted this House which has led the House to suppose it is your intention to take hostile proceedings against an hon. Member of this House—the Member for Cirencester (Mr. Cripps), in consequence of words spoken by him in debate. I hope you will be able to assure the House that that was not your intention; but it is my duty to inform you that, after you left the House, the hon. Member for Cirencester has already expressed his regret that any expression should have fallen from him which is at all unparliamentary. If the expression used by you had reached me at the time, I should have felt bound at once to interfere; but I think it only due to you to call upon the hon. Member for Cirencester to state in your presence what he has already stated in your absence.

§ MR. CRIPPS: I wish only to say, that I felt impelled to speak as I did, hearing the conduct of the Committee directly impugned, for we were charged with making representations capable of being contradicted before another Committee. I have taken a deep interest in this subject, and 300 accordingly felt warmly; but, I say again, if I exceeded the line of expression which is due from one Member of Parliament to another, in any respect, though I confess I meant to impugn the conduct of the hon. Member, yet if I exceeded the line of Parliamentary debate in any thing I said, I deeply regret that that should be the case. I can only assure the House that this is the first time in the course of my life I have ever been betrayed into anything unparliamentary, or that I have said a single word which could offend.

§ MR. F. O'CONNOR: Sir, I beg to exculpate you altogether from the non-performance of your duty, and for this reason. The words I made use of were these:—"I had three duties to perform—one to the House, another to the Committee, and another to myself—that as regarded the House, I hoped they would believe that I should not be a party to any delusion being practised; and, as to the Committee, I reiterated what I before stated, that, so far from casting the slightest imputation upon them, I said, on the contrary, there was none whatever to be cast upon them." That I stated as distinctly as words could state; and, having stated what I considered was my duty to the House and to the Committee, without any further observation, I then left the House. I am proud to say that, having been in this House during tempestuous seasons, and out of this House having led a life which was likely to bring me into collision with others, whilst in this House I have never offered the slightest personal offence to the feelings of any hon. Member of it; but, on the contrary, I have studiously avoided insult. And I think every hon. Member would say I was utterly unworthy of holding a seat here, if I did not in some manner resent the observations which the House seemed to receive with so much willingness. I should not be satisfied with the apology for the unparliamentary words, if it had not been for the concluding words of the hon. Member, who, in a generous manner, having got over the feelings of the moment, said that if he used words which were unbecoming from one to another, he regretted it. I have only to say that I will entirely forget the whole matter; I am not capable of fostering or allowing anything to rankle in my breast. But I have a higher duty to perform to the House, and to the persons who signed the petition I presented. After the expression of feeling on the part of the 301 House, I think it is now my duty to state that I shall abandon my Motion for tomorrow—I shall not found any Motion upon that petition, but shall leave it between the Government and the country —between the Committee and those who signed it. I had no reason to doubt the statements they made to this House, nor was it with my consent, nor shall it ever be, that any delusion has been palmed upon it, or that I shall be a party to any delusion. But there is one thing which I may state fairly, freely, and frankly, and it is this— though it may be the duty of hon. Members closely to examine and nicely scrutinise the signatures of a petition presented to the House, I remember when a petition signed by 3,370,000 persons was presented by the hon. Member for Finsbury (Mr. T. S. Duncombe), and laid on the floor of the House. He never saw the petition till it was laid on the floor; and it would have been utterly impossible for me to have looked at all to signatures to this petition, so far as to be able to assure the House of their accuracy. I state this to show that I would not willingly, and could not, be cognisant of any deception practised upon the House, and could not, by possibility, avert the charge brought against me. I am glad I did not allow myself to be led away by that excitement to which the hon. Member, as he now states, presumed I had given rise, when he said the veracity of the Committee was impugned. Having performed his duty as a gentleman and a Member of Parliament, I perform mine, and tell him he was in error if he supposed it was my intention to cast any imputation upon the Committee. Having shown that there were no grounds for the attack upon me, and that I meant to cast no imputation upon that Committee, I think I have established a good and satisfactory basis for his gentlemanly retractation of the charge.