

After the general election of 1802, the ‘new opposition’ in the Commons numbered about 20. All the above-mentioned Members were returned, while new recruits included Richard Benyon, George Cranfield Berkeley, Lawrence Dundas, Sir John Coxe Hippisley and (from December 1803) Sir John Newport. With the peers, the grouping amounted to about 30 men. It was still far from being a unified party with a coherent political philosophy, and for the first year of the 1802 Parliament Grenville, torn between his desire to see Pitt, whose support for the peace treaty and equivocation in talks with Grenville clouded the issue, installed at the head of a vigorous government, and his attachment to the gradually solidifying ‘new opposition’, did not consider himself as the leader of a party.

The renewal of war in May 1803 removed most of his doubts and he now asserted himself as leader of the ‘new opposition’. On 3 June Peter Patten, at the behest of George Canning, who had been contemptuous of Addington’s premiership from the outset, moved a series of resolutions of censure on ministers for their handling of the negotiations with France. Pitt’s bid to bury the issue by moving the orders of the day was defeated by 333-56, the Foxites walked out, and Patten’s motion was crushed by 275-34. According to Canning’s analysis, the minority included 16 adherents of the ‘new opposition’, including five of Fitzwilliam’s Members. (The remainder were 13 militant Pittites and four ‘stragglers’.) A similar motion made by Fitzwilliam in the Lords secured only 17 votes.

In the following months the ‘new opposition’ and the Foxite Whigs drew closer together, and in January 1804 the Grenvilles, Spencer, Fitzwilliam and Windham resolved to propose to Fox a combined and systematic opposition to the government, with the aim of replacing it with a broad-based administration. The response was favourable, and an onslaught on Addington’s defence measures, into which Pitt and the prince of Wales’s adherents were drawn, brought down the ministry in late April 1804. The king’s veto of Fox dashed hopes of a broad coalition ministry, and Pitt took office without him and Grenville. In May 1804 his head-counter, George Rose, calculated that in the Commons the Foxites numbered 79 and those attached to Grenville 23. Among these Members were 11 of the men who had launched the ‘new opposition’ in the division of 14 May 1802: Elliot; Folkestone; Tom Grenville; Kensington; Laurence; Poyntz; Temple; Windham; the two Williams Wynns, and Young.

From this point the ‘new opposition’ lost its separate identity, but the connection between it and the Foxites shaped the politics of the Whig party in opposition, for the next 14 years.

It is worth noting that when Lord Grenville became head of the short-lived coalition ministry of ‘all the talents’ in February 1806, he, Spencer, Fitzwilliam and Windham were in the cabinet, while 14 men who had been involved in the activities of the ‘new opposition’ were given subordinate offices.