TU UL 


00109329 


ADM 
AqU-O3 
fac| Tey 
\04329 


WOON AUT LA 
00109329 


Digitized with financial assistance from 
Hermés Indi 
ermes indla 
a project facilitated by the Rotary Club of Bombay 


on 12 April, 2019 


(Eaft India Company.) 


FIRST 
REPORT 
FROM 


THE:SELECT COMMITTRER. 


ON. THE: 


1022 


ree) 


9 


as 
Affairs of The Eaft India Company. 


Ordered to be printed 25th May, 
“sat 1808. ; 
19: "ee # 
TAN eee iy 
eed 3 


a eee ae ae 


abn, A 


THE REPORT- - - ~ - ~ © = «© © pp.3tort, 
THE APPENDIX;—Viz 


Ne 1.-Correfpondence relating to the Difcuffions between Mr. Wittwer and Mr. Wright, 
the Accountants employed in the Examination of the Account depending be- 
tween The Public and The Eaft India Company &c. - + p13. 

N¢ 2,—Charges in Regimental Accounts objected to—Charges in Extra Pay 
jetbwrable ay uted Deduction Pe Pay-Office Eaqe Ales Aer 

lutions or eyed De from Pay-Office Accounts - = —pp. 21 to 26, 

N* 3,—Return of the EffeGtive Strength of His Majefty’s iments: ferving in India, . 
exclufive of Ceylon s on the, ut of yay wh mn from 1784 to 180759 
inclufive  - - Pp. 28 & 29, 

N* 4,—Statement of the Account tbcircen The Public and The Eat India Company 

PP. 30 to 40, 

‘Ne 5.—Report from the Committee (26th June 1805) on the ‘Acconat between The Public 
and The Eaft India Company = - 7. pp. 48 to 43. 

N° 6.—Minutes of the Meetings held between the Right Honourable Charles Bragge and 
Nicholas Vanfittart, Efq. onthe part of Government ; and the Deputy Chairman 
“and Sir Hugh Inglis, Bart. on the part of the Court ied Direétors ; for the purpofe of 
fettling and adjulting the Accounts = - - - pp. 44 to 56, 

Ne 7,—Supplement to the Obfervations prefented by the Court of Direétors to the Commit- 
tee of the Houfe of Commons, on the 31 oo 1808, refpedting the Claims of 
the Company on Government - ee 

Ne8.—Receipts and Payments of the Eaft India Compan: inEn Jand, together with an 
Beumate of the fame Pe, the bakers Year, fom 1ft March 1808 to rf March 
1909 =) 's ~ = Pe SJ 

‘Ne 9.—Comparifon of the “fixed “nd pertuanent Sources of Recips and Payments in 

i England, of the Eaft india Company = - - = pp. 58 & 59. 

Ne 10,—Account of Sales for 10 Years, from rom 1798-9 to roe 8, diftinguifhing India and 
China, and the Species of Goods from each - = pp. 60 & 61. 

Ne oe ele of Charles Cartwright, Efq. ‘Accountant General_of the Eaft India 
3 with, an Account exhbiog the Psitme Colt of. the Company’ ’s Goods 

Warehoutej in each year, &e. - = -  p. 62. 

Ne is Bewchnatton of Mr. Robert Brown, relative to the Trade i in Batt India Goods; 
together with the Evidence of Sir Robert Peel, Bart. a Member of the 
Committee = - p63. 

‘Ne 13.—An Account of Bills of “Exchange paid od Eat India Company from ft March 
1798 to 1ft March 1803 - by m = = p.bge 

‘Ne 14.—An Account of Bills of Exch: ‘i b the Eat India Company from 1ft 
March 1803 to aft March i808 = a a ibid. 

Nes Se -Realons for affuming that the Amount eftimated to be owing for Bills of Exchange 

be drawn from Chin, may not enced the = of iL £00,000 on the ift of 
March 1B0g9- + - = p65. 

No 16,—Abftra& Account of the Sums paid in “England for Charges General - ibid. 

Ne 17.—An Effgjmate of the Debts and Credits of the Eaft India Company, in England, ex- 
clafive of their Czpital Stock, as they will ftand on the 1ft March 1809 pp. 66& 67. 

Nv 18.—An Account, thewing the Amount of the Peyencnts made in England, previous to 
ft March 1808, ‘and the Amount eftimated to be paid before 1ft March 1809, 
on Account of Cargues to arrive after the latter period - = = p67. 

Ne 19,—An Eftimate of the Debts and Credits of the Eaft India Com anys in England, ex- 
clufive of their: Capital Stock, as they will ftand on rft ch 1809; together 
with an Eftimate of the Value of Goods expected to be received from India and 
China in the courfe of the Year 1809-10 - - = pp. 68 & 69, 

Ne 20.—Examination of Saimuel Pepys Cockerell Eq. Surveyor to m the Eaft India 
Company : 7B 7% 


REPORT. 


Tar SELECT COMMITTEE appointed to 
enquire into the prefent State of the Affairs of the Eaft India 
Company, and to report the fame, as it {hall appear to them, to 
the Houfe, with their Obfervations thereupon, and alfo to report 
their Proceedings from time to time to the Houfe; and to whom 
feveral Accounts and other Papers prefented to the Houfe, re- 
{peéting the Revenues and Charges, and the commercial Concerns 
of the Eaft India Company; and alfo the Petition of the United 
‘Company of Merchants of England trading to the Eaft Indies, 
were feverally referred :—Have, purfuant to the Orders of The 
‘Houfe examined the matters to them referred, and have agreed 
upon the following REPORT. 


a Bi utmoft diligence which Your Committee have been enabled to 

beftow upon a fubje@ of fuch extenfive detail, as an enquiry into 
* the prefent ftate of the Affairs of the Eaft India Company,” would 
not have been fufficient for its full inveftigation within the period which 
hhas elapfed fince their appointment, even if many of the moft neceffary 
documents, as to the State of the Company’s Affairs in India, had not 
been received fo recently as to preclude the poffibility of their being 

‘examined with that degree of accuracy, care, and attention, which the 
complicated nature, not lefs than the importance .of the fubjeét, indif- 
penfably requires : Your Committee are ftill engaged in the confideration 
of the various matters comprehended in the general object of their 
enquiry, and will from time to time fubmit their obfervations thereupon 
to the Houfe ; but in confequence of the Petition which the Company 
have prefented to the Houfe, and which has been referred to Your 
‘Committee, they have deemed it advifable, in the firft inftance, to 
advert to the Allegations of that Petition, including not only thofe 
which refer exclufively to the Balance claimed by the Company as 
owing to them by the Public, but alfo fuch as relate to the general 
State of their Affairs, and to report upon the fame, as far as the Progrefs 
which Your Committee have been enabled to make in their enquiry, 
has, in their apprehenfion, juftified the Obfervations which they now 
offer to the confideration of the Houfe. 


Your 


Appendix, 
Ne 5. 


4 Finer REPORT from the Setect ComMItTree on the 


Your Committee, finding it ftated in the Petitign from the Company, 
as one of the caufes from which the prefent embarraffment in their 
pecuniary concerns had arifen, that a large balance of Debt remained 
due to them from the Public, on account of various expences incurred 
for Expeditions to the French, Dutch, and Spanith Settlements in the 
Indian Seas, and to Egypt, have proceeded, in the firft inftance, on the 
inveftigation of the Account between the Public and the Company. 
Your Committee find, that in the Report made by a former Committee 
upon this fubjeét, on the 26th day of June 1805, and now referred to 
Your Committee, the feveral heads of Charge upon which the Claims 
preferred on behalf of the Company were founded, are arranged in the 
following manner, in three Claffes, according to the nature of the circum- 
ftances and tran{actions out of which they have refpeétively arifen. The 


Firft Clafs compofed of fuch heads of Charge as fhould fall, in the opinion 


of the Committee framing that Report, exclufively on the Public; the 
Second, of fuch as fhould be borne exclufively by the Company; and the 
Third, confifting of Charges to be divided equally between both parties. 


FIRST CLASS, chargeable to the Public. 


*¢ An Account of Expences incurred by the Eaft India Company in 
“ India and England, for the intended Expedition to the French 
“© Tflands, and for the Expedition againft and Supplies to the Cape 
“ of Good Hope.” ' 

« An Account of Expences incurred by the Eaft India Company, for 
“ the intended Expedition againft Manilla.” 

* An Account of the Expences incurred by the Eaft India Company, 
“ for the purchafe of Veffels for His Majefty’s Navy, Repairs to- 
“ King’s Ships, &c. &c.”” 


. “ An Account of the Expences incurred by the Eaft India Company, 


“ by the capture of the Danith Settlements in India, in 1801.” 
* An Account of the extraordinary Expences incurred by the Eaft 
“ India Company, by the Expedition to Egypt, over and above 
“ the charge of the Troops in India.” 
Ceylon Balance of Property, December 1for, and Remittances from 
“ India fubfequent to that date ; alfo the Expence of the capture of 
“ the faid Ifland.” 


« 


SECOND CLASS, chargeable to the Company 


« An Account of the Expences incurred by the Eaft India Company, 
*¢ in confequence of various Captures made from the French and 
“ Dutch on the Peninfula of India, including Subfiftence of 
“ Prifoners.”” 

“ An Account of the King’s Troops in India, beyond the number 
“ authorized by A@s of Parliament.” 


THIRD CLASS, to be equally divided. 


* An Account of the Expence incurred by the Capture and Main- 
“ tenance of Malacca and the Moluccas, and for the Maintenance 

* of Ceylon, deducting the profit on fpices.”” 
, THE 


Arrairs or Tue East Inpia Company. 5 


THE faid Report further ftates the determination of that Committee, 
concerning the Rates of Intereft to be allowed upon the feveral Sums 
appearing on the different fides of the Account, as follows : 


“ Your Committee have thought it reafonable, that the Company's 
“ Claims, fo far as they arife from an expenditure carried on in India 
“ by Loans raifed there, fhould be made up with.the rate of Intereft 
“ paid. by the Company abroad for the Loan of the year in which the 
© expence was actually incurred; and that the Paymafter General's 
* Account fhould bear Intereft according to the rate paid by the Public 
“ for money in Europe, in the feveral years in which the demands have 
“ accrued ; credit is given on the other fide. of the Account on all pay- 
« ments hitherto made by the Public in difcharge of thefe demands, at 
“ the fame rate of Indian Intereft as that debited by the Company.” 


THE Report then ftates the opinion of the faid Committee, that, as 
far as they can judge, a balance of about £. 2,300,000 would be owing by 
the Public to the Company, according to the mode of ftating and making 
up the Account therein prefcribed, and that the fum of £.1,000,000 
might fafely be voted by the Houfe on account. But it was obferved 
in ‘the faid Report, that the Accounts on which the opinion of the faid 
Committee (in regard to the amount of what might prove due to the 
Company) had been founded, would require revifion ; and it was re- 
commended, that an Accountant fhould be nominated on the part of the 
Treafury, and another on the part of the Company, to examine and 
make up the Account according to the principles therein fpecified, pre- 
vious to the final balance being difcharged; and it was alfo ftrongly 
recommended, that frequent and early adjuftments of Accounts fhould 
take place between the Public and the Company. — 


Your Committee find, that the fum of £.1,000,000 was accordingly 
voted in that Seffion of Parliament, and paid to the Company, and that 
‘in conformity to the recommendation contained in the faid Report, Ac- 
countants were natned on the part of the Public and the Company 
refpectively, for the purpofe therein mentioned, who appear to have 
entered without delay upon the duties affigned to them. The difcuf- 
fions which took place between them on the fubje@ of thefe Accounts, 
will:be found an the Appendix. 


Your Committee find that, in the Seffion of 1806, another fum of 
f. 1,000,000 was voted and paid to the Company on account; it ap- 
pearing by a letter from Mr. Wittwer, the Accountant named by the 
Lords Commiffioners of the Treafury on the part of the Public, to 
George Harrifon, Efquire, dated on the 25th day of June 1806 (which 
fetter is referred to Your Committee) that although, for reafons therein 
particularly detailed, no final adjuftment of Accounts could at that time 
®e made between the Public and the Company, the ultimate balance due 
to the larter would be found to exceed that fum. 


» 261, . B : Your 


App Neu. 


App? N°4. 


6 First REPORT from the Serect Committee on the 


Your Committee find, that additional claims and demands have arifen 
between the Public and the Company, fubfequent to the Report of 1805, 


“above alluded to, fome of which have accrued from a continuation to 


a later period of Accounts and heads of Charge then exiting, and 
others from different circumftances and tranfa€tions which have fince 
occurred, 


" Your Committee have applied, to thofe of the former defcription, the 
principles which they found laid down in the Report of 1805. The 
following Charges, which have grown out of new matter fince that 
Report, they have agreed, after due confideration, to include in the 
Firft Clafs, as payable by the Public : 


Expences incurred in India on account of the Chinefe Settlers at 
Trinidad. 

Expences incurred on account of the Expedition to the Cape of Good 
Hope in 1805. . 

Supplies for the Expedition againft Buenos Ayres. 


Your Committee are alfo of opinion, that the Charge of Prifoners of 
War taken at fea by His Majefty’s thips, which does not appear to 
have been particularly noticed by the Committee of 1805, ought to be 
defrayed by the Public, efpecially as the principle on which this Claim is 
founded, feems to be recognized and admitted in the A@ of 1793, 
chap. 52. fect. 127. 


Your Commitee find that a new demand has alfo been brought forward 
on the part of the Public againft the Company, for Viétualling Stores 
furnifhed for the Company's Service by the Commiffioners of Vidual- 
ling, or their Agents. 


Your Committee find, that the grofs demand of the Company on the 
Public, drawn up in conformity to what has been ftated, with Intereft 
computed to the 1ft March 1808, amounts, according to the beft judg- 
ment which Your Committee can now form, (feveral of the items of 
fach demand being ftated upon eftimate) to the fum of £. 8,461,331, 
and that the counter demand, on the part of the Public, for advances 
of Cafh upon account (including the two fums of £. 1,000,000 and 
‘£- 1,000,000, mentioned in the former part of this Report) for difburfe- 
ments by the Pay Office, and for fupplies furnithed by the Vi@ualling 
Office, with Intereft computed to the fame period, amounts to 
£.6,9683912, leaving a balance due to the Company from the Public 


of £. 1,500,419. 
In the above fam of xe 6,960,91 2. is included the fum of £ 3,082,75 5. 


‘which is the amount of the Claim of the Paymafter General on the 


Company, including Intereft to the 1ft March 1808, deduéting there- 
from the fum of £. 443,767. hereinafter mentioned. 


Your Committee cannot adduce a itronger inftance of the neceffity of 
attending to the recommendation of the Committee of 1805, as to the 
frequent 


Arratrs or Tue Easr Inpia Company, 7 


frequent adjuftment of Accounts between the Public and the Company, 
than the mere ftatement of a Claim to 0 large an amount, and which has 

~ moreover been only brought forward at a period fo recent, that it has 
been, and for a confiderable time muft. be, impoffible for the Accountants 
to examine in detail, and form an opinion on the accuracy of all the 
Charges. There is every reafon to believe, that the obje@ions which 
have already been urged on thé part of the Company to the Pay Gffice 
demands, and which are detailed in the Appendix to this Report, are in 
general well founded, efpecially as their validity has been ftrongly con- 
’ firmed by a Return which was laid before Your Committee, from the 
Oifice of the Adjutant General, of the periods during which the different 
Regiments were chargeable to the Company ; and it is very poffible, that, 
on further and more minute’ examination by the Accountants, other 
objections will be difcovered. On thefe confiderations, Your Committee 
have thought it reafonable to fufpend for further examination, fuch part 
of the Pay “Office demand as has been fpecifically objeéted to on the part 
of the Company, which amonnts to the fum of £. 443,767. In concluding 
this part of the fubjeét, Your Committee have no hefitation in fuggefting 
the expediency of repealing the Claufe in the Adt of 1793 (cap. 52, 
fec. 128.) which enaéts, that the Company fhall be chargeable with all 
the recruiting and other expences incurred in England, for Regiments in 
India {which in practice has been found fo difficult to adjuft,) and fubfti- 
tuting other provifions which might Gimplify the mode of ftating the 
Account, and confequently facilitate its frequent and early adjuftment, 

* and at the fame time fecure to the Public an-equitable compenfation for 
that portion of its Military Expenditure. 


Your Committee have annexed to this Report, a Copy of the Account 
between the Public and the Company, <ontaining’a detailed Statement 
of the particular Items of which the two fums of £.- 8,461,331 and 
£. 6,960,912 are compoted. 


Your Committee cannot, in juftice to the Company, conclude this part 
of their Report, without calling the attention of the Houfe to the remon- 
frances made againft the mode adopted by the Committee appointed in 
1805 to take into confideration the Account between the Public and the 
Eaft India Company, as far as relates to the Expences incurred by the 
Capture and Maintenance of Malacca and the Moluccas, and the Main- 
tenance of Ceylon; a mode of decifion by which Claims en the part of 
the Company, to ro Jefs an amouat than £.1,972,984, have becn fet 
afide. ; 


. The.arguments by which thefe Claims were refifted and defended, and 
from which it is to be prefumed the adjuftment in queftion took place, 
will be found in the Appendix; and alfo, a Statement prepared by the 
Court of DireGors connected with the fame fubje@. 


Your Committee, under the Order of reference made to them, have 
not thought themfelves authorized to make any obfervations upon the 
principles 


App* N° 2. 


App N° 3. 


App® NP & 


Appt N*6 
App" N°7 


‘Appt Nes, 
ppt we 


8 First REPORT from the Serect ComMITTER on the 
principles on which the Committee of 1805 arranged the Claims of the 
Company. 


Your Committee have, however, thought it their duty, under all the 
circumftances of the cafe, to ftate the amount of what the Gompany 
maintain to be their juft and unfatisfied demand. 


+ 


Independently of the Claim which the Company have preferred againft 
the Public, for Expences incurred in carrying’ into execution the Orders 
which at different times have been tran{mitted to India, for Expeditions 
againft the Settlements of fuch European Powers as have been engaged 
in war with this Country, and alfo to. Egypt, Your Committee obferve, 
that in the above-mentioned Petition various circumftances (all of which 
are conneéted with that ftate of war in Europe and in India) are repre- 
fented as the caufes which have produced the prefent embarraffments in 
the Company’s affairs, and the grounds on which they pray for fuch 
relief as Parliament may think fit to grant. 


It will be evident from the examination of the feveral Accounts con- 
tained in the Appendix to this Report, which exhibit a view of the 
Company’s pecuniary concerns in England during the laft ten years, 
-when compared with the Eftimate for 1808-9, that the deficiencies of 
the-laft and prefent year have proceeded from caufes which have been ‘ 
progreffive in their operation, and that the ftate of affairs which thofe 
Accounts now exhibit, is to be traced to a combination of various cir- 
cumftahces connected with the Wars in which the Company have been 
engaged in India, as wellas with the general ftate of warfare in which a 
Jarge portion of Europe has for a. long period been involved. Your 
Committee have felected from the annual Accounts of the Company’s 
affairs at home, which have been prefented to Parliament during the laft 
ten years, a comparative Statement of Receipts and Payments in fuch 
articles as have experienced or admit of any confiderable variation in 
their amount. {t will appear from that Account, that the prefent defi- 
ciency may be afcribed principally to the following caufes : 


ift. To the diminifhed fale of the Company’s goods ; the fum eftimated 
to be réceived from fuch fales for the year 1808-9 being £. 1,394,589 
lef than the average of the ten preceding years; £. 2,200,996 lefs than 
the average of the firft five years of that period ; and £. 588,183 lefs than 
the average of the laft five years. 


It would lead Your Committee much beyond the limits within which 
they propofe to confine this Report, if they were to enter upon the 
difcuffion of all the caufes to which the gradual decreafe in the amount 
of the Company’s fales, during the .laft ten years, may poffibly be 
afcrived. It will appear, however, from the account of fales during that 
period, that in the article of Tea, which forms a large proportion of their 
whole trade, no diminution has taken place, but that it has chiefly occurred 

nm 


Arrarrs 6¢ Tue East Inpia Company, 9 


° 

in the Imports from India, and particularly in the different defcriptions of 
Piece Goods. The increafed confumption of Cotton Stuffs manufactured 
in Britain, and the advantages derived to neutral Nations from the 
expence at which the trade to India muft neceffarily be carried on during 
war, as well as the obftruétions infeparable from that ftate of war 
which has exifted with little intermiffion fince the renewal of the Com 
pany’s Charter in 17935 are the caufes to which, ini the opinion of 
Your Committee, the diminifhed fale of Indian Imports may principally 
be attributed. 


2dly. To the increafed expence of freight and demorage of the Com: 
pany’s fhipping ; the eftimated amount of the fame for the year 1803-9, 
being £.276,251 more than the average of the tem preceding years ; 
£.276,712 more than the average of the firft five years of that period 
and £.275,790 more than the average of the laft five years, 


‘Whether the fyftern now purfued by the Company, in the defcriptien 
of veffels which they have been accuftomed to employ, is the moft agco- 
nomital to them. or the moft beneficial to the Country, or whether it is 
calculated to withftand the competition of Foreign Nations, are points 
on which Your Committee are not yet prepared to pronounce an ‘opinion; 
but which they confider to be of the higheft importance, as they affect 
not only the commercial profperity of the Company, bat the perma- 
jent intereft of the Britith Empire, in the prefervation and exclufive 
enjoyment of a valuable portion of its Trade. In eftimating this charge, 
to which the Commerce of the Company is expofed, from the rate of 
Freight, it muft be recollected that the means of defence and confequent 
fecurity which the fize and ftruéture of their thips afford to their valuable 
cargoes, and to the tranfport of troops and military ftores, mutt necef- 
farily be included in any comparifon between the prefent and any cther 
fyftem which may be fuggefted. 


galy. To the increafed amount of Bills of Exchange drawn on the 
Company in England from India and China; the eftimated amount of 
which for the year 1808-9 being £.725,408 more than the average 
of the ten preceding years ; £521,970 more than the average of the 
firft five years of that period; and £. ae 845 more than the average 
of the laft five years. 


It is unqueftionably to thofe heavy drafts from India and China on 
the Company's Treafury at home, that the largeft portion of the de~ 
ficiency in their funds during the laft and prefent year muft be afcribed. 
Your Committee have been informed, that in confequence of arrange- 
ments which the Court of DireGtors have adopted, and of orders which 
they have tranfmitted to China, the amount of Bills from thence is not 


App? N14, 


App* Nes, 


Appt N°8. 
D® 13,14 


likely to increafe, and that in all probability it will fall confiderably ., 


below the average of former years. . Your Committee have not been 
enabled to form any fach expectation with regard to the dmount of 
Bills from India. Any interruption in the tranquillity of the Company’s 
territories would create increafed demands on their Treafury at home, 
which can only be effectually avoided by a furplus Revenue in India. 

261, c The 


Appt Nei3s 


App* N° 16, 


App? Neig. 


ro »—- First REPORT from the Seuect Commitren on the 


. 
The attainment of that objet, either by a reduction of Expenditure or 
by additional Revenue, or by the operation of both thof caufes, is in- 
difpemable to the maintenance of the Company’s credit and power in 
India; and to this important fubjeé&t Your Committee wae swithout delay, 
dircét its moft {erious attention. 


. Your Committee have confined themfelves in this Report to a ftate- 
ment of the principai caufes which have produced the prefent deficiency. 
There are others, however, of inferior amount, which have contributed 
to augment it. The charge of payments to Military and Marine 
Officers retired from the fervice, has been gradually increafing for feveral 
years, and amounts now to a fum much beyond the calculation which © 
was formed of it when the fyftem was firft eftablifhed. ‘ 


The addition to the Company’s bonded Debt has aifo conitributed to 
iwell the deficit, by the increafed charge for Intereft. 


- With the view of enquiring into the pratticability of Retrenchment in 
Expenditure, Your Committee have called for the detail of the articles 
comprehended under the head of “ Charges General,” which, in the 
aggregate, amounts annually to a very confiderable fum. 


As far as Your Committee have. yet inveftigated this Account, they 
have found no reafon to believe that it is capable. of any material re-, 
duétion, but they propofe to. go into a. more detailed examination of the 
particular articles of which-it confifts. And, entertaining this intention, 
they forbear at prefent laying before the Houfe any thing more thari an 
Abftra& of the Account, and of its principal fubdivifions for the laft three 
years, as it has been prepared by the Court of Direétors. 


The Company having ftated in their Petition, that they did “ not pre+ 
“* fume to requeft the interpofition of the Houfe to aid them in their 
“ prefent emergency, without at the fame time thewing their unquef- 
“ tionable ability to difcharge all their prefent Debts in England, and 
“ torepay whatever the Houfe may in its wifdom think fit to affiftthem 
“ with ;” and having fubmitted to the Houfe a Statement in that Pe- 
tition, by which it appeared that a confiderable balance would remain to 
them, after making provifion for the payment of all their Debts in 
England, but exclufive of their Indian Debt ; Your Committee felt it 
their duty carefully to inveftigate that part of the fubje¢t, and they have 
no difficulty in ftating an opinion, that there will remain Affets in this 
Country to an amount confiderably beyond what the prefent exigency of 
the Company’s affairs appears to demand, in fecurity for any advance to 


- that extent which Parliament may think fit to grant. 


Your Committee ‘have prepared an Account of the probable Affets of 
the Company on the 1ft March 1809, in which the amount of Débt 
due to them by the Public, as the balance of their Account, is taken only 
at £- 1,500,419, inftead of £.2,460,000, which the Company claims 
and in which nothing is allowed for their property afloat, and which wih 
artive in Englaud fubfequently to that period, though a large portion of 

the 


Arrairs or Tas East. Inpia Company. ay 


the charges affecting ‘that property. will be incurred and paid duting the 
current year. Eftimating the amount in that moft unfavourable mode, 
there will remain a balance of £.2,819,587 in favour of the Company. 
If credit however is given for the value of that property, and the fum due 
by the Public is ftated at the amount claimed by the Company, the efti- 
mated balance in their favour will be £.9,050,587. 


The value of the Eaft India Houfe and Warehoufes has been ftated 
by the Company’s Surveyor, whofe evidence on that fubje@ is inferted 
in the Appendix, 


It will be apparent to the Houfe, from the examination of thofe 
Accounts, that the moft accurate Eftimates which can be formed 
’of fuch articles of Receipt and Expenditure as are comprehended in 
them, muft be liable to uncertainty; but Your Committee have no 
reafon to doubt, that every praéticable degree of caution has been ufed 
in preparing them. 


Your Committee have already ftated, that they are proceeding upon 
the detailed inveftigation of the various matters comprehended in the 
general obje@t of.their enquiry, and which embrace the whole of the 
Financial and Commercial as well as Political Concerns of the Com- 
pany. An examination into the Civil and Military Eftablifhments in 
India, will form a material branch of that enquiry; and Your Committee 
are already ftrongly impreffed with the neceffity of carrying into effect 
reduétions in the amount of thofe Eftablifhments to a very confiderable 
extent. Your Committee are happy to add, that this important fubject 

_ has alfo engaged the ferious attention of the Court of Direétors, and of 
their Governments abroad. 


App= N° 18 


App" Nig. 


Ne 2, 


APPENDIX 


Appendix, N° 1. 


CORRESPONDENCE relating to the Difcuffions betweemMr. Wirrwer and, 
Mr. Wricur, the Accountants employed'in the Examination of the Account depending 
‘between The Pustic and The East Inpra Company on the Brinciple.of Adjuftment 
of the Account. 

SIR, Whitehall, 23d April 1807, 
HE progrefs in the inveftigation-of the Account depending between The Public and The 
Eaft India Company, being interrupted ‘by a radical difference in opinion between 
‘Mr. Wright, the Accountant nominated by theCompany, and myfelf, on the interpretation of 
‘the principles laid down in the Report of the Committee; and Mr. Wright having obferved, 
that, without the fanétion of his fuperiors, he does not feel himfelf juftified in acquiefcing in any 
other mode of ftating the Account, than in conformity with the opinion he has formed; I am 
under the neceflity of requefting that you will be pleafed to fubmit the circumftances of the cafe 
to the confideration of the Right Honourable the Lords Commiffioners of His Majefty’s Trea- 
dury, and receive their inftruétions for my guidance. The origin of the difference which has 
‘occurred, and the grounds on which we have refpectively drawn our cenclufions, being diftin&ly 
sdetailed in Minutes recorded on the fubjeét, I have annexed Copies of thofe Documents, pre- 
fuming it would be the beft mode of bringing the fubject before their Lordfhips : it therefore 
‘tay be only neceffary here to fubmit, thatthe queftions for confideration are, whether it was 

intended in the principle laid down by the Committee of the Houfe of Commons, 

‘That the peace, or ordinary charges of the troops employed. at Ceylon and the Eaftern Iflands, 
from the 1 May 1796 to 31ft December 1801, are to be admitted in the accounts.as a charge 
upon the Public :—if not, 

That the fupply by the Company te the Ifand of Ceylon, from rft November 1798 to 3rft 
December 1804, is to be admitted as the fum chargeable to the Public, without reference to 
the application of it. 


Tohave the honour to fubfcribe myfelf 
‘Sir, 
Your moft obedient fervant, 
THOMAS NICHOLAS WITTWER. 


MINUTES of the Proceedings of Mr. Witrwsr, Accountant on the part of the 
Public, and Mr. Wricur, Accountant on the part of the Eaft India Company. 


Mr. Wittwer obferved, that on referring to the amount of the fupplies to Ceylon between No- 
vember 1798 and December 1801, he difcovered that the whole fupply from Madras and Bengal 
during the period, with a fmall difburfement by the Military Paymafter General, was taken as the 
charge: that by the Ceylon Books the whole of the military expences were defrayed from thofe 
fupplies and from the revenues: that it is his idea, according to the principle laid down by the 
Report of the Committee; the charge of the Ifland is to be equally divided between the Company 
and the Public from May 1796 to December 1801, with the exception of the peace eftablifhment 
of the troops, which is to be borne wholly by the Company: that the Account of the demand 
upon the Public had been thus drawn up to November 1798, excluding the peace eftablifhment. 
Ic is therefore his opinion, that the ordinary or peace expence of the troops for the period in quef- 
tion; viz. from November 1798 to December #801, fhould be deducted from the amount of the 
fupplies, and that a further adjuftment fhould be made of the revenues of the Ifand for the fame 
period. 


261. D- Mr. 


16th April 
1807. 


14 Appendix to The Fissr REPORT: from the Setzct Committee 


Mr. Wright.—In reply to Mr, Wittwer’s obfervations onl the charge for Ceyton from No- 
vember 1798 to December 1801 inclufive, Mr. Wright remarks as follows: 

aft. As to the principle conceived by Mr, Wittwer to be laid down in the Report of the Com- 
mittee of the Houfe of Commons, Mr. Weight entertains fome doubts of its being intended to 
apply in the manner noticed ; He underftands it was meant that the Company fhould be reimburfed 
half their expences of Ceylon and the Dutch Iflands. 

ad, The charge for Ceylon from November 1798, accordingly confilts of the advances and 
fupplies made, there being at the time the account was firft ftated no other information on the 
fubje&; and the documents to form the account being very defective, Mr. Wright apprehends 
confiderable difficulty will occur in framing the ftatement in the mode alluded to by Mr Wittwer, 
as the ufual pay of thétroops mutt be taken by eftimate. 

- 3d. But, in proceeding to form fuch an account, credit fhould be given for the ordinary pay, 
&c, for troops raifed exprefsly for fervice at Ceylon, for inftance, the Malay Corps ; the ufual pay 
for this fhould be brought to credit, not only from’ 1798, but from its firft formation in 1796. 

4th, The charge for Ceylon in the prefent ftate of the account, confits as above-noticed in 
the advances for or fupplies to the Ifland. The Company having no controul over the difburfe- 
ments of Ceylon fince O@ober 1798, it was not thought neceflary to make any enquiry regarding 
them; but Mr. Wriglit cari have no objection to opening the account in the way Mr, Wittwer 
mentions, in doing which due credit muft of courfe be given to the Company for a proportion of 
the revenue. In the meantime, the obfervation re{pecting additional corps may be left to the deter 
mination of fuperior authorities, 


Mr. Wittwer.—Mr. Wittwer deems it proper to offer fome further obfervations, in confe- 
quence of Mr. Wright's reply, refpeéting the ftatement of the Ceylon account from November 
1798 to December 1801. 

ft. On the principle. Mr. Wittwer admits, that the principle laid down by the Committee of 
the Houfe of Commons, on which the Company are to be reimburfed the half of their expences 
for Ceylon and the Dutch Iflands, is merely ftated ina general way, witheut diftin@lly and literally 
prefcribing the nature of the difburfement, whether for extra charge or otherwife. Buthe muft 
take leave to remark, that by inference it feems eftablifhed, that the Committee, in determining 
upon the general principle, could only have in view the mode of ftatement in the account referred 
to their confideration. by the Houfe, which account was drawn out by the Officers of the Company, 
under their own fpecial direStion, and had likewife undergone repeated inveftigation by Com 
miffioners on the'behalf of the Public, whofe Minutes on this very account, in concert with fome, 
of the Gentlemen of the Eaft India Direétion, being recorded, confirm, as he conceived, that it 
was underftood that the peace eftablifhments of the troops employed, not only on thefe fervices 
but on other fervices, for which a demand is made upon the Public, is to be borne by the Com- 
pany, and that the war and extra expences only are to become chargeable to the Public.’ On this 
principle it appears to Mr, Wittwer, that the whole of the accounts have been dawn up, and there~ 
fore he cannot confider himfelf authorized, without fuperior authority, to deviate from it. As to the 
Malay Corps, Mr. Wittwer does not difpute that it may be confidered, in fome degree, 2s an 
extra charge for a force raifed exprefsly for the fervice at Ceylon ; but as it was not fo taken in the 
orginal formation of tke account, and does not appear to have come under obfervation in any of 
the difcuffions on the fubjeét, Mr. Wittwer cannot take upon himfelf to admit this expence as a 
claim upon the Public: he therefore begs to exprefs his fatisfaction, that Mr. Wright is difpofed to 
Jeave the point to the ultimate determination of fuperior autkerities. 

‘With regard to the point which has given rife to the prefent difcuffion, viz the expence of 
Ceylon between November 1798 and December 1801. Mr. Wittwer, at the fame time he is 
not unwilling to admit there is {cope for argument, on the ground ftated by Mr. Wright, as co the 
Company pofleffing no controul over the adminiftration of the Ifland in that period, yet, under the 
<ircumftances in which he is placed, he prefumes this cannut be taken into prefent confideration 5 
and that the only courfe he can purfue is a literal and ftri&t attention to the line marked out by the 
Report of the Committee, and this Icaves no latitude but to ftate the account from May 1796 to 
December 1801 upon one uniform principle. The difficulties in the way of fo doing, are certainly 
very great, from the complete alteration in the nature and formation of the books and documents 
confequent upon the change in the mode of adminiftration of the Ifland in November 1798. 
Mr. Wittwer is aware, that from this circumftance, the extra charges can only be feparated from 
the ordinary or peace charges by computation on the refpeétive proportions of each in former. 
months ; and propofes that the account be fo made up. 

By the mode above propofed, uniformity of ftatement will be preferved to the period when 
the entire adminiftration of the Iffand was aflumed by His Majetty’s Government, in December 
801, 


Mr. 


ow the Arraixs or Tur’ East Inp1a Company. | 1S 


Mr. Wright.—1. Having,’ fince the mecting of the r6ti inftant, given the moft deliberate 
and authentic confideration to the obfervations of Mr. Wittwer, exprefiive of bis ideas of the 
manner in which the account for Ceylon, from the ft November £798 to the 31{t December 
¥801, fhould be ftated, and having carefully reperufed the Report of the Committee of the Houle 
of Commons; Mr. Wright finds bimfelf under the neceffity of objecting altogether to the 
principles of framing the Ceylon Account, contended for by Mr. Wittwer. 

, ad. Mr, Wright conceives, thef principles have been adopted on a miftaken conftrudtion of 
the Committee’s Report. No mention is made in that Report of Extra Expences as toCeylon, and 
tke other Ditch ‘Iflands;,. the. only article of the Company’s claims, in which the Committee 
shave ufed the terms Extraordinary Expences, is the charge for the Expedition to Egypt. Andas to 
the inference from the mode of ftatement in the accouat before the Committee, Mr. Wright 
muft be permitted to doubt its accuracy. That the account was drawn out by the Company’s 
‘Officers is certain ; ‘but if it were formed upon the principles ftated, it is to be recoileéted, that 
the Company expected the full reimburfement of the amount; which being denied,. the account 
neceflarily, as Mr. Wright conceives, is liable to correction and alteration, as well in principle as 
an figures, under the Report of the Committee. 

«gh Mr: Wright admits, the proceeding hitherto obferved in examining the Dutch Accounts 
‘has been upon the principle now propeled, on his part, as well as on that of Mr. Wittwer; but a 

_. More attentive examination has convinced Mr. Wright of the error therein, 

4th, That the Committee referred to the account before them is net difputed. The difference 
of opinion arifes from the conftruGtion of their intentions, as tothe alteration to be made in it 
‘qn the principles they have recommended. 

5th. If the revifion, according to Mr. Wittwer’s conftrudtion, is to be proceeded on folely in 
view.to the account as tated, Mr. Wittwer has only to examine the charges made by the Com- 
pany, to fee if they are corre& or otherwife; whereas he himfelf appears to depart from this view, 
by introducing the Ceylon Books from sft November 1798, the charges in which are not in the 

account as ftated. The books were never completely, until within thefe few days, in the 
Company’s poffeffion; the receipts and charges in them were not fubjeét to the Company's 
authority. 

6. Now, if the obje€tion to admit the expence of the Malay Corps, « becaufe it was nat taken 
> an the original formation of the account,’ be valid, the fame reafon fhould, in juftice, operate to 
the exclufton of the charges in the Ceylon: Books, from November 1798; for the charges fpeci- 
fied in thofe books “ were not taken in the original, | formation of the account ;” and as to the ob- 
fervation of the charge for the Malay Corps, itis certain, that it never occurred to recollection 
at any of the difcutfions that took place. 

7. Butfurther, Mr. Wright obferves, that the Committee, in the claffification of the feveral 
Aheads of claim, have placed “ the Expence of the Capture and Maintenance of Malacca and the 
Moluccas, and for the Maintenance of Ceylon,” in the third clafs, to be egually divided between 
the Public and the Company. Xt feems neceflary, therefore, in ftating the whole expence, thac the 
ordinary, as well as other charges, fhould be included, It does not appear that, in any other 
manner, the expence can be faid to be equally divided. There is no “ exception of the peace 
‘eftablifhment,” mentioned by Mr. Wittwer, contained in the Committee’s Report. 

8. The principle above-mentioned appears fo equitable as fcarcely, in Mr. Wright’s opinion, to 
ailmitof doubt. How can it be faid, that two parties bear an expence equally between them, 
if from the aggregate a Proportion is firft deduéted, and charged exclufively to one of the 
parties ? 

g. Mr. Wittwer has evidently formed his ideas of the mode he has fuggefted of ftating the 
accounts, from obferving, in the difcuffions that formerly took place on the Company’s claims, 
the terms “extra expence’’ made ufe of, as well as from feeing thefe terms in the accounts; but 
in regard to the latter, he muft be fenfible that they contain other items, befides the additional al~ 
lowances to the troops, incidental to war; and, as to the former, Mr. Wright mutt repeat his 
doubt of the accuracy of the inference thence deduced, for the reafon above ftated. The terms 
“extra expence’ ate liable to different conftruétions. ‘The queftion ftill recurs, what are extra 
expences? They may fignify expences for which the revenues of the country cannot provide ; in 
which fenfe Mr. Wright has reafon to believe they were taken; during the former difcuffion rela-. 
tive to Ceylon. It is obvious, alfo, that the whole expence, whether ordinary or otherwife, of 
troops employed in defending foreign poffeffions, becomes an “ extra expence,”” when new levies 
are made to fupply the place of thofe troops, or where fuch levies are made for the exprefs purpofe 
of being fo employed. 

10, The latter obfervation is particularly applicable to the Malay Corps, mentioned above. 
‘But Mr. Wright purpofely refrains from infifting on the more general argument in fupport of his 
opinion, upon the prefent occafion, founded on the increafe made to the ordinary military eftablifh- 
ment, for the purpofe, among others, of maintaining the Dutch Pofleffions, this being a fubject 
involving confiderations of a greater extent, which can be determined only by fuperior authorities, 

m1, Mr. 


18th April 
1807. 


16 Appendix 4 The First REPORT jrom the Sevect Commirrzs 


11. Mr. Weight has before noticed the difficulties in the way’ of making out the account’ in 
the mode propofed ; and Mr. Wittwer has fully admitted thefe difficulties in bis recent obfervations, 
wherein he allows, that it mutt, in fome degree, be ftated by computation. From what is above 
remarked, Mr. Wright very much doubts the practicability of making up the accounts from May 
1796 to December 180%, upon the uniform principle mentioned; or that uniformity of ftate~ 
ment will be preferved to that period. It is evident, in any view, that neither cleariefs nor accu- 
racy of calculation can be expeéted from the means propofed, and that, after all, the account: will 
be, in part, an eftimate, and that formed on very uncertain grounds. - - 

12, To conclude ;—The manner in which the account fhould-:now be ftated, Mir. ‘Wright 


conceives is this : 


gat April 
1807. 


13. The whole expence of whatever kind, defrayed by the Company for Ceylon fom the. 1 
May 1796 to the 31ft October 1798, to be charged. 

14. From the aft November £798 to the 31f December 2801, the whole of the fapplies to 
or payments on account of Ceylon, by the Company, to be charged. 

15. Half of the above, according to the Report of the Committee, to be allowed to the Com- 
pany. 

16. The reafon fer tating the latter period in the way propofed, is, that from the iff. November 
1798, the Company had no controul over the expences of the [Mand ;'it would. be-obvioufly unjuft, 
therefore, to make them accountable for any proportion of difburfements made under fuch cir~ 
ccumftances, nor does Mr, Wright conceive this was intended. 

17. As to Malacca and the Moluccas, the whole of the Company’s expence, whether ordinary 
ar otherwife, to be ftated during the entire period of the accounts ; half of which to be carried to 
the credit of the Company, conformable to the rule!aid down in the Committee’s Report. 

- 18, Upon thefe principles alone, Mr. Wright conceives, the account fhould be ftated ; therefore, 
without the fanGtion of his fuperiors, he does not feel himfelf jultified in acquiefcing in any other 
mode, 


Mr. Wittwer having flated, in his Minute of the 16th inflant, the grounds on which he has been 
led to form his opinion on the principles laid down in the Report of the Committe of the Houle 
of Commons, for the fettlement of the account between the Public and the Company, in fo far 
as relates to Ceylons and Mr, Wright having, in his reply of the 18th, fated his view of the 
intention of the Committee, in the principle laid down by them, ina way direély contrary, and 
having further extended his view of the operation of the principle beyond what was fuppofed to 
be in contemplation ; the difcuffion on this point mutt neceflarily be deferred, till Mr. Wittwer 
fhall have fubmitted the whole of the proceedings to the confideration of the Lords of the Trea 
fury, as he fhould not conceive himfelf authorized to agree to fuch a radical change in the mode 
of ftatement, if even the obfervations of Mr. Wright had operated to produce any alteration in 
the fentiments of Mr, Wittwer on the fubje@, 

Under fach circumftances, what has now been remarked might fuffice, But there are fome 
points in the obfervations laft made by Mr. Wright, which Mr. Wittwer fecls himfelf bound, in 
juttice to himfclf, and in vindication of his proceedings, more diftinéily to notice, left it fhould 
be fuppofed that Mr. Wittwer, from a pertinacity in his own opinions, had been the means of 
protrating the completion of an inveftigation, which on every confideration, both regarding the 
Public and the Eaft India Company, it is defirable fhould be brought toa clofe, 

Mr. Wright, it is prefumed, muft admit, that, where principles are only laid down in the 
general manner in which they are laid down in the Report of the Committee, the interpretation 
of their intention muit be a matter of opinion only, and that therefore the difficulty of coming to 
a fatisfa&ory conclufion is great, 

Mr. Wittwer, however, conceives it proper to offer fome further remarks, in fupport’ of the 
conclufions he has been induced to draw, and to detail the grounds of them. It is impoffible for 
him to judge what were the intentions of the Committee, or on what principles the claflification 
of the claims was formed, further than as it may be gathered from the Report and Appendix. 
‘The third clafs, refpecting which the difference of opinion has now arifen, is “ An Account of 
“ the Expence incurred by the Capture and Maintenance of Malacca and the Moluccas, and for 
* the Maintenance of Ceylon, deduéting the Profit on Spices,” which is preferbed to be equally 
divided between the’'Company and the Public; and the Account No. 3. in the Appendix, is re- 
ferred to in the margin. 

Mr. Wittwer mutt be allowed to prefume, that the component parts of the account, thus claffed 
by the Committee, muft have been underftood by them, and that the term Extra Expences of the 
Military, diftin@ly mentioned in moft of the ycar’s ftatements, was underftood to be on the fame 
principles as in the other accounts, viz. the Charges exclufive of what would have been dif 
burfed by the Company, if the troops had remai.ed on the Peninfula, unemployed on foreign expe- 
ditions ; and not merely rhe extra expence for which the revenues of the conquered countries could 

ot 


on the Aygains or Tus East Innta Company. za 


‘not provide, as adverted to by M r, Wright.—Mr. Wittwer admits, that the Committee, in their 
Report, do not exprefsly and literally fanétion any exception as to peace éfablifoment; but he refts 
tis opinion of the intentions of the Committee folely upon the mrafs of collateral evidence to be 
-colleéted from the Report and Appendix. Whether the principle Mr. Wittwer contends for be 
founded in equity or not, is not the point in queftion. He refers to the Record, from which may 
diftin@ly be gathered, the Company have extenfive claims upon the Public; thefe claims are 
arranged under diftin& heads in feveral accounts, which accounts are ultimately brought to the 
Confideration of Parliament, and in which accounts the Company only demand reimburfement of 
extra charges, on the principle already ftated by Mr. Wittwer. Can Mr, Wittwer, therefore, be 

sauthorized to fuppofe, that the Committee of the Houfe, to whom thefe accounts were referred, 

scould intend te give the Company what they did not originally demand, or that, in dividing the 
fum claimed between the Public and the Company, the divifion was to be made otherwife than on 
sthe accounts under their confideration ?—This account, with the others, was ftated to require 
revifion; but shat, Mr. Wittwer conccives, was fimply inveftigation or examination of the 
caccount itfelf. If additions were to be made to it, or alterations in principle introduced, it is to be 

-prefumed they would have been diftinétly mentioned in the Report. 

* Finally, Mr. Wittwer cannot admit of the diftinétion mentioned by Mr. Wright, as to the in- 
terpretation of the intention of the Committee, with refpect to the term extra expence being appli~ 
cable only to claims, the whole of which are allowed. 


‘COPY of a Letter from Gzorce Harrison, Efquire, to Mr. Wrrtwer, dated 
18th June 18073 with the Extract from the Minutes-of the Lords Commifioners of 
the Treafury, of the 12th June, enclofed therein, 


SIR, 

Tue Lords Commiffioners of His Majefty’s Treafury having had under their confideration 
your Letter of the 23d April 1807, praying further dire@tions relative to the examination of your 
Accounts with the Eaft India Company ;—I am commanded by their Lordfhips to tranfmit-a Copy 
‘of their Minute thereon, for yous information and guidance, 


Tam, Sir, 
‘Your moft obedient Servant, 
Treafury Chambers, (Signed) GEO, HARRISON. 
18th June 1807. 
©, N. Wittwer, Efq. 


Extrat of TREASURY MINUTE, ated rath June 1807. 


Reap Letter from Mr. Wittwer, dated 23d April laft, requefting further direCtions relative to the 
examination of the-Accounts between the Public and the Eaft India Company. 

Read alfo Report of the Committee of the Houfe of Commons on the Account between the 
Public and the Eaft India Company, and the Papers prefented to the Houle of Commons, relating 
to the faid account, ordered to be printed the 27th June laft. 

My Lords cannot entertain a doubt that the principles eftablifhed by the Committce of the 
Houte of Commons, for the adjuftment ef the claims of the Eaft India Company againft the Public 
for the Expences incurred at Ceylon and the Eaftern IMlands, were adopted with a reference to the 
accounts prefented by the Company, and then a@tually before the Committee, as printed in the 
Appendix to their Report ; and confequently, as the extra expences alone of the troops employed 
on thofe fervices are generally ftated in thefe accounts, that it could not be in the contemplation 
of the Committee, that any part of the ordinary expences thereof fhould be made a charge againit 
the Public, Upon this point My Lords conccive it to be impoiible that there fhould exift any 
difference of opinion between the refpeciive Accountants, as far as relates to the periods for 
which the accounts were aCtually before the Committee, and upon which they had to decide; nor 
are My Lords aware of any principle being laid down or any exception taken in the faid Report, 
from which it can be inferred, that it was in the contemplation of the Committee that a different 
tule and feale of adjuftment fhould be applied to the aceounts of the charge incurred at the above 
fettlements, fubfequent to the periods for which the accounts were then before them, What 
pofible ground can be affigned for any di jon from the principle adogted by the Committec, as 
far as it applies to the charges incurred for the Eaftern Iflands, My Lords are altogethe: at a iofs to 
conie@ture, as they are not apprized of any circumftance or occurrence which eccalioned any change 
whatever in the fituation of ¢ Tflands, either tdation to the Eaft India Company or to 

261, the 


38 Appendix so The-Finsr REPORT from the Serecr Cosmrrrer 


the Public, at any period between 1798 and 18013 and they art therefore éeciledly of opinion 
that the ordinary charges cannot be admitted in this part of the account. But with refpect to 
Ceyloe, My Lords are difpofed to be of opinion that it may fairly admit ofa doubt, whether the 
change made in the Government of that Hland in November 1798, and confequently in its con- 
neétion with and depeudance upon the Eaft India Company, would not wariant the application: of 
the principle ‘contended for by Mr. Wright, from that period, particularly (as it appeats that the 
Company then ceafed to have any controul over the expences’ of the [fland, and that aty {eparation 
of the orcinary from the extraordinary expenditure could only be made by eftimate and computation, 
and not from any exifting ftatement of the charges a@tually incurred. 

My Lords theretore conceive it may be expedient, without pledging themfelves to any final 
decifion on the queftion, that the account for Ceylon, from the 1ft of November 1798 to the 
git December 1801, thould be prepared in two ways, viz. 

it. ‘The whole of the fupplies or payments on account of Ceylon by the Company to be 
charged, and one half thereof to be allowed tothe Company. 

adly., That from, the total of the above amount of fupplies or payments by the Company, there 
Should be deducted in the firft inftance, fuch a fum as, according to the belt eftimate or computa-- 
tion chat. can be made by the Accountants, the ordinary charges may have amounted to, and that 
one half of the remainder fhould be allowed to the Company. 

When the account is thus prepared, My Lords will have this part of the queftion again under 
their confideration ; and in cafe the doubts they cannot but entertain fhould not then be removed, 
and the difference between them and the Eaft India Company cannot be otherwile fatisfactorily 
adjufted, My Lords will feel it their duty to fubmit to Parliament the expediency of referring to 
another Committee the Reports made by former Committees, and a!l other documents on this 
queftion, for their final examination, decifion and report, 

‘Tranfnit Copy of the foregoing Minute to Mr. Wittwer, for his information and guidance. 


COPY of a Letter from Mr. Wirrwer to the Honourable Henry WELLESLEY, 
dated 4th November 1807; with two Inclofures, 


SIR, Whitehall, 4th November 1807. 


I Am honoured with your Letter of the gth ult. fignifying the defire of the Right Honour- 
able the Lords Commiffioners of His Majefty’s Treafury, that I fhould fuggeft the Jateft period 
at which I think it would be pratticable to wind up the Accounts with the Maft India Company, 
either by the end of this year or the beginning of the next, 

Having in my letter to Mr. Harrifon, of the 16th Sept. adverted in a general way to the dif 
ficulty of defining the period when this bufinefs can be brought to a clofe, it now remains to 
explain more particularly the caufes to which this difficulty is to be afcribed. In fo doing, I 
mutt take leave to call to your recollection, that the account itfelf is prepared by Mr. Wright, 
the officer appointed by the Eatt India Company; that my province is to examine with him the 
principles on which the account is framed, with the calculations. The objeétions which I have 
felt mylelf obliged to make to feveral of the documents from India, and in other refpeéts, have 
confiderably lengthened the difcuflion, and of courfe protracted the fettlement of the bufincls. As 
that gentleman muft naturally be belt informed, as to the means he may be furnifhed with to 
obviate my objections, as well as of the extent of the claims which may ftill be outftanding upon 
the Public, the neceflity of a reference to him, before I could comply with their Lordfhips” 
direGions, will, I truft, appear obvious. 

. have, therefore, addreffed Mr. Wright upon this fubject. Copies of my letters to him, and 
of his reply, are hereunto annexed, as the beft means of bringing to the view of My Lords the 
pfature of the obftacles in the way of winding up the account. 

And I take leave to add, that the part calling more particularly for the confideration of their 
Lordthips is the Account of the demands by the Office of His Majefty’s Paymafters General, which 
is effentially requifite before any balance can be even eftimated: and it is at the fame time to be 
obferved, that this account will be minutely examined on the part of the Company. 

On the whole, therefore, I humbly hope it will appear to their Lordthips, that the delay in the 
fettlement of this long pending account, is folely to be attributed to the various circumftances 
which have now been brought to their confideration, and that it is not in my power to yield a 
literal obedience to their commands, by defining the period when the bufinefs can be brought to a 
final clofe. ig 

Iam, Sir, 
a With due refpeat, 
Your moft obedient fervant, 
THOs NICHOs WITTWER. 
Honourable Henry Wellefley, a 


&c, Ke. 


o the AFFAIRS oF THe East Inpta Company. 19 


SIR, Whitchall, 26 O@ober 1807. 

Havine received the commands of the Right Honourable the Lords Commiffioners of His 
ajefty’s Treafury to fuggeft the lateft period at which it would be pragticable to wind up the 
Accounts depending between the Public and the Eaft India Company, either by the end of this 
year or the beginning of next, I am unable to yield obedience to them, without a reference to you 
upon the fubject, 

As it naturally falls to you to be beft acquainted with the extent of the claims of the Company 
upon the Public, and with the documents which may have been received to eftablith thofe claims, 
I thal! efteem myfelf obliged, if you will favour me wiih fuch obfervations as fhall affift me in 
replying to their Lordfhips’ dire@tions ; alfo with your opinion as to the period at which it may 
probably be practicable to wind up the whole of the accounts as they now ftand, 


lam, Sir, 
Your moft obedient fervant, 
(Signed) T.N. WITTWER. 
William Wright, Efq. 
SIR, Eaft India Houfe, 2d November 1807. 


I wave been honoured with yours of the 26th ult. ftating that you have “ received the 
« commands of the Right Honourable the Lords Commiffioners of His Majefty’s Treafury, to 
“ fuggeft the Jateft period at which it would be practicable to wind upthe Accounts depending 
«© between the Public and the Eaft India Company, either by the end of this year or the beginning 
“of next; that you are unable to yield obedience to thofe commands, without a reference to me on 
“ the fubjeét ;” defiring, therefore, * fuch obfervations from me as may affift you in replying to 
“ their Lordfhips’ dire&tions ;” and “ my opinion, as to the period within which it may probably 
“be praéticable to wind up the whole of the accaunts as they now ftand,”” 

In reply, I have to obferve, that it is not pofiible, in my opinion, to wind up the accounts 
either by the end of this year or the beginning of next, and for the following reafons: 

> aft. From the want of the-complete accounts from India of the charges of the Egyptian Expe- 
dition, as I have underftood from you, in the courfe of the examination we have been inaking, that 
you are not fatisfied with the corre€tnefs of the documents from which thofe charges have been 
tated; and I have no hefitation in acknowledging they are not fufficiently perfect to authorize 
your admiffion of them : before, therefore, this article of the Corapany’s claims can be clearly and 
explicitly ftated, it will be neceflary to wait the arrival of more particular information from 
India, . 

2dly. From the want of ftatements from His Majefty’s Pay Office, relative to the demands on. 
the Company for expences of the King’s Regiments ferving in India, you are aware, that thefe 
demands, as hitherto received, include only to the end of the year 1803, and the particular 
explanations of the accounts to that period, fo long ago and fo repeatedly defired, have not yet been 
furnithed. 

3dly. From want of more precife explanations regarding fome of the heads of charges againft 
the Public, contained in the laft abftra&t account, with a copy’ of which you have been furnithed ; 
viz, the expences of the lait Expedition to the Cape, thofe relative to Trinidad and Buenos 
Ayres. 

"and, laftly, From the difference of opinion which prevails, as to the conftru@tion of the prin- 
ciples intended to be laid down by the Committee of the Houfe of Commons, in their Report of 
June 1805, for tating the accounts of Ceylon and the Eaftern Iflands. From the communications 
I have been honoured with, I apprehend it is not likely that the Company will be contented to 
abide by the decifion of the Right Honourable the Lords Commiffioners of His Majefty’s Trea- 
fury, contained in their Lordfhips’ Minute of the 12th June laft, on the reference you found 
yourfelf under the neceffity of making to them upon this fubject, Until, therefore, fome accom- 
modation of this difagreement fhall take place, the final fettlement of the accounts muft be 
poftponed. 

‘Thefe are the principal obftacles which prefent themfelves to the completion of the accounts, 
at either of the periods you have mentioned; and from what is above ftated, you will readily per- 
ceive that it is entirely out of my power to offer an opinion, as to the period within which it may 
be praéticable to wind up the whole of the accounts as they now ftand, 

I have the honour to be, 
Sir, 
Your obedient humble fervant, 
(Signed) ‘Ws WRIGHT. 
T. N, Wittwer, Ef, 


so Appendix to The First REPORT from the Senxct Commirrie 


¢ 


COPY of a Letter from the Honourable Henry Wetresey to Mr. Wirrwer, 
dated 31ft December 1807; with the Extra& from the Minutes of the Lords Com- 
miffioners of the Treafury enclofed therein, 


SIR, 7 
Tue Lords Commiffioners of His Majefty’s Treafury having had under their confideration 
"your Letter of the 4th November laft, in anfwer to one from this Board, relative to the probable 
period at which it will be practicable to wind up the Accounts between the Public and the Eaft 
India Company, I am commanded by their Lordthips to tranfmit a Copy of their Minute thereon, 
for your information and guidance, 
T am, Sir, 
Your moft obedient Servant, 
Treafury Chambers, (Signed) HH, WELLESLEY. 
grit Dec. 1807.3 


“TAN, Witwer, Efqe 


Extra&t of TREASURY MINUTE, dated 14th December 1807 


Reap Letter from Mr. Wittwer, dated 4th November laft, in anfwer to one from this Board, 
relative to the probable period at which it will be praéticable to wind up the Accounts between the 
Public and the Eaft India Company, and enclofing copy of the correfpondence between him and 
Mr. Wright, the Officer appointed by the Eaft India Company to prepare the accounts. 

My Lords are of opinion, notwithftanding the feveral difficulties ftated by Mr. Wittwer and Mr. 
‘Wright, owing to fome of the accounts not being as yet received from India, and to that of the 
Pay Office not being completely made out, that it would be very defirable to balance the Account 
between the Public and the Eaft India Company, as well as it can be done, from the materials and 
vouchers which now exift, or which may very {peedily be brought forward, and put into the 
hands of the refpeétive Accountants, up to the end of the year 1803, which My Lords con- 
ceive will include all claims on either fide, up to the clofe of the laft war: And My Lords are 
therefore pleafed to dire&t, that the Accountants, having reference to the principles laid down in 
the Reports of the Committees of the Houfe of Commons, and in the Minute of this Board of 
1ath June laft, fhould proceed to prepare fuch an account, and to ftrike the balance thereupon, fo 
that it may, if poffible, be fubmitted to their Lordfhips early in the enfuing feffion of Parliament. 

In direéting this account fo to be prepared and balanced, My Lords are of opinion, that, notwith- 
ftanding any balance which may be declared to be duc on either fide, it fhall be open to either 
party to produce fuch claims, though arifing prior to the end of the year 1803 ; and that fuch claims 
fhould be admitted, if properly fupported by proofs and vouchers to the fatistaétion of the other; 
and, in like manner, that either party may, upon what n:ay appear to him fufficient grounds (if 
furnifhed to him by any information or documents obtaincd fubfequent to the account being fo 
balanced) proceed to challenge and difallow any items therein, and claim, upon a ftatement of the 
cafe, to have fuch particular heads of charge reconfidered. And My Lords are further of opinion, 
that any fettlement of accounts that may take place between the Public and the Eaft India Com- 
pany, upon the principles, and with the exceptions hercin ftated, ought not to preclude the re- 
{pective Accountants from proceeding to examine and baance the accounts fubfequent to the 
year 1803, as expeditioufly as the nature of the refpective ciaims, and of the vouchers by which 
they may be fupported, will admit; but that this latter acccunt fhould be proceeded upon feparately, 
and kept diftinét from the former. 

Trarfmit Copy of this Minute to Mr. Wittwer, for his information and guidance, and to the 
Paymaftcr of the Forces, with directions to expedite, as much as poffible, the Account of Clai:s 
outfanding againft the Eaft India Company in his Office, up to the end of the year 2893. 


on the Arratrs or Tae East Inpra Company. 


at 


ln ETS 


Appendix, N* 2. 


Charges in Regimental Accounts objected to—Charges in Extra Payments objettionable—Difputed Dedudtion from 
Pay-Office Charges—Abftract Amount Deductions or Sufpenfions from Pay-Office Accounts, 


CHARGES iy REGIMENTAL ACOUNTS OBJECTED TO, 


NATURE and AMOUNT of the CHARGE. 


GROUNDS of OBJECTION, 


1793+ 


1796. 


1797- 


3798. 


77th Regiment: Paid goth Augutt 1792, 
for Subfiftence toa Detachment - + 

aed (asthy Dragoons: Extra Feed, paid 
May 1796 

- D- Subiitence, poid at the Cape - 


ath Regiment of Foot: Sublilence, paid 
12th April 1796 - + 


igth D°: Subfiftence, paid April 1796 - 
Payments in the Weft Indies, for the 
12th and 1gth Foot - 


33d Regiment: Subfiftence and other Pay- 
ments prior to November 1796 - = - 


78th Regiment: Subfiftence, to October 
1796 Se ee SU Ne OS oF 


D° to De - 
D° paid at the Cape 
Allowance - + 
Off-reckonings - 


Soth Regiment: 


fone 


78th Re 
4th 


iment: Allowance to Captains, 
larch to 24th December 1796, 

£:797. 14. 2 

Proportion prior to mt November 

3796 = + ay vs 

- D° - Off-reckonings, 4th March to 24th 

December 1796 - - £.2,672. 8. 0. 

Proportion to 1ft November 1796 - 


8oth Regiment: Similar Payments, the 
pexiod not ftated - 

52d Regiment: Rearwitingy, paid 7th July 
and 18th Auguft 1798 = 


= D° - Subfitence, paid a5th Augut — - 
ut Regiment: Subjittence, Feid Avgutt 


- wee Of- reckonings = - se ef 

y2d D°: ~D® - D* - ee 

- D® - Subfiftence : 

25th (2gth) Dragoons: Sublience, ‘paid 
March 1798 = - 

- D° - Offreckonings, paid June ass - 

= D® - Allowances to Captains, . 


d, 8 
- & 12 
700 — — 
*150 — —1(7>  * 
6726 ——j| - - 
7349 == 


597 11 9 is oe 
2,194 11 

56,796 16 11 
ar atte & 24969 —~{ 


3037 ——-| - - 


1,000 ——| - = 


tsps |b > 


2,724 ——1C 
1,106 14. —| 
6,800 — — 
secon | ~ 
geo 18 |S 


734, 75th, & 80th: Off sekonings for |, 


Augmentation = - 


Soth Regiment: Subfiftence to Tnvalids, 
paidat the Cape = = 

git D D: Sublilence paid in Portugal, to 

2gth Oober 1798 - — - - 


795 14 10) =~ 


2218 4h - + 


2,965 12 5) > = 
|——-——~—— 1 24,184 16 


F 


4 


| 


| 


‘The period of Charge being antecedent 
to the commencement by the A@ of 1793. 


‘The Regiment embarked at the Cape for 


| India, April 1796. 


» Requires explanation as to date. 


The Regiment did not embark till June 
1796, when anotber large payment is 
charged, If this fum, £.6,726, was for 
Subfiitence prior to June, it is not charye- 
able to the Company. 


If this was for a period prior to the agth 
April, when the Regiment embarked. 


The Regiment embarked 1ft November 
1796 from the Cape. 

‘The Regiment embarked 1 November 
tgs at 

Such part as belongs to a date prior to 
aft November 1796, 


Regiment embarked 1ft November 1796. 


Such part as belongs to a date prior io 
aft November 1796. 
¢ Regiment lett India in Febrva 
1708, and difembarked in Englan 
ad i aneee 1798. 


The Regiment difembarked 16th July 
1798. 
p De. 


If for a period prior to 29d March 1798, 
when the Regiment embarked, not cliarge- 
able. 

If the Regiments were augmented in 
numbers, and the Augmentation did net 
proceed to India, the expence not charge- 
able. 

Invalids, it is prefumed, were kept ut the 
Cape, and not fert to India. 

For periods prior to embarkation of the 
Regiment, viz. ad Ostober 1798. 


(Ceontinucd.) 


a 


18e0.. 
1801. 


1802. 


1803. 


1804. 


1805. 


1806. 


31807. 


Appendix to The Fret REPORT from the Secect CoMMITTER 


GROUNDS of OBJECTION, 


ioth Regiment of Foot: Subfiftence paid at oe . ae de 
an Cap e, 24th January 1709" Pyare to be for part of the Regiment 
gilt Regiment: Oi ~reckonings for: Aug: 
mentation - - 
734 Do ~~ - - D = ve 


36th D°; Subfifience paid in Auguft 


See above, as to Augmentation. 


‘Yf the Regiment difembarked i9th July, 
and were paid in advance in India, 
Improperly charged, the Regiment being 


- D°_- Recruiting, paid in June ‘on its voyage homie. 


75th Regiment 
Subfiftence of Tnvalids, Invalids at the Cape cannot be charge. 
i - able to the Company, it is not to be fup- 

mae eee pofed they were fent to India. 


ot. De D -- Dp - - De‘ 


1gth Regiment Light Dragoons: Clouthing 
and Accoutrements for Augmentation - It is underftood that the Company are 
Horfe Furniture for rg chargeable only for the King’s troops from 
Offreckonings for D° the petied of cheir embarkation for India) 
i confequently thefe Regiments thould be 
ee : Dragoons: Soe nee cloathed and accoutred, and the Furniture 
e5th DD - - Do - - De - - for the Horfes provided, before embarka- 
Similar Charges for Cloathing and Ac- tion, Alfo the Augmentation cannot be 
coutrements and Ofi-reckonings for ern le to the Company, until the force 


é to the Regiments proceeded to the 
Augmentations to the Regiments of E aide Indies. eg 


Subfiftence to Invalids at the 
Cape - - ee 
Tavalids ie the Cape cannot be confdered 
as on the Indiafervice. 
Invalids at the Cape, for different Re- i 
giments, charged this year - - | 1,248 1 —, 
Off-reckonings for the Augmentation : r 
and to complete, for different Regi- . 
ments, charged this year. 21,377 10 6 See above, 


oa ett Allowances for Great Coats -| 163 16 — 


Cannot be required for India fervice. 


By the Adjutants Generals Return of 
28th April 1808, this Regiment left the 
Cape in September 1802, and February 
1803 proceeded to Ceylon, where it re- 
mained until February 18045 confequently 
is not chargeable to the Company prior to 
the laft-mentioned period. 


Gsth - - Payments this year - 6,353 6 — 
pesca 


8th, 19th, & 22d Dragoons: Accoutre- See above, 1801. 
ments and Horfe Furniture - agin g 
sath Regiment of Foot: Subfittence at the ’ Such part as relates to a p: 
Cape a 930 17 3 to embarkation, 
See note in 1802, 


ec prior 


65th - - Charges this year - 9576 18 11 

Such part as relates to a period prior to 

17th Foot: Subfiftence - = embarkation, viz. 4th July. 
|_——___ 


‘The Regiment embarked goth April 1805, 


534 Foot: Pay, March 1805 ‘This Regiment embarked gth July. 


sgth D°- D® June as5th - 
D°- D° paid 12th July 
67th D* - Pay, 25th Mach 
De 18th April - 
aot jemery 
25th Febru: 
4th March 


This Regiment embarked 22d April. 


‘This Regiment embarked 234 February. 


Deane 


i 
goth Foot: Pay, 25th Sprit iS The Regiment embarked 6th J mip 
se ee oth May - = 
+ 2+ + + + 19th Dv 
- De “ The Regiment difemabarked i in Pacha 
738 De =D - any the a1ft June 1806. 


Preis cana a au 1807 - . ie Se he eh dap Gaal ; 
iment - D? - Sgt De - D® - itended 8 
Gils Regiment - D° - De = - A ‘i aftand ed Augutt 1801 


ift Foot: Pay, esth March - 
Eee feet mh April = ‘The Regiment embarked sth Apa toy 


- - De-aft - + 2 ve, 
agth Dé- De -asth May = . The Regiment embarked roth June, 


on the Arvarrs or Tue East Inpta Company. - 23 


Extra Price Extra 
of Bread aud ‘Allowance, 


Meat and 
Necefaries ; Extra Feed to 


Tankeepers. | Confolidated [Contingencies the Dragoon 
Allowanees, Regiments. 


It is underftood, that Charges of thefe defcriptions having no relation to Troops in India, are 
not properly carried to the debit of the Company. 


CHARGES 1n EXTRA PAYMENTS OBJECTIONABLE. 


YEARS 
in which the se 
Charges, BATURS oh DROME et GROUNDS or OBJECTION. 


are made, the CHARGE. 


Major Dirom left India in February 


2793: | Pay toMajor Dirom,asDe- ff. 8. a n 
3 1792, and another Officer was paid as 


ty Adjutant General in 


India, 25th December 1792 Deputy Adjutant . General. from that 
£.28 10. —{ to gft January 17993 - 28 10 —)] period. 
1794. D°- De - D°- tothe | Ane a AS cae 
£195.15. — gift July 1793 ~~ 135.15 —$] P > -_ 


1795: | Pay of Major Haldane, as De- 
“i pty Quarter Mafter Ge 
neral in India, 365 days, to 
£-365. — —| goth Novemberi794 - 365 — —. 


Major Haldane left India in De- 
1797: | Pay of Major General Rofe, i General Rofs left India 10th OSober 


cember 1793, and another Officer was” 
paid as Deputy Quarter Mafter General 
thereafter. 


as Adjutant General in ‘a another Offi 
: aid as 
India, 365 days to 24th 1793, and another Officer was pai 
Oétober 1794 ys ae a cadet Adjutant General after that time. 
Pay of Lieut, Colonel Night- 
ingale as Major of Brigade, 
212 days to gift March 
795 = > te 
Paffage Money to Officers of 
the 78th Regiment te the 
Cape - = = = 4,974 15 10 
Paffage Money to Officers of 
the 80th Regiment to the 
Larxaigsol Cape - + = + 666 --. 


Lieutenant Colonel Nightingale left 
India in July 1794, and another Officer 
was paid as Major of Brigade after that 
period, 

The Paffage Money of thefe Officers 
from England to India was paid in 
Bengal. 


106 — — 


The Regiment not chargeable to the 
Company until after it left the Cape. 


24 


Appendix # The First REPORT from the Suizet Committee 


= 


Charges in Extra Payments Obje@ionable—continued. 


in wh the 


NATURE end AMOUNT of 
the CHARGE, 


GROUNDS or OBJECTION. 


17993 


f. 2,875. — — 
18002 


Ln. V7 2% 


1802: 


E07 


1803: 


£1,305. — — 
1804: 


£.348. — — 
1805. 


£159. 4. 6. 
1806: 


Lago. 6. 6. 


Pay to Lieut. Colonel Auch- 
muty, as Adjutant General 
in India <2 

Pay to Lieut. Célonel Hall, 
as Quarter Mafter General 
in India 7 

Paflage Money to Indie, for 
Officers of the 36th, 52d, 
ult, and 72d Regiments 

De - - - - 6 Officers of 
the igth Regiment, 
£1805 52 = 


Pay to Dr. Ewart, as Phyfi- 
cian General in Ceylon, to 
24th December 1798 = - 


_| Paffage Money to Dy, Ewart 


Pay to Lieut, George Cornith, 
‘as Brigade Major, 337 
days to g1ft January 1799 1799 

Paffage to India for 

of Regiments ferving in 

Ceylon, £. 1.620. half - 

ie Money to India, of 

Officers of the sed Regi- 

ment - ‘= 


Pay to Lieut. Colonel Gordon 
as Adjutant General, 191 
days to 24th Avante 1801, 
£-191. and to Lieut. Co- 
Yonel Cliffe, as Quarter- 
Mafter General in India, 
186 days to 19th Auguft 
1801 £.186. = 

Pay to Dr. Ewart - 

Paffage Money to India for 
Officers of the 1gth and 
§1ft Regiments to India 

De - D® - to D? of 
the 71ft Regiment 

D° ~ D® - of the 61ft 
Regiment - - 


P 


‘Paffage Money to India of 


Officers of the 19th and 
5ift Regiments = - - 
Pay to Captain Handafyde, as 
Judge Advocate > = 


Paffage Money to India for 
Officers of the roth Regi- 
ment Foot - 

Staff Pay to General ‘Baird, 
from 11th May 1803 = 

D-- to General Sir 
James Craig, from 
December 1801 

D* -- Lieutenant Co- 
Jonel Nicbolfon, as 
Deputy Adjutant- 
General in India - 

Allowances to General Don 

Cloathing for Supernumera- 
ries of the late 9th Weft 
India Regiment — = 

Pay to Lieut. Colonel Nie 
cholfon roof oe 


Total - - £.16,439 19 — | 


~ 1,329 — 


Los ds dU Lieut. Colonel Auehmuty left India 
in January 1797, after which another 
380 — | Officer was paid as Adjutant General. 


For the fame reafon, 
380 — — 


2,095 — s 


‘Thefe Regiments left India in 1798, 
7 Halt the: Expence only to be borne 
by the Compaity. 

Dr. Eivart’s appointment as Phy‘i- 
cian General at Ceylon was not made 
by the Company, nor was Ceylon 


1017 7 ?(lunder the Company's difedion after 
49 — Odtober 1798. 
Lieut, George Cornith left India in 
March 1598, and anther Officer was 
168 10 — } | paidas Brigade Majorafier that period, 
See above. 
810 —— 
This Regiment left India in 1798. 
270 — — 
Thefe Officers left India in Fee” 
bruary 1801, and others were paid 
Adjutant and Quarter Mafter General 
from that time, 
377 — — 


See above. 

‘Thete Regiments were fetving in 
Ceylon, and no Expence thereof is 
chargeable to the Company after 
December 1801, 


This Regiment left India in 1798. 


This Regiment was not on the 
India Eftablithment, 


1140 — — 
12 Ne, 
95 — — 


See above. 


Captain Handafyde left India in 
183 — May 1803. 
The 19th Regiment was in Ceylon. 
95 — . 
General Baird left India in May 
$39 2 5 1803. 


General Sir James Craig’ left India 


428 12 2 in December 1801. 


Lieut, Colonel Nicholfon left India 
in December 1803. 
297 a 


1568 6 4 General Don was not in India, 


This Regiment was never in India, 
678 — 2 


24S peers See above. 


on the Arrains or Tit Easy Inp1a Company. 25 


ee 


Computed DEDUCTION from PAY-OFFICE CHARGES, 
for Regiments ferving in CeYLoy. 


The 72d Regiment was in Ceylon from Sept* to Dec’ 1795 : 
‘ ‘The Charge in 1795 is £. | 3,620 


fay gf - - 1,207 
The 52d Regiment was in Ceylon O@ober to Dect 1795: 
‘The Charge in 1795 is £.] 5,967 


fay Wt] - = | 1492 

‘The Flank Companies of the 71ft and 73d were alfo in 

Ceylon, but no jut Eftimate can be made of the propor- 
tion to be deducted. —a 

Deduétion from 1795 | -  ~ Pa 2,699 


1796.| The 52d Regiment was in Ceylon Jan’ to March: 
‘Total Charge £.| 6,899 


re fay V4 | = >) 785 
A Detachment continued till O&cber, but the proportion 
cannot be made, 


‘The 72d and 73d were in Ceylon the whole year: 
zed Total Expence f. | 8,282 
po- 


734 - 9,400 
; 17,682 
1/3 for January to April - 5,894 
nee 7,019 
é Tlalf of the remaining 2/3 | - - 5,894 
The 19th Regiment was in Ceylon December 1796: - 
Total Charge 1796 £. } 13,248 
fay 1f12 | 1,104 
halfjis |. -  - 552 
Deduttions from 17996 | - - | - - ; 14,065" 
-1797-| The 19th Foot was in Ceylon this year + - Total Charge | 11,180 
: half} = - | 5,590 
The 72d and 73d were in Ceylon Jan’ to April - D° °- | 105163 
fay 1/3 | 3,387 
half} = - 1,693 
The 8oth Regiment was in Ceylon March to December: 
Total Charge | 11,494. 
fay 5/6 | 9,520 
Mra | | o60 
Dedution from 1797 | .-  - - 12,043 
4798. | The 19th end 8oth Regiments were in Ceylon this year: 
‘agth Total Charge £9. 7,474 
goth - De - - 607 
14,082 
half} - - | 7,040 | 
Deduction from 1798 | * - aa 7,040 
-4799.| The igth and.8oth Regiments were in Ceylon this year : 
igth Total Charge £. | 7,105 
Both - Do - + 1396 
14,501 
half| - - 57253 
‘Deduétion from 1799] -  ~ as 7258 


Carricd over ~~ 


261. i G 


= = | = £] 43,008 


36 © Appendix # The First REPORT from the Setecr Commirten 
6 E 
a I, 
Computed Dedu@ion from Pay-Office Charges, for Regiments ferving in Ceylon—continued. 


Broughtover - - £.| - - | - ~- | 43,098 


-4800,| The igth, sift, and Soth Regiments were in Ceylon this year :| 
: agth Total Charge & 6,008 


sit - De 5,016 
soth - De + 1 5,125 
26,149 


half} -' "= | 8,075 
Deduion from 1800 | - - “+ 8,075 


1801.{ The agth, 5 1ft, and Both Regiments were in Ceylon this year 
’ roth Total Charge £. | 12,401 
Bia - D - 12,605 
8oth - De - - | 11,142 


‘half | - - | 18,074 


‘Deduétion from 1801 | - - - 18,074 


3802,! The'Charges for the Regiments at Ceylon in 1802 and 
following years, are ftated, in the Pay Oflice Accounts, to 


be for 1801. 
In 1802 the Charge fer the 19th Regimentis -  - | 8,281 
pit - D°- - - =| 6,147 
14,428 


half} -  - F214 
"| The‘8oth Regiment left Ceylon this year, and arrived-at 


Madras ia September 1802 : 
: ‘The whole Charge being £. | 8,730 


--take 7/¢ for the Sum to be divided | 5,092 
half 


“Deduétion from 1802 | - - | - - | 9,760 
ates" Sees eae sgth Regiment is - oe oe Ls 298 


Do - * - 51% - D® - - 193 
2 
half Ma 245, 
“Dedudtion from 1803 | - ~ - 245 


s180g.| The Gharge for thergth Regiment is - =  - At 302 


Deduétion from ¥805 | = 7 151 


 Asstract AMouNT -peptcrions or SUSPENSIONS from ‘the Pay Office Accouiits. 


Toran, 

“Charges i Regimental Accounts - - ~ ~- =| 289,088 256,584. 
De - D° -  ~- for Marches, Innkeepers, &c. 40,945, 51,250 
Charges in Extra Payments - + - © = +] 16,442 20,370 
D° - for Regiments ferving inCeylen - - -| 79,403 115,563 


+ | 443,767 
{ae 


on the Arrarns oF Tue East Inpia Company. 27 


Appendix, N° 3. 


EFFECTIVE STRENGTH OF. 
WIS MAJESTY’S REGIMENTS SERVING IN INDI Ay. 


-On the aft January in each Year from 1793 to 1807 inclofive, 


Appendix #0 The Frrsr REPORT from the Serect Committee x 


REMARKS, aft of it of aft of it of ih of at of | | 
REGIMENTS. Stating the Date, &c. of Embarkation Janvary | January | January January | January | January | 
india, 1793+ | 1794 | 1795: 1797+ | 1798. | 1799, 
pease |e | a 
g |Embarked for India from the Cape of Good Hope by’ 
Light Drag™) | divifions, at the following periods, viz. 13h Sept.@]- - -]- - -]- - - By bes foe ee aoe | 
Ul a803, 24 a 34 Nov. 1802, and 20th Feb’ 1803 
'agth De - - - |Embarked in February 1782 -) > + ©] qo 386 366 343 342 407 439 
d D° (late 25th) |Embarked from Europe in March 1796- - =|- = - --|- - = = 426 380 4 
th De (iateaschy| |Embarked from Europe in May 1796 - =. =|- - - Crt) pie ys hls a Ee 34n ne 
th D° (late 29th) /Embarked from Europe on 25th March 1798 - © -|- - - |- = -|~ ~ -|- - -|- = -|- = =] gg 


~ |Embarked on rath March 1783 from-England 


RETURN of the Effettive Strength of His Majefty’s Regiments ferving in Inpra, exclufive of Czyro, 


= 


and alfo the ‘Dates of their Difembarkation in Gre,, 


[Embarked from England on 25th Auguit 1798, and 
arrived in Indiain Aprili7g99-  - = -  - $|7 


= |Embarked from Europe, 8th June 1796 - = ~~ 
ae from Portimouth on 4th July 1804, and 

‘arrived at Bengal on 4th December 1804 — 
lEmbasked for India from the Cape of Good Hops in 2 

Hq September, O€tober & November 1802 - — §|~ 

lEmbarked from Enrope, Aprl1796 = = = 

Embarked for India, from the Cape of Good Hope, 
in November and December 1802, and in Febro- f] - 


asy 1803) 3) cae ye Ne oo 
ea. embarked on ah M 783, from England | 
; s f t 
et. { Embarked from. | on 2d OGober "1758, ey x 


frived,in India in April 1799- | -- = 
strlen Todih ape 99 


M! se 


PA 
i 
lEmbarked from Portfmouth on the zoth April 1805, 
and difembarked at Madras on 23¢.Augutt 1805 
Embarleed from the Ile of Wight on sath & 14: 9 
April 2805, and difembarked at Bombay 6n rath 
Avgult 1805-5 i= se = Sa 
Bmbarked at Foieimouth ofl oth July 1805) and ara ’ 
rived at Madras on the qth April 1806.» - 
fEmbarked from the- Cape: of Good Hope in Sep! 
10a and Feb'¥ 1803, and arrived at Ceylon i 
April 1803, from whence it embarked for Madras 
in February 180g = = == 
lEmbarked from Portfmouth on 224 April 1805, and 
difembatked at Bengal on 15th Septenibes 3805 
Embarked fram Porefmouth on 23d Feb €805, and } 
difembarked at Madras on.x8th Joly 1805 - = § 


Embarked 22d January 1781, from England = —- 


lembarkedin January 2779 from England = - =~ 


HEmboskedin January.3779- -- = = -= 


Comp" embarked on 26th March 1788 
6 -D° ~~ D? ~~ sith Febuary 1789 


JEmbarked asth March 1788 
ait 


barked 26th March'1788 See 


mbarked 28th March 2788 = 
mbarked from Eorope in March 1796, and pole! 5 


in India in the beginning of the yest 1797, — 
mbar from n England April 1796» and arized 2 
at Ce; on.at the beginning of 1797, andembarked ¢| — 
from Ceylon in Jone Rot for Bombay 
barked from the Cape of Good Hope on 26th 
(0.1793, and arrived in Indie in Feb 799 2 4] 
JEmbarked from the Cape of Good. Hope on’ sath 
“Feb? 1799, and arrived in India in April 1799 at 
‘barked from Portfmouth in Dee. 1998, and ar- 
vived as Boubay iaJene 17997 = 
backed feom the Cape of Good Hope on 26th 
(Oat. 4798, and arrived in India ia January tsy } © 


underftood, that this Regiment was in India at 
the period of its being fictt received into the Britith 


592 


this Reg* apy 
pears by the Re- 
dated if 


‘Trincomalee, and 
by the Rerurn,| 


on the Arrairs. or Tue East Inpta Companys. 2g 


on the aft January in each Year, from 1793 to 1807 inclufive; fpecifying the Dates of their Embarkation for Inp1a, 
Bartatn, as precifely as can be afcertained, 


Adjutant General’s Office, 28th April 1808: 


itt of tof | xtof | itof | rt of |: rt of | s@ of REMARKS, 
January | January | Janwary | Janvary |” January | Janvary | January | January Stating the Date, gc. of the Embarkation 
1800. 1801. 1802. 1893. 1804. | 1805. | 1806. | 1807 of certain Regiments from India, 

: Goats roth Lt Dragoons embarked from Madrss on the 2th 
ee ae 390 as |- - 2/0 seeps 1806, and arrived ia England in the month of Apri! 
389 387 489 
anh 380 393 44 

FE he 34S 395 fk f 
WP Lpbasked bey °F ats : 
Ceyion in Nove - Ta April 1801, the roth Foot proceeded with the Troop: 
$42 ( 18c0, an? SS es Cee Cs Cee Cs j lunder the orders.of M, Gen! Sir D, Baird to Egy;t. 
ed to Bombay ey 
March 1801. : 
650 648 soe |. 622 636.] 687. | 655 
675 518 615 613 
The g6th Reg’ drafted 427 mentothe 76ch Regiment, and- 
as SVEN MENS. “tt ox tee oe Se the remainder enibarked for Europe in O€tober 1758, and. 
Enbarked ? larriged in the Downs in July. 1799. 
35 ftorCeylon in| ~ ~ 
455 Ie eo. 5 
n|_ ‘The s2d Reg? drafted gor men to ether corps in India ja 
Februmy 17985 and the remainder, confifting of 106 Rank, * 
es ee cs es land Fite, embarked for Buyopt, and arrived inghe Downs.ia 
JAngut 179% 
s 
Be ele Ry ese ce epee SSP Ro eee ate wm ht ; 
In. the month of Odtober 1797) 485-mtn of the 71h Re- 
tices ess te on atta aa molec Ape ~ « ) |giment were drafted:to other Corps, and the remaind:r 122 
yen embarked for England. ‘ 
This Regiment left Madras in July 1795, and procceded to 
Trincomalee; it returned to Madras at the beginning of the 
amet Pai 2d Nae cad ae ire] Fad, ta > * Jyeae 3797, and after drafting 513 men to other Corps, 77, 
. embarked for Europe in Det. 1797, and on 15th February. . 
3798. 
: 
619 66 eh 657 ar sas Rag embaed from p Madras on Sth Sept. s805) and 
: The 74th Reg’ embarked at Madras for Europe on the Sth 
634 655 62 679 453 26a |- ~~ 2)Sept, 1805, and arrived at Portfmouth in February 1806. ; 
! ‘The 7sth Regt embarked from Bengal for Europe on the 
7a i 602 469 534 = Pigs Sept. 2806, and arrived in England sth April 1807. 
8 se 6 | “The 76th Regt embarked at Madras far Europe on sch 
775 19 9 94° 739 762 A208 Sire. 3806, and strived in Engtand on 234 July 1306. 
739 676. 615 bas 377 565 Jo 
870 830 77% 198 Git 544 666 
eSNG Oe AER * 950, 798 73 773 yoo 
oe 63 995 74S 724 68 199 
857 7 735 Q5r 66e. 603 436 
Embarked for Ceylon in Bec. 1800, end returned to Bomtzy. 
tan [een mree fame heer] (Comm Senos eae eae (Merce gr to = +4 lin January 1801, and immediately afterwards proceeded to 
: : ‘ ; ‘yet with Sir D, Baird, 
768 79% $45 gu 770 584 933 
> ‘The Regt de Meuron embarked from Madras, en rcth 
629 596 6r0 $55 5ts 505 oe ; February x805, and arrived in England in July 18c6. 
= : Laan a - 
£ 
2G, Hh Harry Calpers 


A, ARAN enean 


30 Appendix fo The Finst REPORT from the Szxect Committee 


—— 
Appendix, N° 4. 
STATEMEN™ of the ACCOUNT between The Punic .and The East Inpta Company, prepared 


conformable to the Refolutions of the Seleét Committee appointed to enquire into the prefent State of the 
Affairs of the Eaft India Company. 


Principal. 
MAURITIUS £ 
1794-5. Expences paidinIndia - - - ~- =! 123,610 
Tntereft at 63 per Cent. from at Novemnber 1 794 
to 1ft March 1808 - sos 
Tom = f2 Dt 225,795 
‘Demorage, &c. paid in England SS yet are 31,510 
Intereft at £. 4. 10. 12}. per Cent. from ift Au- 
gui 1794 to 1f March 1808 - - fjeee Ss 8, 19,465 
Totad ge Sia se = =| 50,975 
E 155,120 121,650 | 276,770 
‘Dedua overpaid in 1797 for Stores fent out for the | ">? Ne | Stee 
Expedition, but sherwards _ for other Ser- 
vices - - - 35,880 


Intereft at 4 per Cent. per Annum, the rate charged 
in 1797 on all Payments from Government, 
from 1ft Auguft 1797 to 1ft March 1808 -J- o- + 
Total 


Total, Mauritius - -| 119,240 


CAPE OF GOOD HOPE: 


1795-6. Demorage, &c. paid in England - oe - 68,538 
Intereft at & 5+ 19. %. per Cent. from Be May 
1797 to if March 180 - S360 ae 
Total -- -/- - - 
1795-6. Sundries, Bengal =~ - - - - : 93 
Intereft at 7.14. per Cent. from if November 
1795 to 1ft March 1808 - rs 
Total - oefe ee a 
1797-8. Gunpowder from Bengal - = = = = 8,768 i 
Intereft at 11.72. per Cent. from 18 November t 
1797 to 1ft March 1808 - =~ i 


rs 19,387 


1800-1, Freight, &c, Bengal - + 2 © 


Intereft at g. 27. -per Cent. from 1it November * 
2800 to 1ft March 1808 - = 8 fe 
Total - 


3,342 
1801-2. Sundries, Freight, &c. Bengal - 8 - 
Tatereft at 8. 72. per Cent, from 1ft November 
1801 to 1ft March 1808 Ba cen. Ea, pee 

Total coe 28,597 
1802-3. Freight, &c. Bengal ee 
Intereft at 7. 82. per Cent. from 1ft Noverbe 1802 
to if Murch 1808 - . 

Total” ee 506 

Total,Carz - 98,169 66,840 165,009. 


|__| 


217,409 


Total we 173,301 


Carried over = = 


on the Arratrs or THe East Inpia Company. 31 


oe 


Ne 4.—Statement of the Account between The Public and The Eaft India Company, &¢—continued, 


Brought over . noe 390,710 
MANILLA: 
797-8. Provifions, Freight, &c. - - a = a 
Intereft at 12.72, per Cent. from - Noveinber 
1797 to 1 March 1808 - 
Tetal oof 557821 
Dedué Stores returned 1798/9 - = + | - 
Intereft at 10.6. per Cent. from 1ft November 
1798 to 1ft March 1808 = 5 ee 
Total - 42,398 
230,973 535)428 
1798-9. Freight, &. - = - = = = (+ . 
Intereft at 10. 6. per Cent. from Ls evemten 
1798-to ift March 1808 - 
Total - ~ 13,014 
Table Money paidin England - =~ . = 
Intereft at £.6. 4. 11. per Cent. on £.2,589. 
from 11 November 1798 to iff March 
1808 + 2 of £1,509 
D° at £.5.6. 24. per Cent. on £. 2,401. 
from ai July 1799 to 1ft March 1808 £.1,105 
Total - oe 
Freight, &c. paidin England - - ~ + 
Intereft at £.5. 6. 23. eee froma. 1ft January 
1799 to 1ft March 180! 
‘Total - - 156,137 
Remuneration to Commanders and Officers of Ships 
paid in England, January 1800 - - 
Intereftat £.4, 14.2}. rece —— 
1800 aa March 1808 - A 
Total eof 
D° - D® paid in April 1800 - 1% = 
Intereft as ahove, from, aft May 3800. to aft March 
3808 + - 
Total - 
Tol + - “707,955 
“Lartied forward - 1,098,665 


3 


Appendix to The Firsr REPORT from the Seuect Commirres 


‘ Sg ee ee Se ee 
Ne 4.—Statement of the Account between The Public and The Eaft India Company, &e.—continued, 


Brought forward == 


VESSELS, &c. and STORES for King’s Ships. 
1978 ee 
Tntereft a’ 11. 72. per Cont. from 1ft November 

1797 to wt March 1808 - ce Oe 


Total ~ oe 

1798-9. - 
+ Intereft a” 10, 6. per Cent. from tf Noverber 
1798 te. 1ft March £808 - S 
Total oo She 


¥799—1800. - 


Intereft a’ 9. va per Cent. from ae November 
3799 to 1f March 1808 - 
Total =e 
3800-1. a 
Intereft. a’ 9. 27. per Cent. from 1f November 
1800 to ift March 1808 SV Last, Yah a 
Total - 
1801-2, 
Intereft a! a 8, 72. per Cent, from wh November 
1801 to itt March 1808 - - 
Total =e 
3802-3. - - - - - - 2 - a 
Intereft a” 7.82. per Cent. from. 1ft November 
1802 to ift March 1808 - os - - 
Total - 
1803-4. - a 
Interef a’ 8.- per Cent. from 1ft November 1803 
to 1ft March 1508 - - - - - 
Total - - 
3804-5. 
Intereft #8. 84. per Ceat. from a November 
1804 to 1ft March 1808 - 
Tol 5 
3805-6, - 
Intereft a 9. 688. per Cent, from if November 
1805 to « March 1808 - ote 
Toth oe 
DEDUCT: 


3799-1800, Bills in favour of Court =~ - 
Intereft a’ 9. 14. per Cent. from. it November 


1799 to1ft March 1808 - + oa - 
Total coe 
18001, - D® - - - De® 
Tutereft a’ 9, 27. per Cent, from ait November 
1800 to ft March 1808 - = *s = 
Total - oe 
Nett - - 
DANISH CAPTURES. | 
1801-. Amount Expences - ‘. 
Totereft a’ 8. 72. per Cent, from i November 
1802 to rft March 1808 - - oe 
Total oe 


Carriedover + = 


Principal 
f. 

29;603 

= 7 | 
p 65,454 
29,703 

Pm) ei! 1387 

18,814 

eee 145327 

= SOF 33,138 
13,200 

ee 5074 7 

ce hit MELT 2 
255154 

Y one 13,892 

Tt tps os =} 39,045 
55793 

Se eget “e 2,379 

Sea! Oe ek 8,082 
21,472 

Renee D444 

ges! ete 28,916 
30,381 


395333 


4:690 : 
- 25439 


194:776 | 195,805 | 320,672 
6,808 
4,790 

<8 1,598 


_ 267,036 
33559 
36,569 


1,402,270. 


om the Arrays or THe East Inpta Company. 33 
3 $ 


Sr 
N° 4.—Statement of the Account between The Public and The Eaft India Company, &c.—cortinued. 


Intereft, | TOTAL, 


Principal. 


L- 
Broughtovr + <|- = 1,402,270 


EGYPTIAN EXPEDITION. 
1798-9. Naval Armament to join ‘Admiral Blanket i in the 


Red Sea + - - 17,058 
Tntereft a’ 10. 6. per Cent. _ at March: 1799 

to 2 March 1808 == - + 
‘ Total -  -}- = 


‘3800-1. ‘Expence of Expedition, Freight, &c. - = | 673,903 
Intereft a 9. 27. Per Cent. from itt November 
1800 to D® - - “+ 


Tot - -}- = 1,132,092 


1801-2, Expence ~ ee ee HE 81,799 


Intereft 2” 8.72. per Cent. from iff November 
wWorteD?- - - = = «= os 


Total - -j- - 1,058,334 


1802-3, Expence a. ea), tart lt a! Cte oe 


Intereft a’ 7, 82, per Cant, fro mt November 
1802 to De - + - oe 


Total - =) 


409,047 


Bills drawn by General Baird in 1809 - es) 


Interef a? 3. 18. 13. per Cent. _ Baies 7 pay- 
ment te D® 


Total ~ - 


2,981,392 


1,062,849 


1,918,543 


Dedutt - - Ufual or Ordinary Pay of Troops in Egypt, asin former Account - - | 300,000 
Remainder - -  f. | 2,681,392 
Add - - - Eftimated Amount of the Ordinary Charges of fuch of His Majefty’s 
Regiments as went from India to Egypt, and did not return thither, of 
the Regiment that was in Egypt, end ‘hot landed in India; and the 
Ordinary Charges of ‘Levies made in India, to replace Volunteers from 
180,000 


Native Corps fent to Egypt, including Interet - + - + = 


j———i———|_ 29,861,392 


Carried forward =~. | 4,263,662 
261, 


34 Appendix'to The First REPORT rom the Sexicr Committe 
‘ 


SS, 


N° 4.-—Statement of the Account betwoea The Public and The Eaft India Company, & es —continued, 


Brought over + - = 


CEYLON, including Ordinary Charges from 1795 to 
gift OGober 1798:—after that period the Supplies 
furnifhed charged. 


“1795-6. Expence of Capture - - - - - 


Intereft at 7. 14. per Cent. from 1ft November 1795 to 
ut’ March 1808 =  ~ + 


Total - ~ 


2801,- Balance of Property, gift December - £-248,791 


Remittances, January to April 1802 = 559753 


‘Intereft e” 9. 27. per Cent. on £. 12,824 


from 1ft November 1800 - - 8,711 
D° - a’ 8. 72. per Cent. on - 235,977 
from 1f November 1801 = 130,322 


D° - a’ 8. 72. per Cent. on - 55,753 


from if March 1802 - = 29,170 


Total - + 


2802-3, Remittances < - - - - . . 
Interefi a’ 7. 82. per Cent. from ift November 1802 to 
ut March 1808 - + = = =e 
Total -  - 
' 


4801 to 3. Freight, &c. of Stores, Troops, &c. fent to 
Ceylon, on accoun: of Government, ciiimated at - + 


3803-4. Remittances - - - . rs - = 
Intereft_ a’ 8, per Cent. from aft November 1803 to 

it March 1868 + - - - - 

Total - - 

1804-5. - - es 


Intereft a’ 8. 84. per Cent. from if Novenaber 1804 fo 
aft March 1808 - + = 


Tot - = - 

1805-6. 7 wee ee ae - - 2 
Intereft a’ 9. 6. 88. per Cent, from 1ft November 1805 
toi March 1808 == = = = tt 

Total -  - 

1806-7. es 


Intereft_ a? 8. per Cent. from sft November 1806 to 
aft March 1808 - = - 5 = 

Total - + 

‘Fotal CEYLON, chargeable in full - 


Carried over - . 


Principal, 


364,021 


Tatereft. 


320,557 


168,203 


564,221 


TOTAL. 


684,578 


474747 


100,162 


20,000 


92,687 


72,286 


16,667 


26,948 


144.86,074 


[|__| 


1,486,074 


—_——— 


557490738 


on the Arratrs or Tue East Inpta Company. 


ey 


35 


Eee 
N° 4.—Statement of the Account between The Public and The Eaft India Company, &c.— continued, 


Principal. | Iutereft. 
£L ce L 
Brought over ~ -| -~ - | - = 5,749,736 
Expence of Maintenance, 1796 to November 1798, 
and Supplies after that date to 31ft December 1801, 
including Ordinary Charges in the firft period, 
1796-7. ew 251,882 
Intereft a’ 8. 24. per Cent. from ift Navember 1796 to 
atMarch 1808 = + = - = = <-] = ~ | 233,223 
Total - -| - - - - | 487,104 
37978 ee} 110,845 
Intereft a’ 11.72. per Cent. from ift November 1797 to 7 
wt March 1808 - = = = = | 134242 
Total - -| = -f- = 
* a 
1798-9. = ot - - - - = - | 363,014 
Interett a’ 10. 6. per Cent. from 1f November 1793 to a 
! it March 1808 = + =e = - =] - + os] 957,163 
as Oe ers ee tt 
1799-1800. -~ © = = i+ : age _ 7 7 | 296,007 
Tatereft a’ 9. 14. per'Cent. from ft November 1799 to 
aft March 1808 - = =e eee “| - ~. | 225,459 é 
Total - =| ~~ -.] = = | 521,466 
1800-1, eee ee ee | 283,730 
Tntereft a’ 9. 27. per Cent. from 1ft November 1800 to : 
iftMarch 1808 - - = +. =. = -| = = | 192,88 
Total es pig ede ¢ 
3801 to December 1802 ee et ef 237,518 a 
Intereft a’ 8. 72. per Cent. from ift November 1801 to s 
wt March 1808 = = = ~~) + ele = | 123,174 
Total - -|- - 7 > 
1,549,995 [1,258,240 42,799,135 
Dedué - - Balance of Property;as above - - | 248,791 | 139,033 | 387,824 
&- |1,292,204 [1,119,107 [2,411,311 
Carried forward - - half allowed -  - | 646,102 | 559,554 {1,205,656 
. > SE 


Carried forward =~ 


- | 57495736 


36 Appendix zo The First REPORT from the Seazet Committes 
c 


Brought forward - 


Ceylon—brought forward oo - = - 
“EASTERN ISLANDS, including Ordinary Charges: 


2793-6. - 2 
OF atereft at 7. 14. per Cent. from aft November 3795 to 
wt March 1808 - - 
Total oe 
3796-7. - 
Tnterett et 8.24. per Cent. “from eg November 1796 t 
at March 1808 ~ + ~ 
‘Tow ==] 290,950 
2797-8. - % : 


Intereft at 11. 72. 2, perCent fron aft November 1797 8 to 
ift March i208 - 


Toul ++ 187,454 


2798-9. - - 
Intereft at 10. 6 per + Cent, from aft November 1798 te 

itt March 1808 -  ~ - = 184,771 

e Tol = = ane 


3 “aggs1 800: : - = 
Intereft at 9. 14. per Cent, from at November 1799 to 


aft March 1808 - - 
2 Tol = - 
paBOO-s . - 
‘Tntereft at 9. a. per : Cent, from aft November 1800 - 
ah March 1808--  - + - 7 
Total coe 
1861-2. - 
Tatereft at 8. p. per r Cent. from it November 1801 to 
aftMarch 1808 © - 2 © - - «© 
Total - + 
1802-3. - - 
Intereft at 82. per Cont. from at Novernber 1802 toy 
aft March 1808 - - - 
Total - - 
803-4. - 
Shteref “ot 3. per Cent. ‘from ah November 1803 bad 
afi March 1808 - + + - - i 
Total = 289,782 
1804- , - 
teres at 8.84. per Cant from att November 1804 to] 
2f March 2808 - T id 11,186 
0! ‘* = - 


2805-6. . oe < 
Intereft at 9. 6. 88. 8. per Cent. fro if November 1805 
to 1ff March 180! - ~ 


Tol = * 
CANTON © = 5 6 5 eee 


Bills en Europe, net included above - °° -  - 


4,300 
15,568 


3,594,954 


797,477 


Half -  - 


Carried forward - - Total half Ceylon and the 
Eaftern Mands, vic Intereft te aft Mert 


1 
ee 11443579 


Carried over ~~ 


on the Avpatns oF Tue East Inpra Compaxy. 


— 


Ses 


N° 4.~Statement of the Account between The Public and The Eat India Company, &¢.—continsed. 


Brought over - + 


CEYLON, &c. broughtover - 


Dedn@ = ~ Half the Profit on Spices = = = = 


ke 
Intereft at £.6. 4. 11. per Cent. on = 6,481 


from ift O& 1798 to it March 1808 - - 3,812 
D? -- at £.5. 6. 24. per Cent. on - 47.645 
from ift June 1799 to - + D® = 22,139 
De --+ at - + = jo = = on - 56,745 
from uft December 1799 to D®? - + =~ 24,860 
De -~ at £.4. 14.2}. per Cent. on - 33,816 
from 1ft Augufi 1800 to De - - + 12,077 
ne -- at £.5. 5. 54. per Cent. on ~ 16,460 
from ift January 1801 to D° - 6219 
De --at_- - - D° - - on - 7549 
from aft March -- D? to D? ~~ = 0,986 
De -- at - - - D° - - on - 37,98 
from ut July---D° to D? - = ia 13,351 
D° - - at £.3. 18 af. per Cent. on - 38,357 
from iit February 1802 to D° = © 97 
De --at - - - D® - - om - g)6r 
from if April - - D® to D° PL oagt 
De --at - - - D® -~ - on ~ 46:349 
from 1ft July - - D° to D* vn" 10,262 
D° -- at £.5. 2. 5. per Cent. on - 9,859 
from ift February 1803. to D® - =~ 2,567 
Do --at - - - D® ~ - on > 37,612 
from ft Augut-- De to D®° - = ~ 8,828 
D° - - at £.5. 9. 2}. per Cent. on - 21,828 
from ift January 1804 to D® - = = 4,966 
D°~-at - - - D®? - - on - 20,110 
from 1ft Auguft--D°--D° - - = 3,934 
D° - - at £.5. 3. 24. per Cent. on _- 15,797 
from ift February 1805 toD? = = = 8,813 
De --at - - - Do - = on = 17,404 
from it July--D° to D°- - =" = 9,395 
De - - at £.4. 19. 7. per Cent, on ce 3,922 
from 1ft February 1806 to D° - = 406 
Do --at - - - Do - - o ~- 2,913 
from 1ft September - - D° to D° . - 193 
423,395 
Total - + 


Remains - - half Net Expences, deduéting half 
the Profil on Spices =~ s 


Carried forward -  - 


961, 


Principal. | Interet. | TOTAL 
L £ & £ 
vt pee be = 1 55749,736 
1,443:579 | 1,083,936 | 2,527,515 
423,395 
554531 
1,972,984 | 1,972,984 
bear ty 
«= = | 77225720 


38 Appendix to The Firsr REPORT from the Seect Commirrer 


N° 4.—Statement of the Account between The Public and The Fatt India Company, &c.—continued, 


; 


Brought forward - = = 


TRINIDAD: 
‘Expenfe attending Chinefe Settlers - - - - 
Tatereft a’ 9. 6. 88. per Cent. from 1ft November 1805"to 
ut March 1808 0 - - - - - - = 
Total - - 
17977 CEYLON: 


“Bills drawn for-the Regiment De. Meuron, pala in 1797, 
not included in the former Account 


Antereft, at £5.19. 93. per ne fon 1ft Marcha; 79 
to ift March 1808 - oe i 


Total -  - 


1805-6: CAPE GF GOOD.HOPE: 


Valve of Company’s Cargo on Ueord the Britannia, doft 
going tothe Cape ~ - - = 119,812 


Value of Ship andStores = - == == = 30,000 
dnterett at £.5.-3. 24. per Cent. dom it Nov. 1805 - 
Total = - 


{Bupplies fiom St.-Helena <= eee 
-Intereft, at £.5 per Cent. from ift November 1805 =. = 
Total - = 


Drafts on Bengal by the Military and Naval Commanders, 
for Beer taken out -of the Varuna, country dhip, and 


&e. tolndia - e+ 


itited wo King’s troops - - - > £39370 
~reight, &c, of King’s Troops on two Ships = 938 
De - ~~~ of Ships taken up by the Bllitary Yop yer 
and Navai Commanders to fore ard ‘Troops, ‘slsuitelucl: 


pated Demorage of. Ships going-to.the Cape - 24,572 


“Ri 
Xatere’, at 8 per Cent. from aft July 1806 - 
Total - 


Sent from Madras- el e 


BUENOS AYRES: 
Sundries fupplied from’ St. Helena in 7806, for the Ex- 


pedition, Pay, &c, to Troops fent, eftimated -} 


-Tatereft, at 5 per Cent. from 1 November 1806 to 1f 
Alarely 2808 aye se ae a ae 


Total - — - 
*Palageof:Oifiers, ke, to the Cape, and Ceylon, Men fent 


out fur the Navy, Stores, &e. : 


:Eftimated Amount of Charges incurred by the Eaf India 
ny, for Prifoners captured at Sea, from the year 
1) a a 


Total Debits carried over - 


738,614 


8,461,538 


on the Arrairs oF Tue East Inpta Company. 


2 


Se 


39 


Se 


Ne 4.—Statement of the Account between The Public and The Eaft India Company, &c,—continued, 


————————— 


Debits—Brought forward - - 


CREDITS: 
BY Cath, Auguhizg8- - = - + 2 = 


Intereft, at 10. 6. per Cent. from 1ft September 1798 
to aft March 1808, deduéting Expenfe of Remit- 


tance ia Bullion tu India = = = s+ 
. Total - = - 
De-- O@ober 79S - - - - - = = 


Intereft, as above, from 14t November 179%, Ditto - 
Total - 

1 - - July 1799 - : - - - = = 
Intereft at 9. 14. per Cent. from 1ft Augut 1799, Ditto 
Total - - 

D--Julyog- = 2 ee eee 


Tntereft at 8. per Cent. from aft Angutt 1803, Ditto - 


Total -  - 

De - - September 1803 a 
Tntereft, as above, from 1ft OStober 1803, Ditto - 
Total - + 

D°-- Augut 1805 = = ee ee 
Tutereft at 9.6.88, per Cent, from 1ft September 1805, 
De se ee eee 

Toul -  - 

D° - - September 1805 ee eee ee 
Tntereft as above from‘ if Odober 1805, Ditto - - 

; Total - 

D--July 1806 0 - 2 - 2 = = & 
Totereft a’ 8. 0.32. per Cent. from if Auguft 1806, 
Ditto -= = = = 2 8 = = 

Total - 


Tora Receivers with Intereft 
to 1ft March 2808, - 6 - 
Carried forward - - 


: Toray Dusirs carried forwatd - ~ = - 


Principal. 


100,000 


3,400,000 


Intereft, 


148,043 


141,377 


56,593 


. 


841,900 


TOTAL, 


191,875, 


342,787 


193,642 | 


648,043 


641,377 


"585,810 


581,773 


1,056,593 


4)241,900 


L. 
8,461,331 


——— 


8,461,338 


4o Appendix to The Firsr REPORT from the Serzor ComMitTez 


pa 


N° 4.—Statement of the Account between The Public.and The Eat India Company, &c,—continuel, 
_—— = 


Principal.| Intereft. | TOTAL. 


£. £ L hi 


Tora Desirs—Brought forward + RA sen Mies seibtne > 184612 


Recrirts—Brought forward = = + = |8:400,000} 841,90] 4,241,900; 


BY PAY-OFFICE DEMANDS, 
2703 £. 28,597 Int! £.4. 3. 4. prCt. a July 1793 to1 Mar. 1808, £.17,476 


1794 - 48,826 d@ 4.10,123 a? — 1794to = d? - 30,348 
1795 - 50,317 a 4.15. 9. d — 1795to - @ -~ 30,513 . 
1796 -169,017 a 4.14. 3. d° — a1796t0 - dg - 92,924 
2797 - 113,026 d 5.19. 9}. d®? — 1797to - d® -- 72,211 
21798 -173,116-@ 6. 4.11, d? —— 2798 to - d?  - 104,521 
2799 -210,748 d 5. 6. 23..d° — r799to - ad - 96,004 { 
.1800 - 175,079 d° 4.14, 23. d? — 1800to - d’ = 63,225 
1801 -258,740- a? 5. 5. 54. dg? — i801to ~ d® - 90,936 
1802 - 202,758 d° g:18. 13. a? —- 18020 - d ~ 44,893 
~1803 - 176,952 a? 5. 2 5. d° — 1803t0 - d - 49,287 
1804 - 179,883 a 5. 9. 2}. C& —— -1804to - oe. 36,008 
1805 -~ 237,513 -d? 5. 3 2}. d& —. 1805to = a? - 32,678 
1806 ~ 235,581: d? 4.19.7. a — 1806 to - @ + 19,550 
-3807 - 220,255 -€° .4.14. 7. cd? —— 1807t0 - a -- 6,044 
25480,408 ; = 781,508 


18,697 Dedué. Bills i in favour of the Company, not. paid 4,699 


776,809 


£. 2,361,711 é 721,044 


“Torsz—Pay-Office Demands - = - == ~— = 42,361,712) 721,044}3,089,755] 
By Vidualling-Office Demands - - - -| 53,193| 26,859 


-15,814,88211,589,70717,404,679| 


Dedu@, Amoust fufpended from the Pay-Offiee Demands, on the grounds of a 
the Objections to thofe Accounts ~~ ey = of] 443:767] 


TOTAL CREDITS - - = - - - «+ @ 
BALANCE in favour of The Eaft-India Company -~ - + 


May 1808, ; 
(Errors excepted.) 
: Thomas Nicholas. Witwer. 
W Wright, 


an the Avrairs oF Taz East Inpra Company. au 


Appendix, N° 5. 


REPORT from The COMMITTEE on the Account between The Public and 
The Eaft India: Company.—Ordered to be-printed 26th Fune 1805. 


"Tue COMMITTEE appointed-to take into confideration the Account between the Pusre 
-and the East Inp1a Company ;.and to report their obférvarions thereupon to the House rise mittee Om 


he A 
‘Have, purfuant to the Order of ‘the Houfe, exathined the matter to them ‘referred 5 and have beeen te i, 
"agreed to the following. Report: "aft India Company; 
: __ th Fume 1805 


“YOUR Committee find the grots amount of the- claims made by the Company on the Public, | 
vclaffed under eight. different. nets aceon to the seeesiate received from-India up to the pres 
fent time, tobe -= == com 8 — — £81570,336. 


*That the'demanids ofthe’ “Public the ‘Contpany,:confined.to the account of the Paymalter 
:General for expences.attending King’s troops ferving’ in Indiayamountte =~ £. 1,553,600. 


“The former-demands .appear to have Pecans :Detorean the Yost EI and he month of Apri 
13803, ; 


The latter «to. bave atcsudd from-the: year 1793 te the:year: 1803, inclufive, ‘ 


Your Gommittee find, that, during. the period of a¢count above fpecified, Comiiffioners Have © 
sbeen appointed, at thece-differentstimes, onthe part ofthe Treafury and the -BattIndia Company, 
for the purpole of confidering the moft.equitable mode-of adjurfting this account, Thefe Continif- 
-fioners refpedtively made confiderable progrefs; and upon fuch balances.as. wete admitted by the 
- Commiffioners gn the part of the Treafery -as..cleatly eftablifhed, Parliament has-voted ‘money 
on account: but, pattly from the whole of the accounts not havirig been tranfnitted, home 
when thé Cominifieners fat, and partly from’ a confiderable-difference .of opinioa 8.40 the 
: principles upon which she: fetdlement dhould take,place, no final Report appears to -have been 
made by any of thefe Commifionets,-cither to the ‘Treafury.or the Court of Directors, 
Accurate Minutes having been taken of the-feveral difcuffions whicl at various times took 
place between the Gentlemen compofingthe two.latt Commiffions, on the detail of the accouitits, 
Your Committee -thought. it expedient to call fer thofe Minutes, 98-furnithing much. uleful 
information and reafoning, to affift-their judgement i in forming.a decifioa upon this complicated 
cand ¢:‘ficulefubje&ts and they bave thought it right sto annex the fame in the Appendix to this “Appendix, No, 10 
- Report. 
Your Committee, in fubmitting to-the Houfe the gefult of their examination of: thefe stecounts, 
“have endecvoured,.as far as in their power, todos lice between the Public and.the- Company, 
upon a progreiive expenditure of: feveral years. "The proportion-in avhich ‘the-charge was to 
- fall ultimately on the parties, does. not appear to-have-been afeertained with any precifion at the! 
atime, inthe orders. which.gave rife to thofe fervices, but was left to be fettled at .a.future day, 
~in the confidence chat, between fuch parties, an agjudiment on grounds of; jultice and iberality 
would be effected. . 
Your Commitee fhould asnieceflarily extend .this.Report,. were they to enter.into the detailed 
sreafoning.upon which Your Commitee’ have, after much deliberation, aligned the feveral heads of . 
charge to be borne, either feparateiy or jointly by the Public and the Company.; their decifion 
-on each kead has been influenced partly by a confideration of the precife orders iffued at. the 
time of diregting thofe fervices, partly by the. nature of the feryices themfelves, and partly bya 
Contideration ofthe proportionate fhare of advantage from, or duty to perform the fervices in 
-quettion, which appeared.to ‘Your Committee naturally to attach to the Pablic arid the Company 
-refpeCtively, according to. the beft view. they could form of their relations, duties, and interefts, 
within the fphere of thefé operations. But, whilft they have endeavoured to difp6fe of each, 
head of charge, according -to ‘a jut eftimate of its own particular character, Your Committee 
delire it to be asnderitoed, that they-have not found it pofible to adopt a ftridt uniformity of 
principle with re{pett co each head taken feparately, but have-rather aimed at fuch general arrange- 
ment upon-the whole of the account, as might beft reconcile, ont a queftion liable to confider- 
able difference of opinion, the fair claims of the parties, Your Committee have accordingly 
- thrown the feverat heads of:charge into. three claffes ; the firft, failing exctufi ively on the Public; 
othe fecond, exclufively on.the Companys and the third, falling equally spon both. 


amb : L Fick 


A4 Appendix to The: Emsr, REPORT from gheSecect ‘Committee 
c 


Appendix, N*6. 
[Being Appendix, No.19, ta the Report ordered to be printed 26th Funer805.] 
(Phe Committee on “MINUTES. of the Meetings held between the Right Honourable Charles Bragge, and 


Beaccount Nicholas Vanfittart, Efq. appointed .by-the Right Honourable the Chancellor of the 
| enters able Exchequer, and the Lords of the Treafury, on the part of “Government; and Jacob 
bee osama *Bofanquet, Eq. Deputy Chairman, and Sir Hugh Inglis, Bart, on the part of the Court of 

© Append x, Now Be ~Direétors; for the purpofe of fertling and adjufting the Accounts now,depending betweea 
c= "The Public and The Eait India Company. 


» General “Account Current was read; Melfrs. Brake, and Vanfittart divin ‘been previouily 
jot b, 


It was then ftated by the Deputy Chairman and ue tee Inglis, that the whole of the accounts 


fe = «ale ” YS eens 
‘That having’ been employed upon a former occafion eal fome, depending claims between 
tthe Eaft India Company. and the Public, in concert with the’Right honourable Thomas Steele, 


~had been lodged with them in.confequence of the Aét of the 35th of His prefent Majett 
4 Ps carey was in no way’a party, ata hnerheOrae per-cent. 5 cine ugh this 
_ money was in ¢ real property of individuals, it was istpoflible for them to confider it in,any 
. other i than as 2 public: it, and that they.therefore themf{elvcs propofed that no greater 
‘int Id be Ged ee menage ‘was actually paid by the Company upon this public 
ood at the time,.that this rate of intereft was not to extend beyond 


: 
i 
: 
a 
. 


: lent to Government, 2nd provifions and ftores fip- 

a plied for the Expedition to the Cape and Mauritius, were liquidated, and the balance of the 

} : pics due from the Company on the account above mentioned was paidinto the hands of 
_ Government. J 

On this explanation, it was obferved by _ Bragge and Vanfittart, that the difcuffion of 

; © this point might be deferred till Seeerda delineate examineds"and that for the 

‘prefent it muft be left toxdepend upon ‘a fubfequent examination ofthe fair juftice and merits of 


the cafe. - rasp 

Tt was. then propofed to read the directions fent by the Secret Committee for the 

econ 3. intended Expedi ion agai Mauritius, the Sigal atopic, figned by Mr. Pitt, 

% "ia me “ mia : ee Duds and Lord Mornington, dated rsth October 17935 was accordingly 
Bo Ane Tne c © —  Bvidence gvas then adduced from the. Company’s accounts, to prove that a part 


ie ‘of the expenceincurred bythe Company onaccount of this inrended Expedition, viz. the tums 

a “4 which had been difburfed'in this Country, had been repaid by Government in the year 1797, when 

: the laft adjuftment between.the Public and the Company todk place; and thatit was at that 

_ -time admitted,that this was an Expedition commenced entirely under the orders of His Majelty’s 

~  _Minifters, and-fuch as mole nds: bare been undertaken, by the Eaft-India Company, and 

Hat, the expence ought be defrayed by the Public, a 
» “Thefe facts feemed to be admitted by Meflrs. Bragge and<Vanlittart, and it appeared to be 
ard opinion that the .remaining expence of this Expedition ought to form a charge againit the 
ublic, ’ 

Tt was then agreed to examine the items of the account itRIf amounting to £. 157,892, being 

merely the extra expence incurred by the Company on account of the intended Expedition:: 

| enquiry being made at what time the Expedition’ was abandoned, the (ame was, fhewn from the 
+ Sompany’s Rechts Sh ee 

Some objection was made to the mode in which the demorage of the {hips intended to be 

-employed in this Expedition was calculated; the objedtion was admitted to be founded, and the 

_account was ordered to be»corrected.. eral other obfervations were alfo made, and fome other 


_cotredtions took place. Upon the whole, ho material objection {cemed to occur, cither as to the 
.amounty items Of the account, fubject to the correétions, propoled, 
i= Pr sexaminztion of the nextearticle in this acccunt, viz. the charge for the 
by m Ex Cape of Good Hope, 4 part of the expence of which Expedition had been 
al Aimilarly. d eae orien Pe Se ncich inthe year 1797, this charge {cemed to.be 
_admitted as forming an undifpu' lim again{t the Public, in point of principle. 
ox © Oninfpeéting the particulars of the account, it was obferved on the part of Mefits, Bragge and 


ufial 


Wanfitrart, that the Compziy’s outward-bound Acet might have touched at St. Salvadore on their 


: >on the Astaizs or Tue East Jota Company. ~ -% ayy 


‘ufual voyage to China, and that therefore extra demorage ‘on this aceount ought not to.be __ Report from 
charged by the Company. Evidence was exhibitcd from the thips’ journals, to prove that this The Committce on 


could not have been the cafe, and that in the prefeat imitance, the ihips were taken there*by orders ee ae: 


from the Admiral, and the - 
‘The principles upon which-the demorage of fhips was calculated in thefe accounts was then Eaff India Company, 
abjected:to: the obje&tion was admitted, and the accounts ordered to be correéted. 26tlifune 1895. 


‘The receipt of fome gunpowder, on account of Government, was then queftioned: the receipt Appemdix, No. tor 
was found to be acknowiedged by Mr. Pringle. Some obfervations were made on the valuation - 
of fome fugar delivered from the Orpheus for the fervice of Goverment. Some other alterations 
were then ordered to be made in this account, which: was dene accordingly. Upon the whole, it 
was confidered that this article formed a jult demand again Government. 

Tc was then propofed to read the orders under which the Expedition againft Manilla Account, N° 2. 
had. been commenced, a counterpart of which orders were forwarded to india by pM = 
the Secret Committee.» Thele orders were accordingly read, bearing date the gch Be ae cea 
November 1796, and figned by Mr. Pitt, Mr. Dundas, and Mr. Eliot. wih la paeeee - 

£vidence was then’ adduced from the Company’s Records and Accounts received from India, to 
hew when, and how, the Expedition was fulpended, and that the charge made upon Government 
was only the extra expence incurred by the Company beyond what would have exiited if no fuch 

- Expedition had been commenced, Ip was admisted by Meffis. Bragge and Vanfittart, that this 
bedi. would not probably have been undertaken by the Company, except urder the direétions 
of His Majefty's Minifters, and that it feemed realorlable that the expence of it Should form a 
charge agajn(t Government. f Dosa ni< 
he remuneration that had been aétually paid to the Commanders of the Company’s fhizs _ 
employed on the Expedition, for I¢fles and expences incurred thereby, was then difcufled : it as 
fthewn to be well founded and reafonable. It was obferved, that as to the charges Yor demorage Oy, 
and freight, the owners of feveral of the fhips were not fitisfied with the fums allowed, and that | 
fuits at law had been commenced againft the’ Company for Jarger allowances, which fuits were 
till depenging 5 and it was ftated, that had fuch Expeditions beea undertaken by Goverament 
entirely at their own charge, the expence would many times have exceeded what was charged to 
them by the Company ; that éf India could have borne the intended draft of troops, then the Com= 
pany paid more troops than were neceffary for her defence—if {he could not bear fuch adraft 
without danger, then fhe had received “He was to receive no compenfation for this riff. ¢ 
To this it was anfwered, that;the Expedition was abandoned by Lord Hobart, then Governor of 
Madras, on this latter account, viz, a fear of leaving India too hae of troops, an intend:d rein- 
forcement of Europeans not having arrived ; ic was not however denied, bur that all thefe Expe= 
ditions would have been much more expenfive to Government if they had been undertaken under 
othercircumftances, and that it was reafonable that the extra expence of the Company really 
incurred on this account fhould be di(charged. The account was then examined, and fome altera 
tions having becn made therein, the Meeting was adjourned to the 3d inftant. 


tO als lee Eaft India Houfe, 3d January 1§03. 
Proceeding to the difcuffion. of this charge, Mefirs. Bragge and Vanfictart began Account, N° 3. 
by obferving that'on tie’part of Government, they mult object to a very.confiderable ee Ss cacro kn on 
ee of this demand, ‘That the capture of Ceylon was neceflary for the fafety of the EyLoNr es AND hate be 
daft India Company’s pofleffions, and that the Expedition againit that Ifland, as well NANCE OF PRISONEXS. 
‘as thofe againft- Malacca and the Spice Iflands, was fuch as they thought might ‘ 
teafonably have been undertaken’ by:the Company that therefore the moft which the 
Company could: claim, was the charge of Ceylon fince ait had been a King’s government, and _ 
pe a of the captures, which feemed naturally to follow the poffeffion which had been taken 4 “xz. 
ie Crown. ah ‘ Ht : 5 “i 
To this it was anfwered, that Malacca and the Spice Iflands were by no means neceflary fon 
the fafety of the Company’s pofleffions, and that thofe places, as well as Ceylon, had been captured 
in the name and for the benefit of the Crown, and under the exprefs orders of Government ; that 
the Ifland of Ceylon alone had been retained by Great Britain at the peace; and that, of courfe, 
as this had been kept by the Crown, there could exift no pretence for faying what was loft or : 
given up was the Company’s, what was retained was the Crown’s ; for chat this was, in fact, _ 
afluming different and oppofite principles to meet exifting circumftances, which feemed hardly jult . 
or reafonable ; that the | tule of diftin@ion and of equity feemed to be, either to confider 4 
all the captures to have made for the Company or for the Crown if they were, confidered * 
as made for the Company, the pofleffion of Ceylon mutt fell to the Company as a matter of 
eourfe, and they would gladly take it under fuch conditions; if they were made for the Crown, 
shat then, in keeping Ceylony this neceffarily brovght upon the Crowa the expence of all the 
er Captures, re y, 
After much difcuffion upon this fubjeGt, it was agreed to ftate an account of the expence of 
capturing Ceylon, the Spice Ifands, and Malacca, and of maintaining the Dutch prifoners taken in 
thofe polleions, or-at fea; and alfo an account of the expence of the Ifland of Ceylon, fubfequent 
to the appointment of Mr. North as Governor: it was agreed that the end of April 1796 fhould 
-be taken as the, period when the expence of the capture of Ceylon would probably ceafe, it being 
the period when part of the forces, employed in the Expedition, were returned to their refpedtive 
fettlements, and a correfponding date for the other captures. “The accounts above-mentioned were 
then ordered to. BS da tet and the farther confideration of this claim was poftponed. It .was 
agreed that a letter fhould be. written to the Admiralty, requefting an account of all the prifoners 
captured at fea by His Majefty’s-fhips-ia the.Kaft atee Se pa es 4 Be 
~ 268. f ic 


46 Appendix 4 The Firsr REPORT jrom the-Sevect Commirrez 


Account, N° 4. The Account (N° 4.) being then laid before the parties, Meflis. Bragge and 


FXPENCE OF CAPTURES OF 


Vanfittart objected to this claim altogether: they ftated that thefe captures mult be 


FRENCH AND DU CH SETTLE- confidered as indifpenfably neceflary tor the fafety of the Company’s territories, and, 
MENTS ON THE PENINSULA, therefore, that the Company fhould bear all the expenee incurred in fuch captures, or 
“AND OF MAINTENANCE OF jn keeping pofleffion of them ; that the expence of maintaining the prifoners followed 


PRIEON ERS. 


the nature of the captures ia the firft inftance, but that the proper courfe to obtain res 
payment purfuant to the ftipulations of the treaty of peace, would be by an application to the Secre- 
tary of State for Foreign Affairs. 

n reply it was obferved, that whatever might be the determination with refpedl to the captures 
made in the Peninfula, the expence of the prifoners ought to be borne by Government; that 
the Company had no hand in making the peace; that it was poffible a relaxation on the point of 
repayment for the expence of maintaining prifoners might have produced better terms in fome 
other point favourable to the general interefts of the country 5 and that if this fhould be the cafe, 
the Eaft India Company would, in this way, be taxed for the general advantage of the Empire at 
large, which was not jut. 

That claims of this nature had always been introduced in the Company’s accounts ; that they 
Had been reported on as debts by feveral Committees of the Houfe of Commons ; and that they 
had even been fo far allowed by Government as to have been admitted as a fet-off againft the 
claims of Government, in the Act of 17933 and at leaft they ought to be allowed to this extent 
in the Participation Account, or againft the charge made on the Company for recruiting, &c, the 
King’s troops in India. 

‘Thefe arguments feemed to make no impreffion upon the Nominees of Government, 


Account, N? 5. The Account (N° 5.) being then examined, no objection occurred to this demand, 


PURCHASE OF VESSELS FOR 
THE NAVY; 


fo far as it could be fubftantiated; but it was obferved. by Meflts. Bragge and Van- 


STORES Sup. fittart, that ic would be neceflary to refer the account to the Navy ‘other public 


PLIED; REPAIRS, &. Boards for examination, which they would do accordingly. 
Account, N° 6. (N° 6.) being then laid before the parties, the charge was objeéted to altogether 


EXPENCE OF KING'S TROOPS 
IN INDIA IN EXCESS TO THE 


by Meflis. Bragge and Vanfittart: they ftated, that the Company were bound to” 
defend the Peninfula as well in war as in peace, and that they were even bound to 


NUMBER ALLOWED BY ACTS fend their troops on external expeditions, if this fhould appear to be the beft mode of 
OF PARLIAMENT. defending the Peninfula; that the A&s of 1788 and 1791, referred’ to by the Deputy 


Bs 


* Chairman aad Sir Hugh Inglis, as limiting the number of King’s troops that could be’ paid out 
of the Revenues of India, had no reference to the juftice of the cefe between the Public and the 
‘Company, fince they were only made for the purpofe of reftraining the Crown from keeping 
troops in India, or for Indian fervice, which were not acknowledged by Parliament. 

‘That the only ground upon which the Company could claim icich was in café'they could fhew 
that moré troops had been paid in India than were actually neceflary for its defence; that this could 
not be the cafe, as noné had atually been drawn away from India, except thofefent to Egypt, which 
took place at a fubfequent period, for, as to thofe at Ceylon, they helped to fecure the Peninfula; 
and that it muft be obferved, that although the King’s troops had been increafed, the Company’s 

European troops had been decreafed in nearly the fame proportion, 

In reply it was obferved, that the argument refpecting the Company’s being bound to'fend 

, their troops on external expeditions, might be carried to an indefinite lengthy as Adminittration 
had only to give it as their opinion, that it was sora for. the fafety of India, that troops 
thould be fent from thence to the Mediterranean, or the Welt Indies, and the Company would 
be obliged to obey any orders they might think proper to. give to that effe&t; but that it could 
ss reafonably expected that any ex incurred on fuch fervices fhould be borne by thé 

ompany, : : 

Accounts were then ordered to be prepared of the numbers of King’s and Company's Europea 

eset! Tadia for the laft five years. 

Alfo, an eftimate of the expence incurred by the Company for the Egyptian Expedition. 4 
‘ ‘ Adjourned'to the 2rft Inftant. 


Eat India Houle, 21ft Januay 1803. * 


tae 
Account, N® 3. An Account of the expence of the capture of an and Malacca, conformably 


with the orders of the lait Meeting, was prefentzd and read: it was then examined and 


DUTCH CAPTURES. compared with the Account (N° 3, B.) and was propofed to be fubftituted in the room 


tiiereof. ‘The principle of the account feemed to be admittd, 
“An Account of the expence of maintaining Dutch prifoners captared at Ceylon and the Eaftert 
Tflands was then prefented. It feemed admitted that this ought to form ademand againft Governe 
ment. The Military Paymafter’s books of Fort St. George were then examined upon thele 
accounts, which wete found to be fatisfactory. ; 
An Account was then prefented of the expence of maintaining Ceylon, fince October -1798, 
when Mr. North was appointed Governor. A difcuffion enfued, when, 2fter’a variety of obferva- 
tions, it was propofed to exatnine the inffructions which were fent out to India when Mr, North 
‘was appoint -d Governor of Ceylon, and the papers which related to this'appointment, which were 
accordingly produced; a of them were read, and a colleGtion of extradts was oidered to be 
formed againft the ext Meeting. = 


Account, N° 6. 3 The Account ftating the number of King’s and Company’s European troops 


aGtuelly in india, becween 1797 and 1801, was then prefented. “Ir was agreed on the 


KING's TROOPS. pat of Mefizs. Bragge and Vauiinarg that the numbers altegether. very litde.ex- 


2 


3 ceeded 


2 on the’ Arratrs of Taz Easr Inbia Company. te 


Q 
eectled the King’sand Company's troops authorized to Be paid out of the revenues of India by the 
‘AGs of 1783.and 1791; theretore this claim was objected to altogether. 

Tewas obferved on the part of the Company, that theft Aéts had a reference to the eftimated, 
arid’ndt to:the adtual ftrength which this account thewed ; and’ chat it was always calculated that 


Report’from 
The Committee on 
the Account 
between the Fublic — 
ind 1 


2 deftiency would exilt upon the eftimated force; but that, even fuppoling the argument on pat Tadis Company, 


the other fide corrécl, the Company had (ulained a prodigious and unnecellary expence, by 
having maintained'a large number" of incomplete regiments, inflcad of a finaller number of more 
Complete ones. 
* To this it was anfwered, that in war the Eaft India Company mutt take its chance for a fupply 
of effective men upon any terms that they can be procured. 

A rough fketch of the eftimated expence of the Expedition to Egypt was then prefented and 
fead: it feemed to be adniitted that the cliarges of this Exp:dition oughe to be borne by 


Government. 7 
‘ : Adjourned to the 28th Inftant, and fubfequently to the 3d February. 


3 _Eaft India Houfe, 3d February 1803. 
© "The extracts from the correfpondence, &c. relative to Mr. North’s appointment in 1798, and 
‘the plan adopted for the Government of Ceylon in 180i, being prefentcd, were read. It was 
ftated on the part of Government, thatthe terms under which the IMand was to be made a King’s 
government were fully explained in thefe proceedings, viz.—in the Jetter from Mr. Dundas of 
the 3oth December 18005 the inftruétions to Mr. North in 1801, mentioned in the correfpondence 5 
end the Court’s Orders to Madras thereon of the 22d April 1801; that it did not appear that the 
Company had objeéted to this arrangement, and that of courfe the Public could not be charged 
with the expence of keeping it prior to January 1802, the term fixed by Mr. Dundas as {tated in 
the Court’s Letter of the 22d April 18015 that thefe proceedings clearly took the cafe out of that 

general rule of equity which might otherwife have been fuppofed to attach itfelf to it. ‘ 

It was anfwered on the part of the Company, that in January 1798, when Mr. North was ap- 
:pointed Governor, Mr, Dundas made an unequivocal declaration that he faw noreafon why, upon 
apeace, if Ceylon thould be retained by Great Britain, he fhould not recommend that it fhould 
be placed under the Company’s government, and that the inftruétions to Mr. North were framed 
under this intimation; but that it would be feen that the Company had not abandoned their 
¢laim to be reimburfed for the expence of capturing and maintaining it, fince they had added to the 
inftructions a claufe to this effect, but that it-had been ftruck out by the Board of Commiffioners, 
and that of courfe the Company did not acquiefce, but were overruled in thefe inftructions. 

‘That it is true they did not remonftrate againft the orders fent to India in 1801, but that noin~ 
ference can fairly be drawn from filence'when remonftrance, it appears, would have been ineffeCtual. 
‘That heqaiition at iffue is one of natural juftice, where the act of one party cannot fairly 
be-faid to invalidate the juft claims of the other, fince, if this principle were once admitted, the 
-difeuffion could only reft not upon what one party had a right to claim, but what the other would 
confentto allow. , 

Meffrs, Bragge and Vanfittart were of opinion, that, after an examination of the papers in 
quettion, they ‘could not recommend that the extra-expence of keeping Ceylon, between the 
period of its capture in April 1796 and January 1802, ought to be borne by Government, it ap- 
ipearing to have remained for that period under the Company's government. 

The Deputy Chairman and Sir Hugh Inglis were {till of opinion that thefe papers did in no way 
invalidate the juft claims of the Company on this account. 

The Account (N° 5.) with the remarks of the Conmmiffioners of the Navy thereon, was their 
Jaid before the parties: it was difcovered that fome items of the account had been paid by bills in 

| favour ofthe Company; it was fuggefted, that many others might be in the fame predicament, 
dnd that the accounts in general were not dated. 

The Auditor explained the caule of the miftake refpecting the bills, yf. from his not having ex~ 
‘mined the Bill Book in the Treafury at the time he made out the accounts from the India books. 
The Fort St. George books were then examined refpeSting the dates of fome of the items and 
other particulars, and fome of thefe were fatisfaStorily cleared up. 

‘The Bills.drawnin favour of the Company were then ordered to be deduéted, and the account to 

| ‘be further examined, 

A difcuffion then took place relative tothe manner in which the intereft had been charged. 
‘The Deputy Chairman and Sir Hugh Inglis ftated, that it had been made out in a way extremely 
favourable to Governments the reafon why the accounts had been pro tempore le out only 
at4per cent. was then repeated, but it was added, that in common juftice a higher rate muft be 
allowed, fince they were'ready, on the part of the Company, to prove that money had been taken 
up in India at from 8 to 12 percent. intereft to make thefe difburfements, and that although the 
expences bad been incurred at different periods during each year, no charge of intereit had been 
fhade till the end of each year it was alfo obferved, that it might be fuppofed advantageous to the 
Company to receive repayment in this country, but that the contrary was the fat, and that the 
decennial loan bad Joaded them with a rate of 10 per cent. intereft for ten years. 

To this it was obferved in anfwer, thatthe account having been prepared at the rate of 4 per 
cent, though Mefirs. Bragge and Vanfittart were not difpofed to infift upon that rate of intereft, 
yet they did not feel authorized to acquiefce in a demand now firft brought forward, which appeared 
to defcribe the rate which the Company might have been obliged to pay for money borrowed in 
Indiaas applicable to demands upon Government, which might poffidly have been adjufted from 
time to time upon much eafier terms here, wee 

3 ention 


Appendix, Now 0. 
ee 


26th June 1995. 7 


48, Appendix.vo The First REPORT jrcm t#e Serect Commirrex 


‘ 
Report from - Mention was then made of the demand upon the Company for recruiting, &c. His Majefty’s 
The Comittee on forcésin India. ‘The Deputy Chairman and Sir Hugh Inglis {aid, that the Company expeéted to 
the Account jig Pe furnithed with the particulars of this demand, but that none had ever been fent; that no doubt 
[Between the Public \ ten thefe particulars were furnifhed, it would appear that a large part of the charge could not be 
ft India Coinpany, fubftantiated, but that they were fure it was the wih of the Company to difcharge whatever fum 
ie June 1395. was juftly due, and that if no other mode of finifhing the bufinefs occurred, they would recommend 
Appendix, No. 10. to the Company to agree to pay a fair proportion of what might be afcertained to be. the real 
; expence of cloathing and recruiting the troops in the Company's employ, by comparing ong, 
‘part of the fervice with another, but that they were well aware that the charge made againit the 
Company as it at prefent ftood, muft comprehend many items totally foreign from the troops, 

ferving in India. 
It was agreed that Mefirs. Bragge and Vanfittart thould endeavour to procure. detailed account. 
of thefz charges, : 5 
Adjourned to the 18th Inft. and fubfequently to the 15th March, 


Eaft India Houfe, 15th March 1803. 


Oe » The Minutes of the Proceedings at the feveral Meetings hitherto held, were: read, and fome 
} No. alterations being made therein, they were then approved, * 
5 The obfervation of the Navy and Victualling Boards upon the Account (N’ 5.) were then 


read, with regard te the objections. made as to the want of vouchers on Articles 4. §. 11. 12. 14+ 
15.16, 24. and the general obfervation on the abfiraét to the fame effea&, It was remaked on the 
part of the Company, that it is not the practice of their Governments in India to fend home 
é vouchers of the nature required, thefe being kept in the different offices abroad as authorities 
o for pafling the Officers accounts; that it has been ufual in the Courts of Law here to receive the 
i general and other books of account, which are made up annually in India, and figned by the re~ 
refpective Officers or the Members of Government, as valid documents, and it was therefore hoped. 
the fame practice might be followed on the prefent occafion, 
Meflis.. Bragge and Vanfittart onthe part of Government did not objeét to this propofal. 
| With re; to the bills drawn in favour of the Company for which credit had not been given, 
b it was ftated by the Auditor that the Bills from Madras were drawn in October 1800 for advances, 
made in May 1797 end Auguft 1798, confequently the circumftance could not be known here at 
the time of making up the account, but that by an error in the addition, it_would be feen that the 
total charge elt little varied in the amount as it now ftands, after the bills drawn in favour of 
the Company were deducted. The account being accordingly referred to, it was found to beas, 
above ftated. f 
Some converfation then took place with regard to the rate of intereft charged in the accounts, 
and it was then ordered that the accounts fhould be made out again with the ncceflary alterations, 
and divided into three claffes ; the firft, to contain thofe demands which it feemed to be the opinions: 
an both fides ought to be charged to Government; the fecond, of thofe on parts of which the, 
opinions agreed and on other parts differed ; the third clafs, thofe demands which were entircly, 
abjeéted to on, the part of Government. ; 
Adjourned to the 22d Inft. and fubfequently to the 31ft Inf. 


% ; Eaft India Houfe, 31ft March 1803. * 
~The Account (N° 1.) corrected as to the demorage of fhips, &c. was prefented and examined 5, 
' and with refpect to. the fupplies from Bengals the Cape in 1801-2, amounting to £.47,566,-as 
Der tah flated in a memorandum at the foot of the account, the Deputy Chairman and Sir Hugh Inglis 
" obferved, it might be advifable to let this article remain for future confideration. Accounts 
(N° 3-1) oF the expence of the capture of the Dutch {Mlands, and (IN? 3.*) the expence of Dutch 
prifoners captured there, were alfo prefented and examined; and it was obferved by the Deputy’ 
Chairman and Sir Hugh In@lis, that the money paid by the Company in England for bills drawn, 
from Madras in favour of the Proprietor of the Swifs regiment De Meuron, amounting to 
£- 32,000. was not included in this account, but conftituted a feparate charge on Government, 
; . Tbe Account (N° 5.) with the corrections as to bills drawn in favour of the Company for 
part of the charge, and an additional charge for flores captured on French veflels taken by His. 
Majefty’s fhips in India, and paid for by the Madras Government by defire of Admiral Rainier, 
was likewile prefented and examined: it was a that extracts from this account fhould be fent 

to the Navy and other Boards to which the different charges related. 


See Account . A tketch of the General Account as it will now ftand (omitting thofe demands altogether ob= 

2 i jeéted to) fubject to the queltion as to the intermediate expence of Ceylon, between May 1796 

Fs and January 1802, the rate of intereft to be allowed, and the general expence of prifoners, was 
5 ‘then ordered to be prepared. . 


Adjourned, 


* SKETCH 


en the Aveares ér Tar East Ixora Company. ¢ 
> 


49 


== —— ——— 


=e 


SKETCH or tHe ACCOUNT wita GOVERNMENT, including only fuch Articles as are 


admitted as chargeable by Mefits, Bracoz and VansiT TAR. 


Dyes net NS: Government in Account with the | Haft India Company. ety ae le 
i 
To Expences incurred by the Company for By Cath received-in) part in Auguft and 
the intended Expedition to Mauritius f. | , 204;241 saab 1798, eo July 179% with 
a et ntereft at 4 per Cent. per Annum to 
ToD? - D* Expedition tothe Cape - 93423 | the gift March 803 =~ f 4651333 
ToD? - De intended Expedition to Ma- i 
nilla | aa lB aa =. fe} 429,826) 


To Expences incurred in the Capture of 
Ceylonand Eaftern Mands = = = ~~ | 393,989 


To Expences of the Maintenance, &c. of 


Durch 


Eaftern Hands - = - 199735 counts - _ + 


To Expence incurred by the Company in} . 
the Purchale of Veflels for the Ufe of His | 
Majelty’s Navy in India, Stores, &e, &e. | 441,789 


N. B, Intereft at 4 per Cent. per Annum oe { 


By Balance due to the Company, accord- 


Prifoners captured at Ceylon and ing to this mode of flating the Ac- 


i_——_———-|. sania 


to 31st March 1803 is included, { 
&- | 363003 & ~~ £. | 1,363;003 
To Balance, as per Contra = = =| 897,670 |, Byeltimated Amount due for Recruitiig, 
To eftimated Amount of Expence incurred Cra a Sc: for King’s Tiger 6 ’ 
by the Expedition to Egyps, exclulive of BR ieee. ee 
Interet +> = 57 = |= =} 4,500,000 || By Balance  - -. ~ = £.| 1,437,670 


&- | 21397:679 L. 
| 


1804-5. 

MINUTES of Meetings on the Account between Government and the Eaft India Com- 
pany, held between the Right Honourable Charles Long and the Right Honourable 
‘William Dundas, on the ‘pare of Government; and the Deputy Chairman (Charles 
Grant, Efg.) and Sir Hugh Inglis, Bart. on the pare of the Company. 


s E 7 War Office, roth December 1804. 

Tue Auditor to the Company attending with the Accounts, ard the Minutes of Meetings in 
1803, between Mefits Bragge and Vanfittart, on the part of Government, and the Deputy Chair~ 
sman (Jacob Bofanquet, Efq.) and Sir Hugh Inglis, on the part of the Company: 

Onreference to thele Minutes, inquiry was made’ as to accounts therein mentioned to haye been 
formerly fettled, and an explanation thereof given, 3 

Mefirs. Long and Dundas defired to have the Accounts (N° 3.) of Expences.of Ceylon, and of 
:the Moluccas and Malacca, ftated feparately; which was directed accordingly. 

Alfo an Account to be prepared of the Profits on Spices. 


After fome general remarks, agreed to adjourn to the 24th Infant, and fubfequently to the 11th 


January next. 


. Eaf-India Houfe, rrth January 1805. 
Mefiis. Loney Dundas obferved, that having gone over the proceedings of the former Mect- 
ings in 1803, they had now to flate that with regard to the Account (N°4.) containing the 
expence incurred by the Company by the intended Expedition to Mauritius, and by the Expedition 
again(t the Cape of Good Hope; and (N° 2.) the Kxpence of the intended Expedition againft 

janilla ; they concurred in the opinions then given by Melirs. Bragge and Vanlittart, that Go- 
‘vernment ought to reimburfe the Company thole expences. 

That with refpe& to (N° 3.) the expences of the capture of Ceylon, the Moluccas and Ma- 
Jacca, they had not been able to alcertain correétly upon what principle the mere charge of the 
capture of thofe places had been allowed by the gentlemen employed on the part of Government ; 
that it occurred to them, that if fuch expence was allowed, fome farther part was fairly claimable 
by the Company, but to what amount they had not yet formed an opinion ; that they were ready to 
admit, in regard to Ceylon, the poffeffion of that place might be confidered as a double benefit, 
that is, that it was productive of advantage both to Government and the Company; that its value 
to the Company was undoubtedly confiderable, as forming a material defence to their peflefions, 
‘on the Coromandel Coaft in particular, as well as to thofe fituated inthe Bay of Bengal and elfe- 

261. N wheres 


243973670 


__ Report from 

The Committee on 
the Account 

_ between the Public 

) and the 

Ealt India Company, 

‘26th June 1895. 

“Appendix, No. 10. 


a 


5° Appendix so The First REPORT from the Sezer Commirres 


where, ina more general view ; that on 'thefe confiderations, the expence of keeping that THand 
being charged to Government, appeared to them inadmiffible, and they therefore muft obje& to 
-fuch charge. 

That the fame obfervation applied in part to the Moluccas and Malacca, but that they wifhed 
‘to fec a feparate ftatement of the expences of Ceylon and of the places lat mentioned, as defired 

at the former Meeting, before they proceeded farther on the difcuffion, 

Thefe accounts were accordingly fubmitted, with a General Account Current between Govern- 
sment.and the Company, containing fundry alterations and additional charges, caleulzble with 

intereft to the 31ft ultimo, and giving credit for the profit on fpices, exhibiting an eftimated balance 
edue to the Company, upon thefe dates, of £. 4,632,009. 

The Deputy Chairman and Sir Hugh Inglis, on the part of the Company, obferved in reply to 
+the arguments urged by Mefirs. Long and Dundas, regardin Ceylon, that they bad great doubts 
.of the probability of the Company's taking pofleffion of that Tiland under the peculiar circumfances 
-of the time, had it not been for the exprefs directions of His Majefty’s Minifters, as war with 
‘Holland had not been then declared, and it was entirely under thofe directions that the Company 
shad given affiltance in the capture ; that the Adminiftration of this Country having taken the go- 

vernment of the Jfland out of the hands of the Company by the appointment of Mr. North in 
O&eber 1798, the Company from that period had no controul .over the expenditure there; this 
-circumftance they therefore confidered as giving the Company a particular claim upon Government 
+for-reimburfements of a confiderable part, if not the whole, of the expences. 

‘That in thé divifion now mace of the items of theaccount, the balance of property remaining 
gift December 1801, was clearly a fair charge on Government, who had then taken exclufive 
pofleflion of the fettlement; and that the whole of the property captured in 1,795-6 had been granted 
‘by His Majefty tothe captors ; the other particulars of expence appeared alio reafenably charged to 
Government, 

That-as.to the Molucca lands and Malacca, the Company would certainly not have thought 

sof attacking them, but for the orders of Adminiftration already mentioned; this they conceived 
would riot admit of a doubz; therefore the Company’s claim for reimburfement of their expences on 
this account feemed unqueltionable, efpecially as credit was given in the account now ftated for the 
profits on fpices from the Moluccas; and the ftores as well as other captured property had been. 
granted by His Mujefty to’the captors, the Company-deriving no benefit therefrom, 

Meffrs. Long and Dundas exprefled a defire to have more time to confider this article, and the 
further difcuffion thereof was in confequence poftponed. 

Proceeding to article 4th, the expence of captures on the Peninfula,.and of the maintenance of 
prifoners ta&en there, Mefirs. Long and Dundas, on the part of Government, obferved, that they 
acquiefced in the opinions of Meflrs. Bragge and Vanfittart; that the whole fhould be borag by the 
Company, as they muft neceffarily have undertaken the Expeditions in queftion, the natural defence 
of their own pofleffions being.fo materially involved therein, that the expence of .prifoners followed 
sin due and ordinary courfe the expence of capturing the fettlements; they mutt therefore eatirely 
-objeét to thisarticle of charge. 

In reply, it was obferved on the part of the Company, that admitting for a’ moment the force.of 
-the arguments:as to the mere capture of the fettlements, the expence of prifouers ought to be.con- 
fidered, and was generally conlidered, as belonging to Government, who ufually in treaties of 
peace, fettled accounts of fuch expences with the nation with which they had been at war ;. that the 
expence defrayed by the India Company on this account, on former occations, had always con- 
ftituted a demand on the Government of the Country, 2s would appear in various difcullions in 
Parliament and otherwife, and that nothing could fhew in a {tronger light the opinion entertained 

“by Adminiftration itfelf of the Company's right in this refpect, than the aliowance in the A&t of 
1793 of claims of this nature being fet-cfF againft the demands of Government on the Company, 
for the expence of fhips and ftores. 

Thefe arguments did not, however, appear to make any impreffion upon the gentlemen employed 
con the part of Government. 

Owarticles (No. 5. and 6.) Mefirs. Long and Dundas cxpreff':d their acquiefcence in:the opinions. 
“formerly given by Mefirs, Bragge and Vanfittart. 

And rejecting the expences of the Expedition to Egypt, they obferyed, that they faw no objec- 
«tion to recommending that Government fhould defray fuch {um as it appeared had, been aétually 

incurred ‘by thé"Company on that Expedition, beyond the expence which the trooys employed 
would have incurred had they remained ftationary within the Company’s territories in India, pro- 
»vided fatisfattory accounis 6} thele extra charges were made out. BS. 

To this it was ftated in reply, that coniphete accounts had not hitherto been received, the fum 

-charged was therefore partly ettimated, but that the complete accounts might be expected from 
India in a thort time. 

‘The expence of capturing, &c. the Danifh fettlements, was then confidereds the orders from 
Adminiltration on the iubject were referred to, and the claim of the Company for reimburfement 
was not objected to. 

Some obfervations were made by the Deputy Chairman-and Sir Hugh Inglis on the rate of in- 


_sterett charged to Government, viz.4 percent. which they hoped would be confidered as extremely 


moderate; but that poliibly they might herealterice occalion to offer reafous in fupport of a 
-clasm for a higher rate. 

The charge from the Pay Office, flated on the creditor fide of the account, being mentioned, it 
was explained, that the fur credited was lefs than that charzed by the Pay Office, on a fuppofition 
athat in the latter were included expences for recruits raifed tor regiments in linha, but who w 
not fent there, and that particulars of the charges have been requefted, but hitherto noue 


furs 


on tle Arrarrs or Tus East Inpia Company. © 5 
. 
forwarded; that part of the charge, it was prefumed, was for the excefs in‘number of troops, flated _ Report from 
as an article of debit in the account. ‘The ‘Committee. o@ 
Melis. Long and Dundas defired to be furnifhed with a copy of the general Account with ieeeas eee 
Government, as now altered, which was ordered accordingly. and the 
Adjourned to Saturday the rgth Inftant, Eaft India Company, 
26th June 1805. 


Eaft India Houle, roth January 1805. “Aedes No. x0 


‘The Minutes of the Meetings held on the roth December laf, and ith Inftant, were read, 
corrected, and approved, 
Mefirs, Long and Dundas then obferved, that having gone through the Account Current laft 
drawn out, their opinions upon the feveral items therein were as follows: 
To the-r{t and 2d articles, the expences of Mauritius, and the Cape, and of Manilla, they faw 
no objection, and were of opinion they fhould be defrayed by Government. 
On the 3d article it appeared to them, that of the expences of Malacca and the Moluccas, one- 
half only fhould be borne by Government, and the fame with refpect to the expence of the capture 
of Ceylon, That the three next items, viz. balance of property remaining there gift December ~ 
1801, remittances from India not arrived there at the time, and Bills drawn from Ceylon 1802-3, “ 
they were of opinion might be admitted in full, ‘That as to the expence of prifoners, they were 
doubtful if any part thereof could be allowed to the Company.; on further confideration, however, oy 
“they were difpofed to admit of one-half of the expence being borne by Government; but, as to | 
the expence of keeping Ceylon, they mutt objeét to any part thereof being charged to Govern- 
“ment. \ - 
‘That to the 4th article; w/z. the ‘expence of the Foreign Settlements on.the Peninfula, and a 
of prifoners captured there, they muft object altogether. 
‘I'he sth article, the expence of veflels, ‘&c, they were of opinion might be admitted. re 
To the 6tharticle, ‘the expence of the King’s troops in India in excefS to the number. autho. 
rized by the A@s of Parliament, they objected. ‘ " hi 
‘That in'regard to the 8th article, the expences of the Egyptian Expedition, although they con-" 
tinued of opinion, as {tated at the laft Meeting, that the fame fhould be borne by Government, it & 
‘appeared to them that the amount of the charge was very great, efpecially if confined, as they un- 
‘derftoed it to be, to the extraordinary expence of the troops fent from India, more efpecially as on 
referring to the ftatement of the military eftablifhments acBengal, which was then before themy 
itappcared that the expence was beyond all proportion, as to the number of troops fent from India 
to Egypt, of the expence of an equal number of the military charged on-that ftatement ; they mult 
therefore oblerve; that when the accounts were received, it would be neceflary that they fhould 
undergo a ftriét examination, ik 
It was obferved in reply, that the charges of the Expedition did not confit alone of the pay 
and ellowances of the troops, that a -very confiderable proportion thereof was occafioncd by tonnage 
for the tran{portation of tholé troops, and the provifions and ftores neceflary for their fupport, as 
would appear by a ftatement then {ubmitted, which was accordingly referred to; whence it appeared 
the amount of tonnage engaged for thole purpofes was at the rate of upwards of £.600,000 per 
annum, 
Mefits. Long and Dundas then obferved, that they faw no objeétion to allowing the Company 
reimburfement of the’ expences incurred by the capture of the Danith Settlements in India, nor to 
the further intereft to the g1{t/December laft, the fame being computed upon the fums which they 
had now ftated their opinion might be admitted. A 
Having thus explained their fentiments upon the articles debited to Government, Mefirs. Long 
and Dundas produced an account received from the Pay-Olfiee, of the claim on the Company for 
expence of King’s regiments ferving in India, the amount of which was {. 1,285,009 inftead 
of £, 1,090,000, as credited by the Company, and which they fuppofed mutt be fub{titured in lieu of 
the latter; .they alfo were of opinion that intereft thereon, calculated an each year’s payment 
tothe 31ft December laft, was chargeable to the Company at the fame rate as they had charged 
Government. 
The Deputy Chairmaniand Sir Hugh Inglis obferved, that, on looking into this account, they 
found a charge madefor-regimonts ferving at Ceylon, fince shat place was takenunder manage- yee 
ment of the Crown; they muff, therefore, object to this part of the account; this objection was , 
admitted to be valid. ti 4 , 
Meflts. Long and:Dundas ftated, that on the principles which they had now explained, they did 5 
snot mean to charge the Company with the profits on fpices. 2) 
The Deputy Chairman and Sir Hugh Inglis, in reply to the foregoing, expreffed their concern taal 
at the very contiderable diminution in what they conligered the fair and equitable claims of the 
Company on Government upon the principles of the account, as it was now propofed to be ad- 
mitted by Meflrs. Long and. las; thatin particular with regard to she expences of the eapture 
of the Dutch tettlements of Ceylon, Malaccaand Moluccas, ucy had hoped the arguments they 
had offered would have made-fuch an impreffion on thofe gentlemen, 2s would have led to a much 
smore favourable refult in rezard to the Couipany’s claims; thar as to Ceylon, there. teemed to be 
no pofition more incontrovertible than this, that as Government had directed the cupture, and had 
Hfablequently taken the place eut of th Company's hands, they (the Government) thould. bear the 
whole of the expence, 2 
‘That inreply to the arguments againit the Company’s claim on. this fubje&t in. particulzr, as 
well as on the Dutch and other captures in general, they bad com feniimen)s. to 
writing, ina paper which taey detired now to iubmit to tie attens 
tieman empléyedon tee part of Government. " 


52 Appendix vo The First REPORT from tie: Serect Committee 
* 


‘The paper in queftion, entitled * Reply, &c. &c.”” was accordingly read, being as follows; ~ 
¢ Committee on 


“the Account REPLY to the Argument againft the Company’s-Claim for Reimburfement of the Expences 
between the Public of the Durch Captures, vx.5 that fach Captures were neceflary for inforing the Safety of 
anid the. pao aie, i pee AS 

Patt India Company. the Company's pofleffions,” &c. &c. &c. 
zee pea? THo5- This argument appears to be taken-up upon toolimited grounds; the difcufiion of the Com. 
Dappen™, N1D: pany’s clainy in the account fiited, ought in reafon to proceed upon much more enlarged and 
- Tiberal. principles ; for, admitting that the capture of the fettkements. in qut(lion had beew indifpen- 
fable to the fafety of the Company’s other poflefions, fill ic cannot be difputed that the bensiit 
to the Company, in this refpsct, was at the fanie time a benefit to the State; for it fezms imposible 
to confider the queftion 2s one\between two parties having. different intereits; an the cota 
vit onght,to be viewed as a queition between parties whole interctt were and ous esnot only 
reciprocal but infeparable; more efpecially under the Act of 1793, by waich the, States to par 

.- ticipate to a certain extent in the profits of the Company. " 

In this view, therefore, and in view to the large revenue derived to the State fram the Com- 
pany’s commerce, it feems no more than juft and reafonable thatthe State dhould bear, at leaft, a 
partin the expences which diminith or abforb the Comipany’s profits, ia which, the State would 
atherwile participate, more efpecially when this is occafioned, as in the profent initance, by. the 

~exprefs orders of Government creating a heavy expence io the Cosipany, 

n all the wars in India, arifing from war originating between Great Britain and other European 
Powers, and in the origin of which the Eat India Company would of courle have had no concern, 
the additional expences of the Company have been enormous both in Tadia and in Europes in 

‘the former, ftom Expeditions undertaken againft the Enemy’s pollefions, and the confequenc in- 
ereafé which’ has taken place in the military eftablifhments abroad; in the Jatter, from che high 
_ tates of freight incidental to a ftate of European warfare, demorage of fhips, and the increaled 
» ptice of exports from Europe ; ail thele are difadvantages to the Conypany in time of wary, againi 
» which nothing in the vey of counterbalance can be ftated. / 
“On the other hand, all the lofs fuftained by the State jn view to their connedtion with ghe 
: > Company, is, the fhare of the profits which would otherwife accrue to them under the Act of 
fs 1793) but this, it 1s believed, is more than made up by means of the add:tional duties impofed 
‘ on the Company's trade in time of war, by which a confiderable increafe of revenue has been 
br \ ~ derived to the State; and although it may be admitted, that, notwithitanding thefe additional 
i impolts, the trade of the Company, during the laft war, flourilaed beyond example, {till this 
circumftance produced cunfiderable advantage to the Srate in the mode above defcribed ; whereas 
the Company by no means benefited in’ proportion, becanfe, from the heavy expences of their 
ie amilitary eftablifhments, and other incidental caufes, they have been obliged to barrow money in 
India at very high rates of intereft to fupply the inveftments for Europe, which ave turnithed 
» sthe.falesat home, on which Government have reaped fo-great advantages from the dutics levied 
ahereon. 
Unlefs, therefore, the fubject under difcuffion be treated upon the broad bafis and libpral_prin- 
ciples of an inteparable conneétion between the parties, and which feems to be the fair and reafon- 
t » able ground on which it fhould ftand, particularly fince the A&t of 1793 was pafled, the relative 
Aituation in which the Company ‘will ttand in regard to Government will’ be this, /that, when 
there exift a profit from their concerns to a certain extent, the Government fhares therein 
wpe but when the reverfe is the cafe, the Company alone futtain the lofs; for Government, unlels 
» they bear part of the extra expence of in India, not only lofe nothing, but from the additional 
duties.impofed on the trade during the ae may be faid to enjoy equal advantages with thofe they 
veh would derive from a participation in profits which do noe in fact exilt. ihibers, confidering it 
5 as a partnerfhip account, that one of the parties (Government) in every fituation gains, the 
we £ other (the Company) fuftuins all lofles, when loffes accrue. 
= " This feems to be the fair and equitable view in which the queftion ought to be confidercd on 
; igeneral principles ; but ifit were to be argued as a point of colonial, proteion, ilill the Com- 
pany’s right to reimburfement appears well founded, becaufe it is prefixed that no other 
Colony belonging to the Empire would be called upon to defray expeaces of this natures if 
4 the fituation of the India Company can be compared with chat of any of the Briti~a 


* Report from 


> 


Col : . 
“In addition to thefe general arguments, the peculiar circum@ances of the cale deférve atten- 
~~ ‘tion, Admitting that the poffefion of Ceylon: was: nec:flary for the.protection and (afety of the 
Pera 's pofleffions, war had not been declared against Hollatuls therefore, without the exprels 
© direction of Adminiftration, the Company would not have ventured to underteke an Expedition 

~ againft that tfland. . The orders for taking poffeffion of that and tie other Dutch. fetuemeuts, 

‘ direéted they thould be fo taken: and held in His Majeity’s name, not, as. abfelute captures 
from adeclared enemy, but in view to reitoring them to che Stadtaollery if he should recover 
his authority in Holland; the Adminiftration of this Country, efter this Ifland had been in pot 
feffion of the Company for a thort period, (about two years and a half) allumed, in fact, the 
government of Ceylon, by appointing a Governor; and the expences of the: fettlement. were 
thereafter not fubject to che controul or direction of the Companys from January 1802, that 
Wand was completely and exclufively made fubje& to the orders aad controul of the Crowa, 
i A dae confideration of all thefe circumftances feems to eftabiith the claim of the Company jor 
afull reimburfement of their expences on this account upon indifputable grounds; for it would 

F aruba teen liad direct the Company to me themilelves to. certain 
-expence, in acquiris pion of the Ifland under the extraordinary. {tate of affairs at the time, 
‘that they thoulddivelt them of the executive management thereof {202 afterwards, and finaily thould 
deprive them of any controul therein, by vefting the government of tas [Mand in the Crown, and 
yer 


“com the Arvarns or ‘T'ne! East Inpra ‘Company. | 53 


hh. wil. 


yet after all (hould: inf upon their bearing the charge of the Tland for all the pericd antecedent Report Hea 
0 the tranfation daft mentioned ; furely in faitnels and in juttneS the Company have a right The Committe en 
Under the circumflances to expeét the expences they Have incurred for Ceylon fhould be Be ee eae if 
repaid in full ; they giving credit, as they are willing to do, for any profits they may have derived aid Tht. ta 
from the! cinnanion fre to Europe. 2g Batt India Company, 2 

With tefpect to the capture of Malacca and the Moluccas, the fame train of reafening on 26th June 1805. 
general grounds applies equally as to Ceylon; nor can the argument of the neceflity for taking Appendix, Nox P 
thefeplaees, in view to the fafety of the Company’s other pofleffions, be ured here with any 
degree of propriety ; for it is’ certain, that without the pofitive injunctions of Government, as 
delcribed ‘above, Company would never have thought of taking peflefion of theft fettlements 5 
there cannot bea ftronger proof ef ‘this, than by adverting to the circumftaace of the former war 
againft the Duteh, a fituation of affairs differing widely from that at prefent under examination; 
at that period the Company did not think it neceffary to attempt.the capture cf thefe places, nor 
did the Government of this Country think it neceflary to direct {uch capture ; combining, there. 
fore, this’ with thecircumftances of the laft capture, as already alluded to, there feems to be no doubt 
of the validity of the Company’s claim to have their expences on this account rciayburfid in full, 
after allowing for the profits on the {pices fent from the Melucea Jfands. 

In fome degree the general arguments adduced above on N° 2, apply to Ne 4, and 
iris to be noticed, that in’ the latter are included the expenteés of the capture, &e. 
of the Dutch ferdements of Chinfura and Cochin, which being made under the | CAPTURES ON ‘THE 
direction of Adminittration, a8 already explained in refpeée to Neg, the expence contains 
feems fairly chargeable to Government, | It fhould likewife be remembered both as to N? 3, and 
N° 4, that with the exception of ‘Pondicherry, where, in fact, very little was taken, the pri 
property’ captured at ‘all the fetdements; even t6 the ftores; “has ‘been gratited to the captors, 
without any participation being allowsdto the Company, 1 Setad 

‘That having thus ftated their reafons in fupport of what they could not but confider as the» 
‘Company’s equitable claims to “a more liberal allowance on! thelé particular paints, they defire / 
in addition thereto to obferve, that all the profits derived to the Compzny from the poffefions and! 
trade of India, aniounted merely to a dividend oiv'the capital of 630,000; per anivum's thity en? 
the other hand, Government, tothe duties ufually levied on the Company’s trade in peace, 
added to. the amount of upwards of one million annually, under the denomination of W ar Duties: 
‘Thefe, therefore, were circumitances in proof of the arguments above adduced; and on every 
conlideration of the fubjeé they felt themfelves under the neceflity of protefting again{t fo: coh=' 
fiderable a’ reduétion a8 was now propofed; in’ the amount of the Company’s' cléitis, That in 
regard to the exSence of prifoners, they muft defire to refer to and repeat the reafons already’ 
ftated in fupport of that expence being borne by Government’; and they réquefted Meifrs. Long’ 

nd Dundas would maturely reconiider the opinions they had now given on the articles of the 4, 
account objeéted to. 4 

Melits. Long and Dundas, on the part of Government, obferved on the foregoing, that, if the , 
arguments in refpeét to the participation of expence by Government were admitted, they might | 
extend farther than wéuld appear now to be ‘contended for,’ as they might be thouglit to include » 
the expences of wars begun by the Company in India, fuch'as that with Tippoo, &c.: that, under | 
alf the objections now ftated; the Company poffeffed confiderable’power, authority, and advantages: 
in India, which they would ‘very ‘unwillingly forego, and that they would bs glad to receive a Fy 
reiewal of their charter with all'thefe difadvantages : and they cannot but’confider the conceffions: 
they had now made as liberal; aud although ‘they would willingly, as defired, reconfider the whole i 
of the fubjett, ‘they were not aware that fuch’reconfideration would caufe’any alteration in the fen~ ‘ | 
timents they bad now exprefled. i writ 

The Deputy Chairman and Sir'Hugh Inglis now claimed to charge, ott the part of the Company," 
the Indian intereft which they had paid in the period included in the Accounts, the fame being” c | 
at the lowelt rate 8 perveent. per annum: they alfo requefted’ the ‘attention of Meifis. Long: |, ah 
and Dundas to fuch further obfervations * as they might find it neceffary to offer on the Accounts * SePaper anmexeds 
in gerieral, aah. tH . * 4 

Melis. Long and Dundas expreffed’ their inclination to give every due attention to the claim " 
ce intereft, and to fuch other obfervations as might be made on the part of the Company to’ the 4 

ecounts. vinagabvats - st 


Farther Obfervations fubmitted by the Deputy Chairman’ and Sir Hugh Inglis, as referred 
tolin the latter part of the Minutes of the lait Meeting. 
Ainge F ; 3) 
Asin the courfe of the difeuffions refpeing the debt owing by Government to the Company, Ls % 
arguments have’ been maintairied on the part of Government which involve propofitions of a Be 
very important’ and “extenfive nature, it may be’ proper co enter into fome difting&t confideration 
of them. as Skt “i ¥ 
ut. In the café of the capture of Ceylon, Government directed the Company to take pofiefion ) 
of that Ifland: at a time when this Country was not at war with the Dutch. It was conquered at 
the expence of the Compatty,, but, contrary to-all former example, inftead of being united to their 
other Indian territories, was at the end of two years made a King’s Governmetit. ap 
Afterwards, the charge’and maintenance of it with an expenfive eftablifament of Crown Officers, a 
was committed to the Coinpany, under a declaration, that no reafon appeared why, if it were retained 
on a peace, it fhould not be made over to them. 
at. : i (9) When 


rt from 


‘The Committee on 


the Account 


~ between the Public 


and the 


Eaft India Company, 


Appendix, No. 10. 
i —_—_ 


© 26th June 1805. 


54 Appendix te The First REPORT from the Secect Commitrse 


When they had held it for 62 years, at anexpence of £.1,500,000, Government again took it 
from them without reimburfing any part of their expenditure; and finally upon a peace the Ifland 
was ceded to Great Britain, the government of it was retained by the Crown, and payment of the 
heavy out-lay to which the Company had been fubjeéted by the conquelt and charge of this pol 
feflion, excepting only one-half of the expence of capture (that is, £. 168,000 out oy. 1,474,000) 
is now refufed. 

As the gentlemen who aé on the part of Government muft think that it has a right to make 
fuch refufal, they then virtually maintain this propofition, that Government may not only com- 
mand the Company to undertake any military enterpizes which it may ftate to be conneéted with 
the fecurity of their territorial poffeffions in India, but may take to itfelf conquefts acquired by 
thefe enterprizes, or refume them after they have been put into the Company’s hands, ftill leaving 
the Company burthened with the expence they have incurred in keeping them upon the eftablith- 
ments formed by Government, as well as with one half of the expence of acquiring them. 

On the part of the Company, thofe who act for them feel themfelves obliged ftrenuoully to con- 
tend, that however difpofed the Company are at all times to fubferye the meafures of Government, 
and to render their means conducive to the general interefts of the nation, there is no exifting law, 
no authority ia the Executive Government, by which the Company can be compelled to employ 
their funds in making or maintaining conquefts, which, whilft thofe conquefts are retained from 
the enemy, they are not allowed to -poflefs. On behalf of the Company it mutt alfo be urged, 
that the whole of their condu@, in refpeét to the acquifition and maintenance of Ceylon, pro- 
ceeded upon otker grounds, upon confidence in the good faith of Government, that, when they 
(the Company) were required firit to take poffeffion of the Ifland, and afterwards to manage it, 
the intention of Government was either to leave it in theirhands, or to compenfate them for their 
difburfements. The Minutes of a conference with Mr. Dundas (now Lerd Melville) in 1797) 
thew that he coupled the retention of the Ifland by the Company with their defraying the expence 
of it. Had any contrary principle been intimated by Government, or fulpected ty the Court 
of Direétors, they could rot poflibly have been warranted in fubmitting to fuch an application of: 
the funds of their conftituents; nor could they have accepted the charge of the IMlund, had they 
known that it was again to be taken from them without paying them for the expence of keeping it. 
And indeed it is manifeftly contrary to the plain principles of natural juitice, to deprive any one by 
an a@ of power of a pofleflion which he could be induced to accept, and to lay out money. upon, 
only by the expectation of keeping it, without,repaying him the clear expence to which he has been 
fubjected by it. 

2d. Itis further argued, that whatever is fit for the Company themfelves to do for the fecurity of 
their pofféffions, that Government might order them to perform or might perform#or them, and at 
their expence; therefore, the acquifition and retention of Ceylon evidently contributing to give 
additional fafety to the Britith poifeffions in India, it was for the intereft of the Company to be at 
the expence not only of the conqueft of it, but of its permanent maintenance though in the hands 
of Government, and they ought not thence to objeét to the expence of keeping it for the few years 
during which it was in their pofleffion. 

To this propofition alfo, taken in an indefinite and unqualified way, there are decifive objections. 
For it claims for Government an abfolute, independent power over the forces and finances of the 
Company, without even allowing them a voice when this power fhall be exercifed. . This would be 
a power not only to judge and determine for the Company what was fit for them to do in refpeét to 
foreign military enterprizes admitted to be connected with the fecurity of our Indian pofleffions, but 
alfo of conttruing that connection to extend to the moft diftant points, as Egypt, the Cape of Good 
Hope, Malta, the Mediterranean, or places {till more remote, and ordering Expeditions to any or all 
thefe points, the Company in the firit initance to difburfe the charges, or to be fubject to repay the 
fums which (hall be ftated to have been expended on thefe accounts by Government. Such a power 
would be contrary to the whole tenor and {pirit of the exifting laws, and, without meaning to infinuate 
that it would not be equitably exercifed, the Court of Directors can by no means acquiefce in rea- 
foning which affumes or implies it. 

3d. It is urged that all conqueits which improve the fecurity of the Indian poffeflions are fo evi- 
dently for the benefit of the Company, that it is natural and proper they fhould defray the coft of 
acquiring and retaining them. 

‘o this it may be anfwered, that for the expence of conquefts, cither abfolutely neceflary to the 
fafety of the Company’s poflefiions, or of which they exclufively reap the advantage, it may be 
allowable to concend that they alone fhould be liable; but it is obvious that fome of the conquetts 


* attempted or made in the late war, as Manilla and Mauritius, Malacca and the Moluccas, were not 


y 


atall neceflary to the fafety of the Company’s territories ; and with refpect to thefe and all the other 


“acquifitions made in the courfe of that war, particularly from European enemies, the Nation derives 


from them far more benefit than the Company; 1ft, in the general reputation and afcendency they 
give to the Britith power and influence in Europe; 2dly, in the lofs and diftrefs they occation to 
the enemies of the Country ; 3dly, in the wealth they bring into it; 4thly, in the very article of 
fecurity (in whatever degree they do attord greater fecurity) to the Indian pofleflions. To which 
may be added, sthly, as an appendage to thele national advantages, that the controul and direction 
of dian affairs there, is not with the Compaay, unlefs indeed it be argued that the fmall fhare 
of patronage left to them conttitutes power and influence; all the great wheels of the machine are 
moved b: eecatnae at home, who dire€t and coatroul the Company in all their principal opera- 
tiensin India. - 
it has been obferved, that with all the facrifices ftated to have been made by the Company, 
and under all the objections made to the mode of adjufting the Account with Government, 
now propofed oa the pact of the latter, the Company would be glad to have a renewal of 
their charter. TF 
ic 


on the Aveaias or Tu East Inpra Company. — $5 


« ‘The only reply that feems immediately neceflary to this remak is this, that poffibly under the 
exercife of the power of Adminiftration in the manner complained of above, the Company, rather 
than relinquifh altogether rights which they confider juftly their due, might be induced to fubmit to 
the privation ofa part, in order to retain the other part, however fmall the latter might be ; but 
this conftitutes no fair argument againft the Company’s claims now under confideration; claims 
which they confider to have originated in a great degree in the exercife of a power which they do 
not acknowledge to exift in the prefent fituation of affairs regarding the charters of the effects of 
which they now complain, and againft which, in the mode and to the extent infifted on, on the part 
of Government, the Company muft ftrenuoully contend, 

All the territorial acquifitions of the Company have aggrandized and enriched the Nation incom- 
parably more than they have benefited the Proprietors of India flock. ‘Thofe Proprietors have 
hitherto feldom received more than a common intereft for the money invefted by them in the joint 
ftock; but the Nation has received into its bofom all the vaft tide of private wealth, that for 
nearly the laft fifty years has regularly flowed from the Company’s pofleifions in the Eaft; all the 
Profits on the great commerce carried on with thofe countries, by which its manufactures and thip- 
ping have been fo much augmented, a prodigious annual revenue from cuftoms and duties—a 
general incresfe in its trade with other countries, by means of its being fo much the feat of the 
Indian commerce—al} which have contributed to place Great Britain in its prefent elevated rank 
in the feale of nations—contrafting thefe immenfe advantages with the modicum received by the 
Proprietors, by whofe funds and ar whofe rifk the firft territorial conquetis were achieved, the greater 
intereft of the Nation in every addition given to the fecurity of Britifh India cannot be difputed ; 
and therefore inficad of rendering the Company liable to the whole charge of any conqueft not ab- 
folutely neceflary to the fafety of its former pofieffions, it may fairly be queftioned whether it foul 
pay any part, i may alfoon the fame grounds be queftioned, whether it fhould pay the whole 
expence even of the conquefts the moft neceflary. j 

‘Thefe obfervations will apply {till more forcibly, if the expences of the Military Expeditions 
Shouldexceed the ability of the Indian poflkfiions to defray ; had they remained in the hands of 
native fovereigns, thefe HAGA would, certainly have regulated their fyftem of military ope= 
rations by their actual revenue, becaule they could not have had credit to eftablifh the practice of 
funding debt. It is the commercial credit and opulence of the Eaft India Company which has 
introduced this practice into India, and upon this commercial foundation moft of the brilliant 
achievements accomplifhed there in the lait thirty years have refled ; though there are perfons 
(not connected with Adminiftration) who feem willing to forget all that the Company have done 
in obtaining and fupporting our Empire in the Eaft. But undoubtedly the demand upon this re~ 
fource mult have its juft bounds, and thefe bounds may be fairly contended for, without fubjeRing 
the Company to the imputation. of ating upon narrow principles of commercial parlimony. 
Of the enormous Indian debt, exceeding 20 millions fterling, which the Company now owe, 
avery great part has been incurred by wars, by which fo far as they have been advantageous, 
the Nation is atthis moment, in its general interefts, reaping the advantages, at the fame time 
that the capital flock of the Proprietors from which they bave long derived, as already obferved, 
only the common intereft, is, in faét, charged, fo far as it will. go, for the payment of that debt, 
which bas been fwelled by the very Expeditions under confideration. Whilft this is the cafe, 
whilft the Indian debt. goes on increaling, notwithftanding all the acceffions of new territory, 
whilit the Englith capital of the Company is liable to make good that debr, and whilft all the 
profpects. of compenfation long held out to the Proprietors, are ftill removed to a diftant, uncer- 
tain day, it cannot be equitable that they fhould be charged with the coft of any foreign enter- 
prizes which are rather expedient than neceflary, which haye for their object more the annoy- 
ance.of the enemy than the fafety of our pofleffions, and of which the, benefits redound more to 
the Nation than to the Company. Leatt of all, fhould this be the cafe with refpect to conquelts 
made by the Company,.and given up on a peace for the general intereft ; and of all the conqiefts 
mile the lait war in India, none were retained but Ceylon, which the Government has taken 
for itfelf. 

4th. Upon the whole, therefore, the leaft that can be concluded in favour of the Company is, 
that thofe Conquefts or Expeditions which were not atall neceflary to the fecurity of Britith-India, 
but which have been productive of advantages to the State, fhould beat the fole charge of the Go- 
yernment; fuch are the Expeditions to ‘Manilla, Mauritius, to the Cape, to Malacca, the Mo- 
luccas, and to Egypt, ; 

That thofe conquefts in which the Company as well as the Government have had a direct in- 
terelt, thould be at their joint charge ; fuch are the acquirements on the Continent of India and 
the Ifland of ‘Ceylon, fo far as the capture of it is concerned. On this head it has becn afked on 
the part of Government, would the Company extend the principle of participating in expence to 
the wars with the Indian Powers? fuch as that with Tippoo, &c. &c.—the anfwer, without in- 
fifting upon it in the prefent difcuffion, might reafonably be in the affirmative, becaufe Govern- 
ment was materially concerned in the defence and fecurity of the territories which were at ftake 
in that war, oz in the caufes from which it originated; and it may be prefumed that had Tippoo, 
allifted by the French, made fuch oppofition as eventually to threaten the fafety of India, Govern- 
ment would willingly have put this country to an expence far exceeding the whole of the Com- 
pany’s prefent claim, to fecure the Indian poffeffions, without even looking to a compenfation 
from them. 

That under this head of joint expence may alfo be placed the charge of maintaining 
prifoners, which is recognized in the 157th claule of the A& of 1793, as. a charge appertaining 
to Government. 

And thac the Company cannot be charged for the expence of keeping any places which are He 

rf. lefe 


Report from. 
The Committee on — 
the Account 


‘ 56 Appendix so The First REPORT. from the Seuzer, Commit res 


:  Repott from eft in. their hands,,and united to the Indian fyftem of Government : on which point they fet fo 
The Committee on high 2 valuey that they would have been contented to remain charged with the expeuce of main~ 
sete ccone ig ‘ining Ceylon, had they been allowed to keep it. 

‘cadliehe MONE AE even this adjuftmeat were adopted, the Company, from the high-rate at which they borrowed 
‘India Company, money for the Expeditions in queftion, the long time which they have been in advance, and the 
26th; Yune 1805- low rate of intereft charged in the eccounts as they wow ftand, would Rill remain charged with a 


| Appendix, Noor, very heavy difburfement en account of them. 


Appendix, N° 7. 


SUPPLEMENT to the Obfervations. prefented by the Court of Direétors to the 
Committee of the Houfe of Commons, on the 31ft March 1808, refpecting the 
Claims of the Company on Government. 


‘THE chief ground on which the Commiffioners on the part of Government, and the Committee 
of 1805, objected to allow the full expence incurred by the Company on account of Ceyloi, the 
Moluecas and Malacca, the firft of which fettlements was made a King’s Governaient, and the 
others in the general arrangements of the Peace of Amiens reffored to the Dutch, was, that the 

‘y Public had borne the whole expence of the Egyptiaii Expedition, with a thare of which the 
Company might very well be charged 5 and the Committee of 1805 have faid, that they have aimed 
at fuch general arrangement upon the whole of the account, as might beft reconcile, én a queftion 
liable to confiderable difference of opinion, the fair claims’ of the parties, 


Now the Courtof Directors prefume to think, that the arguments which have been advanced to 
fhew, that the Company ought té be charged with a part of the expence of the Egyptian Expe- 
dition, have been fuccefsfully anfwered. But fuppofing the Company juftly chargeable with a hare 
of that expence, fuppofing even that fhare to be made one half, which is a proportion far beyond 
what, upon a juft application of the principle, the Indian territory can afford or fairly be burthened 
with for any fuch expence; till this mode of fettlement would be far lefS injurious to the Company 
than, the one which has been adopted, as will moft clearly appear by the following ftatement, formed 
upon the lait fettleinent made of the charges of the capture and maintenance of Ceylon, the 
Molucca Iflands, Malacca, and the Egyptian Expedition. 


The Company are charged with half the expence of the maintenance of Ceylon, the Moluccas 
and Malacca, which is as follows : : 


& 


‘on Ceylon < ¥ ras =) £.1,205,656 
' Eaftern Iflands, &c, OSLO MAY dren ye cane gy beh? Saas 15321,859 


, k ie 425527515 
i Dedué& belf the profit on Spices which the Company have morcover allowed to z. 
é Government) =) 238 Sa ae 554553" 


/ Remains a clear deduétion from the charge made by the Company againit 
Government == 5 0 ee 

‘The whole amount of expence incurred by the Company for the Egyptian Ex- 

pedition, on the rft March 1808 is £. 2,861,392, one half of which, if charged 


£> 1,972,984 


to the Company, would be - - - 1:430,696 
Difference - - - £.542,288 + 


So that by the mode of fettlement adopted by the Committee of 1805, on the fuppofition of a 
fair adjuftment of the claims of the Parties, the Company fuffer more than if the principle of an 
equal participation of expence had, in following up what the Commiffioners on the part of Go- 

® vernment contended would be juft, been applied to the feveral Expeditions to Ceylon, the Eaftern 
Ifands and Eyypt, to the extent of £. 542,288; which fum the Company contend to be due to 
them upon the principles maintained in favour of Government ; but, upon the principles they 
~ themfelves maintain, they claim the whole fum of £. 1,972,984. 


C Eu Nadia Fougs 
24th May 1808. } 


be 


ou the Arrairs or Tas East Inpia Company. 


AVERAG of the under-mentioned RECEIPTS and PAYMENTS of The Easr Inpta Company, in 
“ ENcrawy, for the following Periods; together with an Eftimaie of the fame for the curcent Year, from-aft— 


" “March 1808 to 1ft March 1809. 


Appendix, N° 8. 


Average of 5 Years| Average of 5 Years | verage of 10 Year 


from 
Mt Mareh 1795, 


from 


Ik March 1803 


from 
1f March 1798 


Ettimate: 
from 


AR March, 


to tr 10 to va ae 
4% March 1803. | 18 March ise8. | 1 Murch 1808, | ft March 1809, 
RECEIPTS: 2 ; 
L £ £ 
Company’s Goods fold =P Pare {er weieot4s 5y520:329 6,326,735 493146 
Mon. Board of Ordnance, for Saltpetre ager 24,049 68,000 46,025 185,000 
Charges and Profit on Private Trade - - -| . 167,966 152,555 + 160,260 $0,000 
Freight] oy 7 yon) 2+ Eee ois ee = i. kt By, 
Intereft received of the Bank path Res ay aah 4 
of Aunuilies - ~ - 36,227 36,224 36,225 36,226 
_————-—-— 
i 7,361,384 | ~ 5,777,108 6,569,245 5,239,372 
PAYMENTS: ; 
‘Cuftoms |. Ja ci> agama =) tien hem 367,229 108,717 © 237,973 59884 
Freight and Demorage _ - - - - - 1,511,693, 1,512,615 1,512,154" 1,788,405, ; 
Goods and Stores exported, and Bullion - - - 2,481,083, ’ 2,983,965 2,732,524 2,044,959 1 
Bills of Exchange from India = = = = 900,054. 528,876. 711,965 1,122,175 
- + Di- = + - Chinn - +0 +) - 556,007 525,310 540,058 855,856 | 
Charges General, includiig Supra Cotee en: “a | y 
fion, Interest on Loans, &c, &e. 725,376 736,629 730,999 758,000 | 
Dividends on Stock, and Intereft on ‘Bonds - = 709,391 742,500 725,945 857,000 
Pay to Marine and Military ace on ey and 
yetired from Service 19 = 7 455795 127,384 86,590 160,000 + 
, 7,296,639 7:200,986, 7:278,808 7,546,279 
‘ ee —_ = = —Y 
Eaft India Houte, (Efzors éxceptéd.) Cha? Cartwright, oe 


J2th May 1808. 


Accountant Gen!, 


“In this way of lating the Accounts, the eftimated Freight on Private Trade is left out; for which reafon the Amount 
of this Head is not the fime heye as in the Annual Accountlaid before Parliament, 


nér, 


j 58 Appendix The Firasr REPORT jrom the Sexect Commrrrez 


Appendix, 


‘COMPARISON of the Fixed and Permanent Sources of RECEIPTS and PAYMENTS 
a temporary or occafional nature, fuch as Tea Duties, Money borrowed, Payments made by 


Sah ea 
Aft Mar.1798 } 1 Mar. 1803 | yfore, Leb, 
t i i 
RECEIPTS. Aner 1903. | 1% Mor 1008, | Mer period latter period. 
“Company's Goods, including Saltpetre £: if: 8 > 
to the Board of Ordnance -  - §| 359785,958 | 27,941,646 = 7844,312 
Charges and Profit on Private Trade = 830,828 762,775 _ 77,953 
Tntereft on the Annuities - - - 181,134 181,119 j — 15 
£- | 36,806,920 | 28,885,540 — 7,921,380 
Total Receipts from 1ft March 1798 to 1ft March 1803 - - = = =|} 36,806,920 
Payments - -°D? - = = D? = -) = = = «| 96,483,145 
( Surplus £-| 323,775 
) 
Total Receipts from aft March 180g to 1ft March 1808 £.28,885,540 
Payments - - D? - = - D® - = 36,304,951 
Deficiency | 7,419,411 
Deficiency £. | 7,095,636 


‘Supplied as under: : 
Balance Cafh, 1ft Mareh 1798 = = toeye = oie. a 


“Receipts from Government on account of the Company’s Claims - = - 
D° - - - D® ~ - forShipsfold - - - - = - 
Loyalty Leanfold "= say = ete 
Bond Debtincreafed - - = = = = = © = = 
Duty on Tea in the Company’s hands on 1ft March 1808 ~ a Ge 
Received from feveral: Compofition for fiaying Law Proceedings - = 
Ls 
Dedué: 

Balance Cath, 1ft March 1808, including Tea Duty - - £.723,692 
Private Trade Goods, more paid than received - = - - 215,135, 
Almshoufes.at Poplar - - D®  - = = - - 30,322 
«Repaid the Bank for Loans. = = =) oe 950,000 
Captains of worn-out Ships = 5 = = = = 294,049 
ee 

Eaft India Honte, : se meats esha 


aath May 1808. 


8,708,834 


7,995,636 


540,645 
3y449,960 

169,986 

7695737 
2,396,762 
1,331,508 
50,236 


1,613,198 


on the Agrarns os THE East Inpta Company. 


59 
N° 9. 
in Evaxann, of ''he East Inpta Company; -exclutive of Receipts and Payments which are of 
Government, and Private ‘rade, beyond the Charges and Profit thereon, in the following Periods. 
' 
. 10 Mar, 1798 | 1f Mar, 1303 More, Sof, 
PAVHEN to 1008 3 latter period, | Intter period. 
TIENTS. 4 Mar. £03, | 1 Mar. 1308. 
L £ £ & 
Cutoms - - - 1,836;148 543588 |- + -~| 1,292,360 
Freight -  -  -- 7558465 | 7,563,076 4,612 aa 
Exports - = = 12,405,416 | 24,919,825 2,514,409 = 
India end China Bills - 7,280,303 | 5,245,999 |- © =} 2,034,374. 
Charges General - - 3,626,879 $623,112 56,233 a 
Officers Pay = = 228,981 636,920 407,939 = 
Intereft and Dividends - 3:546,953 | 3,712,502 165,548 a 
Captains of worn-out Ships - yee as _ 
36,483,145 | 36,304,951 | 3,148,740 | 3,326,934 
148,740 
£- 178,194. 
———— 


Chat Cartwright, 
<Accountant Gen’. 


65. Appendix-1é The Firsr REPORT from the Ssuzcr Conmurres 


Appendix, 


ACCOUNT of SALES for Ten Years, from 1798-9 to 1807-8; 


1800-1. | s801-2, | 1802-3. 
CHINA: L L L L L 
Teas - = 9] 3,368,608 3,665,321 3,479,218 358,284 3)562,653 i 
China Raw Silk - 182,535 71,104 81,683 104,220 131,722 
Ching Ware ~~ 4,032 = _ = => 
‘Nankeens - - - 88,0u9 58,557 55,480 76,542 54,485 
Wrought Silks - = - 9,009 eee - ot oe 4:197 
Digs - + - 193 
China Total-- £.| 3,652,283 31794982 357531252 
INDIA: 
Bengal Piece Goods -| 1,219,818 1,056,840 1,406,879 1,179,447 660,019 
Coatt--D° - - | 1,560,470 603,196 963,706 751,727 516,041 
Surat and Anjengo  - 193,202 177,901 205,283, 14,751 124,436 
Bengal Raw Silk - 322,873 390,149 297,645 395,410 269,249 
Pepper o- = =~ 331,625 256,784 317147 269,246 172,058 
Sugar -  - =| 457,545 123,869 246,569 147,191 102,151 
Coflle - - + 17,688 26,625 42,264 see see 
Saltpetre - - -| 226,742 410,928 228,250 96,880 156,596 
Spices - - 372,637 368,635, 241,573 232,894 192,856 
Cotton Wool + - 84,686 33,653 12,495 _ = 
Drugs, &e. = = 79;704, 26,979 16,989 2,397 62,978 
India, Total - - £-) 4,666,990 | 3,565,550 | 3,078,800 | 3,086,943 | 2,916,384 
“fetal, Indiaand China £.] 8,319,073 | 7,960,541 vaseitt a a 


EAST INDIA HOUSE, t 


ioth May 1808. 


6,626,547 | 6,069,636 


Exrors excepted.) 


. ot the Arearns or Fau-Easr Invra ‘Company. 6% 


Nero. 


difinguifhing INDIA and CIL{NA, and‘the Srecres of Goons from each. 


1803-4. | 1804-5. 1806-7. | 1807-8. 
L L Le L L CHINA: 
3484448 | 3,148,540 | 3,620,904 |. 3,566,048 | 3,795,612 Teas, 


100,028 100,732 545555 92,585, 51,144 China Raw Silk. 


= China Ware, 


43,828 58,223, 65,240 _ Nankeens, 
1,373 = Wrought Silks. 
= 2y Drugs. 


3629,677 | 3,307,495 | 3,740,699 | 3,709,046 | 3,845,756 | China Total. 


INDIA: 


672,031 438,964 260,262 Bengal Piece Goods. _ 
449,731 
14,679 


499,192 


620,454 498,134 


186,273 


5295315 136,177 Coaft - - - D® 


84,617 


419,901 
91,228 


36,383 Surat and Anjengo. 
268,066 Bengal Raw Silk. 


92,755 
192,244 


292,659 219,904 


223,078 141,588 121,844 38,266 75,840 Pepper. 
56,879 208,059 294,704 144,506 202,487 Sugar. 
37344 96,329 39,358 18,731 Coffee. 


217,769 186,866 179,982 . Saltpetre, 


114,246 


239,170 129,192 


174,359 


68,092, 116,502 Spices, 


153,286 


_ Cotton Wool. 


15,837 Drugs, &c. 


29,757 


2,236,396 1,310,215 | India Total. 


$866,073 


5,156,971 | Total India and China, 


5,260,521 | 5,995,598 | 5,181,120 


Cha‘ Cartwright, 


Accountant Gen, 


261. Q EXAMINATION 


62 Appendix to The Firsr REPORT from the Sevect Commirtze 


a 
Appendix, N° 11, 
Veneris 13° die Maij, 1808, 


EXAMINATION of CHARLES CARTWRIGHT, Efquire, 
Accountant General of the Eaft India Company. 


Have you made up an Account of the fuppofed value of the Company’s Goods unfold in their 
warchoufes, on the 1 of March 1808 ?—I1 have, the amount is £. 7,815,305. 


Explain to the Committee the principles upon which you made up that account, and how you 
took the value of the different articles—-My principal guide in valuing thofe articles in which 
there is not a probability of material change, fuch as Teas, &c. is the price at which the articles 
fold at the preceding fale, and all the articles in this valuation have been valued upon this principles 
that Piece Goods have been valued lower than the prices they fold for in the preceding years 5 
Pepper alfo is in the like predicament ; and, fince the valuation, Silk in a confiderable degree has 
increafed in price as well as pepper. 


Ax ACCOUNT, exhibiting the Prime Coft of the Conpany’s Goons in Warehoufe in each Year, from 
1798 to 1808; together With the Prime Coft of the Company's Imports and Saves refpectively 
in the fame Period, and the Sacre VatueE of the Goods unfold at the eud of each Year. 


Prime Coft Prime Cot | Sale Value 
of the Goods in | Prime Cuft Prime Coft of of 


Syarelions of the of the Goods unfold} the Goods untold 


unfold at the 
Commencement | S02 imported the Goods fold ‘sitio siihe. 
ofthe Year, | inthe Year, in the Year. | end of tho Year, | end ofthe Year. 


L L L L L L 
1798/9 | 2,746,339 | 5,738,671 | 8,485,010 | 3,828,495 | 4,656,515 | 8,481,815 


1799/800 | 4,656,515 | 2,600,007 | 7,256,522 | 3,772,639 | 3,483,883 | 5,788,571 
1800/1 | 3,483,883 | 2,572,232 | 6,056,115 | 4,191,727 1,864,388 3:726,000 
1801/2 | 1,864,388 | 3,473,530 | 5,337,918 | 3,351,378 | 1,986,540 | 4,021,078 
1802/3 } 1,986,540 | 9,228,818 | 5,215,358 | 3,155,630 | 2,059,728 | 4,259,554 
1803/4 | 2,059,728 | 3,925,961 | 5,985,689 | 3,242,822 | 2,742,867 | 4,764,344 
1804/5 | 2742,867 | 3,929,870 | 6,672,737 | 2,950,755 | 3,721,982 | 6,446,585 
2805/6 3:721,982, 9,816,242 7,538,224 3:340,916 4,197,308 7,600,022 
1806/7 | 4,197,308 | 2,624,879 | 6,822,187 | 2,949,396 | 3,872,791 6,875,158 
1807/8 | 3,872,798 | 3,157,965 7,030,756 | 2,852,316 ]| 4,178,440 | 7,815,305 


Eaft India Houfe, 
goth March 1808. 


(Errors excepted.) 


Cha’ Cartwright, 
Accountant Gen!, 


on the Arvarrs or Toe East Inota Company. 63 


Appendix, N° 12. 


Martis, 24° die Maij, 1808. 
EXAMINATION of Mr. ROBERT BROWN. 


Tama very large dealer in Eaft India cotton goods. 

Has the confumption of Eaft India cotton goods in this country.increafed or decreafed ?-—It has 
decreafed very confiderably, > 

Have Eaft {ndia cotton goods in this country increafed in their price, or decreafed ?—Some few 
fens of muflins have increafed; but {peaking generally of Eaft India cotton goods, they are 

lower, 

Do thofe articles in which the price has increafed, bear a fmall or a large proportion to the 
Eaft India Company’s fale of piece goods >—~A very {mail proportion. 

When you fay, that the prices of certain arcicles have increafed, do you mean relative to the 
late prices of thole articles, or the average piices for fome years back ?—I mean relatively to the 
late prices. 

Were thofe late prices higher or lower than the average prices?—I think I can ftate, that 
they were from 25 to 30 per-cent. lower than the average prices of fix or feven years paft. 

Has the prefent price of thofe articles, which you ftate to have increafed, rifen up to the average 
price ?—I_ think it has: {peaking generally of Eat India goods, the prefent price is confiderably 
lower chan the average of the lait fix or feven years. 

To what du you afcribe the fall of the price of Eaft India goods for the home confumption ?— 
Certainly, to che interference of the Britifh manufaCtures, 

From your knowledye of the trade, are you enabled to ftate it as a fact, that the Britith manu- 
faGtures have interfered materially with the fale of the Eaft India cotton goods?—I am able to ftate 
it as a fa& confiitent with my own knowledge, that they have interfered, fo much fo, that our 
houfe have been under the neceffity of keeping the. Britifh muflins within the laf two years to 
furnith the affortment for our own immediate conne@ions, 

‘Then your opinion is, as a perfon converfant with the trade, that the Britifh manufadtures have 
materially interfered, and are likely to continue te interfere with the fale of the Company’s cotton, 
goods for home Sontomption ?—Certainly. . 

With regard to i'aft India cotton goods for exportation, has it increafed or diminifhed in a 
confiderable degree ?-—-[t has diminifhed in a confiderable degree. 

To what eaules do you attribute that diminution >—Principally to the want ofintercourfe with the 
‘Continent, but in a material degree to the improvements made inthe Britifh manufacture of cotton 
goods, which now fupplant the india for many purpofes upon the Continent, and particularly in the 
printing manufadtorics, in which Eaft India cotton goods were formerly alone ufed. 

Are you a large exporter of cotton goods ?==[ am, but principally of India; our exportation has 
very confiderably diminifhed within thefe few years. 

}o you afcribe the diminithed fale of the Eaft India cotton goods, in any and what degree to the 
improvement of the manufactures upon the Continent?—I think that the improved {tate of the 
cotton manufactures upon the Continent has not intirely prevented the exportation from this 
country, for when the duty on the Continent was about 40 per-ccent. very large quantities were 
exported, and that it is only fince the abfolute prohibition has taken place, that the cotton manufac- 
tures of the Continent have greatly increafed. 

From what period do you date the abfolute prohibition on the Continent ?—Between two and 
three years ago. 

Do you think the interference of the Britith goods with the Eaft India Company’s goods is 
likely to continue ?—I think it is likely co continue with increafed effet, 


Examination of Sir ROBERT PEEL, Bart. a Member of the Committee. 


Having been examined, faid, That he was of opinion with the witnefs, Mr. Robert Brown, that 
the fale of Eaft India cotton goods has been of late years very much interfered with in Great 
Britain by fimilar fabrics manufa&tured at home. He begged leave to ftate in addition, that 
though the prices of labour and the raw material are much lower in the Eaft Indies than in this 
country, yet thefe advantages are more than counterbalanced by the following circumftances. The 
invention of ingenious machinery by Britifh fubjects has. very much leffened and affifted human 
labour, and, what is perhaps of more importance, the manufacture is eftablifhed in the feat of con- 
famption, and the home trader is enabled with facility to fupply the demand and to accommodate 
himielf to the changes that fo frequently take place in fancy articles; that the Britith cotton 

: goods mutt likewife have very much. interfered with the fale of Eaft India cotton goods on the 

‘ontinent of Europe, from the caules above ftated, and lately thefe markets have been loft by the 
hoftility of France; that he deemed it incumbent on him to ftate, that in confequence of the 
cotton manufaétures on the Continent of Europe being eftablifhed on Britith improvements, he 
apprehends that a return of peace would not reftore to the Haft India Company their accuftomed 
demand to that part of the globe for cotton gaods, 


64 Appendix zo The Firsr REPORT from the Seuzcr Commitrez 


; Appendix, N* 13. 
Aw ACCOUNT of BILLS or EXCHANGE paid by The East Inpta Company; 
from 1ft March 1798 to 1 March 1803. 


Indian Debt, 


CHINA, INDIA DEBT. Old kegitter'd Debt, 


Lo 8d Loos d. Load 

From ut March 1798 to 1ft March 1790 430,051 3 10 204,715 482,895 2 5 
179g to - - ~ 1800 831,826 19 1 980,032 621,744 19 3 

1800 to - - ~ 1801 655,216 11 1 379.532 796,516 6 5 

1801 to - - ~ 1802 475,723 16 — 640,470 475,590 6 1 

3802 to - + - 1803 395,940 11 4 502,183, 106,445 17 9 

£.| 2,786,764 1 4 | 2,106,935 25543192 11 14 


TOTALS. 
ey Be 
1,117,661 19 


1798 to 1799 


1799 to 1800 + 1,833,604 15 
1800 to 1801 - 1,829,265 § 
1801 to :802 - 1,591,789 18 
1802 to 1803 - 1,064,569 15 


oO] wertwe 


£- 7,436,891 13 


Memoranpum : 

‘The Total Amount of Bills of Exchange paid as ftated in this Account, will not 
agree with the Amount of Bills of Exchange paid, as ftated in the Receipts 
and Payments; the Amount of Bills received, drawn.in favour of the Company, 
being dedudted in the latter Account. 


(Errors Excepted.) 
Eaft India Houfe, } 
the gth May 1808. Cha‘ Cartwright, 


Accountant Gent, 


Appendix, N* 14. 


Aw ACCOUNT of BILLS of EXCHANGE paid by The East Inpia Company; 
from 1ft March 1803 to 1ft March 1808. 


CHINA. INDIA DEBT. | Indian Debt, 


on the Regifter. 


7 8 a fe & de Lo & de 

aft March 180g to tf March 1804 = | 250,626 18 10 | 617,156 6 1. 89,996 18 7 
1804. to - - 1805 - 513,149 16 3 483,307 5 1 19,986 12 2 

1805 to ~ - - 1806 - 442,886 18° 1 600,886 6 10 16,512 12 3 

1806 to - - ~ 1807 - 641,994 16 8 520,338 4 6 59,223 19 5 

1807 to = - = 1808 - 783,252 12 6 885,559 17 3 3,167 17 4 

4 | 3,107,247 19 9 179,887 19 9 


£ | 2,636,911 2 


1803 to 1804 - 
2804 to 1805 - 
1805 to 1806 - 
1808 to 1807 - 
1807 to 1808 ~ 


Menonay puts: 

‘The Total Amount of Bills of Exchange paid, as ftated in this Account, will not 
agree with the Amount of bills of Exchange paid as ftated in the Kere:pts 
aud Payments; the Amornt of Bills received, drawn in favour of the Company, 
being deducted in the latter Account 


(Errors Excepted.) 


Cha’ Cartwright, 


Ealt India Houfe, } 
‘Accountzat Gen', 


oth May 1808, 


on the Avrairs or ‘Toe East Inpia Company. 65 


Appendix, N° 15. 


IN aneftimate of ftock at China ‘to the end of the feafon, fay March 1808, made up and 
tranfmitted to China in the month of February laf, a balance was calculated to remain there 
of tales 2,755,505*, after provifion made for. the coft of the cargoes ‘to be fhipped for Europe 
to arrive in England in 1808-9, for all the contingent expences of the factory, and fora remit~ 
tance to Bengal of 600,000 tales, without eftimating any Bills of Exchange to be drawn upon 
the Court ; and the Bengal Government, per their feparate Finance Letter to the Court of the 
14th September 1807, ftate their having requefted the Supracargocs at Canton, in a letter dated 
Auguft 1807, to receive no more cath for Bills of Exchange upon the Court, except what might 
be tendered by the Commanders and Officers of the Company’s fhips, in part of their privilege. 
Under thefe circumftances, from an ample provifion of funds on the one hand, and from the requeft 
of the Bengal Government on the other, it is prefumed that.a debt of £.100,000. for Bills of 
Exchange from China, as inferted in the Account of Debts and Credits of the Eatt IndiaCompany, 
as they will fland on the rf March 1809, will be fully equal to the fum that may be ther 
owing. The Court’s letter to Canton of the 26th February 18c8, directs that no Bills are to 
be drawn on the Court while a favourable exchange offers oa the feveral Prefidencies in India, 


* Value in fterling money £.918,s50r. 136. 44. 
Eaft India Houfe, Chat Cartwright, 
13th May 1808. . ‘Aceoicitabt Geri’, 
Appendix, N° 16, 


ABSTRACT ACCOUNT of the Sums paid in Exezann for Cuances Gavena 
in the under-mentioned Years, under the following Heads. 


1805/5. 1806/7. 1807/8. + 


te 
L L Le. 
‘Political Charges -  - = eS 250,492 . 172,132 205,026 
Commercial Chorges = = = = - 4. 85,628 376,690'. | * 471,045 
Articles for which a Value remains - 515517 : 53,368 58,426 
Articles ufually claffed with Charges ef Mer- 
chandize which do not properly belong to 12,662 + 19,064 $66,931 
that head Se Gist. 6 ie, Tale =~ 
L- 700,299 623,653 : $01,428 


Eaft India Houfe, 
goth March 1808. = 


(Errors excepted.) nie 
: Chat Carteright, 
Accountant Gen’, 


* Paid for Supracargoes Commiffion, ‘the greater part of Two Years Commiffion, for Stamps on 
new Bonds iffued, and Property Tax on the Intereft of Bonds, 


+ This Amount contains Two Years Intereft on the Bank Loan, 


326r, R Appendix, 


+66 Aprendix The Firsr REPORT jrom the Surect Comurrres 


a 


<== 


Appendix, 


Ay ESTIMATE or truz DEBTS axv CR EDITS of The East Ixpra Company, 


‘To Balance of Cath deficient on xf March 1809 


"To Bomds bearing Intereft 
. To'D® - notbearing Interet + -- = 
. To Bills of Hachange mapeid ae China - 


To-,-D° ss ee Tai fe 


‘To Catondhon Goods fid and wnfoid' = - 


. To the Bank for ‘Loan,on Mortgage of the Amuities that may be fol per AG of 1788 


Te. Dee ‘for a Loan on Bond eee 
To~.D* Iter th above Loan - 
To Freightand Demorage xo her ae 


To Supra Cgoes Committion ‘on alt Goods fold and anfold 


To Proprietors of Private Trade, on all Goods fold 
To Almshoutps at Poplar eee oe : 


To what owig ia the Department of the Commitee of Shipping, exclufive of Exports 


“To, whist owing tor Eexpoits of former Seatons’ 
Sto awhat! owing to the Wareboafe Contingent £ 
To Wart pl noe i en tee! 


af March, 1809, after Payment of -all the 


Debts in England 


“-Baance in favour of the Company, ia. Evgland, on a 


L 
876,700 


4:900,000 
15,517 
100,000 
8c0,000 
143,000 
700,000 
- 100,000 
10,667 


180,000 


73,000 


66,000 


8,333,855 


2,819,587 


11,153,442 


on the Avrairs oy Tue East Inpta Company 7 


eed 


Nery. 


in Evotann, exclufive of their Capirat Stock, as they will fland on the 1ft March 1809. 


By whatdue from Government tothe Company -~ = = = = 
By the Amount of Goods fold, not paidfor = = 5 - = ‘5. 
By the Hon! Board of Ordnasic, for Sslipetre delivered |= = + 
By the Value of Goods in England unfold - S SN ve Se 
By the value of Ships, Sloops and Vettels, exclafive of thofe ftationed Abroad 
By the Value of the Eaft India Honfe and Warehoufes - a - '« 


By what owing from fundry Perfons returned from India, ‘and in India, to be a top 
inEngland --  - -- 0 © e e oe: 


Lf ans 
ne 


* An addition is made to the Value of the Eaft India Houfe and Warchoufes by reafon 
of the Sum of £. €7,600. which will be expended for Buildings in the courfe of this Year, - 
_ which is included in the Ettimate of Receipts and Difburfements to-the 1ft March 1809. - 


The eftimated Value of Goods expected to be received from India and China in the 
Year 1809/10 is £.5,271,000. to purchafe which large Payments have been and will be. 
made in England previous to the 1ft March 1809. It is taken at the fame Amount as 
“the preceding Year, having no information from whith a new Eftimate might be made. 


OF the Sum of £.2,460,000. claimed to be due to the Compainy by the'Public on the | 
ift March 1808, ouly £. 1,500,000. is ecrapated to be paid, ¥ 


Appendix, Ne is. 


Aw ACCOUNT, Shewing the Awousr of the PAYMENTS made in Excrayp 
previpus to aft Marth 1808, and the Amount eftimated to be paid before aft March 1809, 
-on account of Caxcoes to arrive after the latter Period. 


& * L 
Exports paid for on 1ft March W808 = =e _ ot 9477477 
Imprefs Advance for Freight on Ships to arrive after at 
March 1809 - === 75,000 
Exports paid and eftimated to be paid between ae March 3 
1808 and aff March 1809. - 1.994059 - 
Ls 35547436 
——= 
(Errors Excepted.) 
aft India Houfe, } 
13 May 1808, Cha’ Carteoright, 


Accountant Gen', 


63. Appendix io The First REPORT from rhe Seuzct Committee 


Append ix, 


Aw ESTIMATE of-the DEBTS and CREDITS of The EasrInpra Company 
Together with an Eftimate of the Value of Goons expetted to be receive 


L 

‘To Balance of. Cath deficient on sft March 1809 - co = 2. i 876,700 
‘To Bonds bearing Intereft -- = - - = = % = = = = +] 4,900,000 
To-- Drnot bearing Inter? = = ee ee T5537 
‘To Bills of Exchange unpaid from: China - - - - - - - - 100,000 
To ~ + Ditto ++ +. -dndia =~ = = 4% = =| 800,000 
“To Cuftoms on.Goods foldand unfold = - - - +. + m= = = 143,000 
‘To the Bank, for a Loan on m Mortgage of og Annuities that may be :fold per A& 

of 1788 - = - - ee 700,000 
To - .D® - foraloanonBond . + = = ~ = = = = =| 100,000 
To - D° ~ for Ingereft on the above Loans 10,667 
To Freight and Demprage - =- - - © = ee, Int as 68 180,000 
"To Supracargoes Comunifion on all Goods fold and unfold? = = .- - -| 90,000 
“To Almshotfes at Poplar - - - - - - . - - =e 66,000 
To what owing in the Department of the Committee of Shipping, exclufive of Exports 120,000 
To - D° -~ for Exports of former Seafons- 7, = = = = > = 40,000 
To -{D° “= ‘to the Warehoufe Contingent Fund -~ Lia cee esi, Sie, A 12,000 


To Warrants paffedthe Court, unpaid ,- +H ee 40,000 
To what owing for Teas returned by the Buyers, and re-fold - - - = - 
To Intereton Bonds - - * = = = = = © Fe os + 


To Dividends on Stock 9- - = + + © = = = 


: . 8,333,855 

Barance in favour, after Payment of all . 8 
Debts in England - <= - - 3:779,587 
12,113,442 


To Balance - £.| 9,050,587 


Errors Excepted.) 


Eaft India Houfe, 
the 13th May 1808. Cha‘ Cartwright, 


Accountant Gen!.. 


on the Arrairs or Tue East Inpra Company. | 69 


Sa 


N° 19. 


in Enctanp, exclufive of their Carrtat Stock, as they will ftand on 1ft March 18093 
-from Inpra and.Cura, in the courfe of the Year 1809-10. 


L 

By what due from Government to the Company - = = = = “+ =| 1,200,000 
By the Amount of Goods fold, not paid for - - - : - - - : 265,000 
By the Honourable. Board of Ordnance, for Saltpetre delivered oo - > ' = = 15,000 


By the Value uf Goods in England mfold = - + = = = «= -«{ 8)g79,000 
By the Value of Ships, Sloops and Veffels, exclufive of thofe ftationed Abroad - = - 102,500 
{| By the Value of tlie Eaft India Houfe and Warehoufes = = - =. = = |*3,300,000 


By what owing from Government for Stores and Supplies to 
His Majefiy’s Troops, on 1 Mar. 1808 - ot 


960,000 
Eftimated to be received from Government - 1,500,000 


By what owing from fundry Perlis geuied from India, and in Tndia, to be repaid at 31,942 
England - - - oe 


——y 


£-] 12,113,442 


Batance in favour as per Contra ~ = = = 8y779,3871 


Add, The Eftimated Value of Goods expected to be ra rows 271,000 
India and China, in the Year 180g/10 45,2708 


9,050,587 


* An Addition is made to the Vulue of the Faft India Houfe and Warehoufes, by reafon 
of the Sum of £. 27,600, which will be expended for Buildings in the courfe of this Year, 
which is included in the Eftimate of Receipts and Difburfements to the aft March 1809. 


+ The Goods expected to arrive in 1809-10 are taken at the fame Amount as the pre- 
ceding Year, having no information from which a new Eftimate might be made; the Net 
Produce of which, after the Payment of all Duties, &c. in England, will be £. 3,660,960, 
and the Amount of Payments made in England, und eftimated to be made to 1 March 1809, 
foi Cargoes to arrive in England after that period, is £. 3.547.436: 


261, Ss : Appendix, 


70 First REPORT from the Sstect Committee, &c: 


Appendix, N?® 20.. 
Fovis, 19° die Maij, 1808. 
EXAMINATION of SAMUEL PEPYS COCKERELL, Efquire. 


YOU are Surveyor of the Eaft India Company ?—I am, 


Have you furveyed the Fatt India Houfe and the Warehoufes for the purpofe of affixing a value 
on them ?—I have not critically furveyed the whole of them, but I have a general knowledge of 
them, and have the plans and dimenfions of each, 


At the end of laft year you put a value of £. 1,072,400. upon the Eaft India Houfe, the Ware- 
thoules and other Buildings belonging to the Eaft India Company; how came you to affix that 
value ?——In the year 1807 I followed the. valuation that had been made by Mr. Holland, my pre- 
deceffor in the Company’s fervice, adding. to it the fums that had been laid out in purchafes and 
new buildings in the current year. . I have fince compared that value with the Company’s ware- 
houfes and other buildings in differen: parts, and find it fo near to my own judgment of it, that E 
again took the fame rule in the year 1808, upon which the return of £. 1,072,400 was made, 


Suppofing that you were placed between two parties, to fay what one fhould pay and the other 
receive as the value of the buildings in queftion, what would be the fum that you would place it 
at ?—The.fum.I have mentioned in my retura, 


$$ 


(Laft India Company.) 


FIRST REPORT 
From the -Szuect Comittee on the 
Affairs of 


The East Inpia Company. 


Ordered to be printed agth May, 
1808. 


ee ee aera eyes 


aba, 


13 
SECOND REPORT 
FROM THE 
SELECT COMMITTEE 
ow tHE 
Affairs of The EAST IN DIA Company. 


a 


Ordered, by The Houfe of Commons, to be printed, 11 May 1810. 


a 


‘The ‘Serect Committee appointed to. enquire into the prefent 
State of the Affairs of The Eaft India Company, and to report the 
fame, as it fhall appear to them, to the Hovfe, with their Obfer- 
vations thereupon; and alfo to report their Proceedings from ‘time 
to time to The Houfe; and to whom the Petitions of The United 
‘Company of Merchants of England trading to The Eaf Indies, 
were feverally referred ;——-Have, purfuant to the Orders of 
the Houfe, further examined the Matters to them referred; and 
have agreed upon the following REPORT: 


your Committee propefe, in this Report, to fubmit.to the confideration of the 
Houfe, a detailed Statement of the Ordinary Revenues and Charges of the Eaft 
India Company's ‘Tervitorial Poffeflions, and a coiparifon of the amount of thole 
Revenues.and Charges at the laft renewal of the Company's Charter in 1793, with 
préfent amount, aecording to the latett advices which have -been received from 
india, g 


On the occafion of renewing the Charter in 1793, every exertion was employed for- 
sthe difcovery of the extent of the Gompany’s refourees, both political and commercial, 
and caiculations were nade with every pra@ticable attention to accuracy, grounded “Appendix, N° 2. 
‘upon the a€tual experience of preceding years, as it regarded both Receipt and 
Expenditure. : 
‘The propriety of taking this as the peried for the commencement of an inveftigation, 
vis ftill further eftablifhed by the confidcration that the arrangement then made was 
upon the moft extenfive fcale, embracing the entire ftate of the concern beth abroad 
‘and.at home, and a line was drawn for the diftribution of the expenditure in India, 49 55 Geo, HI. 
whether-for the expences of Government or the Intereft upon the Debts. A principle Cop. 52. Sec. 107. 
was alfo eftablifhed fer the application of the furplus produce of the Reveaues, which, 
-on the calculations above adverted to, was fairly expefted to arife. : 


It was likewife prefcribed that the Court of Direétors of the Eaft India Company, 
fhould annually lay before Parliament diftin& Accounts of the Revenues and of the Geo. HI. 
Difburfements in India, with.the amount of the fales of Goods and Stores received 20353 8. 196, 
from Europe, the fiate of their Debts and Affets, together with an Account of the Pro- “"P* 
-ceeds of the Home Treafury, and of the Debts and Affets in England, 


The dire@ions of the A& before referred to have been obeyed on the part of the 
Court of DireRors as far as pratticable. ‘The Home Accounts have been uniformly 
prefented at the prefcribed period. The lofS and ‘capture of fome.of the thips from 
Bengal, containing the moft material documents from which the Statements refpe€ting 
the concern in India are prepared, has materially interfered with the regularity which 
sould likeuife have been obierved as to their prefentation in due tine; thofe of the 
year 1807-8, which fhould have been upon the ‘Lable of the Houfe in the latt Seffion, 


303. b having 


"Appendix, N° 2. 
‘and Supplements 
34,5. < 
JA Re NG. 
| lements 
ae 


Bes: 


14 Second REPORT Jrem the Selc& Committee on the 


having been omitted, with the exception of a fhort Abftraét of the Revenues and 
Charges of India for that year, and te Account of the Debts. During the prefent 
Scfiion, the whole mafs of the Accounts for the year 1807-8, properly belonging to 
the latt year, has been prefented to the Houle, and thofe of the year 1808-9 within 
the ftatutory period ; but, owing tothe lois ef the documents above adyerted to, and 
irom the non-receipt of feveral Statement: ‘rom Bengal, neither the actual Accounts 
of the Revenues and Charges of that Preti/oncy for the years 1807-8, and 1808-9, 
nor the Eftimate of 1809-10, could: be compictély fhewn in detail under the various 
dieads, according to the plan in ufual praétice, 


Your Committee do not intend to enter upon any confideration of the policy or 


the prudence of the financial arrangements of the year 1703, but merely to ftate 
{hem in iheir original form and thapeas to figures; nor is it intended, in the exa- 


inination of the progret$ of their operation from year to year, to make any remarks 
upen the various changes which will be difcoyered, further than fuch as fiall be found 
anecefiary to furnith explanations of the caufes of thofe changes. 


‘Phe nature or defeription of the Accounts is fueh as to afford, in each year, a view 
of the amount of the Revenues derived from the Voffeffions in India, and of every 
Charge incurred in the Government and defence of them, with the Intereft payable 
vipon the Debts, ‘They likewife fhew the amouut of thofe Debts, and of the effective 
property of the Eaft India Company, commonly termed the Quick Stock. 


The calculations on which the financial arrangements were made in the year 1793, 
at the commencement of the prefent Charter of the Company, have been adverted to. 
It is prefumed to be material to examine, at this time, how far thofe calculations, 
though governed by the aétual experience of patt years, and regulated by a due atten- 
tion to exifting circumftances at the time they were made, have been juftified in the 
relult; and as that examination could not be better parfued than by combinations, 
as far as praéticable in one view, of the Refources and of the Charges as then eftimated, 
and as by the a@ual Accounts of fucceeding years, Statements have been drawn up 
accordingly, which are hereunto annexed. 


*~ Thefe Statements are prepared upon two principles, viz. the one, marked No. 2, 
fhews the Revenues and Charges of India colle&tively, with the General Refult as 
eftimated inthe year 1793, and according to the‘aétual Accounts of each fucceflive year, 
from 1792-3 to 1808-9 inclufive, with the Eitimate of the year 1809-10. The Sup- 
plementary Statements, marked Nos. 3, 4, 5, thew the Revenues and Charges of the 
three Prefidencies of Bengal, Madras, and Bombay refpeétively.. The columns of 
thefe feveral Statements are in conformity with the heads or items of Revenue and 
Charge in the Accounts Jaid before Parliament. The fums are taken from thole 
Accounts, and are converted into ficrling money at the rates of exchange in ufual 
praétice, viz. at 25, the current rupee, $s. the pagoda, and 2s. 3d. the Bombay 
Tupee, > - 

By this principle or mode of ftatement an opportunity is afforded of difcovering 
the financial fituation of each of the Prefidencies, as to its proper Income and 
Expenditure, during the periods under contideration. 


As that mode of Statement, though ufeful in one point of view, does not exaéily 
atifiver the purpofe which is effential to the plan on whichitis propefed to conduct the 
prefent examination, from not fhewing at one view the Company's antient Revenues, 
diftinguitbed from the Reventies acquired by ceflion or conqueft, nor the Military 
Charges of India, ithas been thought proper to prepare Statements upow another prin- 
ciple, by which thefe ends might be obtained. ‘Lhefe Statements are added to. the 
Appendix. The General Statement, marked No. 6, fhews the Revenues and 
Charges thus diftinguifhed, and the Supplementary Statements, marked A, B, C, 
ane the Revenues and Charges under the various heads which will be hereafter 
tuted. 


It is to beremarked, that the periods of Statement and the final General Refult on 
both principles, are, of courfe, precifely the fame; and the component parts of the 
Statenients are taken from the fame Accounts, with only this difference, that in the 
‘Statement marked No. 6, with its Supplements, adjufiments have been made of the 
deveral heads of Revenue and Charge, in order to accommodate them to the principle 
‘on which it is propofed to procced on the examination of them RAY on 

efults 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, bagi 


Refults in both Statements are exclufive of the Commercial Charges not added to the 
Invoices. 


It is to be regretted that the two laft years, 1807-8 and 1808-9, and the Eftimate 
1§09-10, are necefiarily incomplete from the want of the Bengal Accounts, which has 
already been adverted to, as, from this circumftance, the feparation of the Revenues 
and Charges of the Conquered Diftriéts cannot be made as in former years; but it 
does not affeét the General Refult. : 


‘Thefe Statements, it will be obferved, apply folely to the Revenues and Charges. 
‘The Property or Effeéts, and the Debts of the Company in India, are likewife objeéts 
of confideration, Statements of thein refpectively, from 1792 to 1809, have therefore 
been prepared. 


It is firft propofed to examine the Accounts of the Revenues and Charges, as 
fewn in the Statement marked No. 6, by comparing the General Refult eftimated in 
the year 1793, with that fhewn by the a€tual Accounts of the year 1808-9, and the 
detail of the items with fuch of the later periods* of the Statement as may be moft 
fiitable to the affording the requifite- explanations of the grounds of the difference 
which will be found between the two periods. In moft inftances the comparifon will 
be made with the aétual Accounts of 1808-9. In thofe inftances where this is not 
found praéticable, the year 1806-7, being complete, will be taken as the period of 
comparifon, 


The Surplus Revenue was eftimated in the year 1793 to amount 
tol d= PSOE RSS nce dev BT O3, em 
According to the aétual Accounts of the year 1808-9, there 
was a Surplus Charge of = - - - - - - 26,042 


By which a lefS favourable Refult is exhibited in the fum of £. 1,189,619 


The difference will be found to have been entirely occafioned by the increafe of 
Charge and of Intereft on the Debts, as the fiate of the Revenues has improved in a 
moft material degree ; but it is propofed to enter upon a detailed examination of the 
whole, both Revenue and Charge, as fhewn in the Statement in which the diftine- 
tion is. miade between the Revenues pofteffed exclufively by the Company under 
their antently ela rights, and thofe acquired under fubfidy or by cefion or 
conqu 


REVENUES. 


THE firft points for confideration are the Revenues of the Company's antient 
Poffoffions, and the Revenucs of thofe obtained by ceffion or conqueft. The want of 
the Bengal Accounts, as before adyerted to, renders it neceflary to make the preient 
comparifon in thefe inftances with the year 1806-7. 

The Revenues of the antient Pofiefiions were eftimated in 1793 


& Cy a 2 4 Ch ae na eh Sat ts), (io neers, 529 025) 
Tn the year 1806-7 their amount was - - - 75794,643 
being an inereafe of - : Ss * = =) 19, 271;018 

see 
The Revenues from Subfidies and from the Colle&tions of the - 

Ceded, Countries, were eftimated in 1793 at - - £-1,414, 200 
‘This head, including the Revenues of thofe ceded and conquered 

fince that period, amounted in the year 1£06-7 to. - 4,245,729 - 
being an increafe of pwns esp oete cw az, . 4: 2,831,529 
and the grofs Revenue, including both heads, efiimated in, 

inte ene a i Soc ss, ora kV eet ee 0,903,085 
amounted in 1806-7 to. - - - ee) NE 14,535,739 


being more by cS . ale te - = £.7,572,114 


Appendix, N°7& 8) | 


Appendix, N° 6. 


TT STE 


j Pongal Revenues. 


16 Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on the 


The want of the detail of the Bengal Accounts has not been found to affect the 
General Refult of the year 1808-9. The gro!s Revenues of that year being fhewn, 
the comparifon can be made in like manner with that of the Refult; and it will appear 
that, deducting the amount eftimated in the year 1743, viz. - £- 6,963,625 

from the aétual grofs Revenues in the year 1808-9, which 


amounted to - - - ~ - - 15,525,055 
an increafe beyond the Eftimate is found, amounting tothe |§ ——_— 
fumof =~ - ~ . - - - - £- 8,501,439 


os 
being £.989,316 more than the grofs Revenues of the year 1806-7, before ftated. Of 
this improvement £.656,000. is in the Bengal Revenues, viz. £.372,000. in the Salt 
Sales, £.114,000, in the Opium Sales ; but it cannot be accurately afcertained under 
what heads the remainder was produced. ‘The Kevenues of the Madras Prefidency 
were more by £.365,000, principally by the colleGtions of the Land Revenue having 
been realized in a larger amount, as the countries had recovered the effeéts of a drought 
which affeéted thofe of the year 1806-7. The Revenues of Bombay were lefs by 
£.32,000, principally in the Cuftoms and Daties. ” 

The detail ofthe Revenues of the Company's Poffeffions is next to be confidered. 
Forthis purpofe it is neceflary to refer to the Supplementary Statement, marked A, 
which fhews in detail the feveral items or heads of Reyenue of this defcription, 
scolleGted under the three Prefidencies of Bengal, Madras, and Bombay. 


BENGAL REVENUES. 
The Revenues of the Prefidency of Bengal, eftimated in 


1793 to produce - - + £.4,503,000 
amounted in the year 1826-7 to i Be ohn) 61304,758 

; being an increafe of ~ - - - - - - £.1,801,738 
ee 


Tt is fatisfa€tery to obferve that the caution in 1793, in eftimating the Revenues, is 
Sully eftablithed by the a&tual Accounts of the firft year, and by the progreflive improve- 
nents afterwards. ‘The detail of them is as follows: 


Miyt Dories, 


eftimated in 1793 at - ~ - Stee & & 
‘amounted in the year 1806-7 to - = - = - 


beinganincreafeof - = - 9+ - 3 


The fall Revenue under this lea ! does not particularly require remark. It is 
from its nature a fluétuating refource, being produced for the moft part by duties on 
coinage for individuals, and gains on the coinage for the account of Government. 
Varicus alterations have taken place in the Mint and Aflay Offices, which will be 
noticed under the Charges: and, natwithftanding the increafed Receipt exhibited 
‘throughout the period, and the increafe now fhewn, the Charges have almoft uniformly 
exceeded the Profits. The Accounts for the years 1807-8 and 1808-9 include the 
Mints of Furruckabad and Benares, which cannot be feparated as in former years. 


Post Orrice CoLtEcTIons, 


efiimated intzozat - = - = = = =f 10,200 
‘amounted in the year 1308-9 to - - - = x 34,800 


being an increafe of | ~ - -  - - - - £. 24,600 


Afirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 17 


engal Revonaes 
i 


The TERimate in 1793 was calculated on the average of five years a@ual colle@ions. & , 


‘The inereafe exhibited on this head may partly be imputed to the increafe of corre- 
{fpondence, confequent-upon various circumftances ; but it is principally to be aferibed 
to regulations of the department in 1798 and 1801, increafing the rates of poftage. 


Tt is fatisfa€tory to obferve, the Receipts in the year 2898-9 more than cover the _ 


Charges, which was not the cafe in the year 1793. 


‘Benares Revenve 


was eftimated in 1793 at -  — - -  - = = (£.430,000 
In the years 1807-8 and 1808-9 it is blended with the Ben- 

gal Land Revenues. _ It is. therefore neceflary to take the 

year 1806-7 as the period of comparifon. ae that year 

thisheadof Revenueamountedto - - - = 5375379 


beinganincreafeof - = = = = = =  £,107,379 


=_— 


The Eftimate of 1793 is ftated’to “have “been calculated on the a@ual jumma or 
rent roll of the Province, which was framed according to a fettlement made in the 
year 1781. The management of the Revenues has undergone feveral changes fince 
that period; and, under the orders of the Government dated 11th February 1791, the 
quartennial and decennial {ettlements, formed in 1789-90, were. contirmed ; but -the 
genera! arrangements in the year 1793 for permanently fettling the rents of the Bengal 
provinces, and eftablifhing a new judicial fyftem, which will be hereatter noticed, were 
not carried into effeét in the Province of Benares till the year 1795, when,,in confe- 
quence of a special agreement with the Rajah on the 27th O&t. 1794, regulations were 
pafléd on the 27th March 1795, under which the Revenue affeflment was permanently 
fixed; and the fyftem in praétice in Bengal, “both as to colleCtion of Revenue and 
adminifiration. of juftice, was eftablifhed in Benares, with fuch modifications as were 
found neceffary. 


The apparent increafe is to be imputed principally to the circumfiance of the 
whole of the Receipts being brought into the Colle&tor’s treafury under the prefent 
fyfiem, as will be more particularly explained in the obfervations upon the Charges. 
A confiderable increate will likewile appear in the amount of:the Charges. It will, 
however, be found that an increale of Net Revenue under this head is derived by the 
new arrangement. A further alteration has been made in the adminiftration of the 


Appendix, N°9. 


Appendix, ‘N* 0: 


Province, by placing it under the management of local Commiffioners, and ‘by Appendix, N°21. 


the abolition of the Tehfildarry fyftem of colle€tion, as will be more particularly 
noticed during the examination of the Charges, 


‘Lanp Revesves, 


were eftimated in 1793 at - - ae ~ $3,025,000 
For the reafons ftated under the preceding head, the comparifon 
in this inftance muft Jikewife be made with the aéiual. pro- ; 
duce of.the year 1806-7, which amountedto - _ - ~ 3,296,684 
being an increafe of oh Lien - - -f e £e 273,084 


ee 


it is to be remarked, that under every head: of Revenue the Eftimate of the year 
2793 was tramed with great caution, taking in general the aétual experience of pre- 
ceding years.as the bafis.of the calculation. Under this head, however, more par- 
ticular caution was obferved, and the {um eftimated by the Bengal -Governinent fer 
the year 1791-2, was taken as the amount expetied to be derived in future, This 
{um fell fhort of the average .of the five paft years by £.57,000. ‘The punétual 
realization and improved produce of this truly important refouree is highly creditable 
to the branch of the Government under which it was adminiftered. ‘The Efiimate 
formed in 1793 has been exceeded in each year, notwithftanding the interruptions 
which have oceafionally been experienced from the viciffitudes of feafons; in fome 

363. E years 


B Appendix, N°12, 


Appendix, N*9. 


Appendix, N° 12, 
4 (a, 


= 


| Appendis, Nu. 
tyr 


i 


RTI 


| Appendix, N* 9, 
_ Appendix, N°13. 


; Bengal Revenues. 
Us —_ 


18 Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on the 


years a fuperabundance of rain, in others drought has-occurred, either of which is 
unfavourable to the country, and of courfé to the realization of the land rents. The 
wealth and profperity of the diftriéts may be aflumed from the infpeétion of this 
column of the Statement, particularly from the year 1799, 1800. This pofition is 
further eftablifhed by the refleétion, that the colleStions haye been uniformly made 


* under the operation of the laws and regulations of the Revenue fyftem, without the 


neceffity of military interference, as fometimes praétifed in other parts of India, 


The origin of this fyftem, which, in its operation, has in thefe Provinces proved to 
be beneficial both to the interefts of the Sovereign and the fubjet, may be traced in 
a Letter from the Court of Dire€tors to the Supreme Government of Bengal, dated 
ith April 1786, alfo in the Rules pafied on the 18th September and 25th Novem- 
ber 1789, and the 10th February 1790, under which a decennial fettlement was 
made of the Revenue to be paid for the lands in Bengal, Babar and Orifla, and in 
the alterations pafied on the 23d November 1791, This fettlement commenced 
with the year 1790-1. In the year 1793 the whole of the Revenue code was 
re-enacted with modifications and amendments, and regulations were pafied ‘accord- 
ingly, when the Judicial was feparated from the Revenue adminifiration, and the 
fettlement, originally made for ten years, was declared to be permanent and unalterable 
for ever, fubjeCt to the approbation of the Court of Direftors, which approbation 
was given. 

Tt may not be neceffary in this place to enter upon the confideration of any further 
modifications of the fyftem by fubfequent regulations, as they do not appear to have 
been of a defcription to affeét the bafis of the arrangement as to the amount of the 
jumma perpetually fixed, but merely to give greater fecurity for the pun¢tual realiza- 
tion of that amount, and, of courfe, to prevent the accumulation of balances ; Regu- 
lation 7, pafied the 29th Auguft 1799, was of this defcription. 


‘Upon a general calculation, the amount of Revenue expected under the decennial 
‘or permanent fettlement was 260 lacs of Sicca rupees, or £.3,016,000. The 
annual colle€tions exceeding that fum, are principally to be attributed to the increafed 
amount of Syer and Ab! duties, to the rents of lands not included in the jumma, 
and to other extraordinary Revenues ; in fome inftances to progreflive rents, to in- 
creafed rents on lands not originally fettled, or to refumptions upon the principles of 
the regulations, : 

Tt is very fatisfaGtory to obferve that the Regulation 7, 1799, above adverted to, 
has accomplithed the purpofe of its enaétment. A letter from the Revenue departs 
ment at prt a dated 7th April 1509, gives the following abfiraét of Arrears or 


balances of Revenue at the clofe of the annual Accounts of each year. 
1798-9 - - - - - - £. 124,617 * 

BIT, A SOM Baath = ev hI Ae 90,497 

1800-1 - - - - - - 64,922 

1801-2 - - - - - - 47,784 

1802-3 | Sh d= bear ge ayy he US 35,009 

9803-4 (Sees ee ae Eh = ae 35,916 

1804-57 eee ee =e 39,209 

1805-6 - - - - - - 20,848 

el ed 1800-7 - - - < ~ =" 14,575 


and it isremarked, that the balance of 1806-7 is lefs than one-half per cent, on the 
whole jumma. 


JupiciaL. 


This head of Revenue is compofed of the fees and fines levied in the feveral Native 
Courts of Juftice, under regulations which were paffed in the year 1793, 0u the intro- 
duéion of the judicial fyftem, which will hereafter be more particularly noticed ; 
alfo of the affefiments for defraying the expence of the Police Eftablithments under 
that fytem, together with the fines and licences received by the Juftices of the Peace 
at Calcutta on the fale and manufaéture of {pirituous liquors; likewife the fees on the 
duits in the Court of Requetis at Calcutta. © 


As 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


As this head of Revenue originated for the mot part with the new fyftem of ad- 
sminifiration of juftice, no Eftimate could be made of it in the year 1793. ‘The firlt 


~year in which any Receipt is ftated, is 1793-4, when itamounted to -  £.27,715. 
The year 1806-7 is the laft in which the Accounts of the 
ancient Pofieffions are kept diftin& from the other diftritis. 
The amount realized in that year will therefore be compared 
with the above. It was - i Da pe = - = 92,549 
which is an increafe of - - ~ - - - £. 64,834. 
— ee 


“The Receipt of the vear 1793-4 was principally compofed of the amount realized 
«under Regulation 23 of 1793, for levying a tax on the principe! cities for detraying 
sthe expence of the Police Ettablifhments created under Regulation 22 of the fame 
year; afinall part of the Receipt confifted of fines on unlicenfed retailers of fpirituous 
liquors, and fines, &c. in the Native Courts. Confiderable variations will be ob- 
ferved in the different years of this column of the Statement. ‘They are to be attri- 
buted to the alterations which have been made from time to time in the feveral 
‘branches from which this Refource is derived. ‘The great increafe in the years 1795-6 
and 1796-7 is from the inftitution of fees in the Native Courts, under Kegiilation 38 
of 1795, and from the greater productivencfs of the Police aflefiments. 


In the year 1797 the Regulation 23, 1793, refpecting the Police tax, notwith- 
ftanding its improvement in produce, was refcinded, and the tax abolifhed, as difli- 
culties had arifen with regard to the mode.of ai t; and for that purpofe thellte- 
gulation, 6, was paffed on the 10th April. By this Regulation new fees om fuits 
in the Courts were inftituted, in lieu of thole eftablithed under the Regulation 38, 1795, 


anda Stamp Duty upon law and other papers Negra was likewile eftablithed. 
The receipt on the Stamp Duty will be noticed™ its proper head. . The receipt 
from the year 1797-8 to 1801-2 will ane ty appear much lower than in ‘the two 
preceding years. In the year 1802-3 an increafe again appears, and from that period 
to 1806-7 an improvement inthe produce of this head continues to be fhewa. ‘This 
‘improvement appears t6 have been produced by the receipt on licences from the 
Juttices of the Peace at Calcutta for the fale-of {pirituous liquors, and by a duty on 
fpirits manufaGtured in the diftilleries according to the European manner, levied under 
Regulation 2, 2802. The Court of Requetis at Calcutta being eftablifed on a new 
principle, under Proclamation dated 13th March 1802, by which fees on fuits.in that 
Court were inftituted, has likewife contributed to the improvement, 


Customs. 
The colle&tions were eftimated in 1793, to produce -  £. 60,000. 
The head of Cuftoms, in the years 1807-8 and 1808-9, in- 
- cludes the whole of the colleétions at the feveral Cuftom- 
houfes both in Bengal and Benares, and the Upper Pro- 
vinces; it is therefore neceflury to make the comparifun 
with the amount realized in the year 1806-7, which 
was - - - - - - ~ = - 324,834 
being anincreafe of = - — - ee gual =f. 264,831 
——— 


The amount eftimated in the year 1793 was governed by the a€tual colleStions of 
1790-1, and the Bengal Eftimate of 1791-2. The Cuftoms are eftimated, in 1793, at 
‘a very {mall amount compared with the years antecedent to the year 1788-9. ‘This 
is to beafcribed to the abolition of the Government Cuttoms on the 20th June.1788, 
in confequence. of orders from the Secret Committce, dated 3d November 1787, 
‘throughout the interior of the country; and to the exiftence of Cuftom-houfes at only 
two ftations, Calcutta and Manjee, at which places certain duties were colleéted on 
Imports and Exports. 

This branch of the Refources was under the direétion of the Revenue depart:nent 
till the year 1793, when it was transferred to the Commercial department. Regu- 
Jation 42, pafied the aft of May in that year, eftablifled the principle of collection oo 


1g 


Bengal Revenge, | 
| 


Appendix, N* 14 a 


Appendix, N°46. “i 


Appendix, Neg. 


20 Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on the 


~ Bengal Revenues. the rate of the Cuftoms to be colle&ted on Imports and Exports at the two tlien- 
_ ~~ exiting Cuftom-houfes at Calcutta and Manjee. ; 


On the 22d May 1795 Regulation 39 was pafied, under which material alterations 
were made of the part of Regulation 42, of 1793, in fo far as it applied to the Cuf- 
toms and ‘Town Duties at Calcutta, abolifhing them and reviving the Government 
Cuftoms, which had been difcontined on ‘the zoth June 1788, making alfo feveral 
alterations and new provilions tor.redrefS in cafe of grievances under the operation of 
the Cuftom laws. 


Inthe year 1797, by Regulation 1, a new duty-of one per cent, on all Imports and 
Exports at the town of Calcutta was infiituted, for the exprefs purpofe of defrayin, 
the expence of an armament for the proteétion of the Bengal River. In 1800 Regu- 
lution 11 was pafied, which fuperfeded that of 17097, and eftablifhed the additional 
duty.of 1 per cent. upon other principles: In 1801, by Regulation 5, dated 14th 
May, the Calcutta Town Duties, abolithed by Regulation 39 of 1795, were re- 
“Appendix, N* 17. eliablithed ; and by Regulations 10 and_11, 6th Augett, fome other Lmport duties 
4 were impofed, and the Government Cuftoms on Inland Imports and Exports, 
abolithed in 1788, were revived st the principal cities, and the Cuftom-houfe at 
Manjec withdrawn. In 1§02 Regulatiéns 1, 5 and 7 were paficd for the alteration of 
tates, and eftablithing modes for the better colleGtion of the Culioms. In 1806, 
Regulation 19, pafed 16th O€tobar, modiited the rules under former regulations 
refpedling {pirits. 5 

‘The extent of the colleGtion met of courfe be governed by the extent of the:trade, 
whi@h is naturally fuGtuatingy The increafé of the amonnt of the Cutioms exhibited 
in the“eolumn of the State is to be attributed gencrally to the additional 
duties eftablifhed under the feveral regulations, and the great increafe on the.com- 


parifon now made is to be attribat it circumfiance, 
ia Sarr Saes, 
eftinated in1793%0 produce  - - - += + £.725,000 
‘amounted in the year 1808-9 to = + - 1,815,822 
being an increafe of - -  - - - -  £. 1,090,822 


The average produce of this article, in the five ycars 1786-7 to 1790-1, woulil 
haye jufiified a more fanguine Eftimate in 1793, but it was thought proper to ftate 
the future expeélation on the principle affumed by the Bengal Government as the 
prof{peét of the year 1791-2, which was £.262,000 below that average. 


The value and importance of the exclufive privilege with refpeét to this article, 
which from time immemorial had been referved hy the ruling power of the country, 
have not ceated to occupy the attention of fuccefiiye Governments from the time of 
the pofleffion of the Dewanny, although the advantages _refulting from. it were not 
afluined to any confidcrable amount till the year 1781-2, 


A new fyfiem of management had been-adopted in 1780, when it was placed 
under a Comptroller and Affiftants, which fyftcm continued in operation till the 
year 1793. The moft material alteration in the interim? was the fibftitution of 
public auétion inftead of private contraét, for the difpofal of the Salt from the ycar 
1806-7, The benefit derived by this meafure, during the fix years from 1806-7, 
when its operation commenced, to 1791-2, amounted, on an average, to£.300,000 
annually. . 


Tn the year 1793 the Salt Office wos aboliflicd, and the entire dircétion of the 
concerns of it was transferred from the Revenue to the Commercial department, 
under which it continues at this time. The advantages _refulting from this arrange- 
ment are confirmed by the improved produce of the Refource, as exhibited in the 
Statement. ‘Thefale in the year 1792+3, the ycar immediately preceding the 
transfer, exceeded the Eftimate of 1793, and was alfo more than the average of the 
five preceding years by £.67,000. It will be obferved that in fome few years the 
fales tell fhort of the general produce during the early and latter periods in the 
Account. ‘Tbe. defalcation in thefe inftauces is.to be imputed to various circum- 

i fiances; » 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 25 


1801-2 the Receipts comprized the Revenues of Ceylon, and of Malacca and the Madras Revenues. 
Moluecas. From December 1801, Ceylon was taken under the immediate govern- ———~——— 
ment of the Crown, The Moluccas were furrendered to the Dutch in confequence | 
of the peace’of Amiens,~and no Revenue has-been -derived from Malacca fince | 
1805-6, The Receipts in 1806-7, and the two following years, are from ‘the Pearl 

and Chank Fifhery at Tutacorin, 


BOMBAY REVENUES. 4 


The Revenues of the Company's antient Poffefions upder the Prefidency of Bom- Bombay Revenues, — 
. UH 


bay are now to be noticed. “q 
Tn 1793 they were efiimated to produce - - - £140,625 | 
Tithe year 1808-9 their amount was ~ - - - - 268, 468 | 
beinganincreaféof - = = = - (= = | £127,843 ‘ 

——as 


In the Statement marked A, they are fhewn under three diftinét heads, Land Reve- Appendix, N*6.As 
nues, Cuftoms, Farms and Licences. | 


By the mode of drawing up the Accounts of this Prefidency from the year 1788-9 ‘ 
to 1791-2, thef feveral branches not being feparately ftated, the Eftimate in 1793 was | 
not formed to meet the detail ofthe items as fhewn in later years. ‘The firft complete ] 
diftinGion of them in the Statement is in the year 1796-7. The aggregate of the | 
Revenues of that year is £.119,432, which is lefS than the eftimated amount in the # 4 
year 1793 by £.21,193; but the average on the four years, 1792-3 to 1795-6, was ha ¥ 
£145,804, exceeding the Eftimate in the fum ef £.5,179; from which it is to be 
inferred, that the Eftimate was calculated on principles very nearly approaching to 
accuracy, 


The Revenues of this Prefidency, from the limited extent of the diftri@s originally 
ander its adminiftration, are fmall compared with thofe of the other Prefidencies: r 
inereaf is exhibited in thefe Revenues from the year 1800-1 inclufive, which is to be’ Gh 
cattributed to alterations occafioned by a treaty with the Nabob of Surat, dated 13th Appendix, N° 21+ 
May 1800. Before that period the Company were in the receipt of a part only of : 
the Revenues of that city, under their long eftablithed rights as Governors of the Caftle 
-and Commanders of the fleet at Surat. By the new treaty full powers are given for 
the management and colleétion of the Revenues of the city and its dependencies, and 
generally for the whole government of them. ‘The ftipulations in the treaty for a 
-payment to the Nabob, and the introduétion of judicial arrangements, will be found to 
have occafioned an addition to the Charges. 


On the prefent occafion it is propofed to examine the detail of the year 1796-7, as 
‘@ comparifon with the year 1808-9. 


In the year 1796-7 the Lanp Revenvursamounted to ~ £39,724 
10 1808-90) sme Oe oe ue ee 45,700 


beinganincreaeof - = += = - = = L£. 5,976 


The increafe on this head.of Revenues, in part, to be accomnted for by the addition 
Surat, Little further remark is requifite, than that the propofal to extend to the 
whole of the Territories under the Britith dominion, as far as praéticable, the fyftem of Appendix, N° 24, 
Revenve and Judicial Adminiftration eftablithed in Bengal, has been carried into effeGt 
at this Prefidency. ‘The firft meafures for this purpofe were adopted in the year | 
1799. tions have been enaéted and promulgated upon the fame principle as at | 
‘the other Prefidencies, adapting the provifions to the circumftances to which they | 
were applicable, ; f 
* 363, G ‘The 


- 


Bombay Revenues. © 
F 


Appendix, N° 21, 


Subfidies and Re+ 
| venues of Ceted 
and Conquered 


‘Conntries, 
~ 


atk 


Appendix, N° 6. B. 


726 _ Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on the 


The colleétion of the Customs in the year 1796-7 amounted to - £- 52,994 
In 1808-9 it was Sct rose o Sr 137,497 
beinganincreafeof - - - - - = = £. $4,503 


The increafe is, in part, to be attributed to the levy of additional duties at Bombay, 
and in part to the arrangement by the treaty with the Nabob of Surat. 


Farms anp Licences. 


Amount in 1796-7 - - - - = - £. 26,714 
Amount in 1808-9 - - - - <teee| aaa 85,271 
being'anincreafe‘of- = swt eK. 58,557 

——— 


This Refource is derived from reftriétions on the fale of Tobacco, Arrack, and other 
articles for confumption by the inhabitants. 

The increafe may be afcribed to the attention of Government to render it produ@ive, 
and to the arrangement under which the whole of the Revenues of Surat devolved to 
the Company. 


SUBSIDIES anv REVENUES or CEDED any CONQUERED 
COUNTRIES. 


THE next branch of thefe Accounts to which Your Committee have direéted their 
attention, is the amount realized by Receipts irom Subfidies in confequence of treaties 
with the Native Princes of India, or from the Revenues of Territories conquered by 
the Britith arms. They will be found to form a confiderable part of the Refources 
of the Company, and it has been thought proper to exhibit the detail of the whole 
of them in one difiinét view, feparate from the antient Pofleffions, although the 
management falls under the adminiftration of different Prefidencies. ‘I’his has been 
done in the Supplementary Statement marked B. 


With the exception of the Subfidy from the Rajah of Travancore, the ftipulations 
under the treaties with the feveral Native Princes in the way of Subfidy have, fince 
the year 1793, been commuted for the ceflion of diftriéts, the Revenues of which 
are received as an equivalent for the payment of the expenfe of the Company's 
forces employed for the proteétion of their dominions refpeétively. Explanations 
will be given in the examination of the detail of the Statement now adverted to. 


‘The review of this Statement will thew that the political relations ef the Company 
in India have been greatly changed and enlarged within the period under examination. 
‘The inveftigation of the Charges of the Indian Government in general is propofed to 
be taken up diftinétly in another part of this Report, and it will then appear that the 
increafed Civil Charge to be exhibited has been enhanced in a very confiderable 
degree, in confequence of ceflions obtained under fubfidiary arrangements, or of Ter- 
Titories acquired by conqueft. ‘The examination of this branch leparately has there- 
fore been thought preferable. But before entering upon the detail, it is proper to 
premife that the Charges confift folely of the expenie attending” the collcétion of ‘the 
Revenues and Adminifiration of Juftice, with the payments made to the Nabobs.or 
Princes, and their dependants ; the net amount being jared to beapplicable to the 
difcharge of fuch part of the military expenfes which may have been incurred under 
‘the engagements of the treaties, or have been produced by additional forces required 
for maintaining the conquefis. The Eftimate of 1793 was formed foon after the receipt 
-of the advices of the conclufion of the Myfore war in 1792, and the. calculations 
were made under very imperfect information of the real value of the dittri€ts olan 

un 


- Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 27 


yunder the treaty then concluded with Tippoo. The Receipts from Oade, Arcot, Subfidies and Re 
and Tanjore, were agreeable to the treaties, as will be hereafter more particularly venues of Ceded 
explained. According to that Eitimate, the expeétations from Subfidiary Arrangements @n4 Conquered 


ries. 


Peo R Grofs Receipt. 


‘by 


1,414,200 


were flated as follows : 


For reafons affigned in the |” 
former part of this Report, 
the general comparifon of 
this branch mutt neceffarily 
be made with the year 
1806-7, in which year the 
Amount is ftated at - -| 6,741,096 


1,440,000 


2,495,307 | 4,245,729 - 


being an increafe of - - £.| ~5,301,096 | 2,469,567 | 2,831,529 
a 
The purfuit of the examination in detail of this Statement will firft lead to, 


The Receirr from the Nasos of Oupe: Which was eftimated in 1793 


as follows: 
Gros - - - - £.530,000 
Charges - - mie. 25,800 
Net - - - £. 504,200 


The Ceded Difiriéts of Oude being under the adminiftration of 
the Bengal Prefidency, the year 1806-7 muft be taken as the 
period for comparifon, In that year the grofs Revenues 
were. in Ws 7 ts = he 1,742,534 

the Charges - alge 511,255 


and the Net Revenue - - - - 1,231,279 
exceeding the Eftimate in 1793, in Grofs Receipt, 
£.1,2123,534; inNet -  - CN ay Te - £- 727,079 


The Eftimate formed in the year 1793, is flated to have been drawn in conformity 
with the treaty or agreement with the Nabob of Oude in the year 1787, under which t oa 
a {iipulated fum was to be paid for the employment of a fpécitic number of the Com- *Ppendix, Neas. 
ny’s oops for the protection of the Nabob’s dominions, and providing that the 
jum ftipulated to be paid fhould be increafed or diminithed, according to the altera- 
tion which might be made in the number of troops fo employed. 


On the 20th March 1797 the Nabob agreed to the addition of 5 lacs of rupees Appendix, N* 24, 
per annum, for an increaféd military force of one regiinent of European, and one of 
native cavalry, 


Thefe agreements continued in operation till the end of the year 1797. The increafe es 
of Subfidy, after that period to 1800-1, was in confequence of a new treaty with the x : 
prefent reigning Nabob of Oude, Saudut Ally Khan, who fucceeded to the Mufnud “Ppendix, N° 25, 
on the depofition of the Nabob Vizir Ally, the immediate fucceffor of Afoph ul Dow- 
lah. ‘This treaty was dated the 21ft Resta 1798, to commence fromthe 21f 
January. The fum ftipulated to be paid by the Nabob Vizier was £.844,132 per 
annum, including ftipenids and*pentions to be paid-to the Beguins, Princes, &c. The 
force to be fupplied by the Company was never to be lef than 10,000 men, 
including Europeans, natives, ‘cavalry, and infantry ; if it fhould become neceffary to 
increafe them beyond 13,000, the actual difference of expenfe to be paid by the 
Nabob; and if from any neceffity reduced below 8,000 men, a deduétion to be made 
fronr the annual ftipend; equal to the aétual difference below the fipulated number. 

Temporary provifions were made refpe@ling the expenfe of the repairs of forts, and of 
placing the Nabob Sandut Ally upon the throne. The political fityation of India 
requiting a’force exceeding the 13,000 men, as ftipulated, to be fiationed in Oude 
fron the year 1798-9 to 1800-1, the Receipts from the Nabob appear greater in thot 


haste This 


a8 Second REPORT from the Scle8& Coinmittee’ onthe 


Subfidies and Re. ‘This treaty continued in operation till the year 1801, when it was fupsrfeded by 

a peucetl Geis another treaty, dated the 10th November, under which diftriéts were cedediin perpe- 
Roker tual fovereignty to the Company, eftimated at a jumma or annual grof rent of Lucknow 
a4 J Sicca rupees 1,35,23,474, or £. 1,502,052. The diftriéts were to be delivered to 
| Appeneisy N° 26. the Company from the 22d September. ‘This territorial ceffion being declared to be 
in liea of the Subfidy and of all expenfes on account of defenfive engagements, no 
f demand is to be made in future upon the Vizier, either for the expenfe of the Britih 
| detachments attached to his perfon, or on any other account whatever. 4 


The financial effet of this alteration in the engagement with the Nabob of Oude 
is fhewn in the Statement from the year 1801-2, by increafed Receipt and additional 
Charge for the management of the Revenues and the Adminiftration of Juttice in the 
Ceded Diftri&ts. Antecedent to this period, the Charges ftated in the Account as 
difburfed, were merely thofe of the Refidencies at Lucknow and with Scindia. 


i 

|) Apbendis, N°27- = On the 14th of July 1802 a proclamation was iffued, declaring the intention of the 
: Government refpeéting the plan of fettlement of the landed Revenue of the Ceded 
a Difwriéts, which, after the trial of two triennial fettlements, finally extended to ten 
\ years, with increafed rents in each period, upon principles detailed in the proclamation, 
, and was eventually to lead, under certain refervations and provifions, to a permanent 
fettlement. In March 1803 a code of laws was publifhed for the internal Govern- 
ment of the diftriéts, in a number of regulations, according to the plan in prattice as 
sto the lower provinces, defining the privciples both of Revenue management and 
Judicial adminifiration. Others have been fince pafied, modifying and amending the 
former regulations as occafion required. 


The management of thefe newly Ceded Diftriéts was at firft committed to a Lieu- 
rtenant Governor and three Commiffioners, with proper Officers for the collection of 
the Revenue and the adminiftration of Juftice. In the year 1803 the offices of Lieu- 
.tenant Goyernor and of Commiffioners were abolithed, and the fuperintendance was 
committed to the Board of Revenue at the Prefidency. 


Reg. 10 & 11, Tn 1807 a temporary Commiffion was appointed, for the purpofe of an enquiry, pre- 
_ .,._ paratory to the completion of fettlements of the rents of thefe diliriéts, The Revenue 
Appendix, N° 11. Letter irom Bengal of the 7th April 1809, advifes the eftablifhment of thefe Com- * 
-miffioners asapermanent Board haying been determined upon,aud that their jurifiction 
-was to comprehend the whole of the Upper Provinces, viz. the Ceded in Oude, the 
Conquered, and the Benares Diftriét. The controul of the Board of Revenue over the 
Colleétions, and of the Board of Trade over the Cuftoms, with the exception of 
Cuttack, is transferred to the Board of Commiftioners. 


‘The great Receipt in the year 1802-3 arifes from the recovery of balances of the 
Revenues of the preceding year. ‘The inereafed Receipt from Oude, after the year 
1800-1, is to be attributed to the complete alteration of the relations with the Nabob 

of Oude in the commutation ef Térritory for Subfidy. The improvement of the Re- 
‘venue.of the Dittriéts fince they have been under the management of the Company's 
-Goyernment, is fhewn by the latter years of the Statement. 


. Tae ARCOT. 
Supsipy anp CoxLecrions or tHE Revenues or THE Carnaric. 


“The Subfidy was eftimated in 17¢ _ yee - £.360,000° 
“The grofs Revenues of the Carnatic amounted <in the year 
P 1808-9 to - - - - = £.1,016,679 
3 and the Charges, including the payment of ~~ x 
= ‘ . the Nabob’s fhare of the Revenues re-~ 
| ferved underthe treaty, at - "= -~ 414,308 


makinga Net Revenue of = ~ = = + = 602,371 


<which is more than the Subfidy, as cfiimated‘in 1 
_ the fum of - - a - - - hao! 


=~ £.242,371 
OES 


‘SAppendix, No/28, “The fum eftimated in 1793 was according to the ftipulations of the treaty con- 
_#luded by. the Marquis Cornwallis with the Nabob of Arcot, dated 12th July a 


Aye 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 29 


By thofe ftipulations, as applicable to the Nabob, he was bound to the annual pay- subgdies and Ree 
ment of a Subtidy amounting to £.608,442; of which fum £.248,442, was to venues of Ceded 
applied to the liquidation of the debts due to his private creditors, leaving £. 360,000 and Conquered 
asa Subfidy to the Company. £. 502,560 was to be paid by the Nabob in monthly Counties. 
kifts, (or inftalments) the remainder was to be received by a -transfer of the poets 

or tribute payable by the Poligars of certain diftri€ts mentioned in the fchedule of the 

treaty, The Subfidy of £.3060,000 was ftated to be for the Nabob's thare of the 

expenfe of the Company's military forces; but in the event of occafion arifing on the 

part of the Nabob for any number of troops for colleétion of his Revenues or fupport 

of his authority, the additional extra expenfe was to be charged to him. In the 

event of the kifis payable to the Company falling in arrear, power of affumption of 

certain diftri&ts was referved to the Company. —~ 


4 has been remarked that the Eftimate of 1793 was framed according to that 
treaty. The Receipts from Arcot, in the Statement marked B., in the year 1792-3, Appendix, N°6. B. 
difter from this Eftimate, from the Revenues of the Carnatic having been colleéted by 
the Company for a part of that year. They were affumed, under the treaty of 1787, 
during the war with Tippoo then concluded. The affumed diftri&s having been 
delivered over to the Nabob foon after the exccution of the treaty of 1792, the pay- 
ments made by His Highnefs from 1793-4 to 1800-1 were in conformity with the 
ftipulations of that treaty. : : 
On the 31ft July 1801 a new treaty was concluded with the Nabob of Arcof, Appendix, No. 29. 
refing the Civil and Military Government of the Carnatic in the Company, together 
with the full and exclufive right to the Revenues thereof for ever; referving to the 
Nabob the annual payment of one-fifth part of the net colle&tions upon principles 
defined in the treaty; the Company engaging to apply the annual fem of £.243,442 
to the liquidation of the Nabob’s regiftered private debts, according to the ttipulation 
of the treaty of 1792, till it fhould,be completed. ‘The entire defence of the Car- 
natic, and the maintenance of internal tranquillity and police, were undertaken by 
the Company. The treaty to take place from the tft July 1801. 


‘The effeét of this. new arrangement appears in the Statement from the yeat 
1801-2, 


__ _ The grofs Receipt of the year 1803-4 was the greateft realized fince the ceffion of 

the diftri&ts to the Company. It was lefs in 1804-5, but in 1806-7 a confiderable 
defalcation appears. The fettlements on which the colletions of 1803-4 and 1804-5. 
_ were made, - were found too high for the following years ; but she defalcation in 1806-7 

is chiefly to be afcribed to the fevere drought over almoft the whole of the Veninfula. 

‘The Charges include the psyments to the Nabob for his hare, which mutt vary with 

the amount of the Revenués, and the expenfes of every defcription attending the civil 
adminiftration of the cduntries;, which have been increafed fince 1806 by the general : 
introdu@tion of the judicial fyftem. The increafed net Receipt on the ftv be compariz 

fou is to be attributed to the change produced by the treaty of 1801 ; and it is to be 
remarked tlint the grofs Receipt is exclufive of the fam fet apart for the liquidation of. 

the private debts of the Nabob ; refpeGting which it is to be obferved, thatthe fum of . 
£.248,442, which has already been adverted to, as tet apart for the liquidation of thofe 
debts, in conformity with the treaty of 1792, was appropriated to that purpofe, till the 

whole amount of the feveral clafles, which had been arranged in.confequence of inftruc- 

tions to the Madras Governurent by letter dated gth December 1784, in cotiformity 

with the A& ot the 24th Geo. 3d. cap, 25. fec. 37. was paid off. ‘This was accomplithed 

in the year 1804. Since that period meafures have been taken for the liquidation of 

the debts which were pot included in thofe clafles, as well as what were afterwards 
incurred. Commiffioners have been appointed in England and. at Madras for vide Aa46Geos. 
examining and making up the Account, and the annual fum of Pagodas 3,40,000 or Cap. 133. (Loc. & 
£136,000, has been fet apart from the, Revenues for the payment of the fame, Pers.) 


363. . nH “TANJORE 


Batfdies and Re- 
veriues of Ceded 

and Conquered _ 
Countries. 


ee 


Appendix, N*30, 


SpPendix, N°31. 


APPendix, Ne32. 


APbendix, N° 33. 


30 Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on the 


Tansorz Sunsipy anp CoLLection or THE REvENves. 


The Subfidy was eftimatedin1793at - + - .- . £.160,000 
‘The grofs colleGtion of the Revenues amounted 

in the year 1808-9 to = - - - - £.431,405 
the Charges, inddattiog the payment to the 

Rajah,to -° - a! = 139,054 
and the Net Revenueto - + = - - - 292,351 
exceeding the amount of the Subfidy eftimated in the year 

w7gzby = = tt ht 32,351 

* 


‘The fum eftimated in 1793 to be payable under this head, was according toa 
propofed to be entered upon ‘with the Rajah of Tanjore in the year es The pay 
ments ftipulated to be made by the Rajah to the Company for his fhare of the military 
expenfes, upon the principle on which the Nabob of Arcot had agreed to contribute 
towards thoi expenfes, was £.160,000; £.140,000 as an annual fubfidy, and 
£-20,000 -for the part of his former fubfidy which had fallen.in arrear: £.45,714 for 
pefhcufh or tribute tu the Nabob of Arcot, and £.24,000, for the liquidation of his 
private debts. In the whole £.229,714. The payment of the pefhcuth was to be 
deferred for three years, to be atterwards recoverable. Power was referved for aflump- 
tion of the Revenues, in the event of failure in the regular payment of the kifts detailed 
in the treaty. : 

The war with Tippoo having ended early in the year 1792, it was thought a 
proper feafon for entering into treaties with the Nabob of Arcot and che Rajah of 

‘anjore, moie fuited to the abilities of their refpettive countries than thofe concluded 
with them in the 1787, which had been aéted upon to this period. The arrange- 
ment with the Nabob ef Arcot has been already fated. It was expeéted that the 


: tied propofed:to be made with the Rajah of Tanjore would have been executed at 


the fame time, in which cafe the management of the Revenues of his country, which 
had been affumed during the war, in like manner with thofe of Arcot, would alfo have 
been furrendered to him; but a variety of obftacles retarded the conclufion of the 
arrangeinent, partly from the reje€tion at firfl by the Rajah of the terms propofed, and 
partly from doubts havirig been entertained of the propriety of entrufting him, at that 
time, withthe charge and management of the public Revenue, which had beea 
‘affumed as fecurityfor the Subfidy. It was not therefore till the 12th July 1793 that 
the treafy was executed, and the.country futrendered to his management. 


The effeéts of the-above appear in the Receipts of the year 1792-3 and 1793-4, 88 
fhewn in the Statement... It will likewife appear that, though the country was durrea- 
dered to the Rajah, he did not fulfil the ftipulated engagements of the treaty, but fell 
fhort in bis-payments in the year 1794-5 to the amount of £.20,000. This failure is 
to be attributed to the complete diforder. into which the whole of the internal 
‘ment of his affairs had fallen, infomuch as to endanger the future realization ‘of eit 
the accruing demands, or of the exifting arrears of the former Subfidy. It became 
therefore neceffary for the Madras Government to avail itlelfof the powers referved by 
the treaty, ‘by affuming the management of the ‘diftri&ts afligned as fecurity for the 
fulfilment of the terms of it... The effeG of this meafure is fhewn in the Receipt of the 
year 1795-6. : : ; . 

It is not deemed neceffgry in this place to ftate in detail the depofition of the Raj 
the meafures purfued for placing the legal heir ‘upon the Mutnud. or the Coonan 
appointed to inveftigate the fate of affairs in the'¢ountry, as it is. merely propofed to 
bring to notice the leading circumftances which affe€yed the Receipt and ‘the Expendi- 
ture. It is therefore only requifite toremark that the afumed diftriéts remained under 
the management of the Company’s fervants till the year 1799. On the 25th O@ober 
of that year, the Rajah, who had been called to the fucceflion on the opinions of the 
moft refpe€table Pundits as to his legal right, entered into another treaty, in which he 
furrendered the whole of the Revenues of the country to the exclufive mana; of 
the Company, referving to himfelf the annual payment of one lac of pagodas, of 
£-40,000, and one-fifth of the net Revenues, to be computed on principles defined in the 
treaty. The Revenues derived from Tanjore continue to be realized agreeably to the .. 

5 terms 


Affairs of ‘The EAST INDIA COMPANY. - 33 


‘terms of this treaty, and, the internal ‘management of the diftriéts has been affimilated, Subfidies and Rea’ 
as much as poftible, both in colleGtion of Revenue and adminiftration of Juftice, to the sens. mre 
yftem in praétice in other Territories of the Company. Coutiee 

The alteration which is exhibited on the comparifon with the Eftimate in'1793, “——~-""—~* 
ds to be attributed to the change of circumftances as above fiated. 


Mysore. 
The Net Colleétions from thele diftrifts were eftimated in 1793 
teamountto - - = - £+ 390,000 


“The Revenues realized, together with the Subfidy 
fromthe Rajah in the year 1808-9, amounted to £.1,540,228 


Dedué& Charges of colletting the Revenue, &c. 280,302 
the Net Receipt is > + + = © + 4,259,926 
which exceeds the Eftimate made in the year ——— 
ajgg3inthefumef - - - - + «+ £. 869,926 


This part of the Territories was acquired by conqueft, and the great increafe in 
Net Revenue is to be attributed to the entire change which has been produced fince 
the year 1793.. The Eftimate formed at that period was calculated upon rather 
‘imperfeét information as to the real value of the diftriéts devolved to the Company in 
-confequence of the treaty of Seringapatam, concluded after the highly favourable iffue 
ofthe war which terminated in the compnencement of the year 1792. By thattreaty Appendix, N°34: 
the Nabob Tippoo Sultaun furrendered one half of his dominions. The war having 
been conduéted by the united operations of the forces of the Company, the Nizam 
and the Peithwa, an equal divifion of the conquered Territories was made between 
ithe allies, as fpecified.in the fchedules to the treaty. 


The Jumma or Rent Roll of the Company’s fhare was rated at Canterai Pagodas 
13,16,765 or £438.92. The Eftimate in 1793 was taken on what was, at the 
time, conceived a lerate fcale of calculation, being £.70,000 below the amount 
warranted by the advices from India. The infpe&ion of the Statement will fhew 
that during the firft four years, 1792-3 to 1795-6, the grofs Colleftions were confi-" 
derably below the amount in the-Jumma: on the av of the three following 
years they exceeded the Jumma; but the net produce sa the whole of this 
period, viz. 1792-3 to 1798-9, never reached the fum eftimated in 1793. The in- 
ternal tranquillity of one-of the principal diftriéts having frequently been difturbed, 
amuft have occafioned fome lof of Revenue. 

The complete change of circumftances, which has been adverted to, was pro- 
duced by the war which ended in the year 1799 in the death of Tippoo, and the 
entire conqueft of the whole of his dominions. ‘The effeét is thewn in the Statement 
from the year 1799-1800. After that event the legitimate Rajah of Nee Mal 
placed upon his throne, and a partition treaty was concluded : the thares of Territory Appeidis, N°35. 
allotted to the Rajah of Myfore, the Company, the Nizam -and the Peifhwa, are 
fhewn in diftin& fchedules. The furrender of the part‘allotted to the Peithwa was 
fabje& to certain conditions on his part, which, on his failing to fulfil them, was to 
be made over to the Nizam and the Company ; two-thirds to the former and one-third 
fo the latter. The Peifhwa’s thare was lublequently divided in that proportion, __ 


The additional Revenues which fell to the Company in confequence of this treat 
may -he eftimated as follows: ¢ : 


Share of Territory - | - - = - - ~- Page ~ 6,47,641. 
Dedu& allowances to the families of Hyder Ally and Tippoo —_ 2,000,090 
A fepara iuded with the Rajah of Myfore, ti cs 
te treaty was concluded with the Raj fore, Hie Gth July 1799. 
pulating the os ear of a Subfidy. té the Company, for. the Appendix, N° $i 
defence of his lominions, amounting to Se ame” gS 7:90,000. 


Total Pag’. = —11,47.6at 


vor Lftaslt +e. 44894058. « 
=e 
The 


38 Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee am the 


Selsidies andRe- _ The whole grofs Revenue, as fiated in the fchedules of the treaties of 1792. and 
ree Cras 2799, might be eftimated as follows 

eens Treaty of 1792 - = = = = he 438,021 
ee Treatiesof1799 = = - 5 + = = 459,056 


Tota - + £.897,977 


The correfinefs of the Accounts on which the fchedules to the treaties were 
formed was much doubted. After the capture of Seringapatam in 1799 a very in- 
telligent Officer was appointed to enter upon @ minute inveftigation of the rent rolls 

Appendix, N°s7. of the diftrifts. According to his report, the rental of thofe acquired by the Com- 
pany in 1799 was calculated at Pagodas 14,78,698 or £.591,479. On this prin- 
ciple the Revenue obtained by the conqueft might be ftated as foliows: - 


Territories 9 -- - + - st 5914 
Deduét Penfions = - - “ee - - te ue 
: + 511,471 
Subfidy from the Rajah ~~ - roe & pred 
5 i , &-791,479 
Adding what was eftimated under the treaty of 1792 - 438,92 


the whole amount eftimated to be derived by the conqueft of 
Myfore might be ftated at - =» £.1,230,400 
To thew the grofs produce, add Penfions, as they are included 


in the Charge in the Statement - - - 80,000 
when the eftimated total grofs Revenues willbe’ = - £- 1,320,400 
. ed 


“which calculation is fourrd to be nearly verified by the a€tual Accounts for the 
r 1800-1, and forms fome proof of the correGtnefs of the Eftimate now made. 


"The fyfiem of management in practice. in the oth¢r provinces, as to the collection 
of Revenue and admiuiftration of Juftice, has been introduced, wherever practi- 
cable, into thefe diftricts, and the Charges comprize the expenie attending the fame, 
and the allowances and penfions confequeut upon the poffeffion of the country. 


Sunsipy From THE Nizam, anv Revenues or tHe Districts cepED 
BY HIM.“ ~ 


It was not thought proper to include, in the Eftimate of the year 1793, any fum 
on account of the Subiidy trom,the Nizam, as nothing was inferted upon this account 
: either-in the Statements of the preceding years to 1790-1, .or in the Eftimates re- 
Appendix, N°6,B, ceived from India for the year 1791-8, ‘The view of the Statement will thew a 
change in-the relations with the Nizam as complete as what has been exhibited in 

thofe with the other Princes. 


‘The origin of any fubfidiary engagement appears to have been in the treaty of the 

© 1768, but the more immediate caufe which led to the firft payment of @ 
Appendix, N*ss. -Subfidy from bim, which appears in the year 1792-3 of the Statement, is to be 
found in a letter from the Governor General to that Prince, dated the 7th July 
1789, in which principles were laid down and afterwards acted upon as having the 
full force of a treaty. Thof principles recognized the ftipulations in the treaty of 
1768, in fo far as they were applicable to the furnifhing of a military force by the 
Company for the Service of the Nizam, and to the fubGidiary payment in confequence. 
It refted with bis Highnefs to make application for the force, which was to confift 
of two battalions of Sepoys of not lefs than 800 men-each, and fix field-pieces to be 
manned with the number of Europeans ufual in time of war, the expenfe of which 
was to be charged at no more than the exact fum fuch a force would coft when 
employed in the field. The force was to march within two months, or fooner if 
ble, after being demanded. ‘The charge to commence from the day of entering 

fis Territories, and to ceafe from the day of quitting them, with the addition of 
oue 


. Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 93 


‘one month for defiaying the neceffary Charges of preparing the detaciment for Subtdies 

In the year 1790, on the Nizam’s application for the fupply of this force, it was-Couniries,..- 7 
ordered accordingly.. The payments made es a Subfidy, in conformity with this ~~: 
treaty or agreement, continued from 1792-3 to 1797-8. - 


Tn confequence: of the political fituation of India, from ‘the defigns of Tippoo 
Sultaun in concert with the French, defentive meafures were thought neceflary, ‘The 
Nizam having expreffed a defire for an increafé of the detachnient ferving in bis do- 
‘minions, 6n the ‘1ft September 1798 a new fubfidiary treaty was entered into with Appendis, N° 39, 
him. The detachment was increafed to 6,000 Sepoys, with a due proportion of field- 
pieces manned with Europeans, and the fubfidiary payment for the fame was fixed at 
Arcot rupees 24,137,300, or £.276,240, payable in filyer of full currency in. four 
equal inftalments. A provifion was made for aflignment of Territories in the event of 
the payment falling in arrear. The effeét of this increafe appears in the Receipts of 
the years 1798-9 and 1799-1800. ” a art 
On the 12th O&tober 1800 a treaty of perpetual and general defenfive alliance was Appendix, Nt49. 
eoncluded with the Nizam, in which material alterations’ were made in the conneGticns cet 
avith his Highnefs. The force to be fupplied by the Company’ for the general defence 
and proteétion of ‘his dominions was increafed to eight battalions of Sepoys, or 8,006 
rank and file, and two regiments of cavalry, or 1,000 horfe, with their requitite 
complement of guns, European Artillery-men, Lafcars and Pioneers, fully equipped 
with warlike ftores and  anmunition, to “be ftationed in- perpetuity in his Highnefs's 
dominions, _ For the pene of this force, the Territories acquired by the Nizam 
under the treaty of Sermgapatam: of the 18th 1792, and under the treaty of 
Myfore of the 224 June 1799, ‘according to the Schedules, were ceded in perpetuity 
to the Company, and the Reveriucs of them were to be confidered as a full and 
‘complete fatisfaétion of all-demands ‘on’ account of the. fubfidiary force. Some 
changes of Territory for the accommodation of: thé. refpeStive boundaries were ftipu- 
lated for, but, according to thé Schedules to thé. treaty, the annual jumma of 
aie Cole Difitiéts may be eGitnated at Pagodas 17,58,000, or £.703,200 roe 
~ “From the yéar 1800-1 in the Statement. the effe& of this Inf attangemneet is 
exhibited. : It will appear that'thé gro& Recéipt, ‘as above eftimated, has deca fully 
realized in ‘olie year only, viz, 1807-8; it is however to be remarked that’ at the 
time the difrias were. made ‘over to the Company their internal fituation was 
vei uipromifing, and ‘the inhabitants were much 1 aiucecom Confiderable im- 
prevements have been prodaced, ‘and the hope may be entertained of the original 
-eftimated affeffinent being exceeded. |. ‘ a : 
« ‘The Charges here thewn' are for the expeace of management, and payments of 
:Penfions te of the Nizaiy’s officers. tee he mes ' 
The fyftem in getéra! pragtice for the colleion of the Reyenies“and. the admi- 
nition of Tite bee been intreduced, ‘as far as pratticable, into thele diftridts. 
. The Net Revenue is. the fam applicable to thé paytient of the expente of thi 
fablidiary force furniftied ‘under the treaty. 


/ ; ‘Suasipy rrowt tae Rasa OF Travan . . 
‘The Eftimate of 1793 did not ftate any expeGtation undet this head... According 
to the Madras Accounts, the Rajah had made-fublidiary payments to thd Company 
from fy year 1789290. . ‘The omiftion is fuppofed. to. have arifen fromy;the .circim- 


payments not baving been made under permanent engagements. 2. 
The wer with Tippoo; ‘concluded fa the year 1792, had for its firt oftentible‘catife 
the attack by that Prince on the Jines. of the Rajah of ‘Travancore, iwho was in clole 
alliance with the Company. It was therefore’ confidered as a mattef. of juftice that 
the Rajah thould, in like manner with the Nabob of Arcot and the Rajah of:Tan- 
jore, be called upor to contribute, according to his ability, his proportion towards 
the ex] ‘of the war. “The proportion was calculated at half the amount of, his 
Net Revenues.~ ‘The laft-payment, toany'amount, appears in the Statement to havé 
been made in 2792-3. A finall fum was received in 1793-4, After this:peried-the 
363. ‘ Ir -fettlement 


34 Second REPORT fran the Sele& Committee on the 


Sebfidies nde. fettlement of Accounts with the Rajah was transferred from Madras to Bombay, but, 
‘Nodes of Ceded. during the three years 1794-5 to 1796-7, nothing was received under this head. - In 
Bed Conquest . the year 1795 a permanént treaty was concluded with the Rajah, fubje@ to the rati- 
“Sunes, ficatioiv-or approval of the Court-of Direétors, in which it was ftipulated that a fub- 
“Appendix, N*.41. -fidiary force thould be furnithed by the Company for the fervice of the Rajah, con- 
, : sfifting of three battalions of Sepoys, one company -of European artillery, and two 
coinpaniés of Lafcars, for which a fum was to be paid annually,.equivalent to the 

expenfe of the fame, 


No payment was made under this ¢reaty till the year 1797-8. From 1798-9 to 

1806 the amount of this Subtidy, fixed at £.42,914, has been annually realized inthe 

ef O way of fet-offin the Accounts: with the Rajah for Pepper furnifhed by him under con- 

Appendix, N°a2- traét. It is to be remarked that in January 1805 another treaty was entered into 

with the Rajah, increafing the fubfidiary force by one compicte regiment of native 

infantry, ‘and adding to the Subfidy to the amount of £. 45,186, for the expenfe of its 

-but no payment was made on account of the additional Subfidy for nearly two years 

‘fabfequent to the conclufion of the treaty, notwithitanding the remiffion of half of it 

for. that period. In the year 1808, threngh the. intrigues of the Dewan of the Rajah, 

Pia be +ferious ditturbances occurred, and. ended. in dire€ hoitility againft the Company, which 

Appendix, N° 43. was happily fubdued ; and the Rajah is tated to, have made a confiderable payment in 
~ difcharge of the arrears of Subfidy. 


‘Sunsrpy rrosr tus Rayan or Cocarn 


“No ‘Eftimate was made of any payment.under.this head. The-onlly ‘Receipts fro 
the Rajah upow this account, were “in-the years 17y1-2-and 1792-3. 
* “The” Rajah was, previowfly’ to 1791, a tributary to Tippoo Sultaun. On 
the 6th January’ of that'year he threw ‘off his allegiance and ‘became tributary to the 
Company, and entéréd into. a treaty accordingly, fixing his yearly tribute to rife in 
shvee sour nosis fog i 1,00,060,rupees, at which it was to continue, _ 

“Phe: poffetiiod of, Malabar. by, the Company after 1792, and" the conqueft of Cochie 
from the Dutch tat pleced he fituation of the Rajah upon another footing with the 
Company, ‘nothing further bas been recgived.gn the balis of the above treaty. : 


“Colrections frou THE ‘Destincts Cenzp wr tux'Guscowan Razas, 
Appendiz, N’6.B. "The political condeftion with the Guicdirar Rajah (as exhibited in the Statement) 
Appendix, Noa4, 
a ‘Tight as logitimate heir. ‘This convention ‘provided, ini the firft place, for the reim- 


num; .for.the payment: 
A.ceffion from the forr 


"till the advances’niade by the Company on account of the Rajah thould be Jiquidated. 
‘The effeét of thefe feveral arrangements is fhewn in the Statement... The Reccipts are 
Sxclufive of what has been recovered of the debt owing by the Rajah to sae 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 35. 


tho Charges are thoft of management. The Revenue and Judicial Syftems have been Subsidies and Ree. 
extended to certain parts of the Soubah or Province. coneot ‘Coded 
7 2 Countfies. > 
Tue Revenues oF THE Districts acquirep By Crssion anp Conquest ~~ 
FROM nt Mauaarras, as fhewn in the laft column of the Statement, are’ now to 
be exainined. 


Although a treaty of offenfive and defenfive alliance fubfifted between the: Peithwa 
and the Company: at the time of the formation of the Eftimate of 1793, ‘no ‘notice 
was taken of the fubfidiary ftipulations of that treaty, as they were not of a per- 
manent defcription. “his treaty was dated the 5th July 1790. I was entered into’ 
during the war with Tippoo then depending, and ftipulated for the employment of two 
hattalions of the Company's forces, the charge of which was to be defrayed by the, 
Peifhwa ; the Recéipt in 1792-3 was upon this account, and that in 1794-5 was in 
difcharge of the balance remaining due uader the treaty. The “Receipts in the: year" 
1803-4 and the fubfequent years, were in confequence of the acquirement of Territories 
from the Peifwa.under a treaty of ceflion, and from: Dowlut Row Scindia and the’ 
‘Rajah of Berar by-conqueft: ‘The ceffions by the Peithwa were made und@ the id=. . 
-ftrument denominated:the ‘Freaty of Baffein, which was concluded with ‘his Highnefs Appendix, N° 47. 
on the 31ft December #802, © 9) re Pre et yn aie 
Under this treaty the Company were engaged to: farnith a itera fe for'the 
fervice of the Peithwa, confitting of 6,000 native infantry and the ufsa ion of 
-field pieces and European artillery men, with the proper equipment of warlike ftores, 
rand ammunition, fo.be ftationed in perpetuity i his Highnefs’s dominions. ~ For.the 
payment of the expertfe of this force Territories -were'teded, producing, according ta’ 
‘the Schedule; a rental of 26 lacks of rupees ; seferving a provifion for an area 
if afterwardig found neveflary; or for additional ceffions if the Ceded DiftiGs thould 
not, ‘after'the experience of three- years, realize their ted. value. . Provifidns 
bosby apea made for mutual’ affiftance in the-event of .war,,ahd for other eit 
-cumftances. oe : A ee ante 
“On the 16th December 1803 this treaty underwént a confiderable modification; Apprendi Need. 
sand ana or fupplemental treaty was concluded, which is the bafig.on which. ~__ 
the dif ey the Peifhwa are now held. ‘Under this agreement the fabfidiary 
force was increafed by the adiition. of a regiment of natiye cavalry ;'-and fome, 
alteration was ‘made in -thé-principle: of: mutual: affiftante ia the, event. 6f. war';a, 
«change of. the ‘Territories ceded under the former treaty was alfo made. Diftridts 
fituated in the*Carnatic ‘and in Guzzerat, valued in the Schedule at 19,16,000 rupees, 
-were cominuted for' territory itv Bundlécund yalued at ‘rupees 36,16,000; but it isto. 
abe remarked that, at the tie of thé conclufion of this treaty, the Dittri@.of Bun- 
«dlecund was in @ difturbed. {tate, and the néceffity exifted for the employment of & 
“military force to eftablifh an, authority over the country; extraordinary provifion was 
— made in the above'coimputation, of the'value of the’ ‘effion to defray that- 
sexpenfe, ve om : es 
The Receipts from the Peifhwa are on Land Rents, Cuftoms and Duties, partly in 
‘Surat, and partly in the Province of Bundlecund, the former- under the” management _ 
of the Bombay Goverminent, and the latter under that 6f Bengal:, “3 tigi se 
The dittrigts ‘obtained ‘by conquet from Dowlut Row Scindiah were firttefta- Appendix, N49, 
‘blithed in the poffeffion ‘of the ‘Company by the treaty of peace dated the 30th of ' - 
December 1803 ; but'a mifimderftanding haying arifen between the parties, another. sppendix, N° 50.. 
‘treaty was entered into the 22d Novémber 1805, to which fupplemental'or declara-’~ 
tory articles were aiineyed. By this treaty the boundaries of the Conquered Diftritts” 
are defined, Thefe diftriGs are fituated in the Dooab, and to the weftward of the’ 
Jurona, and are under the managemént af the Bengal Government, to whichis to be 
cadded Broach and’ its) dependencies, whichis under the direétion of “the: Bombay. 


Government. , baie ‘ 
: bay : weg. spendix, N° 513 
The part aéquired by congueft from the Rajah’ of Berar was finally furrendered SPP 
under the’ treaty of peace dated thé 17th aber 1803, it piesa the 
province of Cuttack, including the port and diftri& of Ballafore, and’ is a dependency 
under the’ Bengal Government, ; ; a 
The Receipts contain the grof Revenues of thefe feveral diftrids obtained from the 
Mahratas by tieaty or eonquett. The Charges are thofe of the management of the 


Revenues, 


96 » Second’ REPORT jrom the Séle& Committee on the 


Bablidies end Re- Revenues,.and the adminiftration of Juftice, which have been introduced upon the 
grenus of Ceded — fyfteny in I practice. They likewife include the ftipends, allowances and pén- 
and Conquered fons. paid the Royal Family at Delhi and their dependants, and to other pertons, 
Reunites. agreeably to ftipulations in the treaties with the Peifhwa and Scindia. 


“The colleftions. have, been made on {ettlements concluded from year to year. It 
. being of importance for the proper adminiftration of thefe diftrié&ts, and the more ac- 
. eurately afcertaining their real value, a local Commiffion was determined upon in the 
Appendix, N° 41, . year 1807, which, as already noticed in the Revenues of Oude, was-in the year 1809 
3 rendered permanent, and their fuperintendance extended to.the Ceded Diftriéts of 
Oude, and. to the Province of Benares. 


CHARGES. 


‘Cherges. “THE Charges of the adminiftration of the Government of India are next to be exa- 
a mined, upon the fame principle of comparifon as the. Revenues, and fuch explanations 
: sill be given: gs circumstances may appear to‘preferibe. ‘The want of the detailed 

Acconnts of the Bengal Prefidency, .as already noticed, ‘will induce the neceffity of 
occafioually,taking the year 1806-7 as the period of comparifon, upon a fimilar princi- 
ple with the Revenues. : 


“The éxpenditare confequent upon the poffeffion of the Ceded.and Conquered Diftrifts, 
in fo far as relates to the civil adminittration of them, and the ftipulated and other 
payments tothe Native Princes and their dependants, having been already inveftigated, 
it will benecefary to make an adjuftment of the amount.fo difburfed in the examina- 


top mow propofed 46 bemade, - 
‘ “Appendix, N°.” °-!Thie entire Chidiges of the Goverment of India were eftimated 
a a. “panthe peat 179 a <0 we eee £- 5,188,125 
Deduét thofe attending the Subfidies-  - + = = 25,800 


nthe Mek Amount, as effimated in 1793, will then be -  ~ 5,162,395 
.Fronithe want of the detail of certain Accounts, the compati- . 


“Coded and Conquered Diftriéts: ="? =" “2,495,367 


ste Net Amount will be = wee we a 92;788, 544 
aa SRS poker le ae tnt — 
-which exceeds the Eftimate of the year 1793 in the fam.of L- 7,626,216: 


= 


But the comparifon with this period, altisegh dn.fome-meafure preferibed by necef 
lity, froni.the want of docurients by which the | gs of the Ce and Conquered 
Daftri€s might be ttated in detail for the yéars 1867-8 and 1808-9, is not quite’ correét,_. 
nor a: fair criterion of ‘the fate of affairs at ‘the two periods, nor is it in coincidence. 
with the view given of the aggregate of the Revenues, or of the General Refults. as 
-eftimated in 1793 and by the aétual “Accofints of the, year 1$08-9.. The Charges 
-difburted inthe year’ 1806-7, were greatly enhanced from including arrears incurred 
during. the late war, and the Deficit was. im confequence very large, The Charge in 
the. year. 1808-9 is not affefted by thofe.circumftanves, and ‘the effeét of meafures of 
retrenchment adopted by the Indian Governments is beneficially experienced, 


The difference between the General Refutt of the year 1806-7 and that of the year 
1808-9, was no lefs than £.3,126,280;. of. which fam £.989,316 was pendubed by 
increabed and £.2,132,684-by a diminution of the-Charges. It would have 
‘been fatisfaétdry to have found it. praGticable ‘to make en accurate adjuftment of the 
Charges of 1808-9, for the perp fe of a comparifon. with this year, but as that-cannot 
de done, the only courfe to be purfued is to fupply the defect by fach general ee 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 37 
“tion.as can be derived from the Statements. Comparing the aggregate Charge, efti- 


mated in the year 1793 at - - - 7 £.5,188,125 
with that difburfed in 1806-7, amounting to - - - 15,283,908 


the increafe would be - + = + = = $10,095,783" 
and with that difburfed in 1808-9, amounting to - “A- 13,151,924 
the increafe would be - 


r - ot ee = £:7,963,099 
which is lef than is fhewn in the comparifon with 1806-7. —~ 

“in the fum already ftated as a diminution of Charge, viz. _£.2,132,684 

— oe 
The increafe of Charges, on comparifon with the Eftimate of 1793, excluding thofe 
of the Ceded and Conquered Countries, has been fhewn to amount, in the year 1806-7, 
to £.7,626.216. The increafe, in the comparifon with 1808-9, including the Charges 

of thofe Countries, has been ftated at £.7,963,099. x 

Reafons have been afligned for affuming the Eftimate, made in the year 1793 as the 
bafis of comparifon with the a€tual Accounts of the lateft period. It muft neverthe- 


the 
Charge attending which is to be examined hereafter in detail j and as in that year the 
ted, a8 wil 


oo 


The grofs Charge of the year'1793-4 was £.6,066,924, being lefs than in 1808-9 by | 


£-7,084,300 ; of which £.4, 182,764 isin the Military Charges, and Buildings and Forti- 
ications ; and £.415,671 in increafed Civil ee Madras and Bombay : £.975,303 
in the Ceded and Conquered Countries under the Bengal Prefidency, as far as can be 
traced in the Accounts ; £.860,428 in, thofe under Madras and Bombay ; pei be 
fum of £.648,799 to be accounted for, partly in the Charges of the Ceded and Con- 
quered Diftriéts under Bengal, and partly in the increafed civil expenfes of that Prefi- 
dency, the detail of which is wanting, | 
Notwithftanding the propofition of taking the 1793-4 for the immediate pur- 
pole of comparifon with the Charges the left Kesha it is not intended to depart 
from the plan originally laid downin this Report with regard to the Eftimate of 1793 ; 
but in the purfuit of the examination of the detail of the various heads of Charge, the 
views entertained by that Eftimate will be uoticed, and fuch explanatory remarks offered 
refpeRting them as occafion may require. - 


In the general Statement, the Charges, exclufive of thofe’ of the Ceded and Con- 
quered Diftriéts, are feparated into three heads : the Military; the expente of Buildings 
and Fortifications; and the Civil Charges, which comprize every other item of fixed 
expenditure; and are fhewn in detail in the fupplementary Statement marked C. 

It is.to be remarked that the amount of the feveral heads of Charge refpettively, as 
exhibited-in the columns of the Statement, are taken from the columns of the Accounts 
laid before Parliament, which thew-the fams sétually difburfed in the year; confe- 
quently, thofe fums ‘may not always be confidered as the aCtual. Charge appertaining 
to the year; as it occafionally happened that, in fome years, a part of the Charge 
became in arrear, and féll upoa the difburfement of the next year, by which the 
Charge of orie year appeared at alef amount, and that of another was enhanced 
in proportion. ore 


: MILITARY CHARGES. 
THE feparation of the Military Charges and thofe of Buildings aud Fortifications 


Appendix, N° 6. = 


Appendix, N°6.C. 


e Military Charges: * 
under diftin& heads or columns having been noticed, it may not be improper to offer 


fome explanation of the reafoa of making this feparation, in fo far as_refpeéts ihe 
yeah Charge, The Army,in India, though divided under the adminifiration of 
Pig Prefidencies refpeétively, is, in . aggregate, to he confidered as engaged 

. a 3 for 


Ky 


iiitrey Charges. 


98 Sccond REPORT. from, the Sete& Committee on: the 
for. the protetion of the. Empire at large. The immenf incyeafe, both in numbers-and 


tome expenfe, demands more payticular examination as to the immediate caufes of it; and 


UAppendix, N°6. 


it is conceived that this examination can beft be made by a combination, of the entire 
Mititary Charge. It is, however, to be premifed that the prefent numerical force of 
the Army cannot be fiid to have been determined merely by the extent of the 
Company's antient Poffeffions, but is governed likev-ife by fublidiary ftipulations under 
treaties with the. Natiye Princes of India, and by the increafe required in confequence 
of the additional Territories obtained by conquett. 

‘When the Eftimate was framed in the year 1793, the political ftate of India was 
very different to what it was at the later periods in the Statement. The principle on 
which the calculations in that Efiimate were made was governed by the circumftances 
of the time, having in view the eftablithment and continuance of peace. ‘The opinion 
ef the late Marquis Cornwallis was adverted to in fupport of thofe calculations, and 
tbe expenfe incurred previous to the war with ‘Tippoo Sultaun, then recently con- 
cluded, was adopted for the general rule as to the Eftimate of the future profpetts, 
On thefe feveral grounds, the Military Charges were eftimated in the year 1793 at 
thefumof - + + = © - = £.2,917,500 

Tt is found neceffary to the .comparifon with the 
Charge of the year 1808- to add the Buildings 
and Fortifications, becaufe the Military Buildings 
at Bengal in that year could not be feparated. 
Add therefore - - =) 5 =) = 117,875 


ss ; . £.33035,375 
The aétual Military Charge in 1808-9, was, in- 
_ cluding Militzry Buildings at Bengal, - £-°7,380,427 

- Add remaining Buildings and Fortifications . - — 279,364 


7,659,791 
Tnereafe beyond the Eftimate of 1793 +  - + £. 4,624,416 


———— 
_ The Eftimate.of 1793 appears to have been calculated upon rather. too.low a 
feale as to the Military Charges ; tor, by the a€tual Accounts of the year.1792-3, they 
amounted to a larger fum by £. 563,000 ; this, however, may be in part imputed to 
the expenfe of winding up the war concluded in 1792,” 

. It is propofed to take the expenfe- of. the year 1703-4 as ‘the .moft proper for 
eomparifon with that of the year 1808-9, for the following reafon. Although the war 
with France commenced in Europe in the early pertof 1793, it.conld have but tittle 
effe€t upon the Military Charge in India during the year_ 1743-4; and confequently, 
-as peace had taken place, generally in India, and as a .fmall fam only was included 
for the arrears of the war, the expenfe might be confidered as not far exceeding that 
of a peace eftablithment. a : ee fe 


‘The Military Charges in the’ year 1793-4 amounted to ~ L. 3,361,837 
- and the expenfe of buildings and Fortifications to = 145,190 


es Total ae Se he 39477,027 
e Military Chargein 1808-9, including Military 

Buildings at Pengal; amounted to. = 3 - £6 7,380,427 

and the remaining Buildings and Fortifications to. - 279.364 


Together = - ee 7659797 
Tnereafe in 1808-9 se we ee 182,764 


Tt has been remarked that the expenfe of the Buildings and Fortifications at 
Bengal could not be diftin@ly ftated for the 808-9. “Ihis is to be afcribed te 
the clreurnftance of the’ military part of: them lended with the. hoe ry ba 
in the abftraé& documents received. from thence. ¢ ere€tion or repairs of Military 
Buildings muft be governed, in a great meafurc, by cafual circumftances. Upon the 
prefent-occafion it.is difficult to form any Eftimete of them. If the grofs expenfe,of 

4 e “.° Buildings 


Affiirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 39 


Buildings and Fortifications at the Prefidency of Bengal in 1808-9 might be com- Mititery €targes. 
puted upon the average of the four years T8oged to ee the part sation to the Se 4 
Military might be ftated at £. 45,000. This fum, added to the expenfe already 

mentioned tor Buildings, viz. £.279,364, would carry the whole Charge of the 

Buildings and Fortifications to £.324,364, confequently the increafo on that head, on 

a comparifon with the year 1793-4, would be £.209,174. But this particular 

branch of expenfe will be confidered in its proper place. The prefent remarks are 

introduced for the purpofe of endeavouring to give a more diftinct view of the in- 

-creafe in the Military Charge in the year 1808-9. Dedutting therefore the fam of 

£.209,174 from £. 4,182,764, the amount firft fiated as the increafe combined with 

the Buildings, the net increafe of Military Charge, between 1793-4 and 1808-9, will 

then appear to be £.3,973,590- 4 


From the want of the books from Bengal, there exifts much difficulty in the way of 
accounting for this increafe with fatisfatory precifion. The firft explanation of the 
caufe of it might be given from the increafe of the numbers of the Armies in nearly. 
an equal ratio. This will appear on a reference to a Comparative Abftract View of the : 
fate of the Armies of the three Prefidencies, which is placed in the Appendix. By Appendix, Ne5s._ 
this Abftratt, an increafe of effe€tive force in rank and file is exhibited as follows : : 


E | - § His Majetty’s - | 5,: 20,348 
{ Gompauys 2 4,026 


“Total Europeans - - - - 
Natives - eee 


Grand Tol + - - + 


But this explanation, although affording a plaufible reafon for the additional Cun 
4s by fartoo general. It is therefore thought neceffary to enter upon a more detailed. 

examination of this materially important branch of the expenditure, In this procels 

it is tound that the increafed expenfe now fhewn is not merely to he seed to the 

increaf of the forces _as to numbers, but is likewife to be afcribed to an alteration itt 

the conftitution or fyftem on which the Army was formed in the year 1794. . This 

alteration is manifeft on the face of the AbftraG already referred to ; but, conceiving 

it proper. that more detailed: information upon this point fhould be furnithed, copies 

of the Abftraéts of the Military Eftablifhment Books of the three Prefidencies on the 4 pendix, N@ 53; 
goth April +794, and the goth April 1807, are added to the Appendix. It is to be 54, 55, 56, 57 and” 
remarked that. the books of the year 1807 are the lateft received in a complete feries, 55 % 
‘and although the agerevate amount of. the expenfe may not exa@ily accord with the 

amount of the. Military Cl in the year 1808-9, the Abftraéts now produced will, 

it is prefumed, be ufeful in affording a general idea of the nature and numbers of the 
- different corps of which the Indian Armies ate compofed, and particularly as no 

alteration as to the number of regiments is known to have taken place: fince that 

period, except as to thofe of His Majefty. 


It is not requifite wpon: this occafion to cnter at large into the detail of the alteration 
‘in the «military (yftem which has been alluded to, or of the caufes ‘which led: to its - 
adoption ; it may fuffice {o ftate, that from the conftitution of the Army, the Officers 
were expofed to: peculiay hardthips; the increafe of Territory had, at that period, 
led to the increafe of numbers, with which neither the gradations of rank, .nor the 
proportion: of Officers, paiticularly of Ficld Officers, were in conformity. ‘Phe highelt 
rank was that of Colonel, and as promotion only took piace in_the line, the progrefs 
was fo flow as to.offord bet a diftant and difcouraging profpe& of attaining it. No 
provifion exifted for the relief of any who, from ill health or other circumftances, found 
it neceffary to vifit their native country ; nor for the retreat of thofe who, aftcr a cer- 
tain number of years of fervide, might with to retire. Thefe feveral circumftances 
- were brought to the confideration of the Court of Direfors, and of the Board of 
‘Commiffioners for the Affairs of India, who, with the affiftance of the opinions of the 
mot refpeGtable local authorities, cntered upon a very laborious examination of the 
fybjeS, and finally determined upon an entire wew-arrangement of the Army. Pied 

’ le 


"40 Second REPORT from se ScleGt Committee on the 


Mititary Charges, 


“Appendix, N°59- 


Appendix, N° 59. 


detail of this arrangement was communicated to India by letters, dated in January 


1796. The immediate effe&ts of this meafure will appear in the Statement No. 59. in 


‘the Appendix, which thews, upon a general principle, that by. this alteration in the 


Eftablithment of the feveral corps of the Army, the European infantry, before con- 
fifting of 12 battalions, was converted into fix regiments ; the native infantry, confifting 
of 13 brigades, (each brigade containing fix battalions) being in the whole 78 bat- 


‘talions, was formed into 26 regiments of two battalions each; and that reforms were 


likewife made in the other corps of the Army. By the formation of the Arm 
according to this principle the profpeé& of promotion was greatly enlarged: the 

of Major General was inftituted in the Company's fervice ; the number of Field 
Officers was increafed ; and the expe@ation of attaining the higher ranks was rendered 
more encouraging, by the eftablithment of the principle of promotion in regiments ae- 
cording to feniority, as follows : in the Evropean and native infantry to the rank of 
Lieutenant Colonel ; in the native cavalry to the rank of Captain, and afterwards in 
the line; the promotion in the artillery was continued in feniority in the whole corps, 
aceording to the praétice in His Majetty's fervice ; liberal provifion was likewife 
made for allowances to a limited number of Officers on furlough in Europe, and for 
the event of total retirement after the fervice of a certain number of years. A mo- 
dification of the rule of promotion was dire@ted by letters to India dated in June and 
July 1798, eftablithing it generally to be to the rank of Major in the refpeétive 
regiments, and afterwards by feniority in the whole corps, excepting the artillery, in 
which the promotion continued by feniority in the corps. 


It is obvious that a charge fo material could not be effeéted without confiderable 
additional expen. Attention was, as far as praCticable, paid to economy, by reducing 
cerfain allowances ; but, according to Eftimates which were prepared with es much 
accuracy as circumftances would admit of, the addition likely to be made to the 
Military Charges could not be taken at a lef amount than £ 460,000, including the 
allqwances on furlough and retirement. 


It has that the leading obje& of thefe feveral arrangements was the 
fatisfadtion o the European sinenthest Officers, and to afford ‘tet the relief which, 
on principles i aries equity, they were entitled to; but the permanent Military 
expenfes were fhortly after confiderably increafed by an attention, equally neceffary 
and juft, to the caie of the lower ranks, both European and native. As to the 
Europeans, it is to be obferved that it is an eftablifhed general principle, that in 
refpc& of pay and allowances, His Majefty’s and the Company's forees are placed 
upon. an cqual footing, In the year 1797 an increafe of pay was granted to the 
Royal Army by His No} ’s order, dated 25th May; this grant extending ‘to the 
fervice in India, the fame increafe was given to the Company's European foldiers. 
An addition was likewife made in the year 1801 to the pay of the native Officers and 
Sepoys at, Madras and Bombay ; @ confiderable additional expenfe, and.of courte an 
increafe of the Military Charges, was occafioned by thefe grants, from the period at 
which they were refpeétively carried into effeG.. 

‘The increafe of numbers as to rank and file, between the year 1793-4 and the year 
1808-9, has been already adverted ta, but the confideration of the expenfe of the. 
Army on its prefent eftablithment will naturally bring into view the. ftate of it, accord-. 
ing to the Regulations paffed in the year 1796, and as it is at prefent. The principal 
regular corps will only be noticed. “ It is propofed to thew ghe general -ftate of the 
Company's Army according to thofe Regulations, and ing to the Retums 
of the year 1808. : 


1796. 1. 1808. 


- «| 6 Battalions. | .6-Battations. . 
- -| 6 Regiments. | 3 Regiments. 


8 Regiments. ‘ 16 Regiments. 
26 Regiments. 59 Regiments. 


. ‘Astiller 
European - - fintory 


‘ 


‘Cavalr, 
Native - - - hirer a SS 


° 
From which it will appear. that the. alterations in the Army were, the European 
infantry lefs by three regiments; the native cavalry more by eight regiments; - 
and the native infantry more by thirty-three regiments. : : 

‘The’ 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. . 41 


‘The annual expenfe of thefe feveral-additions to the military force is of courfe Military Charges, 
Sama aid 


greatly enhanced by the new principle of formation of the regiments in 1796, and by 
the increafed pay to the Europeans‘and Natives, which, as to the Europeans, was ftill 
further increafed by a grant in the year 1807 made to His Majefty’s foldiers in 
Europe, and generally extended to thofe of -His Majefty’s and the Coupiays fervice 
on the Indian Eftablithment. 


It may not be neceffary in this place to ftate in detail the meafures adopted by the 
Indian Governments on the receipt of the orders of 1796, or the modifications which 
were afterwards made by the Court of Direétors in the years 1798 and 1801, as no 
material alteration appears in the general principle of the arrangements, except as to 
the operations of the orders of the Court on the rule of regimental promotion; the 
increafe of the ftrength of the artillery to feven companies each battalion ; the reduétion 
of three; the European regiments, with the increafe of the numbers of the remaining 
three, and the formation of the native cavalry in regiments of greater firength by 
two troops each, with the addition of one cornet and thirty men to cach troop; upon 
which occafion two of the Madras regiments of cavalry were ordered to be reduced, 
but which was not fully carried into effeét. 


The great addition to the ftrength of the Army fince the year 1796, with the im- 
mediate caufes of it, may be confidered the chief obje€t of attention, as being the 
principal fources to which the large increafe of, the military expenditure is to be 
attributed. Adverting to the whole of the period in the Statement, or at lcaft fronr 
1795-6, it may be pronounced to have been almoft one continual fcene of war, or 
preparation for it; European or Indian. In fome inftances the neceflary meafures of 
defence led to the raifing of new regiments; in others levies were required to fupply 
the place of troops employed on expeditions undertaken againft the poffeffions of 
the enemy. The combined effe& of the whole has been fhewn to produce an addition 
of King’s regiments, and an increafe in the eftablifynent of the Company’s Army to 
the extent already ftated, oo 


Referring to the total of the Military Charges in the Statement marked No. 6, it Appendix, N°6. 


will appear that they progreffively increafed in amount,’ firft, from the year. 1795-6 
to the year 1801-2 inclufive, which was almoft entirely 4 period of active we . 
Ceylon, Malacca, and the Eaftern Ifands were conquered; which, with the mainte-" 
nance of Ceylon to December 1801, and of the other conquefts till the year 1801-2, 
added ‘confiderably to the expence in each year. After that period the Military 
Charge in this inftance is included under the head of Dutch Settlements. An expe- 
dition was prepared upon a large fcale to proceed againft Manilla: though ulumately 
abandoned, it occafioned a confiderable addition to the expenfes of 1797-8. ‘Fhe 
expedition ,to Egypt fell upon the Charges from the year 1798-9 to 3801-2, and in 
a {malt degree upon 1802-3.. Upon the Peninfula the French and Dutch fettlements 
were captured immediately after the commencement of the war with tofe powers ; 
but the mo material addition to the Military expenfes upon the continent of India, 
between the yéars 1796-7 and 18: 3; was occalioned by the concert which exifted 
between the French, Zemaun Shaby and Tippoo Sultaun, from whence arofe the 
apprehenfion of ‘invafion by Zemaun Shah on the north-weit frontier of Bengal, and 
the war with Tippoo Sultaun which ended in 1799. The necetlary confequence of 
thefe circumftances was an increafe of the Armies of Bengal and Madras, and an 
enhancement of the, Military Charges of all the Prefidencies, by the addition of field 
allowances aad expenfes. 


In the year 1802-3 the Charges are fhewn to have decreafed in a con‘derable 
amount, (near a million), ‘The war with the European enemies having enced in 1801, 
and peace exifting with the Native Powers of India, expe@tations were entertained that 
the expenditure of the year would have been reduced to a peace cftablithment; in 
which cafe a decreafe of Charge would have been exhibited in a much Jarger amount ;. 
but the Charge of that year included past of the expentes of the cxpedition .to 
Egypt, and for the field Charges of the Madras Army from November 1802, pre- 
vioufly to the breaking out of the war with the Mahrattas in 1803-4, the effetts of 
which are fhewn in that and the three following years; although this war may be 
faid to have ended in December 1805, when a treaty of peace was concluded with 
Holkar. Notwithftanding the effet of the. reftoration of peace upon the continent 
of India is fhewn in the redu€tion of the Charges of 1807-8 and_ 1808-9, the amount 
in each of thefe years may be confidered as full very high compared with’ the year 

363. AD, 1802-3; 


42 Second REPORT from the Scle€t Committee on the 


Military Charges. 1802-3; but the caufe of it-is to be found for the moft part in the permanent addi- 

—~~—~--r=- tions made to the military eftablifhmebts fince that period, both of His Majetty’s 
-troops and of te Company's ; of the former feven regiments of foot, and of the latter 
twelve. regiments of native infantry and three regiments of native cavalry, the aggregate 
expente of which might be eftimated at an amount exceeding a million fterling, 


From the remarks which have been offered it is to be inferred that the increate of 
‘the military expenditure of India, between the years 1793-4 and 1808-9, is to be 
dmputed to a combination of ¢ircumftances; to the new modelling of the Army in 
1746 ; to-the increafe of pay to the Europeans and Natives; but principally to addi- 
tions which have been made to the eftablithments, 


The obje& at prefent-in view being merely to thew the effe&t produced upon the 

‘finances from the various meafures adopted by the Governments of India, either by 

" .orders from England, or, as might have been prefcribed, by the circumftances of the 
times, it is not propofed to enter upon any confideration of the political grounds on 
awhich the military eftablithments were increafed, but to ftate only the increafe itklf, 
‘to trace the periods when it was carried into effeét, and to thew, with as much preci- 

« fion as the citcumftances with which this immenfe expenditure is involved will permit, 
the feveral branches wherein the additional expenfe has taken place: as, from this 
view, fome idea may be entertained of the part to be looked upon as a fixed annual 
Charge upon the Revenues of India. The difappointment in the receipt of a very 
-material part'of the documents for the year 1808-9 occafions the neceffity of making 
:this exhibition upon rather a general principle, and chiefly upon Eftimate. 

The of the increafed annual Charge to be confidered as fixed in its nature, is 
that arifing from the regulations of 1796, and from the additional eftablithed force. 
‘This has heen fhewn to be, three regiments of dragoons and 11 regiments of infantry 
of His Majefty's Forces, and of the Company's as follows; viz. 

European Artillery.«The increafe was by the changes in the corps in 1796, 1798, 
and 1801; alf, =a omopanies of Lafears. zs 9 

Native Cavalry.-g regiments and 1 troop. - 

,: Native Infantry,—compared with its formation in 1796, which was nearly, as to 

bers ofrank and file, upon the bafis of 1794, 33 regiments. y 

‘Pioneers,——1 battalion and four companies, 

From the obfervations already made it muft be inferred that the Military Charges 
‘in each year of the cohémn of the Statement have been inereafed in a very con- 
‘fiderable degree by.the Contingent or extraordinary expenfes of war. It would be 
extremely difficult, if prafticable at this tim®, to make a calculation of thofe expentes. 
It is Hkewife: to be inferred, thet thofe Charges have been gradually imcreafed by the 
«modifications of, or additions to the eftablifhed force from time to time. & 


It having been propofed to trace the Bear at which thefe additions were made, 
the advices from India and the proceedings land, have been «attentively exa- 
anined, and it is afcertained, that they were carffed into effet in the following years: 


COMPAN Y'& 


HIS MAJESTY’S. 


Infantry. 


1796 
1797 
1798 
1799 
1800 
1801 - 
1802 
1803 
1804 
~ 1805 
2806 
1807 
1908 - 


Net Increafe 


' 
Jowaan 


Aer ore 


i 


Seer epee ave ee 
pepe eavevanvest 


Aftzirs of The FAST, INDIA COMPANY. 43 


In the year 17G8 the Company's artillery was increafed:in numbers, and in 1801 Military Charges. 

by the addition of two companiés to each battalion, in the whole 12 companics, and —+—L—« 
in the fame years their European regiments, confifting of fix, were reduced to three. 
‘The progreflive effet of thefe additions on ‘the amount of the Military Charges 
in each year, if it could be fhewn with accuracy, is not material to the object. im- 
mediately in view at this time, which is to account for the great increafe of expenfe 
between 1753-4, and 1808-9 ; that object will therefore be purfued in order to bring 
the examination of this branch of the Accounts to a clofe. 


It muft have appeared evident, from the remarks and explanations in the preceding 
parts of this Report, that confiderable difficulty would exift in accounting with pre- 
cifion and accuracy for the component paris of the fum of £. 3,973,590, ftated to be 
the amount of the increafe on the comparifon now made, and that it can be only done 
upon Eitimate, the calculations of which muft neceffarily be framed on the computed. 
annual expenfe of the additional regiments, and by advcrting to the aétual amount 
incurred in the year 1806-7, as fiated in the Book of Eftablithments, with refpeét to 
the other Charges, particularly thofe ofa contingent nature. It mutt be admitted that 
an Eftimate drawn upon fach principles is liable to obje@ion, but being the only mode 
by which any explanation can be at prefent obtained upon this point, itis inferted in the 
Appendix, and is prefimed to be as accurate a calculation a3. can be formed, when Appendix, Ne 60. 
every circumflance refpetting the ftate of the Accounts is taken into confideration, : 


BUILDINGS ayn FORTIFICATIONS. 


This head was eftimated in 1793 at =- 7° + = . £117,873 . ~” puildings and 
From the remarks on the Military Charges it will have been —> Fostifications. 
obferved that the view given of the expenfe of Buildings:and” : 
Fortifications in 1808-9 is incomplete, from not including that 
incurred in the Military department'at Bengal. If the adjuft- 
ment made on the examination of the Military Charges-were- 
now reforted to, the Account would ftand as follows: - ‘ 
Buildings and Fortifications in 1808-9, as per State- 
ment, - ees - . - £. 279,364 
Add for the Military part at Bengal 7 + = 45,000 


The total will then be - = + + - +s - = 324,364 


which exceeds the Etimate in 1793 in the famof + - £.206,489 
x i 


Appendix, N° 6, 


The difficulty of giving with accuracy a profpettive view of expenfes of this def 
cription is obvious, as it depends fo greatly upon contingent and catual circumftances, 
The calculation in the Eftimate was in part governed by the average of preceding 
years, and the experience of the firft feven years of the aGiual Accounts, 1792-3 to 
1797-8 inclufive, afforded fome proof of the agcuracy of it, for on the average of 
thofe years the expenfe only proved to be £:113,048, although in fome of them the 
Charge exceeded the Eftimate, On the infpeétion of thefe columns of the Statement 
it will appear that, as the ‘lerritories of the Company inereafed, the expenfe of the 
ereftion and repairs of Buildings and Fortifications increafed likewife; and here it is 
to be remarked that the Charge under this head includes, in like manner with the 
Military Charges, the entire expenditure, whether on account of the Company's 
ancient Poffefions, or of thofe acquired by ceflion or conqueft. The increafed ex- 
penfe in the Bengal column, during the feveral years’ from 1798-9 to 1803-4," is prin- 
‘cipally to be afcribed to repairs Xc. of Buildings and Fortifications in Oude, ‘a part .a>pendix, Né 26 
of which was provided for in the ftipulations of the treaty of February 1798; alfo * 
to the ereGtion of a new Government-houfe at Calcutta; to the purchafe of houfes 

"and grounds, and the making of new roads and avenues. As to the Madras columa, 
the additional Territories acquired by the conqueft of Myfore, by the ceffion of the 
Camatic by the Nabob of Arcot, and of the diftri@s by the Nizam, having greatly 
inereafed the number of fortreffes, the neceflity. of* maintaining and keeping them in 


repaiy_ will be found to have materially added to the expenfes of this defeription : 
‘ unde: 


ip 


Duildings and 
Fortifications, 


k 


Civil, &c. Charges. 
Appendix, N°6, 


Appendix, N°6.C. 


‘Appendix, N° 61. 


44 Second REP ORT: rom the Select Committee on the 
. 

under the Madras Government. The great increafe of Charge after the year 1804-5, 
is to be afcribed to various circumftances ; the improvement and repairs of the works 
at the fortrefS of Seringapatam; the building a new mint and cuftom-houfe and a 
jail at Madras; the ere¢tion of barracks at feveral ftations for the accommodation 
‘of the increafed number of European troops; extenfive repairs of the fortifications 
of the Prefidency, which had received very confiderable damage by a ftorm in 1805; 
cand other works of different defcriptions, of which it may not be requifite, even if 
it were praticable, to give a minute detail. The increafe of Territory on the wettern 
fide of India, under the adminiftration of the Bombay Government, being far le& 
confiderable than what has come under that of Madras, the additional expen 
attending the Buildings and Fortifications is likewife les. The inereafed Charge ex-" 
hibited in the years fubfequent to 1802-3 is in fome degree to be attributed to the 
effets of a fire at the Prefidency in February 1803, by which very extenfive damage 
was produced, and, in confequence, confiderable expenfe incurred in the ereting of 
new barracks for the European regiments, and of other buildings. ‘The extention of 
the Efplanade, the compenfation to perfons whofe houfes were removed, and the 
further ftrengthening the fortifications, have added to the Charges. 


It would lead to a very extenfive detail to account minutely for the increafe under 
this head of Charge at each of the Prefidencies; but it may be proper to obferve that 
infiruGtions have been given, from time to time, to keep it within cyery practicable 
Jimit. 


CIVIL, &. CHARGES. 


THE Civil, Revenue, Judicial.and Marine Charges, as fhewn in the General State- 
ment marked No. 6, are next to be examined. ‘The total of Charges incurred under 
thefe feveral heads on account of the Company's ancient Pofleftions was eftimated in 
1793.8 oe Nae nibteimedine pai, oF began ~ 2. L.2,126,950 
_ On a comparifon with the year 1806-7, in which their amount 

Ee Ey Ries Ae At Nd 3,725,381 


=a was + 


‘an increafe is exhibited of - - - - - -  £1,598,431 


If the comparifon could have been made with the year 1808-9, a different Refult 
would have beeu fhewn, as the expenditure at Madras and Bombay in that year 
was lefS by £.277,720. 


‘The view of this Statement will thew, during the whole of the period, a. generdl 
tendency to increafed expente; and that, between 1793-4 and 1806-7, the increafe 
accumulated to £.1,312,830. This increafe would certainly have appeared lefs on a 
eomparifon with 1808-9, but it is deemed of importance to enter upon a detailed 
examination, in order to difcover, as far as praéticable, the real caufes from which 
the expenfe of the Civil Adminifiration or Government of thefe Pofeftions has been 
carried to its prefent large annual amount. It is, however, to be premifed that, in 
fome inftances, the increafed Charge will be found to be imputable to alterations of 
fyfiem under which increafed Revende has been produced; and, in others, to expen- 
five meafures which have been preferibed by the more extended political relations of 
the Company in Afia, 


In the courfe of this examination the Prefidencies Will be taken feparately, and 
every item of Charge at each will undergo diftin& confideration. To accomplifh this 
purpofe with greater facility, the Supplementary Statement marked C. has been 
placed in the Appendix, in addition to the General Statement, 


Tt has been remarked that the year 1793-4 might be confidered as a period of 
more particular importance, in conféquence of ‘alterations of fyfiem, and of ar- 
Tangements carried into effet at the commencement of it. ‘This remark will be 
found to apply moft particularly to the Accounts of the Bengs ‘Prefidency. It is 
neverthelefs deemed proper to confider this year as a period in which the attention 
fhould be direGed to the fituation of the other Prefidencies likewife. On thefe con- 
fiderations, and as itis thought tg be highly defirable to bring forward more diftinct 
information upon this important branch’ of the enquiry, Abfiradts of the Civil 

Eftablifhments 


“Attirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 8 


ERabliiments of the three Prefidencies, as they food in April 1794, 1807 and ‘Civil, Re 


2808; hive been called for, and are likewile added’ to the Appendix, 


‘The Civ ut Cuarcezs of the Prefidency of Bena are fhewn 
to have been eftimated in the year 1795 to amountte - _£..1,581,200 


“In the year 1806-7 they amountedto - = = = 2;417,318 
being an increafeof - >  - = = - = £.836,r 18 
=e 


In the year 1793 the Civil Charges of the General departinent were eftimated in 
the gto at £.403,000. Of this fum an adjuftment has been made in the State- 
ment now under examination, in order to diftinguith the feveral heads of Charge, 
for the purpofe of comparifon with the Eftimate of them now made, The principle 
upon which the calculation of thefe Charges was made at £. 403,000 15 faid fo be the 
average of the three paft years. As the application of that principle to the Charges of 
the Muyr might fiate them too low for the purpofe of comparifon,.on account of a 
anaterial alteration by a new coinage inftituted in 1789, by which the Eftablithment was 
increafed, it is thought beft, upon this occafion, to take the fum eftimated by the 
Bengal Government in the year 1791-2 for the Charges of the Mint and Affay Offices 
as a point of comparifon, The Minr Cuancus, as eftimated in 1793, are therefore 


tobe taken at - ~ - = os ot 7 £- 13,309 
In 1806-7'the Charge was. - = = = =, = 28,558 


ran 


being an increafecof - 9.2 = = - = = ££ 1,438 


The Charges in the years 1807-8 and 1808-9 are ftated at a larger amount, from ~ 


including the Mints at Benares and Furruckabad. . This head of Charge, from loffes 
occafionally incurred by coinage, and from being expofed to contingencies dependent 
upon the quantity coined from year to year, mutt neceffarily be fl ting ; and it is 
chiefly owing to this circumftance that the Eftimate in 1793, though governed in its 
calculation by that received from Bengal for. the year 1791-2, appears to have given 
fo inaccurate a view of the Charge of the department, which in the year 1792-3 
amounted to £.33,600. A part of this increafe is to be attributed to a Mint being 
included in the latter year for Moorfhedabad, whereas the Eftimate of 1791-2 
comprized only the three Mints of Calcutta, Dacca, and Patna. 


Tt may not be requifite to trace minutely the caufes of the flu€tuations which are 
annually fhewn in this column of the Statement, as the prefent and probable future 
expenfé of the Mint and Affay Offices is’ the chief point for confideration. It may be 
remarked that this department lias engaged particular attention both abroad and at 
home, and that meafures have been reforted to to vender it completely efficient at 
the leaft expente practicable. 


In the year 1792-3 there were four Mints as alreaily ftated; at the prefent period 
the coinage is confined to one Mint at Caleutta, iMhaving been thought expedient to 
abolifh the other three. In’ April 1794 the annual expenfe of the fixed eftablith- 
ment of the four Mints was £.14,652. ‘The fixed eftablifiment of the Mint and Aflay 
Offices, on the 3oth April 1808. is ftated at £. 16,702. 

There are at this time likewile eftablifhments of Mint Offices at Benares and at 
Turuckabad, the profits and expenfes of which are included in the Accuunts of the 
Rovenues and Charges of Benares, and of the Ceded Provinces of Oude. 


3 ’ 
# Post Orrice CuarcEs. 


‘Thefe Charges were likewile feparated from the gro amount of the Civil Charges, 
‘ut they were taken upon the éalculation of the average of five years, and eftimated 


dor the year 1793 at - Sa a S - £14,800 
They amounted in the year 1808-9 to - - -  - 31,60 
Tene anne OR ere iy ec i> mh:  L-16,890 

. ao RES 


03. ie M The 


+ = 
Sebi Cie aloes s 


Ss j 


my 


; 6 Second REPORT from the Scle& Committee on the 


OF: 
- * 


| wivil, &e. Charges, _ The increafe of Receipts, produced by regulations of this department in 1798 and 
~ ‘Benga ~ | 1801, has been adverted to. ‘The greater facilities in the conveyance of letters could 

| ~—~—— not be obtained without an increafe in the means, by additions to the Dawk Eftablith- 
| ments both on the regular and the erofs roads. “Ihe increafe in the extent of the 
Re, ‘Company's Territories has neceflarily added to this ufeful branch of the Efta- 
blifhments, as will appear by the Statement from the year 1801-2. ‘The expenfes 

E are increafed by contingent Charges. The eftablithed Charge in 1794 was 
. fe £18,220, and in 1808, £.20,686. It is however fatisfa&tory to obferve that, 
Notwithftanding the increafe of Charge which is exhibited on the comparifon with the 
Eftimate made in the year 1793, the regulations which have been paffed for the 
gmanagement of the Poft Office lave been produ€tive of advantage, a furplus Charge 
having been eftimated in the year 1793, whereas, from the year 1799-800, the Poft 


a 
Z 3 


being an inereafe of — - ai ie ae aA i - £.108,032 
C 

"Tke Charges of this Retidency were blended with the general Civil Charges in 
the Eftimate of 1793, and the calculation of their amount rather exceeded the 
Bengal Eftimate of 1791-2. ‘The alteration of the circumftances of this Diftrict and 
Refidency has been noticed under the Revenues. ‘The agreement with the Rajah 
Appendix, N° 10. on the 27th of October 1794, and the regulations pafled in March 1795, have like- 
wife been adverted to. The introduction of the modes of adminiftration practifed in 
the lower provinces has occafioned an increafe of expenfe, but the great additional 
Charge, fince the year 1800-1, is more to be attributed to the alteration in the mode 
of keeping the Accounts than to a pofitive increafe of expenfe ; and it will be found, 
from an increafé of Revenue in a greater amount, that, in point of fact, on an 
average of feven years from 1800-1 to 1806-7, the net fum realized from the diftrict 
exceeded both the Eftimate of 1793 and the actual Accounts of the year 1792-3. The 
general principle of this alteration was to bring to account the whole Receipt and 
Expenditure of the Moolky or provincial treafury, fubjecting them to the fame rules 
‘as the other Revenue Accounts. In this cafe, the Reccipt under the head of Surplus 
Collections, and the payment of the allowance to the Rajah under the agreement of 
1794, with every other Difburfement, are ftated on both fides of the Account. In the 
latter years both Receipt and Expenditure are ftill further eubanced byan alteration in 
the mode of Collection by Tebfildars or native Collectors, who, inftead of remunc- 
rating or paying themfelves by the deduction of a per-centage from the collections, 
are in fature to receive a perfonal allowance irom the Collector, and the gro’ Re- 
venue is to be paid into the treafiry. A confiderable faving is expected ultimately to 

urife from this meafure, and of cOurfe an addition to the Net Revenue. 


Tt is to be remarked that the Charges include every Difburfement of the difiriét, 
Revenue, Judicial, and relating to the Mint and Cuftoms. 


Office colleGtions have uniformly exceeded the expenfes,’ and in the year 1808-9, 
i were more by £.3,110, fhewing a net difference of £.7,710, in the refult of the 
fet comparifon. 4 
" Cuancrs or THE RESIDENCY OF BENARES, 
Rs cfiimated in the year 1793 at - - mH eed - £.32,700 
F amounted in the year 1806-7 to = - - - - 140,732 
& 
- 
| 
a 


¥ Civit Cuarcts ry GENERAL, termed in the Parliamentary Accounts, N* 2. 


® “ Other Charges of the Civil Efablifiment.” They comprize the whole of the fixed 
rs and contingent expenfes of the Civil Department General which are not ftated in the 
other heads of the Account; as the pay and allowances of the Members of Government, 


ae : * the Secretary's, Accountant's, and feveral other Offices, the Durbar Charges, &c. &c. 
In confequence of the adjuftment noted under the head of Mint Charges, this head 

#f Charge is to be ftated as eftimated in the year 1793 at - -  £. 258,800 

In the year 1806-7 it amounted to ~~ = ee 575,856 

‘being an increafe of | - - - - - - - £. 317,056 

— 


This head of Difburfement is liable to be affeGed by a variety of contingercics. 
‘The Durbar Charges, from ineluding the political expenfes incurred by embaffies to 


oF 


‘Afurs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 47. 


or from the feveral Powers of Afia, muft neceffarily be ever flu@uating. On the view civil, &e. Charges, 
of this column of the Statement it will appear that, from the year 1792-3 to 1798-9, Bengal | 
with the exception of 1795-6, thefe Charges continued at an amount {6 fteady as to call Femi | 
for no particular remark. ‘The large amount in that year is to be attributed partly to Ake 


i ae 


extraordinary or temporary circumfiances : a payment to the a€ting Governor General ;, 
a remmeration ordered by the Court of Direftors to the late Acco General ; 
and the expenfe of the public Pref. After the year 1798-9 the of the 


political velations of the Company, and other circumftances, led to a large inereafe of 
expenfe on the efiablifhed Refdencies at the Courts of the Native Princes, and for 
temporary embaflies ; by which the Durbar Charges were enhanced in avery material 
degree, ‘The very large expenfe in the year 1805-6 is, in addition to. thefe circum- 
fiances, to be attributed to the Charge incurred in an atiempt to efiablith afettlement 
at Balambangan. The inftitution of a College at Calcutta in the year 1800 has like- 
wife added to the expenfes after that period. 


It appears by the Statement that after the year 1805-6 the Civil Charges were very ~ 
confiderably reduced, the Goverament General havisg made confiderable retrench- 
ments of eftablithed as well as temporary expenditure. In’ confidering the ‘excefs, 
under this head, on a comparifon with the amount at which it was eftimated in 1793, 
or what was aCtually incurred in the year 1793-4, which, upon this eccafion, may be” 
confidered as a more proper period of comparifon, the difference of the circumftances 
of the times muft not be loft fight of, and particularly the very great extenfion of the 
bufinefs of the Secretary's and other departments from the increafe of Territory. The 
extended political relations of the Company may probably keep the Durbar Charges at 
an amount exceeding that which was required in former times. This column’ is not 
filled up for the years 1807-8 and 1808-9, as the want of the detail of the Bengal 
Statements for thofe years prevented the Accounts from being drawn up, as to the va~ 
rious items, with fufficient precifion for grounding a compavifon with other years. 


i 
| 
| 
el 


62 


Cuances or tHe Juproran Deranruent. 


‘This head comprizes the expenfes of the Supreme Court, with the law Charges of — | 
the Company; alfo the expentes of the Adminiftration of Juftice in the feveral Adawluts | 
or Native Courts of the provinces of Bengal, Bahar and Orifla; the expenfes of this 
defeription for Oude, Benares and the Conquered Difiriés, being included under thofe 
heads refpetively. ] 

At the time the Eftimate of the year 1793 was framed the judicial fyftem had not | 
deen inftituted, confequently the law expenfes and thofe of the Supreme Court of 
Judicature could alone be introduced into that Eftimate. They were included in the a 
amount taken for the Civil Charges generally, and are calculated | 
atthe fumof - - - - - - - = - £.57,600 A 

‘Their amount in the yeer 1806-7 wes .- - ms 57,052 | 


nA 


exceeding the Eftimate in the fumof -  — - be Leb 52 

This head of Charge comprizts the falaries and allowances of the Judges and the 
Officers, with the other expen{es of the Supreme Court of Judicature ; alfo the falaries 
ofthe Company's law officers, and the expenfés incurred by legal procefies ; likewife ; 
ofthe Court of Requefts, &e. ‘The expenfe under this head is {abject to fluctuation, | 
fiom being expofed to contingencies. Great attention has been paid to keep the, efta- 4 
blifhed Charge Within the narrowett limits practicable : the Eftablithment of the Supreme aa 
Court was revifed with much care in the year 1798, and confiderable reductions in | 
the expente were effeGted. ‘The expenfe in the year 1794, although there was then a ! 
vacancy of one Judge, isfiated ut £.40,982¢ in 1807 it was £.39,975 3 but the latter 
period includes the fam of £.4,070 for Penfions, which were not in the former, The 
Charge of the Court of Requefis, which in 1794 wes £.780, amounted in 1807 to 
4£.7,827; but this expenfe is merely nominal, being more than covered by the Receipts 
from fees, which were inftituted on fuits when the alterations were made in the Efta- 
blithment ofthat Court, under proclamation dated 13th March 1862. 


The part of the Charges of the Judicial Department which is incurred by the 
alminifiration of juftice in the provinces is next to be noticed. In the Accounts 
Pefonted to Parliament it is termed “ Charges of the Dewarnny and Nizanut City 
* and Zilla Adaceluts, allo of the Police Eiftablifments and Courts of Appedt. 


OS st Was 


i 


| Civil, &t. Charges, 
b> Bengal. 


: 
eee 
be N°9. A, 


48. Second REPORT jro the Selc& “Comhaittee on the 


It nas been already remarked that the Charges now under confideration apply only 
to the provinces. of Lenzal, Behar and Orifla, und the reafon has been afligned why 
no Eftimate could be made of them by the Court of Dircétors in February 1793. 


~ Tt is not propofed in this place to enicr upon any explanation of the grounds on 
nvhich alterations were made in the fyficm of the adminiftration of Juftice in. thele 
difiri@s, but merely to ftate the faét that fuch alterations were made, and to examine 
what additional expenfe has been produced by them. _ * 

The whole of the grounds for the adoption of the new fyftem is to be found in the 
Minute of the late Marquis Cornwallis, duted 11th February 1793, and the detail of 
the feveral arrangements on the execution of it in the Bengal regulations paffed in the 
year 1793, their operation being direfted to cow ce on the 1ft May of that year. 
The modifteations and alterations which have been oecafionally made by fabfequent 
regulations, will, in fO far as they apply to expente, be adverted to as eccafion may 
require. 

Anteccdent to the year 1793 the col!c@ion of the Revenues and the adminifiration 
of Juftice were under the fuperintendence of the Revenue Department, and the 
expenfe attending them refpeétively were included under one head of Charge; viz. 
The Revenue Charge.» The a€tual expente defrayed upon thef accounts in the year 
1792-3 was £. 782,744. “Lhe general principle of the alteration of the fyftem, as 
propofed in the Minute of the Governor General, went to an entire feparation of the 
management of the Revenues and the adiminiftration of Juftice, which led to the 
creation of a new Department, termed The Judicial, the Receipts and Charges of 
which were to be ftated under a feparate and diitin@ head. It was calculated that 
the expenfe of the propofed new Efiablithment, in fo far as related to the Sudder or 
Chief, and other Adawluts or Native Courts of Juftice, would amount annually to 
the fin of £, 220,515; that reduétions would then be made upon the exifting Efta- 
dlithments of the Revenue Department to the amount of £. 173,300; fo that the 
whole increafe of expenfe-under this branch would be only £. 47,215. 


The internal Police, or the prefervation of the peace of the difiri&s, was, till 
December 1792, under the aera of the farmers and landholders, who were 
boundto keep Eftablifhments of Officers for that purpofe. By a Regulation pafled the 
7to of that month, the Police was taken under the exclufive charge of Officers ap- 
pointed by Government, and a fund eftablifhed for defraying the expente. This 
Regulation was re-enaéted on the ift May 1793, and a further Regulation was pafled 
at the fame time for raifing a fund to meet the Charge of the new Police Eftablith- 
ments, by an aflefliment termed The Police Tax. 


‘The Police is to be confidered as another branch of the new fyftem, and the expenfe 
of it forms part of the Charges. It does not appear that an exaét Eftimate was made 
of the Charges of its jdbment; but it fecms to have been confidered that the 
affeffment upon the di Sto be made to fuch an amount as fhould mect tho 
Charges. a be nti 

Tt has been obferved, he Revenue Charges of the year 1792-3, which included 
the expenfe. attending the adminifiration of Juftice, amounted to £- 782,744. Pre- 
vioufly to the examination of the Revenue and Judicial Departments after their 
feparation, it may not be improper to confider their combined amount in the firft 
year, viz. 1793-4, as it will thew how far the Eitimate, on making the feparation, was 
verified; and as that year will be now taken for the period from which the operation 
of the fy{tem financially will be inveftigated. : 


Jn 1793-4 the Revenue Charges amountedto + - - J, 569,203 


; And the Judicial to._ ee 314,766 
malay together = = i i - 884,059 

‘This exceeds the year 1702-3 inthe fumof ~ = £.101,315 
‘As it was eftimated that the extraordinary expenfe of the new aohagiet 
fyftem would amount to - - = ne & 47,215 


the fum to be accounted for willbe 9 = - . « 4: 54,100 


h ‘The 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 57 


The Revenue Cuanees, or the expentes of colleéting the Revenues and Cuftoms Civil, &c. Charges, 


of the antient Pofleffions under the Mapras Government, were eftimated in the year 


17g3 at - ieee > 2, & ota ese, £. 256,000 
In the year 1808-9 they amounted to - ay ae eS 333,024 
being an increafe of — - - - - ~ - - La 77,024 


—>———— 


The calculation of the Eftimate in the ycar 1793 appears to have been in fome 
degree governed by the Fftimate of the year 1791-2, It was, however, lef3 than that 
Eftimate by £.11,000. _ At that period the Revenue fyfiem at Madras was inateriaily 
‘different from what it is at the prefent time. The introduGtion of the permanent 
fettlement into thefe diftriéts, to which the greatefi change is to be aferibed, 
has already been adverted to; it is however proper, upon this occafion, to remark 
that, antecedent to the carrying the principles of the permanent fettiement iuto efiee, 
the Revenue adminiftration of the moft confiderable part was altered by the abolition 
-of the Chiefships of Mafalipatam and Vizagapatam, and the Refidency of Ganjam, 
and the feparation of the lands under their refpeStive fuperintendency into nine divi- 
fions, with a colle€tor to each ; viz. Mafillipatam four, Vizagapatam three, Ganjain 
one, and Guntoor ne. This arrangement was advifed by letter dated 23d Novom- 
ber 1794. On the three years previous to it the average Charge was below the 
Eftimate in 1793 in the fam of £.22,000, On the average of the next feven years, 
1795-6 to 1801-2 inclufive, the Charge was £.347,000. After that period the jper- 
manent fetilement was gradually introduced, aud the average Charge of the next 
feven years, 1802-3 to 1808-9, was £.396,000.  Notwithitanding the expeCtation, that 
the feparation of the Jadicial Department would be: the means of reducing the ex- 
penfes of the Revenue Department, if the latter average were taken ow the fix years, 
the amount would be £.400,000. — Retrenchments are reported to haye been made in 


the years 1807 and 1808, to which the reduced Charge in the year 1808-9 may be 


principally afcribed. oe : ony bidet &% 

It is to be remarked that this head of Charge includes the payment to the Nizain 
of a Peifhcuth or annual tribute for the Northern Circars, amounting to £.80,o00. 
‘The extraordinary amount of the Charge of the year 1806-7 arifes from the payment 
of the Peifheuth for two years and a halt, The Charges, as a€tually difburfed, con- 
fiderably exceed the amount in the Abitra& of the Eftabliliments, as the latter do 
not include the Peifhcuth for the Circars, the Salt Advances, and fundry other con- 
tingent and extraordinary expentes. di oa , 

‘ fee: 
Dutea SerrLeMeENTs. t 

Tue Charges under this head were firt brought into the Accounts in the year 
1796-7, although the fettlements were obtained by conqueft in the year preceding. 
Other expentes in the Military Department were incurred upon this account to a very 
confiderable amount, and are principally inchided in the Military Charges of the 
Madras Prefideney from wast to 1801-2. “The Charges ftated in this column for 
‘the fame period, are chiefly the civil expenfes of Ceylon, the Eaftern Mands, and 
Malacca. = yb 

In December 1801 Ceylon ceafed to be under the Government of the Company, 
as ftated in the Remarks: upon the Receipts. The great amount of the Charge in the 
years 1802-3 to 1205-6 arifes trom an alteration in the mode of {tating the Account, 
‘by including the whole of the Military CHarge-difburfed on account of the Eaftern 
Tilands. ‘Yhete iflands having been furrendered to the Dutch in confequence of the 
peace of Amiens, and Malacca in part abandoned, the Charge in the two laft years 
is moftly on account of the Chankand Pearl Fifhery at Tutacorin. 


ee 

With refpeét to the Charges fiated in this colyinu, and to thofe which were included 
in the Military Charges, as above adverted to, it is to be obferved that an Account has 
been drawn out, comprizing not only thofe Charges refpectively, but every advance and 
difburfement made by the Eatt Iudia Company on account of the capture and main- 
tenance of thefe dettlements, the amount of which has been brought forward as’a 
claim upon the Public, in conformy with the principles on which the feveral expe- 
ditions againft them were undertaken ; and having been fubmitted to Parliament, and 

363. a: undergone 


Madras. 


Appendix, N* 63. 


Civil, &: Charges, 
, Madras, 


Bombay. 


58 Second REPORT from the Seleé Committee on the 


undergone the examination of Committees in the Seffions of 1805 and 1808,. funs | 
have been voted, on the Reports of thofe Committees, to the Eaft India Company 


on account thereof. 


————— 


BOMBAY CHARGES, 
THE Civil, Marine, and Revenue Charges of the Prefidency of Bombay, exclufive 


of the Charge of the Ceded and Conquered. Diftriéts, are now to be examined. 
In 1793 they were eftinatedat = - >  - > = £177,750 

In 1808-9 they amounted to a ihe : F e. 3795272 
being an increafe of ~ - ro * oe - ~ . £.192,522 
enee 

The Civit Caarces 

were cftimated in 1793 at - - - = = .- £+ 90,000 
and amounted in 1808-9 to - = - =  - = = 100,751 
beinganincreafeof = = = = ee = fe 6,751 

\ — 


The Eftimate of the year 1793 was calculated on the everage expenfe of the five 
preceding years. The average of the five years, 1792-3 to 1790-7, exceeded this 
Eftimate in the fum of £14,000, The expenfe in the year 1808-9 being only 
£.2,500 more than the average laft adverted to, it does not appear neceflury to enter 
largely upon explanations of the detail of the difference which has been exhibited ; 
and it may faffice to remark that this column includes the Charges of the Judicial 
Department, and of the Pofi Office and Mint, and that the inftitution of a Recorder's 
Court at the Prefidency in the. year 1798-9, the introduction of judicial arrange- 
ments, and the change of the mode of adminittration at Surat, are. generally to be 
referred to as the eaufes of the increafe which has been fliewn. It may, however, be 
proper, to obferve, refpe€ting thofe years in this célumn in which the expenses have 
very far exceeded both the averages above flewn, and the Charge of the year 1808-9, 
that it is not practicable, at the prefent time, to trace with precifion the caufes of the 
exceffes. They appear to have been various, and principally cafival and contingent. 
During the years in which the Government was er aged in hotijlities with ‘Tippoo or 
the Mabrattas, the Police corps were neceflarily increafed in confequence of the 
abfence of the military force. Much expenfe was incurred by additional political 
refidencies inthe Red Sea and Perfian Gulph, and by the employment of native 
Agents. In the year 1804-5, in which the largeft Difburfement is exhibited, a con- 
fiderable expenditure was occafioned by the reliet’ afforded to the native inhabitants, 
who were brought to cireumfiances of extreme difirefs by the prevalence of famine. 
Since that period the expenfes appear to have gradually decreafed, which is to be 
attributed to the ceflation of contingent demands, and to the excrtions of the Govern- 
ment to carry into effect meafures of yetrenchment. _ 


The Marine Ghineeee 


were eftimated in 1793 at - - = - - - £274,250 
and amounted in the year 1808-9 to <a 4 34 ies K: Sek 
beinglanincrea@of “~~ 8 = 2 ga, 190 


The Eftimate of 1793 Was calculated, in this infiance likewile, on the average of 
five years: ‘This calculation was fully juftified, for ldipualienes gate 
ee firft years, 1792-3 and 1793-4, on the average of feven years, 1792-3 to 1798-9 

expenfe was only £.72,000.. The increafe of Charge in and after the year 
bce rane requires tome remark, ard more particularly as a very material part of 
addition thus made was of a permanent detcription. The Marine Extabilifiment ] 
of this Prefidency was originally inttitated, and has been maintained for fervices of col- | 
fiderable importance to the interetis of the Company, and to the commerce int gen 
on the wefiern fide of India. * It is in fa6t a {pecies of navy. ‘The merits and fervices | 
of 


_ Airs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 59 


si) 


ofthe Officers, and the extenfive benefits derived by the docks and arfenals, are well civil, &e: Charges, 


known, The immediate leading -objeéts of this Eitablithment are, 


_ it, The proteétion of the trade, which is confiderable, from’ port to port, from 
ppiratical eruizers, ‘ 


ad. The defence efthe Company's trade and poffeffions, in time of war, ‘eguing 
European enemies. 


‘3d. The tranfport of troops, &e. 
4th. For making nautical difcoveries. 
5th. For conveying packets to and from the Red Sea, &c. 


In the year 1798, the Court of Direétors entered upon a full examination of the 
fubjett of the Marine Departmentof this Prefidency, in which they took into confidera- 
tion the deficiency of the Eftablifhment upon its conftitution at that time, and for~ 
warded fuch inftruétions for its improvement in every refpeét as appeared requifite. 
‘The fituation of the Officers drew kewite their particular attention, and regulations 
were pafled refpeGting their rank, placing it in relative proportion with that of the 
Officers of the Army, which bad recently been-confiderably improved. The principle 
-of granting fuses and sheng oi retirement after preferibed periods with the 
pay ofthe refpestive ranks, was alfo inftituted, in like manner as in the military fervice. 
The whole of thefe arrangements was communicated to the Bombay Government, by 
letter dated 1ft Augutt 1798. 

From the nature of the fervice, iv time of war particularly, the annual expenfe. of 
‘this Department is fluétuating and uncertain in its amount, as will appear by the infpec- 
tion of the colaum now under examination. _. Meafiures are, however, adopted to check 
and control the expenditure, and keep it within ach limits as are confiticnt with the 


efficiency of the fervice. , 
+ ORE BOS 4 ey , r 
Ee ed < “The Revexve Cnances ¢ 
were eftimated ims1793 at) = > = £13,500 
and amounted in the year 1808-9 to ats be = 96,081 
being an increafe of - - oo - - ch aa £-82,581 


The Eftimate was, in this inftance likewife, calculated on the average expenfe of 
‘the five preceding years. It appears to have been juttified by the average of the five 
years from 1792-3 to 1796-7, which amounted to £.14,200. It is to be remarked 
that thefe Charges include the expenfe attending the colletion of the Land Revenues, 
‘the Cuftoms, and the Farms and 5. ‘The increafé in the Receipts on the two 
aft articles has been before noti and the occafion of it aferibed principally to the 


arrangements made with the Nal b of Surat in the 1800; alfo to the levy of new * 


duties. ‘The Revenue management at Surat, and the’ ttipulated payments to the 
Nabob, are the principal caufes of the increafe now fhewn. ‘The iterations in the 
management of the Revenues of Saliette have produced a part of it. 


THE cxamination in detail of the &veral heads of Revenue and Charge being com- 
pleted, it remains to direé& the attention to the final Refults produced by the financial 
‘operations which have'been brought under review. ‘The firlt objet is to thew how far 
‘the Revenues of the Prefidencies of Bengal, Madras and Bombay, duriny the period 
which has been under examination, have been fufficient to meet the Charges imme- 
diately attendant upon the adminiftration of them, ay yn ae! 

The inveftigation of the detail ofthe items of Revenue and Charge, lias been made 
‘on Statements adjufted: and drawn out upon principles to meet the particular mode on 
which it was originally propofed to conduét it, as diftingily expluined-in.a former part’ 
-of this Report. ‘This mode, however fuitable to thé purpote tor which it was adopted, 
does not furnith the means of difcovering tlie powers of the Revenues of cach Prefi- 
dency vefpeétively to meet its Charges. It is therefore propofed:to proceed upon the 


‘examination of the Refults upon a principle by which this object may be attained. ae 


Bombay. 


Appendix, N* 3, 4, 
a. 


| Appendix, N°2. 
i Appendix, N* 6. 


60 Second REPORT from the Select Committee on the’ 


this end it is neceffary to refer to the feveral, Statements in the Appendix firft adverted 
to at the beginning of this Report, which thew both the detail and the Refults of the 
Revenues and Charges of the three Prefidencies, likewife a General Statement of the 
whole; and here the remark is to be repeated, that the Refults in it are precifely fimilar 
to the Refults in the General Account, which has been the bafis of the exautination 
already made. The General Statement, marked No. 2., is firlt to be reterred to, 
On this view it will appear that in the year 1793 Itwas ettimated that, atter paying 
the direét Charges of the Governments of the three Prefidencies, exclufive of the Supply 
to Bencoolen, &c. the Commercial Charges and the Intereft upon the Debts, a Net 


Neyenue would remain to the amount of - a - $£.1,775,500 
and that, on the fame principle, there would remain in the 
year 1808-9 a Net Revenue amounting to - - 4 2.373,831 
being anexcels of Net Revenue above the Eftimate, in this 
view, in the fum of - + ee ro -  £- 59,3831 


The view of this Statement further fuggefts the inference that, in point of faé, the 
Revenues of India were more than fuflicient to cover the immediate Charges of the 
Governinent of it upon the principles now ftated, during the whole of the period from 
1792-3 to 1808-9, with the exception of twa years only, 1805-6 and 1806-75 in 
which years the Charges of the ADauetee war, and the arrears of thofe Charges, bore 
with the greateft preflure. r 

It is, however, to be remarked that other demands which have fallen upon the 
Revenues of India remain to be examined, before it will be pfaéticable to purfue the 
invettivation of the final Refults.  ‘Fhefe demands are deferived in the column of the 
Statement as Supplies to Bencoolen, Penang, Xc. and the Intereft on the Debts. 


Thefe feveral articles cannot, in either cafe, be confidered as wholly of a political 
or of a commercial defcription, ‘although they have uniformly been brought forward 
in the Accounts from year to year as a direét demand upom the Revenues of India, 
and have very materially atfe¢ted the General Retilt of the fame. The Commercial 
Charges might have been brought under obfervation in this place) but it having Ween 
ufval to exclude them in every political confideration of the Finances, they will be 
the fubjeét of remark in another part of this Report. 


The Surpuirs TO BeNxcooLeN, PENANG, &c. were 
eftimated in the year 1793 at the fum of - - - £.50,000 


‘The a€tual Supply in the year 1808-9 was - - - 158,208 
being an increafe of Oo SURES dbs ihe ga o8) 208) 


“It has been reinarked that this head of Charge may be ¢onfidered as neither 
wholly political nor wholly commereial. ‘This remark is in part jufiified by the 


~ Charge itielf, as in fome years the advances to Bencoolen far exceeded the demand | 


for the direét expentes of the Refidency, and muft in fuch eafe have been applied to 
the purchafe of Pepper, which is the principal article of the trade of the Ifland, and 
is fuppoled to be the ground, in a commercial view at leaft, of its retention. ‘The cul- 
tivation of other Spices has alfo been introduced to a confiderable extent, and thu 
plantations are underftood to be in a flourifhing fate. 


Although Prince of Wales Ifland has not hitherto produced any material fources of 
trade except Pepper, it is a tration of great commercial as well as political importance, 
from its fituation in a convenient traét for the paiiage to and from China, and trom 


its proximity to the Continent. Yr 
The Supply to thefe fettlements, from being below their aGtial wants, appears to 
have been eftimated in the 1793 at a finall amount. ‘The difference between 


the fupply and the demand, particularly as it refpeéts Bencoolen, muft have been 
found from other fources, probably fone Burope. or amount ‘of the Supplies has 
uniformly execeded the Eiiimate of 1793, exeept the year 1793-4. ‘The average 
from 1792-3 to 1794-5 was £. 56,000; it will Le obferved that after that period, 
the expenfe in this column was carried to an amount very far exceeding both the 
original Efownate and the average now fiated. Confiderable alterations have bec 

anade 


Affairs ef The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 65 


eannot be depended uponas accurate upon the prefent oceafion, without reference to General Refult. 


a great variety of documents, and without much more extentive information tipon the 
fubjeét than Your Committee have been enabled to procure ; and it isto be remarked 
that the courfe to be purfued on fuch occation would, by neceffarily leading to a clofe 
enquiry into the commercial tranfiétions of the Company, have carried this branch of 
the examination into a more estenfive range then was originally propofed. The 
importance of the queitions which have been ftated is confiderable, and it is very 
defirable that they thould be fatista€torily folved ; but the various Accounts which will 
be wanted for that purpofe induce the neceflity of deferring this objcét of enquiry. Ir 
is however proper, upon the prefent occafion, to offer fome remarks in further expla- 
nation of the difficulties in the way of purfuing this neceflary object to a clofe. 


The Political and Commercial Concerns of the Company are {0 intgrwoven in the 
Financial Syftem of India,that,under its prefeutiarrangement,it is oftheufbot difficulty, 
if not totally impracticable to make a dittinét feparation of them, and more particu- 
larly for the period under examination. “The fources from which Funds have been 
derived from year to year for the fupply of the combined operations of Government 
and Commerce, were the Revenues of the Territories, and Supplies from Europe cither 
in bullion or exports, or by bills upon the Court. When the aggregate amount of 
thefe feveral heads has not been futticient to defray the expenfes of Government, to 

rovide Inveltments, and to remit Supplies to China, money has been raifed upon loan. 
Froin thefe cireumftances it is evident that, till accounts thall be obtained of the 
amount aélually realized in India by the Supplies received from Europe, and of the 
Advances made for the purpofes of commerce during the period, it will be impraética- 
ble to give an accurate view of the Refult upon the principles now in queftion ; and, itis 
to be added, that there.are items of receipt and expenditure which, though they cannot 
be claffed either with the Revenues or the Charges, have an effeét upon the Debts and 
Affets, which items demand examination. ‘The Affects contain likewife articles which 
certainly require adjufiment before a correét Refilt can be drawn from the amount of 
them. “This pofition is eftablifhed from the confideration of their component parts in 
general being created from different fources, viz. Supplies from Europe, as the Inport 
Goods, part of the Stores, Revenue balances and Debts to a confiderable amount, arifing 


out of various tranfaétions with Native Princes and others at the feveral Pretidencies ;* 


including likewife Advances Which are conneéted with both the political and commer- 
ciul branches of the fervice, as thoie for Salt and Ofium,, and for the provifion of Inveft- 
ments, ‘The inereaféd balance of cath, which “wnounts to £.5,544,998, is alfo an 
important feature of this Statement, From all thefe circumftances it is evidently a 
point of moft ferious difficulty fo afcertain with precifion what part of the balance of 
efleétive property, as fhewn in this Statement, has becn produced by Supplies from 
Europe, and what part has beea provided by the application of Funds raifed in India. 


From the preceding obfervations it muft appear evident that it is not at prefent 
within the power of Your Commitice to purfue the examination of this very important 
point to a clofe, however delirable itmay be that the conelufion of their Report fhould 
thevy, in adifting& manner, the Refult of the application of the whele ot the Funds, whe- 
ther ordinary from the Revenues of the Territories in India, or extraordinary from 
Supplies reeeived from Europe, or money railed en loan ; and, it wnuft be added, another 
material obftacle in this refpe&t is. found in the want of the Bengal books, which bas 
been fo repeatedly the fubjeG of remark upon the prefent occafion. j 


Your Committee further beg to obferve that the more immediate objeét of their 
prefent examination has been merely the {tate and refiiits of the Reventies and Charges, 
or, in other words, the financial tranfuétions of a political defeription, comprizing the 
ordinary Receipt and Expenditure in India, during the periods in the Account. The 
difficulties in the way of extending-their enquiry at this time to the detail of the cx- 
traordinary Receipts and Difburfements Rave been adverted to; but it mutt be added, 
that, inafinuch as the latter cafe involves both the political and commercial concerns. of 
the Company, it is very doubtful whether, in poffeflion of every facility, it would be 
PraGticable to place the fubjeét in that view which, could-be pronounced to exhibit an 

| accurate and diftingt feparation, ofthe Refults of each refpettively. 

The importance attaching to the confideration’ of this intricate and complicated 
point is evidently great, and the attention of Your Committee has been more pat- 
ticularly drawn to it’by a Doeutnent produced on the part of the. Court of Directors. 
of the ae India Company, which, though not direétly applicable in the fixiétett oe 

363. & 


—_— 
are 


66 Second REPORT /rom the Select Comm'ttze on the 


is in many refpe€s in neat conneétion with it. This. Document, w hich is added to the 
1, Appendix, is entitled, 4n Lxpofitiow of the State of the Company's Affairs at home and 
. abroad. It isin two parts; the fidt made up to the year 1808, and the fecond is, in 
© Appendix, N°71.a. faét, a continuation of the firit for two years, and termed a Supplement. Tt contains 
oe) extenfive information refpe€ting the political and commercial concerns of the Com- 
pany, fiating the general cafes te which, in the opinion of the Court, the deterioration 
of the wflairs is to be attributed. Views aie given of the Net Produce of the Revenues 
of India from 1793-4 to 1808-9, and ef the fiate of the Debts; the profits on the 
trade are fhewn from the years 1798-g to 1809-10. A computation is made of the 
balance between the Supplies from the home treafury and the returns from India 
zind Chinayin eleven years; and feveral other Statements are added agreeably to re- 
erences made to them in the document adverted to. 


Your Comiflittee havemnot thought proper, upon the prefent oceafion, to cnter upon 
6 detailed examination of the priaciples and opinions, or of the refults of Statements 
‘Drought forward in this Document, as, in the latter cafe particularly, they are not 
quite applicable to:the plan on which it was propoféd te conduét the examination of 
‘this branch of the-concern. 

Iris therefore thought right to defer offering an opinion upon any part of it at this 
time, and the more, as, in many refpeéts, it is conceived to fall more directly within 
the Commercial branch of the concern, the details of which muft be left to future 
enquiry. ; 


Appendix; N*°7 


Tisste 1809-10. _ YOUR ‘Committee will now conclude their examination of this branch of the 
Financial Concerns of the Company hy fome obfervations on the profpeétive view of 
the Revenues:and Charges of Indiafor the year 1809-10, as thewn in the Statements 
marked Nos. 2, 3,4 & 5. In fo doing it is not propofed to enter lurgely into the 
‘dctail, which confifts for the moft part of the fame defeription of [tems as thofe in the 
-a€iual Accounts of the year 1$08-9, but merely to ftate the fubjeét in a general way, 
contrafting the actual Refult of this year with that eftimated for the next, axid offering 


fach further remarks as may appear requifte. 

Bythe actual Accounts of the year 1808-9 the Surplus Charge is 

i + ftated at = - - ei - 4 - Re - oe - £226,042 
‘ 7 Tt is Eftimated for 1809-10 at = = - “penis = 1,686 


avhich is 1e% than in'the preceding year jn the fam off. = => £.24,356 


5 ‘This view, more favourable than the laft year in a finall amount, is much more fo than 
: ‘has been exhibited during the five years antecedent to 1808-9. It muft, however, be 
i remarked that fome doubtis to be entertained of the accuracy of the calculation of tle 
by Tniereft of the Debts; which, upon examination, is found to be only the amount which 
Be sbpenitiagey, would be diiburied within the year. On reference to the Statement of the Debts, the 
aa amount payable on the ‘Principal exifiing on the 30th April 1809 excceds that which is 
fiatey“in the Ettimate by £. 281,254; from which circumftance, after taking into the 
account the diminution to be expected from liquidation of Debt in the courfe of the 
Year, it is to. be apprehended that the fum really chargeable for Intereft mutt be 
greater than what is now ftated, and would inereafe the Surplus Charge accordingly. 


~The grofs Revenues in the year 1808-g were - =~ £. 15,525,025 
‘and are eftimated for 1809-10 at ae Ever hs i inesso8s 
| oN eee ‘being an excels of He er a al eae | a aint 30,960 
E ; pik vo vf 
FE _. The Bengal Revenues are eftimated at a lefs amount by £.225,000, of which 
fees $-137,000 1s in the Sait. The calculations are made on the other heads in fome 


ou iuftances higher and others lower than the paft year. A decreafe appears in ‘ve 
pid Be in confequence of new regulations, but a new fouree of Revenue is iv 

fevted, ‘termed The Houfe Tax, whieli las been’ recommended by a Comniitiee of 

Finanee at Calcutta, whoie Report is not yet received. The calculation of its produce 

only extends at prefent to the Lower Proviuces, and amounts to fe 23;200. : 

3 pte E The 


[ 68 J 


LIST or rune APPENDIX. 


SEINE NEIEeneaessiieiientnenEEER 


No, 1.—FSTIMATE of the probable Revenues and Charges of India on a Peace Ettablithment; 
thewing the expected Surplus Revenue.—Reported to the Court of Diredors by a ( 
mittee of Accounts, 15th February 1793 - ® -  - = = - pp. 72-76, 


No, 2.—General Statement of the Revenues and Charges of India (exclufive of the Commerci:l 
Charges) as eftimated in 1793, and by the actual Accounts from the year 1792-3 to the 
year 1808-9, with the Eftimate for the fame for tle year 1809-10, drawn from the Accounts 
prelented to Parliament; thewing alfo the Supply to Bencoolen, &c. and the Interett paid 

= upon the Debts, with the Refultineach year = = = = = pp. 7879. 


No. 3.—Statement of the Revenues and Charges of the Prefidency of Bengal (exclufive of the Com. 
mercial Charges) as eftimated in 1793, and by the actual Accounts from the year 1792-3 
tothe year 180S-9, with the Eitimate of the fame for the year 1809-10, drawn from the 
Accounts prefented to Parliament; shewing alfo the lotereft paid upon the Debts, with 
the Refultin each year = - “a5 i ae - o pp. 80—S1. 


No. 4.—Statement of the Revenues and Charges of the Prefidency of Madras (exclufiye of the Com- 
metcial Charges) as eftimated in 1793, and by the actual Accounts from the year 1792-3 
to the year 1803-9, with the Eftimate of the fame for the year 1809-10, drawn from the 
Accounts prefented to Parliament ;'thewing ulfo the Intereft paid upon the Debts, with 

the Refultin each year - - = = SHE LI el the pp. 82—83, 


‘No, 5.—Statement of the Revenues and Charges of the Prefidency of Bombay (exclufive of the 
Commercial Charges) as eftimated in 1793, and by the aétual Accounts from the year 
1792-3 to the year 1808-9, with the Efiimate of the fume for the year 1809-10, drawn 
from the Accounts prefented to Parliament; fhewing alfo the Iniereft paid upon the 
Debts, with the Refult in each year DR redgrie™ ik 5 CC ALpp! S488, 


No, 6.—An Account of the Total Annual Amount of the Revennes and Charges of the feveral Pre- 

2 fidencies in India, as eftimated in 1793, and by the actual Accounts from the year 1799-3 
to the year 1808-9, with the Eftimate of the fame for the year 1809-10, as laid before 
Parliament ; diftinguifhing, as to the Revenues, the Revenues of the Company's Poflellions 
exclufively, from the Subfidies from Native Princes, or Colle@ions from Ceded and Con- * 
quered Countries; and, as to the Charges, the Military Charges, and the Charges for Build- 
ings and Fortifications, from the Civil, Revenue, Judicial, and Marine Charges; thewing 
alfo the Supply to Bencoolen, &c. and the Intereft paid on the Debts - pp. 86—87. 


No.6. (A.)—Statement of the Revenues of the Company's Poffeffions exclufively at Bengal, Madras, 
nd Bombay, as eftimated in 1793, and by the actual Accounts from 1792-3 to 1808-9, 
with the Eftimate of the fame for the year 1809-10 = 5 = = ppp. 888). 


No. 6. (B)—Account thewing the Grofs and Net Receipts from Subfidies under Treaties with the Na- 
tive Princes of Judia, or from the Revenues of the Ceded and Conquered Countries, ay 
eftimated in 1793, and by the actual Accounts from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9, 
with the Efiimate of the fume for the year 1809-10) - 7 - Bi pp: 90—91. 


No. 6, (C.)—Statement of the Civil, Revenue, Judicial, Marine and other Charges (exclufive of the 
Civil Charges of the Ceded and Conquered Countries) at Bengal, Madras, and Bombay, 
asefiimated in 1793, and by the actual Accounts from 1792-3 to 1808-0, with the Ettimate 
Of the fame for the year 1809-10 © = Fe se op, gong, 

No, 7.—An Account of the Amount of the Bond and other Debts owing by the Eat India Company 


ut the feveral Prefidencies in India, on the 30th April in bh -3 to 
ede, both inclutive tet latvia iat ote mas a Or 


No, 8,—An Account of the Amount of the Affetsof the Eaft India Company at the feveral Prefidencies 
in India, on the 30th April in each year from 1792-3 to 1808-9, both inclulive pp. 95—07- 


No, 9.—Letter from the Governor General in Council at Bengal (Revenue Department) dated 6th 


March 1793 = = = pod 
No, 9. (A.)—Minute of the Governor General, dated 1ith February 1793, with Accounts accompa 
t nying it = OE eae = are BSE RF ea te iw 107 


No, 10.— Agreement withthe Rajah of Renarcs, dated 97th Oober 1794- = = = Sh 


No. 11.—Extra&@ Letter from the Governor General in Council at Bengal | tment 
ee ip tis a Se eral ia Coane cbenpalitevenue Depa a 
No. 12.—Separate Letter from the Court of Direators to the Gpyernor i il i 

Ggied 48th April 176600 aE ae Ee ee ee eC otnel  Benaty 


No. 12.(1.)—Letter from the Court of Diredors to the Gavernor General in Council at Bengil 
(Revenue Department) dated 19th September 3792 - - - = aioe) 15 


No. 13. 


LIST oy mw APPENDIX. - 69 


‘No. 15.—Minute of the Governor General in Council, dated 7th December 1792 - pe 176. 


No. 14—Extract Letter from the Goyernor General in pean, at Bee al Di 
dated 31itAuguiti7g7 - = +a. E es = o oe 


No.15.—Extraét Letter from the Governor General in Council at Bengal (Judicial Department) 


dated 30th September 1802 sig shea + * 192, 
No, 16,—Extraét Letter from the Secret Committee of the Court of Diypeigts to the » Governor Ge- 
neral in Council at Bengal, dated 3d’ November 1787 - = ibid, 
No, 17.—Extragt Letter from the Governor General iv Saget at pene, Germ Department). 
dated 3ikJuly 1801 - = > ibid. 
No. 18,—Extradt Letver from the Board of Trade 45) ve COPETADT: General in Councils at ed 
dated Sth May 1795 - -  - 193, 
No. 19.—Extraét Letter from the Gatespay Sara in ereancil at wegasl (en enue uaiDepatement) 
dated 16th May 1798 - = 201, 


No. 20,—Letter from the Governor General in Council at Bengal, to the Govervor in Council at 
Fort St. Geerge, dated Sift December 1799, together with Extract Letter from Marquis 


Wellefley to Lord Clive, dated Siz January BLOG angen AY pity 2s ibid. 
No, 21,—Treaty with the Nabob of Surat, dated 13th May 1800 - =) os ry 216. 
No. 22.—Extract Letter from the Court of Directors to the Governor ia Council at Bombay, 

(Political Department) dated 19th February 1794 - = = = = =) iy. 


No. 23.—Treaty or Agreement with the Nabob of Oude, as fpecified in Extra Letter from the 
Governor General in Council at Bengal, (Secret Department) dated 17th May 1787, with 


Enclofure, and Letter from the Nabob, Jated 21iJuly 1787 - = = = ibidy, 
No. 24—Agreement with the Nabob of Oude, dated 20th March 1797 - = - += Q@1. 
No. 25.—Treaty with the Nabob of Oude, dated 21ft February 1798 - - - - - 222. 
No, 26.—Treaty with the Nabob of Oude, duted 20 November1S0L -- - + ~~ 904, 
No. 27,—Proclamation of the Lieutenant Governor aud Commiflioners of the Ceded Provinces in 
Oude, dated 14th July1802 0 = = os = ee ee 8G, 
No, 28.—Treaty with the Nabob of Arcot, dated 12th July 1792 - =) = > = ye ibid 
No. 29.—Treaty with the Nabob of Ayeot, dated SiftJuly 1801 = z Sacra d os Oty Sos 
No, 30.—Extrat Letter fFom the Governor in Council at Fort St. George, (Political Di partment) 
dated 20th September 1793 ~ =~ =) 284. 
No. 31.—Treaty with the Rajah of Tanjore, dated 12th July 1793 -  - 2 - == * ibid. 
No, $2.—Extract Letter from the Governor in pec at’ ley rp George A Departarey 
dated 15th Ogtober 1798 ~ - + 238, 
No. 33—Treaty with the Rajah of Tanjore, dated 25th Oaober 1799 = = RHO 
No, 34.—Treaty with Tippoo Sultaun, dated 18th March 1792 - - - seb 242, 
No. 35.—Treaty of Partition with the Nyer and the Peifhwa, dated 2¢d June 1799 - S 48.5 * 
No. 36.—Treaty with the Rajah of Myfore, dated Gih July 1799 - = sh) Baa 


No, 37.—Report of Captain Macl®d on the Myfore Revenues, dated 8th July 1799 = = 256. 
No. 38—Leiter from the Governor General in Council to the Nizam, dated 7th July 1789 - 255. 


No. 39.—Treaty with the Nizam, dated ai September 1798 = = - = = = 860, 
No, 40.—Treaty with the Nizam, dated 19th Odtober 1800, - - = = = = 262. 
No. 41.—Treaty with the Rajah of Travaitgre, dated 17th November 1795 = a Sa 267. 
No, 42-—Treaty with the Rajah of Travancore, dated 1@tyJanuary 1805 = = - ~~ 68. 
No. 43.—Extraét Letter from the Governor in cone at Bort Se George KSeorgl Departazent) 
dated 15th May 1809- =~ 4 = pea 2690 
No. 44.—Convention with the Guicowar Rajab, dated !5th March t802 = = = = 973. 
No. 45.—Agreement with the Guicowar Rajah, dated Gth June 1802 - = = = S74. 
No. 46.—Treaty with the Gicowar Rajab, dated it April1803 - -- > > - M77 
No. 47.—Treaty with the Peithwa, dated SifbDecember 1802 = > > BL 
No. 48—Supplement to the above, dated 16th December 1803 = | = = = = 88H, 
No, 49,—Treaty with Dowlut Rao Scindia, duted 30th December 1803 = - => = 280. 
No. 50.—Troaty with Dowlut Rao Scindia, dated 22d November 1805 -  - = - 288. 
No, 61.--Treaty with the Rajah of Berar, dated 17th December 1803 -  - = = 289. 


Pe i 6 No. 8% 


{7 ] 


APPENDIX. 


No. 1. 


ESTIMATE 


OF THE PROBABLE REVENUES AND CHARGES IN 
INDIA, 


ON A PEACE ESTABLISHMENT: 
&e, 


303 


72 APPENDIX fo the Second REPORT from the Sele&t Committee on 
a 
Appendix, 
—_—_____. 
ESTIMATE of the Probable REVENUES and CHARGES of INDIA ona 
Court of Directors by a Committee 


ESTIMATED REVENUES. 


* 
BENGAL. cR. ~CERS 
Mint anv Post Orritce Revenues taken at the average 
actual Receipts of the lat 5 years ~ + + - 2 2 ee + 1,530,200 


Benares. The fame average of this article is Ct R’ 44,00,000. 
but, as large balances were collected in 1789-90 wiich cannot 
be reckoned on in future, the prefent Jumma is here taken, 
beingabout- - - - - - + 2+ - ee ee ee 43,00,000 


Vizier’s SupsipyY as fixed in 1787, and which has been re- 
alized; is: Joncet seins er see ec’, ele ae 53,00,000 


Lanp Revewves, on average of the laft 5 years actual collec- 
tion were Ct R* 3,08,24,000; they are eftimated for 1791-2 at 
Ct Ré 3,02,5¢,000: and as in forming the permanent fettle- 


ment, fome deduétions were allowed, the latter fum is here | 
eekeni a Ga-S se ea) (heya ce ele yes a ait! wae SY 8850.00 


Customs, The average Collections of three years fince the abo- 
lition of the greater part of the Government daties were 
Ct R* 8,32,000, but in the laft year they were only 6 lacs, and 
are eftimated at this amonnt for 1791-2. This head of Re- 
venue, as well as the Land Revenues, has been reduced by the 
abolition of the Gunge, &c. Collections: fay therefore “- - 6,00,000 


Saxt. On the average of 5 years the Sale amount has been 
Ct R* 98,70,000: but in the firft three years the price was 
much higher than afterwards, and in the two laft the quautity 
fold larger than is eftimated for 1793-2, which may therefore 
be here taken - - - - - - = = - 2 te ee 50,0 


Ovrum,on the fame average of 5 years, has produced 24 lacs; it 
is eltimated in 1791-2 at Ct R¢ 26,84,000, fay, - - - - - 25,00,0°0 


$,03,30,000 


5,035, 


Total Eftimated Bengal Revenues - - - -| - - -CtR 


or, at2/perCtR'}| - - - £. 


MADRAS. 


Lanp Revenvrs on the average of 5 years a@ual Colle@ions, 
from 1786, have amounted to Pagodas 17,50,000; but in the 
lat year 1790-1, the receipts fell fhort chiely in confequence 
of the irruptions of the Enemy and exceffive drought; the 
Eftimate for 1791-2 amounts to 24 lacs, notwi:hftanding large 
deduétions are made for probable arrears in the Zemindars 
payments: but as this far exceeds any a@ual Collections 
hitherto made it appears liable to objetion, although fome of 
the Revenues are leafed at an annual increafe; the future 
amount may therefore be taken within probability at Pagodas | . 20,00,000 


Custous avp Fanus of exclufive privilege have, on the ave- 


rage of five years, produced about- - - = + 5 - = = 2,00,000 
Napos's Subfidy - - + - - - = 2 7 2 te tee 9,00,0C0 | 
Rasan’s D9 + - - - = = = et ee ee ee 4,00,000 
Revexves of the Countries ceded by Tippoo: thofe under 

Madras are eftimated at - - - 2 2 = # = = ee 3,50,000 


Total Efimated Madras Revenues - - Pag | 98,50,000 
At8/per Pagoda | » - + - f. 


1,540,009 


LL 


6,572,000 


“Carried over = 6 - -L 


the Affairs of The EAST-INDIA COMPANY. 73 


.No. 1. 


Peace EstapiisuMent; fhewing the expe@ed Surplus Revenue.e-Reported to the 
of Accounts, 15th February 1793. 


ESTIMATED CHARGES. 


ENGAL 


Civin Cuarces. An average of thefe may be better taken on 
the laft three years actual Difhurfements, becaufe of the alte- 
rations that have taken place in feveral articles in 1788, &c. 
and the impoflibility of ftating the former years a€tual expenfe 
with precifiop, It is trae the- Charges of the new Coinage, 
began in 1789, will fwell this by near Ct R* 90,000 a year more 
than in the former period; but as other Contingencies may 
arife hereafter, it is not thought neceffary to make any deduc- 
tion on this account = - - 2 - 2 2 et ee ee 


40,530,000 


Miitary Careers as before the late War, Lord Corn- 
wallis having given it as his opinion that the increafe made on 
that account might be reduced oo - = - ~ = - = © & 1,38,00,000 


Manrvz Crarcts on average of three years as above, which 
is rather more than the Eftimate for 1791-2 - - - - - - 5,40,000 


Buripines and Fortiricatiowson the fame average amount- 
ed to Ct R* 7,40,000, but, on account of the War, orders were 
iffued for expending no more than was abfolately neceffary for 
repairs; in confequence only Ct R* 2,95,000 were laid out in 
1790-1, and the Eftimate for thefe expences in 1791-2 is only 
Ct Re 250,000. It may however be prefumed that thefe 
charges will now be more; and they are therefore eftimated at 6,00,000 


Reveyue Cuances, on average of three laft years, the Eftimate 

for 1791-2, Ct R*67,25,000, being fuppofed too low - - - 74,50,000 
‘Customs, on the fame average. See this article in Revenuzs 1,25,000 
Saut: Advances and Charges + + - = 5 + 2 + + = 29,50,000 
Oprom: -d® - ad - se ee ee ee eee 975,000 


‘The advances for thefe articles depend entirely on the quan- 
tities manufaétured ; but as it is neceffary to make fome 
Estimate thereof, they are here taken at a medinm between 
the average of the three preceding years aQual ditburfe- 
ments and the Eftimate for 1791-2, 


Coumenctar CHARGES not added to the Invoices, eftimated 
on an average of the laft three years - - = - - = - = 8,00,000 


Total E@imated Bengal Charges - - - - -|- - -C!R 
or, at2/perCtR? |. . - - 


3,12,70,000 
3,127,000 


MADRAS, 


Crvi~ Cnanees, on average of five years, amounted to Pagodas 
2,84,000; they are eftimated for 1791-2, at Pagodas 2,58,000. 
Some reduétions have been lately made, but to ellow for 


increafes recommended, and other Contingencies, fay - Pag* 2,80,000 
Mitrrany Craners, before the War, including King’s Troops, 

amounted to about - - = - - - = + - se ee 30,00,000 
Bu.pixes anp Fortirications, about - - - + - - $0,000 


Revenve Cuances, including comniiffion on the Revenues, 
which varies with the net colleétions, may Le ettimated, to- 


gether with the Pethcuth to the Nizam, at - - - - = ~ 6,40,000 
Commenctat CHARGES, eftimated for 1791-2 at Sider ee * $3,000 


Total eftimated Madras Charges, - - - Pag? 40,33,000 


‘At8/ per Pagoda| - - - - £. 1,613,200 
: 


Carried over = - - - £ 4,740,200 
383. T 


74 “APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Scle& Committee on 


Appendix, 


ESTIMATED REVENUES—contiaued, 


Brought over 


BOMBAY. 


The Revenues under this Prefidency have produced, on average 
of three years, about Rupees 13 lacs; but the laft year’s receipts 
and the Eflimate for 1791-2, being lower than in preceding 
years, fay Bombay Rupees 12,50,000, or at 2/34 perRupee « 


Revenvzs of the Ceded Countries on the Malabar coatt ere 
€ftimated by Tippoo, and alfo by information which has been 
received, to exceed £.320,000 per annum, but the Cummittee |_ 
apprehend, from the Papers lately received by The Queen from 
Bombay, that the Affeffment will fall confiderably thort of the 
Eftimate, they have therefore valued this article forthe prefent 
@t no more than the fumof- - - - - - 2 - - + + 


Total Eftimated Bombay Revenues - - - - £. 


$90,625 


Total EftimatedRevenves - 2 2 « - £. 6,963,625 
ee 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. "75 


Se: 


—— 


. No. 1.—continued. 


ESTIMATED CHARG ES—continued. 


Brought over 
" BOMBAY. 
Crvit, CHances, on average of five years - - - - Rupees. 


Marine - De on +--+ Ds - - = - ee ee 
Mitrrary D°,as before the War - ‘. miei “85 & a. ee 
Bui.pines anv. FonrtiricatTions, on average of five ycars - 
Revenue Cnances - + - - = + = 2 = = = a 
CoumerciaL D®, as eftimated for 1791-2 - - - - - - ~ 


Rupees 
or, at 2/34, 


$52,375 


Bexcootex ano Paince or Wares Istanp. 


, The Supplies from Bengal to thefe Places may be reckoned at - + - - + - 50,000 
Total Efimated Cuances - - - -£./ 5,542,573 
Effimated Surplus Revenue, applicable to the payment of intere& on, or difcharge 
of Debts, to Commercial Advances or remittances to China - - - - = =|. 1,691,050 
‘  L | 6,963,625 
Eftimated Surplus Revenue brought down ~- - Tr LOnD 


1,621,050 
To this may be added, as aids to Commercial purpofes, the expeded Receipts for . 7 
fales of Imports and Certificates for Officers privileges. Thefe,.on the average of 

the three laft years a€tual Receipts, have produced £. 301,000, valuing the Pagodas 
and the Bombay Rupees as in the foregoing accownt; but it is apprehended that 
Stores to a confiderable amount, fupplied for the ufe of the Armies at Madras and 
Bombay, bave not been brought to account. The Eftimate for 1791-2 amounts to 
- £412,000; and although it uray be hoped that, from the late regulations, the Im- |’ 

Port: trade to India may be much benefited, this is pefibly not over-rated: yet in 

giving an Eftimate for the future, itmay be better to keep more within probability; | . 

jay therefore» - 2 - = 2 = ee wee tt op ea om 350,000 


_ ‘The Total Efimated SURPLUS is therefore- - - £.| 3,971,050 
————— 


36 APPENDIX to che Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


As the Ivtrnest on the Debts in India mutt probably be confidered as the firtt Article to be 
provided for from this Surplus, it may not be improper to give a Calculation of the Amount 
therecf; which, on the Debts bearing Intereit, by the lateft Advices, is as follows: 


Ait BENGAL; Sift January 1792. 


On Bond Debts - - CtR* 1,57,46,982 - at Sp.cent. - Ct ‘12,509,758 
On Loan, = - - 1790-1 —— "45,39,605 - 4°12 d° - - —— 544753 
On Prumiffory Notes -—— 2,00,20,983 - d° 8 ad - - —— 1602,159 
On - Dt. - - —— 80,96,569 - 4° 6 dt - - —— 305,794 


_ Total Principal Ct R* 4,54,10,139 - Total Intereft ~ C* R'37,12,464 


or, at 27 £.4,541,014 : or,at2/{ £371,246 
« At MADRAS; Sift January 1792. 
On Bond and Depofits - Pag’ 16;72,342-- at 8p.cent. = Pag’ 1,33,787 
(On Depolits - - - -—— 33,895 - d° 6 ad? 2,034 
* On Bonds - - - =—-— 9,97,458 - d?12 d® 9 - -—=— 47,695 
‘Total Principal - Pag? .21,03,095 + TotalIntereft - ~ Pag’ 1,83,516 
or, at 8/ £. 841,478 or, at Sf £73,406 
* Thefe amounted on 31ft January to P* 8,838,000 ; but by the Letter of 
25th May, Pag’. 4,85,000 had been paid off. 
At BOMBAY ; 31f O@ober 1791. 
Qn Bonds- - - - - Re 1,08,36,623 - atQEp. cent. - - R* 9,88,863 
de 6 de 
or; at ai 3 £ 1,219,119 or, at 21 3 LMM 
fopimeninshlina @ 
At BENCOOLEN ; 31f January 1792. > 
On Bonds & Paper currency Di* 1,253,844 - atlOp.cent. - - De 19,588 
— 
on ati] £:33,472 7 ‘or, at 5) L347 
—— 
~ Add Sums borrowed at 8 pent at Modres, in order to difcbarge the 22 p. cent. 
Bonds above-mentioned, P* 90,000 £.36,000 = - - + - Intereft, P” 7,200 £52,880 
—— 
Total bearing Intereft - £.6,669,682 ‘Fotal Intereft - 28 £561,923 
ef ee ——————— 
This Sum, deduéted from the above Surplus, leaves for Commercial purpofes, or 
difcharge of Debts - - - - = - 2 + 2 te et et ee = | £.1,409,197 
ESTIMATED APPROPRIATION. 
Europe Inveftment - - - - - - 2 = ge ee we » 1,127, - 
‘China Inveftment - - + - +--+ - ee ee ee ame riys 
——-——_—- 
7 1,377,000 
Remains - | £. 32,127 


£.1,409,127 
—— 


DEBTS. 


_ - THE Advices from India concur in an opinion that the Arrears of the War are comparatively fmall, 
whilft there are fome Refources to come in aid thereof: but fuppofe the Debts at Intereft to amount to 
7 crores of Ru the annual Intereft thereon will not exceed Ct R® 56,00,000, or £. 560,000, as the 

~ Loans for which a high rate is now paid will be foon diicharged, and there is reafon to think that ina 
thort time a reduction may be made in thofe carrying 8 per cent. per sayum at prefent. 


" Eaft India Houfe, (A true Copy) William Ramfiy, 


‘goth February 1793. + Seer. 


* ttle 


the Afuirs of The EASTINDEA.COMPANY. ~~ 79 


REVENUES AND CHARGES 
ee OF INDIA; — aa 


BOND AND OTHER DEBTS: 
AND ASSETS, 
OR THE EASTINDIA COMBRANY. 


363.0 U 


APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Seles Committee on ; 
Se, 


Appendix, 1 


G EN BRAL STATEMENT of the REVENUES and CHARGES of INDIA (exclufive of the Commercial Charges) 
year 1809-10, drawn from the Accounts prefented to Parliament; fhewing-alfo the Supply to 


REVENUES. CHARGES. 


BOMBAY. 


BENGAL, 

MADRAS. 

BOMBAY. 
BENGAL, 

| MADRAS. 


4 


2 L 
5,047,000 } 1,600,000 $41,125 5,188,123] 


fe 
6,963,625 


*L 
390,625 


ic 
5,033,000 


(Court's Efimate, Feby. 1793 1,540,000 


2. 


2,285,490 
192,822 


2,476,312 
1,708,263 
401,826 


2,110,089 


% 
3,425,300 | 2,140,305 | 739,002 || 6,304, 


5,512,761 236,555 |] 8,225,623 


294,736 


3,354,736 | 1,925,497 | 786,691 || 6,066,92 


8,276,770 


“| 5,871,045 


3,4645344.) 1,871,525) 747,838 || 6,083,50; 


| 1412}480 |}. 8,026,193 


LTT5 782 


‘| 5,987,931 


5,694,194 | 1,894,304 | 277,596 |] 7,866,004] | 3,636,193 | 2,103,902 | 754,152 || 6,474,204 


4793-6 = =~ 


3,774,319 | 2,411,960 894,912 7,081,191 


5,703,906 | 1,996,328 | 315,937 


— 1790-7 - +e 


338,18) 


1997-8 = eRe 3,943,116 | 2,517,774 950,511 7,411,401 


5,782,741 | 1,938,950 


3,912,999 | 3,281,606 | 1,223,208 || 8,417,815) 


— 1798-9 - - =| 6,150,615 2,123,851 574,587 


2,822,536 * 415,665 4,437,463 | 5,063,880 | 1,491,811 8,998,15: 


4799, 1800- - 


n 


—— 1800-1 - - = 


GAQ8ATS 


6,058,354 


3,540,268 286,457 4,702,400 | 4,405,558 | 1,297,543 10,405,50) 


4,723,478 | 5,085,2)5 | 1,204,759 11,023,4: 


7,127,988 | 4,729,609 | 305,992 


— 1801-2- - - 


12,163,589 


4,914,105 | 4,831,158 | 1,220,164 |} 10,965,49) 


359,546 |] 13,494,597 


. 


a > 4800-3 - 8,380,087 | 4,724,904 


—— 1803-4 = = - 4,651,744 | 558,648 |} 13,971;985| | 5,354,821 | 5,994,131 | 1,652,631 || 13,001,0 


$8,060,093 


} 6,503,200 | 5,991,746 | 2,048,487 |} 14,548,4: 


——— 1804-5 - + -| 9,336,797 | 4,897,140] — 715,548 |] 14,949,595 


7;719,944 | 5,385,640 | 2,455,744 || 15,561,921 


18056. + - 


el ee 


£46,486 |} 15,403,409 


9,542,430 | 5,014,493 


9,160,149 | 4,602,721 14,535,739} | 7,847,604 | 5,269,700 | 2,166,604 || 15,288, 


6,371,843 | 5,193,673 | 2,059,106 |} 13,624,62: 


: 
‘ 
1 


—= _ 1807-8 9,971,695 15,669,905 


4,997,519 


6,476,986 | 4,935,743 | 1,738,495 |] 13,151,224 


9,816,458 


4,968,521 


15,525,055 


6,362,875 | 9,257,365 | 1,789,171 134609,411} 


9,590,880 | 5,373,191 691,914 || 15,655,985 


India Board Office, 
Whitehall, 14th June 1810; 


3 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA°COMPANY. +9) 
e Nor2. ‘ { * 


‘ 
) gs éftimated in 1793, and by the aétial Accounts from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9, with the Effimaté of ie fame forthe © 
Bencodlen, &c. and the Tnterett paid upon the Debts; with the Refult in each year. 


we 
eo ee 
I | Soils INTEREST on DEBTS. GENERAL RESULT. 
3 iy Excefs Eacels ? ee 
aS ‘Beacon iH . 4 3 ee 
| Revenue, Penang POMS Bo & = 4 SURPLUS | SCRPLUS ©" 
a venue, ange. = 3 TOTAL | aevenvy | u HARB: - 
ee ——_— oe > hapeahaaTet Sa? a eee 
; 
: ie £ £ £. £ L £ yee: Coe 
1,775,500 §0,000 | | 1,725,500,{ - =~ ens - = - > }Ka)s61,9¢3 
. e Feaaiaes 
| 
I 
j i 
! 
| 
‘a 
| 1,921,021 66,217 | | 1,854,844 - - - 448,559 4 82,573 | 636,226-| | 1,218,578 
. 4 : : 
2,209,846 40,822 | | 2,169,024 - - - 359,424 46,727 | 120,054 526;205°| 
I. 
1,942,686 62,080;} | 1,880/606 | - ~ - 899,422 8,807 76,072 |) 484,s00' 1,396,3 
° 44,391,847 104,154] | 1,287,693 | - - - 350,551 15,294 | -48;905 414,750 “87! 
cr feet: } 
+ 934,980 }-|, 101,190 833,790 | = - - 352,325 | $7,030 | 57,482 ] 425,847! |p" 
{ 
4. 648,479 163,299 485,180), - - - 408,810 | 1473458 47658 | 
‘ 234,220 120,668 113,552 | - - -. | |6) 503,955 | 160,488 ae 
. 738,518 171,363 567,155)|- + 9- 621,198 | » 253,667 | + 82,371 
| 
79,558 156,325 ayes 76,767 718,366 |(5) 208,829 |» 135,289. |} 1,062,684 
1,140,137 241,220 898.917; - - 9 - 913,937 | $262,590 |. 210,066 111,386,503 
| 2,499,110 196,848 | | 2,202,269} - = - 884,753)| © 286,611 |» 190,089 |) 1,361,453 
+270,302 304,056 eye 33,754 $39,317 +) $12,353 | 4 249,852 Laces 
400,962 372,163 28799 | - = 956,091 | 320,867 } 289,792 i 4,566,775 
Net Charge. ' ; 
157,919, 250,589 || = - = 408,518 1,212,094 49 '842,594 |) *305,552 
¢ 
¢ 
| 748,169 179,197 || -.- = >|) 92975866 94735129 |01307,605 | 294,056" 4 
! § 
} 2,045,288 198,737 | | 1,916,546 523,555 | 313,036 || 2,295,668 |’ 
| ‘ 
2,873,831 158,908 |-| 2,215,623° ww 80a5319 |}'2;242,065) 1+ 
ey 
| 2,046,574 | | 192,960 | | 1,925,614 299,500 | 0 


(a) This fum includes £. 3,147, Intereft on Debt at Bencoolen. Din. eas thas « 
JW) A Sioking Fund for the liquidatiod of the Debt was infiitited in the ycar 1798, from that pevfod the In 
of what was-paid on the Securities redeemed by the £ ind. 


(Errors excepied) 


-¥ 


\ Thomas Nicholas Wittwer, Accom 


APPENDIX. to the Second REPORT fran the Sele& Committee on 


———— 
Appendix, 


STATEMENT oftie REVENUES wa CUA bsg PrefitencydPBEN GALL (exctutve of the Commercial Charges) as eftimated i 1793, and by the AEt¥al 
Intereft paid upon the Debs; 


Poh 1 
‘Opium. | Scanips 


& ié L L & 


— = - } 5,033,0c0 | | 13.300 | 14,800 | 32,700 


- > - || 5,812,761 | | 33,600 | 18\307 | 42,9-40 


985.907 | 3,091,516 216 | 1,054,455 


545 069/\'aoh 1,293457 | “304054 ] - ~ | i =) 2 | S875 26,508 | 18,199 | 35,703 
1 ¢ 


i i 
$285.59 50,190 |-77, b769 | s54g21| - - | = == |) 5,037,951} | 48,120 | 19,305 | 32,892) 


= }) 3,703,906 | | 24,56 


' 

4,210,771} —'- } SiG0419$ | 4 32,068) 21,453 | 49,274 
=p 5irsazan fT as.e19 
- } 6,153,615 | | 30,630 
= = - } Gagsazs'| | 31,192 
Hor 4 | 418,702 
+ =5+ | rar9884 aber 


| As$86,774)) 5856. i. 20.1 sas0os7 
1,796,355 


i - - | socogos: 


47aae3s | 72s if | 963,258 } 9.336.707 


1,535,108 Logon | 942,190 4 


| 33443,740] a Au12.977 | 9,160,149 


@ 
1orss11 4 9971, 


9816453. 


OT Hisinguited trom Hoke of 3 
ees for the fame period, do not include the Cuforas: OA ihn rid ee Charges of col 


the “Afuits of The EAST INDIA COMPANY: 


&1 


Accounts from the year 1792-3:to the year 1803-9, with the Eitimiste of the fame forthe year 1800-10, drawn ffom the alfo, the 
J the A ‘Pari ; . 
“ \écounts prefented! W8'Parliament; thewing ulfo, 


CHARGES 


* 


ihe | ome: TNE saa | cota sos 
Advances | Advances | REVENUE, 
cee [te Joga are | Moc fone | ae |e fat | ome er 
] 

L & & & i L r3 £ L L £ L z L L L a 
125,800 | 258,800 | 57,600 | - - - | 1,380,000 | 54,000 | 60,000 |745,000!f/12,500 }295,000 | 97,500 }- - -)- - - || 3,047,000 3,4ag,246 || 1,614,756 
33,570, | 294,037 | $5,982 | - - ©] 1,588,784 | 60,959 | $9,455 [782,744 | 12,663 | 340,168) 102,097 }- - -|- - - sass jf 448,559 || 3,873,859 || 1,693,902 
28,302 | 261,294 66,063 | 514,766 | 1,445,596 | 65,965 | 82,905 | 509,203 | 10,851 | 328,483 | 102,692 ]- - -|- - || 3,354,736 959,424 |) 3,714,160 |} 2,157,785 
32,995 |266,097 | 59,452 | 360,418 | 1,452,860 | 67,128 |°91,648 | 571,177 | 10,984 | 344,264] 126,901 [- -"- |---| 3,463,144 399,422 || 3,863,565 || 2,074,965 
29,299 | 331,429 | 62,588 {390,188 | 1,589,380 | 61,109 | 48,172 | 516,682 | 8,630 }354,612 | 141,29¢ |- = -|- - -|} 3,696,199 |) 350,551 || 3,986,748 |} 11707450 
30,142 | 283,963 | 48,571 [422,491 | 1,700,660 69,808. 59,260 | 559,659 | 9,518 | 334,330 | 140,054 [- -' -|- = - 352,925 || 4,126,644 || 1,577,262 
39,818 | 280,168 | 44,523 |391,098 | 1,996,487 301,881 | 173,665 | 8,745 }- - = 408,810 |) 4,951,926 || 1,490,815 
| 21,559 | 272,368 | 69,785 }396,260+| 2,010,227 326877 | 97795 | 6638 |- - - || 912,999 | (a) 505,988 || 4,415,954 || 1,736,661 
| 21,772 | 366,117 | 67.599 | 453,712 | 2,285,791 suasiz| 97,968 | 1,956 |= - -|] 44s7s6s |] 622,198 || $058,662 |} 1459512 
4 23,494 | 435,766 | 60,760 | 435,303 asr7s 49,920 | 119,96 | 512,465 | 11,938 |352,666 | 165,881 | 1,836 |-~- - 9 47024c0 718,566 || 5,420,966 || 1,297,368 
| 51,400 | 458,232 | 51,979 | 411,233 | 2,569 375 | 76,409 | 99,888 | 471,517 | 22,221 } 284,629 | 94,127 1858 _ = =|] a7as73 |] 919,997 |] 5,647,415 |] 1,480,578 
212,890 | 586,951 | 54,224 | 418,788 | 2,977,885 | 70,469 | 126,960 498,501 | 32,380 121,126] s2,990 |. 298 }- - .- | 9isos || ssus7ss || 5,798,859 |) 258,889 
556,815 | 548,506 | 54,125 |448,800 | 2,490,626 | 69,581 | 83,046 | 461,052 | so,o1¢ |3st,76 | 72188 | 2984 |= - - | 995452 $39,517 |} 6,199,638 || 1,867,355 
591,208 | 647,984 | 56,096 | 512,309 | 2,875,714 408,661 | 85,796 } 1,574 | 475,060 |} 6,503,200 936,091 |} 7.464,291 || 1,872,416 
470,440 | 3,743,868 350,343 | 93,473 | 9,450 [692,511 | 7,719,944 1,212,014 || 8,931,958 |} 610,472 
439,655 | 4.028973 s7eear | 953808 | 10,s08 |806,149 |] 7,847,604 || 1,484,222 |] 9.291.826 acres 
Ho esi laraaie | 400886 fers a6a 259,996 406,232 | 104,508 2,989,077 || 7,760,920 |} 2,210,775 
402,320 | 600,906 | 46,400 |546,367 | 2,990,578 406,000 | 100,920 1,421,938 || 7,898,924 |] 1,917,558 
s7o,o40 | 740,068 | 48,720 | 548,600 | 2,045,240 | 58,000 | 29,000 | 538,200 | €7,000 | 406,000 | 100,920 1o,sse [614,00 || 6362.75 |) 1t52800 || 75075 | 278208 

| 


@_ A Sinkin; 


363. 


Fond for the Liquidation of the Debt was infituted in the year 1798; from that period the 
redcemed by the Fund. 


(Errors excepted) 


Intereft 


je exclutve of what was paid on the Securities 


 qhamas Nicholas Wittwer, Accoansast 


APPENDIX f thé Second REPORT from the SeleSt Committee on ! 


ENUES end CHANG ESE the pice, of MADRAS (exclafive of the Commercial Charges). as eftimated. in | 
y 


STATEMENT of the REV prefented to Parliament; thewibg alfo, the Intereft 
ff REVENUES, 
AR ; bi i TOTAL 
—— |__| _—$—$<— — | | ——_— —_| ! ; —— | 
L L g & L £ L “LS L 
Court's Etimate, Feb’, 1798] - ~~ | tsar fame ccd Se OA AN al ekg at Fs fs a 
— . 17923 - - =] 11449 610,128 | 495,426 54794 | 9,041 | 742,700 | 48,000} - - - 
= 1793-4 - - -| 11,980 321,823 } 225,459 68,666] 1,249|- - =| 789,050] 38,085] - -! - || “3,110, 
a W79H5 - - - Bei 363,117 | 140,000 217,989 | 51475] - - -]- = = 891,640 50,359 |- - - 
— 1795-6 5 - =] 13,82 [sss 350,859 168,200] 927,620} 96,076] - - ~]- - -| 929,200] 54,862]-'- - | 2,894,904 
1796-7 - - =] 15,434 [55,524 | 354,200 | 17 207,437 | 64,523] + + -]- = =|" 900,594 | 38,420 | 128,191 || 1,996,528 J 
1 irons x= =} 15,514 50,419 | 379,251 | 208.468) 548 zesss]-- -|- - -| 739,980 | 47,647 |227,192 |] 1,998,950. 
— 17989 - - -| 15,892 | 7,649 | 359,171 | 214,074 205,966 1193,368 + - =] - >]? 856,666 | 45,884 |) $9,491 1 185,831 PJ 
— __ 1799, 1800- - | 31,645 |} Gpio90 | 363081 | 288590] “soss2 [aigaos]- - -|- - - 889,539 | 46,744 | 24,911 || 2,822,536 
— 18001 -*. -| 17,910 Roath 960,000 |/327,540} 1,250,920 |$66,602}- < -]- - -| 957,799 | 59,089 | 41,038 || 3,540,968 
— >. 1802 - - 1 15,038 |Posaze | 878,048 | 417,617] 1,293,950 [634,248 |- - -|- ->- 1,095,972 | 76,518 | 22,664 | 4,729,609 
“=. 18023- - ~] 15,080 (02,910 | 1,074,100 | 421,759] 1,413,592 | 638,983 |- - -|- - -| 933,108 | 94,491 | 32,861 || 4,724,008 
TT 808 = P5240 hasose 1,981,881 | 299,797} 1,228,120 | 605,161 | - - -]- - -] 921,686 | 99,441 | 13,684 |) 4,051,744 | 
Seats SS -3—F issigy | Meeeas Ihi sogjesoil adle sos 1,252,631 |628,759|- - -|- - -| 993,849 | 60,004 | 16,062 || 4,897,140 |) 
Ty 97856 = ~] 15,035 |h5,008 | 1,197,611,]/590,878] 1,011,863 leonera|- - -|- = - 1,097.46 | 63,401 | 23,610] 5,014,493 
seaweeds PIGSIG ea 916,975 | $55,939] 1,924,860 |626,001]- - -|- - -] 965,640 | 63,58 | 5,681 | 4602,721__ 
bear gske i et eee 17,002 [114,814 | 1,027,233 502,412| 1,399,488 | 718,037 45,908 = + -| 1,039,671 | 56,720] 6,758 4,927,519 
— $808 9 26,806 {152,088 | 1,016,679 | 4913405] 1,540,228 |6s1,807 | 6,508 | - - - | 1,057,628 | 61,999 | 9787 |) 4,008,521 
Efiimate 180919 | “ics JEL ae s 
#212 | 451,038} 1,528,460 |709,202 | 151,744 | 11,428 | 1,184,258 | 69,595} 5,087 || 5,373,191 


f 
| (® Payment from Tippov Sultaun under the Treaty of Seringupatam. 


© qyltin Boar Otice, 
| Milltehalty 1465 Tune 2510; 


f 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 83 


3799, and by the A@usl Accounts frém the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-0, with the Eftimate of the fame for the year 1809-10, drawn from the Accounts 


pidupon the Debis; with the Refult ia each year. 3 
\ cae CHARGES. 7 
Ei Saas TOTAL 
Polk oh ee Lee fone ee qoTaL | = Seu Sunetus | Sunexts 
= ber Carnatic. | Mylfore. | Tanjore. | Settle 5 a pe aacooee: 
Ofice. | ait =f Sg ileag aioe, | Sle | ceded | candies ips xvexvz,| Cwanax, 
Dittrigs, | = a 'EREST. 
rca — eu | 
L L L a L L 1p Pap | faery L L L L = ke 
9,240 | 109,760} 1,200,000 | $2,000 | 2560001. - -|- - -|- - -|- - -|- - -|] 1,600, fovea et tages 


8,347 | 137,409] 1,412,597 | 24,942 | 272,498| 80,800| 19,655} 174,120/- - -|- - - || 2,140.50: 82,573 || 2,222,878 || 253,494) — 


8,499 | 120,870] 1,144,165 | 9,258 | 263,976} - = +} 33,553] 44,176) - - -|- - - |} 1,925,497 46,727 || 1,972,224 || 137,868] — 


9401 | 128,284] 1,508,197 | 19,128 | 164,259]- - -| 42,976}. - -|- - -)- = - |] 1,871,582 8,807 || 3,880,332 ||- - -| 104,550 


11,511 | 126,318] 1,529,781 | 39,219 | 342,124] - - -| 48,008 6941} - - -}- + - Seles | 15,294 | | 2,119,196 |] - - - | 224,892 

12,542 | 110,951] 1,796,377 | 34,898 | 316,535] - - -| 50,776] 17,963] 71,978 |- ~ - || 2,411,960 87,040 || 2,449,000 || - - -| 452,672 
t. “3 

12,466 | 121,107] 1,968,498 |" 32,330 | 324,128] - - -] 57,370} 17,614] 84,261 ]- - - |} 2,517,774 |) 147,458 || 2,665,232 |] - - -] 726,282 


12,819 | 187,863 | 2,561,972 |" 18,456 | 974,888]- - -] 71,344] 39,070] 63,798] - - - || 3,281,606 || 150,488 || 5,442,094 |] - - {1,518,263 


15,849 | 146,918 | 3,129,878 | “41,996 | 990,987} - - - | 336,890} 255,995) 85,975 | 21,070)) 4,405,558 |@) 208,829 4,614,387 || - -. - |1,074,119 
15,832 | 155,148 | 3,571,235 | 59,599 | 395,377) 228,693 946,797 171,506} 55,895 | 85,202]] 5,085,215 262,590 || 5,347,805 }}- - - 618,196 
¥6,904 | 211,560] 2,839,028 | 39,656 | 374,778] 393,182) 316,820 148,060) 378,752 | 112,618} 4,851,158 286,611 5,117,769 || - - - | 392,805 
20,750 | 287,622| “4,096,028 | 42,234 | $77,228] 417,914 274,017] 118,855} 331,976 | 97,527|| 5,994,151 312,153 || 6,306,284 || - - = |1,654,540 


19,251 | 374,230| 4,072,144 | ‘75,458 | 520,164] 387,773] 272,520] 183,761 | 131,631 | 154,814] 5,991,746 320,867 || 6,312,613 || - - = }1,415,473 


713,071 


24,639 | 378,051| 3,384,211 124,042 | 420,460] 575,719} 270,581] 220,611} 62,124 | 125,402] 5,885,640 |) 342,524 5,728,164 || = - > 


22,980 | 506,654) 3,125,764 | 146,151 | 504,010] 374,106] 283,369] 174,571] 7,912-| 124,183} 5,269,700 |) 473,129 || 5,742,829 |) - - - 1,140,108 


789,709 


5,193,673 || 523,555 || 8,727,228 || - - - 


ee 547,576 | 3,094,806 | 199,260 | 442,126) 349,621 | 265,902} 162,154) 13,132 | 101,712 


4,935,743 || 495,408 |} 5,491,151 462,830 


19,926 } 493,548 | 3,143,575 | 185,966 | $33,024] 853,613 | 208,519] 130,685] 9,336 | 77,551 


ij 2 174 
17,868 | 494,526] 3,610,312 | 58,800 | 416,180] $21,366] 159,273] 116,029 5,646 | 57,365 |) 5,257,365 380,000 || 5,637,365 ||- - 264, 


‘ 
| 18,615 | 156,300] 2,261,151 |“ 12,006 | 285,836] - - - | 174,737] 68,915} 88,512 |-. - - |} 3,065,880 258,667 || 3,319,547 || - = - | 497,011 


i ‘th 
Fund for the Liguidution of the Debt was inftituted in the year 1800; from that period the Intereft is exclufive of what was paid on the 


s redeemed by the Pund. 


(a) A Sink 
Secur: 

f sted) - i 
- s gee ; Thomas Nicholas Wittwer, Accountant 


ry 7 


APPEN DIX fe the send REPGe ros the see Co Committee on 


STATEMENT offthe REVENUES and CHARGES of the Prefidency of BOMBAY (exclufive of the Commierci 


Appendiy, 


fame for the year 1809-10, drawn from-the Accounts prefented to” Parliamel; 


Court’s Eftimate, Feb’. 1793 
ped - = - 


SP pha als 


{ 
jon085 


45,000 


79,025 


170,238 


$1,364 
45,130 
54,571 
168,015 
$05,861 
$84,740 


471,544 


— 1806-7 - - - -| 988,536 


—_— 1808-9 - 2 ee 


: | 
Bfimate 1809-10 - - - - 


i 
q 


$17,186 


427,033 


$96,482 


India Board 
Whitehall, ta eed 1810. 


} 


REVENUES. 


Sublidy Subfidy Ceded TOTAL 
from fron Countries, oe, 
Teasancote. | Maratias. ]: - -Myfore! || S3VENUBS. 

Lt £ } 

80,000 15,625 250,000 390,625 || 
102,638 @ 44,140 236,555 
80,300 (a) 132,386 294,736 
62,913 (@) 164,223. 312,480 


41,968 @® 171,543. 277,596 


196,505 315,037 


52,994 26,714 


150,904 


63,493 31,731 338,189 


187,287 


64,606 42,773 374,587 


415,663 


69,880 42,633 228,872 


286,457 


106,505 67,040 24,868 


305,992 
359,546 


128,551 79,956 


157,595 91,022 


112,157 97,716 558,648 


715,548 


172,562 115,352 


176,506 | | 155,722 846,486 


186,706 154,713 772,869 


770,691 


167,524 | - 143,267 


740,276 


161,959 145,656 


159,335 136,097 601,914 | 


(2) Included in Land Revenues. 


va 


: Saaaaa__s— 


the Aflairs of Thee EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


85 


a ce 


! 
| No. 5. 
r 


fhewing alfo, the Intereft paid upon the Debts; with the Refult in each year, 


‘Marine. 


Military. 


Buildings 


and 


Fortifica- 


tions, 


Revenue. 


ee 


TOTAL 
CHARGES 


AND 


Charges) as eftimated in 1793, and by the A@ual Accounts from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9, with the Eftimate of the 


SURPLUS 
CHARGE. 


: CHARGES. f 
Civil. 


L L & £ £ £ £ 3 L 
. 90,000 | 74,250 | 337,500} 25,875 | 13,500] - - = 541,125 111,244 652,369 201,744 
[ 109,984 79,750 479,205 | 33,741 | 15,357 | 20,965 739,002 105,094 844,096 607.541 
113,586 | 93,530 | 472,076 | 22,967 | 13,411 | 71,321 786,691 120,054 906,745 612,009 
102,163 77,825 468,541 | 26,367 | 12,860 | 60,582 747,838 76,072 823,910 511,430 
j 97,616 66,741 $03,385 | 11,121 | 13,190 | 52,099 7345152 48,905. 733,057 505,40 ° 
107,491 65,747 610,014 } 28,635 | 17,012 | 66,013 894,912 37,482 932,394 616,437 
115,977 65,604 641,469 | 36,363 | 19,643 | 71,455 950,511 47,658 998,169 659,980 
143,529 | 57,292 | 901,988 | 25.429 | 17,123 | 77,847 || 1,229,208 57,107 1,280,315 905,728 
| | 164,208 | 126,172 | 1,039,152 | 52.644] 21,503 | 91,132 || 1,494,811 82,371 1,577,182 1,161,519 
| | 142,809 | 152,60. 904,800 | 21,513 | 55,441 | 20,379 |} 1,297,545 135,289 1,432,852 1,146,575 
166,286 | 116,867 856,061 16669 48,876 |- - - | 1,204,759 210,066 1,414,825 1,108,833 
| * | 178,720 | 118,694 | 844,253 | 17,179 | 61,518 | - - | 1,220,164 190,089 1,410,253 1,050,707 
164,783 | 108,875 | 1,961,139 | 40,076 | 77,758|- ~ =|) 1,652,631 242,852 1,895,483 1,896,833 
» | 219,008 | 131,627 | 1,511,405 | $4,918} 101,509 |- ~ -|} 2,048,437 289,792 2,338,279 1,622,731 
| 208,326 134,493 | 1,904,519 | 59,460 |148,946 | - - ~]) 2,455,744 305,552 2,761,2! 1,914,810 
| 192,427 158,393 | 1,617,685 | 63,158 134,941 }- - - |) 2,166,604 307,605 2,474,209 1,701,340 
| 
i 200,354 | 154,674 | 1,521,425 | 67,647 |115,006 | - - - || 2,059,106 313,036 2,372,142 1,601,451 
| 147,423 167,980 | 1,246,279 | 61,489 |115,519 |- - -] 1,738,495 324,319, 2,062,814 1,322,538 
158,645 | 155,205 | 1,282,815 | 88,110 | 104,396} - - -] 1,789,171 292,500 2,081,671 1)389,757 


(Errors excepted) 


i Thomas Nicholas Wittwer, 
- Accountant , 
363, Lae 


Boeri cg APPENDIX #0 the Second’ REPORT from the Scleét Committee on 


= ——— 


Appendix, 
pss eee 


Ax ACCOUNT of the Total Annual Amount of he REVENUES ond CHARGES of the feveral RESIDENCIES in INDIA, a5 climated in 1799, ane by the A&ta, 
of the Company's Poiledions exclusively fiom the Subsidies from Nave Priuces, or Colledtions from Cedted and Conquered Countries; and, as tothe Cizandrs, the Military Charges td 


REVENUES. 


ee - 
3 
Revesves of the Conrasy’s Possrsstoxs | Sunsipres,and CoLtKeioss {row 
exclatively 5 Ceded and Conquered Countries; MILITARY, 
_—) Bar peraiaSeuence (A) Pet (ejarate Stutemscist(B.) TOTAL 
z © GRUSs 5 
3 a e a 3 2 4 
3 2 a Prete wee REVENUES. “| 2 2 
a g 
a 2 ES : = = 2 
feat | drsekes pean | jem eh ee 
L L £ Le &£ & £ L L 


‘Court's Eflimate, Feb". 1793, 4,503,000 | $80,000} 140,625 }} 5,529,625 25,500 | 1,414,200 1,580,600 | 1,200,000 | 337,300 | 2,017,500] 


se9ai0-| 1.718.670 : 
| 


1792-3 - = - -| 4,078,854} 824,509 | 181,603 |} (5,085,026 See 
{ 2,515,178 17,5: 
co) a08 B26 11 


1,598,784 | 1.419,597 | 479,205 | 5,480,58i| 


17934 = - - -| 5,336,280 


462,050 |} 6,250,466 1,445,596 | 1,444,165 | 472,076 | 3,961,897 


1,432,860 | 1.508.197} 463,541 | 5,409,598] 


17945 - = - -| 5402376 | 1,008,2011}. 198,151 | 688.608 } 1487/65] | 1353853] 1.951712 
1795-6 - = = | 5,162,057 | 1,051,569 }. 106,053 |) 619,679 


1,546,818 | 198,547,| 1,410,068] 7.866005 |] 1,589,3:0 | 1,529,781 | 503,585 | 3,622,548 
| 6484599 |) 2,551,781 163,895 | 1,566,684 
4797-8 = - - -| 5,107,814 | 3,073,625 | 154,096 || 6.315,605 | brsears 
1798-9 - - 5,168,545 


1796-7 - = - -| 5,297,208 | 1,197,953 | 119,492 


é 
5 


1,700,666 | 1.796.877 | 610,014 | 4,107,054 
1,558,018 '$,059,880 || 1,996,487 | 1,808,195] 641,469 | 4,506.49) 
6,380,884 | 2271149 "209,820 | 2,061,52: ( 8,652,035 


17,952 | 144,386 


|| 2,020,227 901,988 | 5,473,587) 
1799-1800 - = - | 5,577,035 | 1,056,129;| 143,877 Svar |) 2es0.638 956,564 | 2,603,067 || 9,796,672|| 9,925,721" 1,039,152 4,526,024 
1800-1 - - - -| 5,493,352 | 1,135,S06 | 218,675 | 6,847,835 | $637,226 654,168 | 2.983.053 20,485,059 |} 2.477.745 904,800 | 6,512,425) 
1801-2 -'- > -| 564,168 | 1,505,770 | 259,992 |} 7,206,926 || 4.936.669] $96,889 | 4,059.780 || 12,163,380 || 2.56975 856,061 | 6,996,67| 


1802-3 - >-- -| 6,359,150 | 1,178,590 | 293,174 }'7,825,914 |' 5,010,625 | 1,011,120} 4,429,503 || 33,465,557 |} 2977;888 


1803-4 - = - -| 6,506,429 | 1,136,845 | 235,598 } 7,876,612 |' 5,094,773 | 1,530,628 | 3,895,125 || ig.e71.3s5 


844,255 | 6,061,11 


2,400,626 1,261,139 | 7,777,7: 
104-5 - = = -|'6,625,773 | 1,245,977 | 288;517 |/8,158,267 || 6,791,128 | 2.144704 |/4.616,490-| }> 14 o003905 4] eara7i8 | 4.072.048 | 1,511,405 | 9,459, 
1805.6 - - - ~| 636,148 | 1,322,465.| 295,082 


(F149711 | 2,453,807} 4,695,904 || 15,403,409} | 9,743,863 | 3,384,211 | 1,904,519} 9,032, 
| 6 741,006 2,495,367 | 4,285,729 | |) 14,595,739 4,028,973 525,764 | 1,617,085 } 8,772.40 
107-8 =4- = |<. Ge)" “lassgeast alain: beeen te} fe) |= = =|), 15:669.908.| | 2,858,086 | 9,094,806 | 1,521,425 | 7,470, 
eee Oh Ss (@) | 1,291,698 | 268,468 | >= <= 


1806-7 - - - -| 6,303,738 | 1,180,386 | 309,519 


(seer a sieiahele teteleled 


©) Z ©) se 15,525,055!) | 9.990,573' |’ 3,143,575 | 1,246,979 | 7,080, 


Efimate 1809 10 - ©) {1,496,107 | 256,443 | =) - - :) : = 


=|] 15,655,985 ||) 2,945,240 | 3,610,912 


282,815 | 7,858, 


(@.) Payment from Tippoo Saltaun under the Treaty of Sevingapatdmn. et ze 4) { 
4 ae 
(©) The feparation of the Revenues and Charges cannot be made forthe years fubfequent to 1806-7, in confequetice of the detailed Aecouniis of the Bengal Prefidency for' 


‘years not huving been rece: mn 
N.B, The Indian Currency is converted into Britifh at the following Rates: i 
Carrent Rupee - - - - at ¥ 1 
Pagoda yi - =.= - ~ at Sf, AS 


Bombay Rupee - - - - at 2/34. i C 
India Board Office, 
Whitelill, 14th Sune 1810. : 


87 
= 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY: 


Accounts, from the ye 1799-8 to the year 1808-9, with the Eftimate of the fame for the year 1809-10, as laid before Parliament; diftinguithing, as to the Rucexwrs, the Revenues 
f the Charges for Buildings und Fortifications, from the Civil, Revenue, Judicial,and Marine Charges; thewing alfo the Supply to Béxcoolen, &e. aud tle Intereft paid on the Debts, 
_——— 

CHARGES. 


GENERAL RESULT. 


Cistt, Revexvs, Jupscrat and 
Burtprxes and Fortreicatioxs. Marixe; 4 eae 
Per Separate Statement (C) CHARGES: SURPLUS | suRPLUS 
Z ; asp 
4 3 4 a 3 aor REvENvE. | cHanos, 
ao jee Prone |S Sena W ncrats istEnrst. 
8 & FA S é 
2 jes | a 2 & js 
-| ia n =| ———— ——— 
| & Le \ae L L £ Ce L £ L eee | L £. L 
4 32,000 | 25,875 | 117,875|\ 1,581,200 | 363,00] 177,750} 2,196,950"]) 5,188,195-|/ 1,775,500 || 50,0008] 561,923 geo Ica a eee 
i SA) area,199 i | 
i 
84,952 | 33,741 || 108,138 | 4,763,491 | 415,191] 205,091)! 2,586,775 | ~ 6:304,607 Soarg 226 |) 7,007,050 pet 
‘ ) 
z|_ | 82.965 | 9,258 | 92.967 || 115,190) 1,707,573 | 294.535) 990,597 || 2,412,535 | 6,066,024 . ane |p 526,205 |) 6,053,951 fee 
ent | 
r 91,648 | 19,128 | 96,367 |) 137,143 || 1,996,641 | 301,924} 192,545) 2,400,913 6,083,507 || 1,942,686 62.090) 484,301 || 6,629,388 = 
| p 2 x 
a) | 48172) 99,229 | 11,291 |) 98.512) 1,969,342 | 479,953} 167,547) 2,616,842 | 6,474,087 |} 1,991,887 || 104,156 414,750 6,993;155 872,043 ; 
59,260 | 24,82 } 98,635 |) 122,723 | 1,984,251 190,250 |, 2,696,517 7,084,198 || 934,980} | 101,199 |” 7609208 || 406,988 = 
| 
92,830 | 36,363 || 99,505 || 1,875,996 201,224 }}-2,619,182 4). 7,411,401 G48.479 8,1783626 ¥2 11s 746 
18,456 | 25,499 || 110,129 | 1,814,959 | 591.364) 217,948 q 2,624,277 ‘8,417,813, 284,220 @.) 721,550 260,051 fey }) 607,998 ii 
12,006 | 32,644 || 162,034 || 2,071,686 | 549,063) 591,883} 2,052,632 }- §,998,154 |). 738,518 957,286}} 10,126,753 = ‘890,081 
41,996 | 21,515 ||-183,473 |) 2,081,197 | 62s,389| 390,851) 3,055,437 | 10,405,501.|) 79,558 1,062,684} 11,624,510 = lhrsoer © 
59,599} 16,669 |} 176,156 || 2,019,815 | 608,897 352,030} 12,953,741 11,023,432 || 1,140,157 1,386,593 12,651,265 = | 437,676 


99,656 | 17,179 |} 183,795 |) 2,196,367 | 967.287 | 345,689 
83,046 | 42,234 | 40,076 || 165.956 }| 2,295,834 | 078,255 


3,509,343 10,965,427 |) 2.409.110 1,361,483 || 12,523,728 |} 940,809 | 
i 


f 
ye ee 13,001,083 || 


1,394,922 |} 14,699,461 || — — hargor6 
(69,687 | 75,458 | sagxs |) 200,038 | '2.506,562 | so6;249} 411,625] 372,495] 14,549,495 


14966,780, || 16,487,346 — |i fargsu 
3796587 | 15.561,528 


124,042 | 59,460 | 1978,336)]| 21579.191 | $22,450 ee 3 1,860,090) ) 17,672,017 — 2,268,608 
| $3,609 | 146,151 | 60,978 | ‘38 }) 2,417,318 | 399,206 | 408,857 oa 15,283,908 179:19% 2,294,950 17,688,061 | = pts2.s82 
i Bi 5. a7 | rae 
32,016 | 193,260 | 63,601 | 288,877) © | 834546} 00,981} - - - | 13,624,622 198,797 ¢]) 2,225,668 || 15,979027 } 509,192 

185,966 | 58,598 979,364 (O} 660,071 | 370,272) =) =) - 13,151,224 158,24 2,241,665 15,551,097 fp 26,042 

I : ! : ssz,ort || — 14686 
000 | 88,800 | 85,826 | 173,626 637,650} 349,860} - - - || 13,609,411 d.)1,925,300 || 15,657,671 08 


fal 


( a ie De : i ’ is ities redeemed by the Fond. 
@) A Sinking Fund for the liquidation ‘of Uie Debt was inftitated in the year 1798; from thet ‘period the Intereft is exclutive of what was paid on the Securities redeem: by 
. : abe 


(4) This is the Amoant eftitated td be paid for Tntereft within the year 1809-10. 


} 


(Errors excepted.) 


oe RSS Thomas Nicholas Witwer, 
“in ei Accountast, 


88 APPENDIX fo the Second REPORT from the Sclcé&: Committee on 
er a 


Appendix, 
TS 
STATEMENT of the REVENUES of the Company’s Pofftflions exclufively at BENGAIg MADR = aud 
OF the 
a rR eT | 
BENGAL | 
wa ? 
Mint. 1 ome} Benares, Stamp. 
£ he L . - £: F : | 
Eftimate 1793 2,800 | 10,200 | 430,000 725,000 4,503,000 
1792-3--- 5,704 | 13,261 | 442,850] 3,091,616 78,216 | 1,054,456 4,978,854 | 
1793 4- - 4,310) 14,344) 433,345} 3,177,028 | 27,715 | 80,627 | 1,293,457 | 304,954 5,336,280 
1794-5- = 12,516 | 14,752 | 432,579 3,235,259 | 50,190 | 77,290 | 1,224,769 | 554.921 P 5,402,076 
1795-6 - 2 12,446 | 16,935 | 408,865] 3,130,697 | 99,087 | 93,778 1,210,771 | 189,278 5,162,057 
1796-7- = 5,155 |. 16,522 | 469,051) 3,118,556 | 101,706 | 87,366 1,248,604 5,227,208 | 
4797-8- - 7,487 | 16,286 | 435,169} 3,097,445 | 55,921 | 92,290 | 1,154,525 | 93 5,107,814 
| 4798-9- - * 6,713 | 20,193 | 398,543] 3,079,743 | 43,541 | 95,710 | 1,296,723 s 5,168,546 
1799; 1800 13,028 | 24,953 | 484,723] 3,213,230 , 133,404 | 1,264,767 | 372,025 | 26.378) 5,577,035 
| 4800.1- - 4,582 re 526,589 3,218,766 | 50; 141,158 | 1,129,720 5,493,352 
1S01-2- - 5,717 | 26,372 | 462,619) 3,096,303 5 285,764 1,096,284 5,641,164 
1802-3- - 6,573 | 29,584 | 584,216 $295,751 322,380 | 1,446,774 5; 5) 6,352,150 
[2803-4243 S112 | 30,502 | 535,351} 3,259,621 5. 289,879 | 1,796,355 730\! 6,506,429 
4A80h5-" - ~| 8,002] 39,9891 438,637. 272,513 | 1,722,234 6,625,773 ; 
P W058 2 91,655 36,157 | 591,865! 3,311,673 | 89; 290,308 | 1;535,108 6,636,148 ya 
sia0s7e = 19,136 } 37,208 537,879 3,296,634 324,831 4 1,443,740 ) 6,304,738 } i 
| 807-8. "17,783 } 34,504 1,895,080 ail 1; 
1808-9. - -| 10,819 | 34,800 1,815,892 | 1 
11,600 game 1,670,400 20 


__ India Board Offee, 
Whiteball, 14th June 1810. } 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, &9 
——SSSS———————————————EEEe 


| Noet6si(A.) 


BOMBAY, as eflimated in 1793, and by the A@ual Accounts from 1792-3 to 1808-9; with the Eftimate of the fanie 
year 1809-10. ; bs 


MADRAS, BOMBAY. 


Sand Farms | Dutch h 4 Farms GRAND 
Pott and Tand Se x Land . TOTAL. 
Of Sea ae Sele] TOTAL, Cuiffoms, |. m4 TOVAL. 
ee. feb Revenues. | +. Revenues. * . 
Cufioms, Licences, ments. 4] Licences, 


Lo bk i he £: L L Bey 
- - -]| 40,000} 800,000 | 40,000} - - - | 880,000} | 45,000 | 80,000 


he 
15,625, 140,625 5,523,625 


11,449 | 22,300) 742,760.) 48,000 |. -7,- =|) 824,509 79,025 |.202;033} (ay 181,663 | | 5,985,026 


(a) “162,350 | | 6,359,406 


11,980 | 21,761. 789,030 | 38,045 860,836: 82,050} $0,300 
: % B| pa ie } 


12,981 | 48,241] ‘991,640 | 30,399 ~ - | 1,003,201 | | 7oaas} 62,913] (a) 193,161 | | 6,558,628 
y! % Be us % 


. =| ¥ ~ 
13,182 |. 54,325} 929,200 | 54,862.) -- ~ |} 1,051,569 64,085 | 41,968] @)* 106,053 - 65319,679. 


ab a 


j i 7 . 
ae ae 
15,484 | 55,324] 900,534 20 128,192 | 1,197,953. |} 39,724 | 52,994] 26,714] 5 119,452 || 6,488,593 


15,514 | 50,419 31731 |) 134,096 _| 6,218,605 


42,773 |} 144,886 | | 6,580,884 
5 


732,983,| 47,047 | 227,182 | 1,073,695 | | 98,872 | 63,493 


Se —— 


18,822 has 856,066] 45,384 | 89,491 |) 1,067,952 | | 37,007 | 64,606 


31,645 | 69.990) 883,539 | 46,744 | 24,211 | 1,056,129 51,364 | 69,880]. 42,693 143,877 |) Gy77704 
| ' | ‘ ae ia 
17,910 |, 65,970] 957,799 | 53,089 | 41,038 || 1,135,806 45,130 | 106,505] 67,040 218,675 6,847,853 - 
Sins te > re y | » ¢ vom. tae 
15,038 | 95,778} 1,095,972 76.318~29,661. 1,305,770 | | 52,433.| 128,551] 79,008) 259,999 | | 7,206,926 
What . Opie We ie Bee” 
15,280 ||102,910] 933,108 | 94,431 | 32,861. | 1,178,590 | |. 48)928 | 157,595) 687,851 | 293,174 TyS28,914 | 
f 15,142 | 1469301 921,610 199,842 | 13,084} 4,136,845 |] 143,528.) 106,638}. 83,172 |} 283,938 |) 7,876,012" 
15,177 ||158,985] 999,819°} 60,004} 16,062) 1.249\927 | | 46,090 | 187,215 | 85,212, 288,517 |) | 8,158,207 
. : Blog 
| 18,038 | 133,008} 1,097,416.) 53,401 | 23,610 | 1,922,968 +} 30,093 } 1544210 | 90,539) 295,082 |"/£8\258,698 
16,3195 131,438) 963,140 | 63,598 | 5,641 | 1,180,886 |} 65,727 | 162,705} 91,087 | 309,519 | 7,794,643, 
aa 2 Tear ce! in : é t , wolie i Nh z 
3 ; Pe To3 ' y ‘ 3 ‘ 
17,002 {114,514 -14959,071 50,720 6738 1,234,405 52,100 |-136,595} 92,703 |} 281,999.) = 
4 SHO eal : Fh oe a yak ae ee ah she ok 
16,806 | 152,998] 1,057,028 | 61,599 | 2,727 |) 291,698 || 45.700.) 157,497 268,468 = 
‘ S { 1 Se ee a) % ras 
‘ . : Selene ey | if 
” 20,000 | 216,309 | 1,184,253] 69,895 5,657. || 1,496,107 AG,280 | 181,682 | 78,510. 256,448 | teat 
a. 


90 5 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Scle& Committee om 
‘ i ais = 


e Grofs and Net Receipts from SUBSIDLES under Treaties with the NATIVE PRINCES of INDIA, or i eee 


of the fame fy 


— — 
, OUDE TANIORE MYSORE. | 
Got | 
Geof. a ‘ or | HT 
Reeceijuy | CMTS Reschass | CES sa Beaee) ore 
£ ‘ ss 
Eftimate 1795 - - - 160,000 | = - - 160,000 
+5. 17923°- =], 30,907]. 93,570'| *sogsar | sat 496,426 | 174,120 | 522,306 
# I 365,116 
f he het Se Wormer 
—— 1793-4 - = =} 595065] ascqe | 5 324,923 | 298,450 | 44176 | 181,283. 
: as a | 
— ts - = | 525,635 f y 363,117 |} 140,000 |. ~ = - | 130,000 }) 382,212 | 109,838 | 
Tod - =| 5931397 168,200 p41 | 161,259 100,107 
— = - | “476,698 3042 172,195 17,905} 154,252 |, 463,962 | 116,789] 347,173 


206,468 17,613 | 188,854 | 407,552] 198,825 | 978,797 


——— 


2, > + =} 6rsoa7 | 9,818 
a 17989 Se> > | 9 985,080 21,559 214.974 | 39,070 | 175,904 |] 482,653 | 149,191 333,462 
— _ 1799-1800 - - | © 921,458 <shcrs 288,530, “63919 219,017 || 1,125,804 | 265,879 | 359,925 | | 
18001 = + - | 1.16698e 23498 327,880 | 285,995 | 91,588 | 1,975,188 | 973,609 | 1,001,579] | 
—"isors, 243 S| é Ee 417,617 246,111 |} 1,493,990 | 960.082 | 1,133,318 
— Tons’) = — | 2,027,937 421,739" 273,679 || 1,411,592 | 351,398 | 1,080,264 
© 1805-4 - =~ 556,815, 299,737 180,153 || 1.28120 | 302 925,353 
es 591208 4 462,525 277,289. 45252,631 204,607 | 958,024 


=> 2] LSet | 609,600 _sdos7s | 224.335 | 966,545 | 1211,863 | 206112] 913731 


174208 555,339 | 191,666 saith 97,824,560 |. 331,069 | 993,491 


12] 184,488 | 317,924 } 1,399,488 927,353 } 1,072,195 


i 451,105 199,054 202,351 } 1,540,228 | 280,302 | 1,259,920 


1,277,071 


© Tudia Bosra: Oftce, 
Whiteball, “14¢h June 1810, 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


. Nov6. (B.) 


CEDED and CONQUERED COUNTRIES, aseftimated in 1793, and by the A@ual Accounts from the year 17: 
the year 1809-10, 


as 


92-3 to the year 1808-95 with the Eflimate 


NIZAM Subfidy, &e. 


Grol 


cocHIN 


GCUICOWAR 


MAHRATTA 


Gros 


Receipts, 


Grote 
Reccipta 


Hceeipiss |feenst Net, 
L L “ 
70,636 | - - ~ | 70,636 
63666) - - - | 65,666 
5147S Pome SLATS 


96,076} - 9+ - 607g. 


64,523 | > = - 64,599 
gases] - - - 22,888 
193,368 | - = - | 199,368 
212,896] = - - | 212,804 


965,602 | 21,070 | 345,532, 


654,244 85,202 | 549,04: 
638,883 | 112,618 | » 526,265 


605,161 97,803 | 507,358 


628,759 | 187,621 | 471,138. | 


691,673 | 128.542} $63,131 
626,061 139,121 | 486,940 
718,037 127,567 | 590,470. 


681,807 | 112,467 | 369,840 


709,202 |) 89482} 619,720 


9,041 


11,428 


& 


3,086 
23/458 
Toys 
158,414 
153,510. 
157,00% 
163,357 


173,701 


166,691 


10,752 


166,959 


1,188,961 
1,377,073 
1,876,309, 


(Errors excepted) © : 
Thomas Nicholas Wittwer, Accountant, 


1,440,000 


2017. 7H0 
ue 


2)280,002 


1915478 
won, 


1,487,565 
1,046,415 
1,531,878 
174,975 
2,971,149 
2,959,031 
3,037,296 
4,956,663 
5,640,629 


5,994,773 


T)149,711 


OTAL 


25,800 | 1,414,200 


1718670 
A9eiee 


195,859 | 1,951,712 


136,947 | 1,410,068 
164,894 | 1,366,084 
186,257 | 1,588,018 
209,820 | 2,061,929 
556,564 | 2,603,067 
654,168 | 2,989,088 
896,883 | 4,059,780 
1,911,120 | 4,429,503 


1,699,648 | 3,855,125 


6,791,128 | 2,144,704 | 4,616,424 


2,459,807 | 4,695,904 


4,245,729 


Appendig | 


—~—. 


STATEMENT of the CIVIL REVENGE, JUDICIAL, MARINE, and other Charges, (exclafive of the Civil Charg,, 
: Accounts ftom 1792-3 to 1808-9; with the 


oy k Gisil 
ae Charges 
Béiares | in 
Office. |- 
geuvral, 
ant rf hi 
%. ares 
Eitimate 1793 | =/'- 14,800 | 32,700 | 258,800 
— 17923 -| - | 33,600 | 18,307 | 42,910 | 284,637 
a 
—— 1793-4-" -| 26,504 | 48,199. | 35,763 |-261,294 
l= | arss-5-) =} 48,120] 19,305 | 129,892 [266,097 
| 5") vas 
—— 1795-0 =| - | 32,068 | 21,453 | 49,274 | 331,429 
: - oo ha 
4 24,564 | 23,348 | 67,719 | 289,963 
3 ; 
—— 1797-8 -"- | 18,419 | 25,861 | 63,197 | 280,168 
-— - 1798-§-»-| 30,630.) 20,990 | 69,682 } 979,968 
“= 1799, 1800-| 31,192 | 21,737 } 74,501 | 366,117 
, t . fmt 
{ - “1800-1- - } 18,702 20,420 76,730 | 435,766 
web eake feet : 
} lem | 
es : ae of 38,87 22,239 99,494 
1» 1802-8 -) = } 20,554 |. 25,650 | 91,941 | 586,951 
> fo aid aie 
SS “1800-4 - = | 18,667 | 23803 | 112,038°} 54sj506', 
=3 = | 31,065 | 26,135 | 197,098"| 647,984 
e ¥ ~ t 4 ’ T 
© F%| 18056 = - | 20,362 | 33,067 }113,907 | 857,383 
2 ee i 3 hs 
SS 1067 4 - me 33,061 } 140,732 | 575,856 
1807.8 4 - | 33,89b f= 31,564 |/2 2 oR 
peers tol aes 
Fa Wsosig’- = | 53,955 31,096 | PS 
TF Anaked Hl 
 Eftimate 1809.10- =| 33,955 


BENGAL, 


India Board Office; 


Whiteball, 14th June 1810, 


j - 


Marine 


Ye. 
54,000 
69.039 
66,063 } 314,766] 63,965 
59,452] 360,418} 67,128" 
62,588 | 390,183) 61,109 
i: j | 
48,571 | 422,491] 69,808 
44,523 | 391,098] 53,180 
‘j 
69,785 | 396,260} 55,000. 
67,899°| 453,712] 63,511 
60,760. | 435,303 49,220) 
j : 
31,979 | 411,233) 76,409 
Fics a Ae 
54,224 | 418,788) 70,469 
54,125" £48,800) °69,541 
56,096} 512,309] 69,099 
7 
55,876 470,440 74,576 
Y = ae i 
57,652 4s2.604 69,518 
Shr Fisseree 
4sdsa]-- 4 87,081 
: 
“46,4001. - - 


Revenue. 


x 
785,006 
782,744 
$09,298 


e7i,iz7 
+ “ 


471,517), 


498,501 
461,082 
508,599 


472,264 


516,340 


eins 


Salt: 
Advances 
Cuftims. | and 
~ | | Charges 
£ £ 
124500 | 295,000 
1 
+ 4 
12663 | 310,162 
: 
10/852 | $28,483. 


10,984 | 344,264 


8,650 | 354,612 


gj31s | 334,556} 


84556: |_301,88%|.” 


| 

8448 |-326,377° 
Fis 

10,681 | 344,347 
1,948 | 352,666 
2M ee) 
29,091 


284,629 
32,580, Jo342,126 
peers bsbiibe 
31,346 "48,661 


27,400 | 350,34: 


27,599 | 37 8,24 1 


| F 406,232 


406,000 


Opium: 
Advances 
and 
Cliarges. 


102,097 


102,692 


126,804. 


‘ a 
the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


ess 4 j 93 


No. 6. (C) i 


of the Ceded ant Conquered Countries) at BENGAL, MADRAS, aud BOMBAY, as cfimated in 1793, and by the Aaval 


Eftimate of the fume for the year 1809-10. 


MADRAS. BOMBAY, 
i } 
: Dateh | 
i Pot s, GRAN! 
2 eM iciat.. | Te _ | Settle. i ‘1 : GRAND 
Stamp. | TOT cae ‘vil. | Judiciat.. | Revenne. sgh Gril, | Marine. | Revenve. |} TorAL. |{ 5. us 
\ 
Baek aa Ao aie eee es 
| al 
amine’ Bee Coihec Vice ie ie MBA. igi Sh cea L 
i he 90,000} 74,250} 19,500 | 17757:50| 12,196,950 
i w 


- - 4 1,763,491 || 8,347] 136,748} 661 | 272,435] - = =] 418,191]| 109,984! 79,750] 15,957 


1,581,200 || 9,230) 102,760) =~ | 256,000 | "=~ = | 368,000 
! 

ec teal 2,386,779 
i 

q 


113,586] 93,330} 13,411 |} 220,597 2,412,545 


394,345 


1,797,873 8,499} 120,208 662 | 264,976 


-| ~ll-1,996,641 }| 9,402] 197,569} 715°} 164,239] s - = 501,926] 102,163! 77,825] 12,350 | 199818 | }2,100,919 


o 
8 
y 

= 


1,969,342 11/811) 125,208] 1,110] 342,194] - = ~ |] 479,95; $7,616 13,190 || 167,547 | |2,616,342 


- '- |] 1,984,251 |} 12,542] 99,575] 11,876 | $16,545) 71,978 || 512,016}} 107,491) 65,747) 17,012 }} 190,250 | |2,686,517 


| 
8745 |] 1,875,996 || 12,466] 107,088] 14,069 | 324,128] 94,061 |} 541,962]] 115,977), 65,604) 19,045 |} 2014224 | 2,619,182 


6,638 | 1,814,969 | | 12,819} 122,289) 15,574 | 974,888] 65,794 143,599] 57,292] 17,125 || 217,944) |2,624,277 


1,986 || 2,071,686 || 18,615) 154,981} 21,369 | 285,836] 88,912 164,208] 146,172}--21,503 |] 331,883 | |2,952,682 


1,836] 2,081,197 || 15,849} 104,862 | 25,716 |-390,987| 85,975 142,809} 152,601 | 55,441 |'350\251 | |3,055,437 


1,858 |] 2,012,815 || 15,832] 113,221 | 28,672 |- 395,877 | 55,895 166,286} 116,867| 48,876 |) 332029 | |2,953,741 


2,193 || 2,196,367 || 16,904} 105,377 | 91,476 | 374,778 | 978,752 165,677 | 118,094) 61,318 sigou 8,509,343. 
2,884\| 3,223,884 || 20,750] 108,095 | 140,266 | 877,288 | 931,976 148,863| 108,875] 58,459 id,197 |fy518,286 
1,574 || 2,506,562 || 19,251] 156,290} 178,907 | 320,164! 151,631 201,872} 131,647 | 78,109 || 411,628 5,724,433” 
justo 2,579,191 || 24,639) 103,702 | 211,555. 420460 62,124 177,490| 134,493) 82,993 394,976 796,587 
10,804 | 2,417,318 || 22,980] 138,154 | 225,950 | 504,210) — 7,912 158,859] 158,393] 91,005 408,857 725,98) 
ins | ~ & = |} 23,384) 141,780}214,124 | 442,126] 13,132 156,894} 154,134) 89,953 |} 400,981 a 
duel _ = =-}}-19,926] 108,807'}193,978 | 333,024) 9,396 106,751| 167,440] 90,081. 376,272|} — 
10,642] - = §= | / 17,868) 115,395 132,563 | 416,180} 5,646 111,263] 155,025} 83,572 | 949,360 <7 
| Fis ee - 


ccountant. 


WF mas Nicola Wittoer, 
tig i 


303+ a ——— 


Srom the Sclee& Connuittee on 


—$ — <= 


SDIN to the Second REPORT 


, Appendi 
; Dia COMPANY 
Ax ACCOYNT of the AMOUNT of the BOND and other DEBTS owing by the RAST INDIA COMPANY 


BENGAL | MADRAS. 
" Ate Pete Most 
wa, | BRE | white | Ue [aon 
Le L eS iL es L 
6,072,044 989,242 656, 045,685 
W792"s v= Grofi Debt = + = = - = = =| aorasso| aograss | 607204 | gsgee2 | 656,403 | 3,635,6 
* a9 Gro& Debt - - - - = - + ~] gsGeor4| 1,090,902] 5,057,816 364,468 4,095,189 
‘ Peaster ore rarity ron a9: 53,490 sp2.90 197,960 8056 
1794 ~ + GrofeDebt - - - = = = - ~[~azen749| 1,080,179 39,195 184614 | 334,405 309,089 
ne snp pat wr See Seba . 
Deore wrsoas2 2] MO gas ; ue surat} iat | juss 
W795 + - Gro&Dett - - - - = ~~ -\ yGoaon ‘99,448 | 5,605,872 363,452. 993,905 | 971,683 495078 
Inereate 17945 - - Vie = aa % Bae re ‘eS 
Decreafe roe > 22 ; outs wud P 
1796 = + GrofDebt. - + = = - - 2 = T0113 | 3,097,060. s5y68] {431,960 770 
Tneronlt 1795-6)> =). ie vores | ares 3,500 
Decree 1708-0 = tae ae BER a5 
A797 =~ GrofeDebt ~~~ 2 ee 1254042] 6206 11729/899 | — 310,710 191,691 |? 
2 GOT re 120199 Joh a seeaay 90,206 
1798 > - GrofDebt - © =)- - -|-| ~Gorna5e| vasgsaie | 7arani8 asso | 20201 151,686 
98 7 y 
Incceule 479 3 1.906 a8 Aco | on SF 
Dosreate 179 Sots cae gh! tine ‘i gee 
ta ae 
1799 - = Grofs Debt - - 


Pre eRe 40,972 278,290 sid i 
‘Sinking Fund ~ ATT 843 AYE * 
Net Debt = - = = «17 679,509 8.994 )105 2,120,800 2 2,998,958 | 196,298 
Tocreafe 1798-9» ~~ 18,4 06 een 4 i} Ae 
Decreafe tracy o> oan a eH: Bad amen) ae lines 
Pee ———_}__- ——|——_] 
1900 -- + GrofsDebt - - - - 2 2 2 8 8,512,007 AFOATIS 10,274,014 735,052 603,706 | 215.14 
Sinking Fund ~ 387,079 | 3,289 12,808 3 23,994] 1803. 
Net Debt - = - = -[7 gjre4720 | 9801186 | 710088 081 gue 
Thereafe 1799-000 Mi 1 09,90 t é Suto 
Decree io9.a09 = >|» eNIoL teks As 
1801 -.- GrofDebt =. '- - -- . +! Tos; 12,018,594 2880 
Sinking Fund =|” “638,350 742,907 73,08 
Net Debt - - - - 


9,690,681 e75a6 | | aquvart | avejo0 


9,054 
7 Tnereafe 19008. <= arya Misha MG ST? 9ATd ATG Mi.343 
Deerenie woot = > 2 Reece oa Pe bee | rouse | 36948 
oe ——$—_}__ 
1802 - GrofDebt -  - ~~ - = =| iingog7e 13,361,489 391095 | 430,972 | 3,822,067 | 305,705 
Rinking Fund =] “gos iso2 Aibisa0g, re 134,540 | 10,763 
Net Debt - - - = -|Tosszare 12,493,080 206,955 | asvu72 | “58707 | apngve 
Increale wold = =<] anna warAge ows) abe 
1903 = = Grof,Pebr - -- - - =| ii7agsie dagcoe'| og iay 


wiking Find =| 199h380] su 


087477 $018516 | so7izt | 


’ 4.414487 | 940,046 
430) 719,810 102,937 275999 | = 


- 275,909 | 22,00 
Net Debt = = -"- =} 1043482] gaedevie | 12479,906 | essay | | avanaer | agraq 318,090 
Toertnfe 10g. - = 908,006 TAH ATONE 4Aede = =e tl 41d ore 
Decreate noes = ee = : hon iis ee 
Woe << Gros Debt 2 - - -  gasonus | a,ei6c08 aa0m01s | 441,585 
SinkingBund =| |1,845,075 555,25 S759 | 2S 
Net Debt - - - = -| hiGons71 958,066, 928,624 | 441,385 
Increve 1nog - = =|) avon 7 trast aa va 
Deevenle 1803-4 > sae ee aye 


1805 - - Grofe Debt - - - . - 


oer 
Foe a 189017 1975750 5,462,001 | 420,01 
Sinking Vuod = 23192800 |" T54203, 4890235 | 39,139 
Net Debt - + = = ~/ 45,366,504 | — 3,982,483 | azagior7 | 4,121,547 4,520,682 381,16: 
Tyetete aoa = <=] una3eh tev aan ron ay ssa 
06 Grats Deb 61,692 | 3,006,852 | a1 s08,c44 
WWOG = = Grafs Debe ~ - ~~. Ger6ione| 3,206,882 | ai,s08,0 1,533,009 51759 
Sinking Fund =| gaannsi6 921984 019 reas 
Net Debt - - -* 1 45,990,071 5,795,030 | 470,528. 
Hien sat «=| ease 135,40 wana | wees 
(a dae 
1807 = = Grof Debt ~~ 19,970,088 | 9,896,666 799,450 
2714988 | “116016 Sere 
Net Debt 5-9 << - se) 7 absob 19,976:554'| 1,499,010 749459 as6iGsy 
Dremel? 22 2] yt eed ee sie 
; ee eerie 
1808 - = Grofs Debt = - ‘Sinking Fang 1] 20884408 | 9,002,708 1,696, 
Sioking Fund -} “siiisz74| "120,606 253,478 
3 NeDebr ~- <5. £ is,f34 | 2,892,168 | 20,680,802 | 4.460761 6,112,528 6,888,977 | 503,203, 
Bono S 18890 1aot8 orate ‘5751 mosre| 2. Torscs | 16,608 
| a _—— fs | |__| 
ee reg DE Sa 7 | 20.962,985 | 2,865,200 | 90.897.595 | agonaz0 7.950670 
gad = | 39990 | “125.489 | 3.540.849 | ae Sig (626,268 
ee Debt ns tier Seen bon ce dsgge 20,286,646 | Tagaase 6193413 | 459,685 
bes genta sisr29 Freres 368, fa%9 
| 


assact| — sgoe 


N-B The Indinn Curreney is converted into Brith at the follawi 
Current Rupee ~~ at Bi: | Boptay Roiee «sor as i 
Tndia Noord Office, “gabe mame Mra caueccearen a 
Whitehall, 14th June 1810, 


INDIA COMPANY. 


the Advis of The EAST 
es 


ed 


——e 


at the feveral PRESIDENCIES in INDIA, on the 30th April, in each year, from 1792-3 to 1808-9, both inclufive. 


BONBAY. FORT MARLBRO. 


TOTAL 


i 
TOTAL 


low 
@[rtzogae | 2012,796 | suaazraal GxGrs 


Spec 
7,971,005), 306,300 


109,975 


7,305,007] 432,478 


Jae penseusa+ 


wavs | woisoo] rae 


1,468.800 |) 6,798.99: 


4} Net Decivate 17040 = - 


Yer tert al 


398,595 
peas | 


= a5 


7195982) 492,690 


rar 


567,973. 


= 2] xe memetarars -- 


WOsOG sss] 746 908 


s72s,oo0) 474,80 


12,811,863) 900,907 
ur” 194555; 


14,584,00]) 987,412 


| Nec tne 1799 == sain ware 
14,454,508] 1,064,041 
435, 2787 


{Nectnomtevroneco | sox 


19,999,196! 1,097,614 


| waterr]— s2osoe 


1,923912 
48,500 


16,610,803} 4,073,971 


$Net terente 1000-1, =~ 


175,007], 4,302,049]) 


9,816,120) 18,409,81 


Net tnereafo 1001-2 ~~ 


| 


{Net trcreafe 1902-8 - = 


snis907]) 36.457 


19,7 085,82 


1,170,160 


1a oor 
08 


out 


19,572,203} 


41,160,993 50,008 
24,898,075), 1,724,493 
2,776,393|) 164,57 


gy121 482) 1,559,856 


Yrectasee sans «7 


sa9,oe9 || asa, 


| 


266)) 1,954,590 
2081,035]| “199,382 


See nme 8048 - 


25,400 ,631)) 1,792,248 


9805;149 34, 


1806 - =| 97,359,609 91,515,195] 2,545,588 


terete 08.6 


Yee terete 1800-7.» + 


na 


9 | 28,802,000 
| 


wwe | 
j ssro1007 | 2081.78 
‘37450,600 | 259,022 


980,244,341'] 898,056, 


ayrazjsos |} 09,en1 


181,587 a 


Yer tacreate 1002-8 » = 


27,152,728! 9,724,003 


35,870,484 |) 2,580,970 
4,862,606) "283,579 


|| 9,297,591 


A6H470 6575 
85,053,043|| 2,513,573. 
4167,155]| 307,019 


30,876,788 


Nex Decreafe 1008-9 ~ » arene | 131,091 


(Errors excepted) 


Thomas Nicholas Wittwer, Accounts. 


4 < 7. — we * bse — =. 5 
of 3 APPENDIX ‘to the Second REPORT from the Scle& Committee on — - =z a4 
z ‘ 
= = = — —_ =- : 
7 . : Appendix, 
ay s > pte, « ae 2 
+4 Ax ACCOUNT of the Amoustofthe ASSETS of the EAST INDIA COMPANY at the 
Se ; PENGAL MADRAS. BOM | 
abe : 
oa! La i ca ; tel 
Export Tune 
oot Gane} tora. and | Steret 
; Wor | Goods. |G an 
F Bilis 5 |fiivetincat Cate. sere 
tas 2 = — 
kL ES £ L 


pec eee fs 
1792 - -| 995,95 F080, | 
803,194) 469,289] 1,242,831) 314,195 


S783 150,489 }#081,802} | S69, 949,804 2,206,915} 


76,268\\2do4,a77) | 754,301] 496,515 5,050.08 


300,987, 
1794 ~ -] 716,281} 481,111 |1185,763) 447,498 


1,069,224) $82.53: 
4795 = =|1131,108| 475,667 |1,107,536) 944,181! 86,508] Go,o02 fi,519,825} | 655,728] $95,657 2.817, 


{ 
1796 - = |1,003,8591 445,658 |1,413,891] 258,47 | 96,251] 163,200 }3,41,330, | 592,419) 612,3003,00,41 
» 1797 ~ -| 645,308, 984,700 [1,675,581 


2,549,171 


'1671,586| | 180,095 } 129972] 596,509 
ls.499.893} | 2655987} 199:517 |' 4205095 
'4,363.156) | 110,177 | 348,226 
5,463,147] 568,556 | 349,066 
“1798 - -| 754,002] '542,770)1,599,124) 296,002 52,657 (3,488,092 | 415,121) 753,995.5,584,519) 213,817 | 177,952| 133,008 ose 419,011 } 948,510 | 491,791 


2701) | 649,718) 586,7219.951.004 


1,722,551) 
a a 
1799 = -| 431,893} 584874 |1,305,053| 469.476) 71.199 


33609 
| (or: 


703,541) 519,2109.065,74) su1.e59| 147,750] 207-682 ||57268,624) in 355,542 411,697 
$26,560) 1,290,193] 707,512: 


1800 - -} 611,919) 363,715 | 68,920] 311,431 


} 29,968) 283,718 pee 278,780 | 392,572] 381,178 
36.495 | 367.162 |6,434,018] | 79,797} 281,951 | 202,095 
= | ot 
$6,162 | 299889 117,102,540] | 198,507 | 905,532 250,254 


* 


298,282 | 454,791 iees| 116,897 | 531,011 406,997 


1go1 = =} 589,159) 


254,628} 104,350} 282,001 fs {1,529,976 
| 


1902 - -| 667,019) 


| 247,537 | 186,735 | 284,395 15,644,555) [1,952,341 


1803 ~ - [1,020,841 


698,852 1, 342,731 | 209,693 4,184,427) |2,097,631) 


‘280% - - |1,058,287] 725,670 $43,310 | 271,145}4,756,443] 1,900,177) 948,12: $29,214 | 936,673 ;)7,511,119| | 190,151] 344,392] 546,488 


4905.- ~|1,128,881) 770,619, 188,974] 528,450} 400,913)6,148,293] |1.093,680| $75,110.4,000,12 


260,398 | 364,959 | 275,402 j7.975,686) | 242,621| 368,568 | 535,654, 


1806 ~ - 11,236,489) 667/491 283,219 | 245,282 (408,1 


esta 702,363/4,202, S775AS | 549,715 18,877,274) | 456,087 | 356,726) 589,720 


4. 


1807 - -}1,429,8: 418,915 | 210,052. 358,323 | 3574 3,510,510) | 550,540 | 359,343 | 601,465 


1808 - - 15,103,459) 290,617 | 517,124 999,125 } 525,897 | 0,630,514] | 668,367 | 469,966 | 880,502 
Pai 

. } 

} 


Sif Jen, 


3,540,889) 1] . 
1809 ~ - /5,239,153} 691,193}5,167 462) 376,466} 403,581 ! E 1906 oe 619,659) 9,182,689) | GoG;287 | 433,908 | 64.669 a 


“Yadia Board Office, 
Whieball, 14th June 1810, 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 97 


No. 8. 


= > e 
feveral PRESTDENCIES in IN DIA, on the Soth April in each year, fiom 1792-5 to 1808-9, both inclulive. 


BAY. FORTMARLBRO 
Grain Cath 
bits ei and, TOTAL, aad 
Goods, Goods. 
Cattle. ~ Bilis 
I) . 
L & L & & 
SifSun, 7 aie 
151,733] 85,111 - = - | 902,480 80,034 29199. 816,171 
+ 62,238] 52,467|- - - || 719,60) 40,580 | 36,729 1,854,493! ,043,8094,682,129)> 
Sit July. rok Ben é. 
48,786] 84ge2)- - -} 839,084] | 39,934 907,054 Eve eee 
87,754] 87,602] - ~~ | 983,805] | “S1,598 103,821]1,215877-4:715,569 
140,982} 59,705} - - - || 86,135] | 37ag0 = 16 1,800/46]1,186,26514, 
249,918] 130,039 | 28,940]}1,311,204] | 14,585] 24,136] 74,735) 30,2%1) 215 }1.494,495)3,969,567)5,484,05 
we 
199,557 | 18,518] 23,169]}1,202,456] | 23,053) 23,263) 103,027} 20,904 1,04} 1,812,087} 1,651,438)53578,4: 
7 ‘ We |e 
. atts 
135,959] 165,248] 5,232 }}1,300, 8)731| 24,866) 198,081| 96,742) 1,006 |) 0 9378,599)1,475,69215,399,986) 
23)1,743,46215,673,749) " 
+ 


179,958} 188,801 | | ~ 1,015 1,992,30¢ ai 24,366) 123,061] 26,742} | 1,006 jj 


878,205 | 208,889 | 1,183 |}1,152,06c| 


(1iss2 | 23,697 


103,005 small 2,898 1,037,683) 


15,667] 7,092] 3,948]| 875,952 


143,925 | 483,705 | 79,142 ||1,736,903) 


131,927 | 409,268 | 109,011 Be oak 929,412 |, 90,252 


140,266) 545,598 | 9,948 }1,898.085) | 18,027) 42,287 


245,621 258,006] 759 nae } 18360} 49.756), 


152,156] -2,288'}!2,02,124 


158,708|* 2,102 Lara 


. the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 103 


expediency of the meafure. We are not aware of any material reafon that would render it 
adyilable to poftpone the declaration, whereas there are a variety of confiderations which 
appear tous to make it highly expedient that the valuable rights and tenures which you 
shave conferred upon the asides in thefe proyinces fhould be announced to them 
without delay. The feafons this year have been remarkably favourable, and abundance 
reigns throughout the country. The public credit is high, the paper in circulation bearing 
an’ interett of eight per cent., felling ata premium of one per cent. and the intereft of money 
is proportionably low. As this paper is in a courfe of payment, there is every ground to 
expect that the large capitals poffefled by many of the Natives, which they will have no 
means of employing when the public debt is dtcHatged, will Ge applied to the purchafe of 
janded property us-foon as the tenure is declared to be fecure, and they are capable of 
efimating what profit they will be certain of deriving from it by the public Tax upon it 
being unalterably fixed. - With refpeét to thofe Landholders with whom a ten-years fettle- 
ment has been concluded, the announcing to them that their Jumma is fixed for ever will 
not only incline them to pay their current Revenué with cheerfulnefs, bur add to-their 
ability todifeharge it by the credit which they will obtain from the increnfid value of their 
tenures. On the other hand, the declaratiqn will not fait to yender the few Landholders who 
have not entered into engagements, eager to fecure to tlemielves the fume valuable rights 
and privileges: ” reset Ss ? 

23. For the above reafons we fhould think it impolitic to delay the declaration that you 
have empowered us to: make, the announcing of which will, we are perfunded:7be confidered 
as the commencement of the era of improvement aud profperity in tis coucts 
fhall be particularly careful that the notification is drawn np in the manner you preferibe, 
and that the terms of it may be calculated to imprefs the Landholders with the value and 
importance of the rights conferred upon them, and of your folicitude for their welfare and 
profperity. We fhall likewile, to prevent any future mifconception, exprefsly referve to 
you the right of eftablifhing and colle@ing any internal Duties that you may hereafter think 
proper to impofe; and ailo declare your determination to affels ull alienated or rent-free 
Jands that may hereatier revert to Government, or be proved, after a regular trial in a Court 
of Juflice, to a held under an invalid tenure. We thal further declare tala a claule to 
that effect has been inferted in the engagements with the Landholders) that you do not mean, 
by fixing the public demand upon the lands, to debar yourfelves trom the exercite of the 
right inherent in you as Sovereigns of the country, of making {uch regulations as you may 
occulionally think proper for the proteétion of the Ryots an infenior taidhold 3, Or other 
orders of peo concerned in the cultivation of the lands. A defire to give this notification 
the confideration that the importance of it merits, is the reafon of its not having beea 
tranlinitted to you by this difpatch. 


24. We now come to the clofe of your infiructions; “the watching over and the maturing of Par, 49 tosh 


this fyftem, maintaining under future Adminifirations the energy which has commenced it,” 
and to the other important points detailed in the paragraphs {pecified in the margin. 


25. It is with much {atisfaétion we acquaint hes that we haye endeavoured to provide 
for thele important paints, as well as for the adminiftration of the Laws and Regulations in 
general, both civil and cviminal. The arrangements which we haye adopied for this pui pole, 
are contained in the accompanying eopy of a Minute from the Governor General, recorded 
in our Proceedings of the 1ithealtimo, and we have refolved to earry them into execution 
as foon as the collections of the Bengal year are brought to a clote. Vor the reafons at 
Jarge which have induced us to adopt hele arrangements, as well as for the detail of them, 
we muftrefer you to the Minute itfelf; we flail here only {tate fome obfervations re(pediing 

‘ Ly on they are immediately eOunecied with the part of your infiructions above no- 
ticed. eles "Oy 

26, With refpedt to maturing the fvfem, it will depend ti 
palling occafionally fuch Regulations as may be contiftent wil 
declaring and defining the righis and privileges of the feyeral de! ions of Proprietors 
and Cultivators of the Lands. To enable you at ull times to form a judgment how far 
your Adminiftrations conform to theie principles, we have be) that all Regulations 
which may be in tuture enacted by your Governments regarding the above points, as well 
as every other matter affeGling the rights and property of the popes fiiall be frtimed into 


m your Government 
principles of it, for 


Bills like the Aéts of Parliament ii’ Great Britain; that every lation fhall have a 
preamble, fiating the reifens for adopting it; tha: the feveral’ Regulations pafied in each 
year {hall be numbered, and that at the expiration of every year, tbe i ations paffed 
during the conrfe of it (hall be printed and bonad up in volum that a fafticient 
sumber of thefe: s fhall be fent to the Courts of Juftice, and if to you. We 
have allo refolved that ail the exilling Regulations which may not be tevoked by the plan 
in queltion, fhall be arranged in a timiar order, and be printed: We fhall not here enumerate 
the benefits which muft refult from baving a regular and complete Goi for all the Regulations 
which have been, or may be patled by the Britith Government, and which mult neceflarily 
involve all’ points refpecting the commerce and agriculture Gf the couairy, and the 
adminiftration of juftice, as they are fully detailed in the Governor | eneral’s Minute. We 
fhall only obferve, that you will in conlequence always have before you ia a clear and 
diftin& feries, every meafure that may be adopted by your Governments in any sefpect 
affecting the rights or property of your fubjects, and” the internal government of the 

363. Dd countrys 


coustry. We / 


| 


104 APPENDIX ¢o éhe Sécond REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


country, with the grounds for fuch Regulation; that you will be able to trace with cer- 
tainty every deviation trom the principles which you may prefcribe for the government of 
this country; and that if evils thould refult from impolitic or dnjutt Regulations, they will 
ee i evidence againft the framers, who muitanfwer to you and to their country for their 
conduct. a 


27. The next obje& which is moft effential to the profperity of your dominions, is the 
peoriding for the due enforcement not only of the Neaalatinns refpecting the decennial 

ettlement, but of the Laws and Regulations in general which in any refpect affect the 
tights or property of your fubjeés. You will obferve from the Governor General’s Minute, 
that we have anticipated your remark (than which nothing can be more juft) that the neglect 
of inftituted Regulations has been moft noxious to your affairs; and we have long been of 
opinion, that no fyftem will ever be carried into effeé fo long as the perfonal qualifications 
of the individuals that may be appointed to fuperintend it form the only fecurity for the 
due execution of it. In this country, as in every other, fecurity of property mu be efta- 
blithed by a dy{tem upheld by its inherent principles, and not by the men who are oceationally 
to have the conduc of it; the body of the people mutt feel and be fatisfied of this fecurity, 
before induftry will exert itfelf, or the monied men embark their capitals in agricultural or 
commercial {peculations. There are certain powers and funétions which can never be 
velted in the fame Officers without deftroying all confidence in the’ proteétion of the Laws: 
this remark is particularly applicable to the various functions vefted in the prefent Collectors. 
All canfes relating to the rights of the feveral deferiptions of Landholders and Cultivators 
of the foil, and ail claims urifing between them and their fecurities, have been excepted from 
the cognizance of the regular Courts of Juftice, and made exclufively cognizable by the 
Colleétor of the Revenue. This office has of late years been allowed ‘a commifiion upon 
the ‘colleétions, and at all times the realizing of the Revenue has been confidered as 
his moft important duty, and any failure in the fuecelsful collection of it has fubjected 
him to difmifiion from bis office. Under fuch circumftances, it was natural to be 
expected that the collection of the Revenues would be deemed by thefe Officers the 
mott important of their daties, and that all confiderations of right would be made 
fabfervient to it; where the power to redrefs oppreffions, and fun¢tions that muft always have 
a tendency to promote or fkreen the" commiilion of them, are united in the fame perfon, 
a firiét adherence to the principles of jultice cannot be expedited, and fill lefs can it be hoped 
that the people will feel a confidence of obtaining jufiice. Upon thefe and other grounds, 
whieh are fully detailed in. the Governor General's Minute, we refolved to abolifli the Mahal 
Adawluts or Revenue Courts, und to withdraw from, the Board of Revenue and the 
Colleéiors, all judicial powers, thereby confining their duties and functions tothe mere 
collection of the public dues, and to transfer the cognizance of the caules hitherto tried in 
thefe Courts to. the Courts of Juitice, 4.2), ai Se 


28. For a more particular detail of the eonfiitution of thefe Courts, we mutt refer you to 
the Governor General's Minute; und we fliall here only obferve, that Courts of Juftice are to 
be continued on each cvlledorthip as heretofore, which are to be denominated Zillah, or 
Difiriét Courts, and the » Ju Na ae is to have cognizance over civil cautes of all 
defcriptions that may in his, iGion, whether of the nature of thofe termed Revenue 
Caules, and hitherto tried in the [ees Cotas or of the defcription of thofe which have 
been cognizable in the Courts of Dewanny Adawlut. We have refolyed likewife that the 
Colleétors of Revenue and their Officers, and indeed all the Officers of Government, fhall be_ 
amenable to thefe Courts for aéis done in their official capacity, and that Government itlelf, 
in cafes in which it. may beva party with its fabjedis i sof property, fhall fubmit 


ts beiire the Cours of Creat 
blith two Provincial Courts of Appeal at the cities 
if cutta. Each of thete Courts to be fuperintended 
appeal to lie to in all cafes whatfuever from the decifions of the 
and the City Courts within their refpedtive jurifdidions, The appellant 


City and Colleéorfiips included in the 
« jarifdiétion of each Court. 


ai ie og 


Provincial City of Patna. 
of Al for the Coll ene Sircar Sarum, 
- Divifion of ~ -Sirear Tuhoar, 
Shahabad, 
Bh et Bahar Proper. 


Dacca, 


106 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT fvom the Scled Committeo on 


ample time to remove themfelves with their plander out of the reach of their purfuers. We 
have therefore refolved to exonerate the Landholders from the charge of the Police, and of 
courte to deprive them of all the authority which they derive under the above-mentioned 
-claufe in their engagements, and to declare that they fhall not be held refponfible for 
robberies committed on their eftates, excepting where they fhall be proved to have connived 
at the robbery, received part of the property ftolen or plundered, harboured the offenders, 
aided or refufed to give effectual afliftance to prevent their efcape, or omitted to afford every 
afliftance in their power to the officers of Government for their apprehenfion. ‘Theie 
indeed, are the only cafes in which the Landholders were ever confidered at all refponfible for 
robberies, or in which they could in juftice have been made accountable for them. . Under 
thefe arrangements the country will experience all the benefit which it at prefent derives 
from the condition annexed to the tenures of the Landholders, without being expofed to the 
.evils and ubufes to which it has been hitherto liable from the vague and indefinite re- 
Aponfibility heretotore vefted in them, at the fame time that it will derive an effeual 
-protectivn trom the eftablifhments appointed for that purpofe on the part of Government. 


4. To render this proteétion as complete as poflible, we have divided the country into 
Police Jurifdictions, and appointed the neceflary eftablifhment of officers for guarding them. 
“Thefe officers are to be fubordinate to the Magiftrate, and are to be fiationed in the centre 
-of their refpeétive jurildiétions, in order that they may be better able to protect every part of 
them, and that the eftablifhments may be as near to each other as poffible. The means taken 
to keep a ready communication between thefe efiublifhments and the feveral Magiftrates 
throtighout the country, and that they may be informed of all vagrants and fufpeéted perfons 
that may’ be lurking in their refpective juri{diétions, muft foon bring to juftice thofe who now 
ive by committing depredations upon the country, and alfo deter others from entering upon 
fo defperate a-courfe of life. You will obierve, that at the fame time that we have yetted the 
Police Officers with fullicient authority to perform the duties required of them, we have 
‘taken care that they fhall esercife this authority at their peril, by rendering them liable to 
civil or criminal profecutions for any illegal aéts done in their official capacity. 


35. But tovrevert to the generul fubject. To give efficacy to the fyftem for the due admi- 
niftration of the laws and regulations, we have made ample allowances to the Judges of the 
Zillah and Provincial Courts of Appexl, fo as to put them out of the reach of temptation ; 
and itis our intention to confer thefe important offices on fervants of unimpeached chu- 
raéters, and whofe abilities particularly recommend them for holding thefe important trufts. 
As the Judges of thefe Courts will have no concern or connection with the Revenues and will 
haye no other occupation but that of dilpenting the laws and regulations; and as they will 
be bound by oath to adminifter them impartially, even when Government or its officers are a 
party, there is every reafon to expect from them a faithful and upright difcharge of their 
trufi and duty. Every motive will impel them to this: line of conduct: the Natives will foon 
acquire confidence in the protection of | aws 5 indir piney can neither injure 


others by intrigue or corruption, nor are in danger o} r aéts themlelyes, 
and thai the infects ol Tera wera lated, | mea paper fan and oppret- 
fion, which has 0 in | Ww deb princip! oe r own Government, will 
give place.to moderation and good faith. ie ei 


36. To render br ease nplete, ave refolved that a certain number of licenfed 
makes (fubject ty id ie at retin ions detailed in ih Goer Genta mate dpe: 
‘be appointed to ple: he caules of the fuitors in the feveral Courts of Jufiice, but without 
-debarring any fuitor from pleading: ins eae in perfon. The eaufes have hitherto been 
pleaded ‘by any perfous that fuitors have thought proper, to depute for that purpofe. The 
evils, abuiés, and impediments to the due adminiftration of juftice refultng from this 
practice, are pointed out inthe Goyeruor General's Minute, ~ hotepesiatment of thefe 
licenfed Advocates, the pleadings of the Courts will (oon come to be conducted with regularity 
and. dijpatch, aid pee will form a partof the efiabli ts the fuitors will no longer be 
fubjeci to the franc of the minifierial officers of the Courts. The reputation 
and emoluments of the will nd upon their exertions in favour of their clients. 

nowlede nlations which thefe Vakeels muft in a courfe of time 

fi every canfe will be fiated to the Judges, and 

I be expoled by them in the appeal to the dughes 

ir power to obtain advice refpeéting their 

their engagements wi ealyidihls 

impunity, injure them in 

tho ie nade, tnaether will” 
ocates, to command the exercite 


the offices of the Salt Comptrolier, the Preparer of Reports 
eve e i ae f pt cee other offices; the transfer of the 
ment of the Salt , and the fuperintendance of the Opium Sales, to the 
i f Trade; the refeindi ag regulations, and other meafures more 
‘or lefs connected with the leading principles of the fyfiew, and the adoption of which will 
_ be effential to the due execution of it. — "sg el a ae 
a . - 38. ie 


wio ‘APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Seleti Committee on 


17«Fifth. The 44th and 45th articles of the Judicial Regulations, which require a depofit 
:from two to five per cent. from the plaintiff upon the inftitation of a tuit, to be abolithed. 
“The 53rd.article of the Judicial Regulations, which allows an appeal only in caufes for a 
«certain amount, to be refcinded. An appeai-to lie to the four Provincial Courts of Appeal 
«from the devifions of the Ziilab and city Courts within. their refpeétive juri{dictions, in all 
-canles whatfoever. The-decitions ef the foar Provincial‘Courts of Appeal.to be final only 
in the following: cafes; viz. In fuits for perfonal property, where the money or the value of 
the thing claimed or decreed fhall not exceed one thouland Rupees. Jn fuits for real pro- 
perty being Malguzary (or fubjeét to the payment of Revenue to Government) where the 
annual produce thall not-exceed five handved Rupees. In faits for real pidperty being 
sLakerage (or exempt from the payment of Revenue) where the annual produce Mhall not 
exceed one hundred Rupees. An appeal to fie to the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut from all 
.decifions paied by the four Provincial Courts of Appeal regarding perfonal Brae where 
-the money or value of the thing claimed or derived thall be more thaa one thouiand Rupees, 
- and reipecting the foregoing deferiptions of real property the annual produce of which thall 
vexceed the fuims above {pecitied. — 


18,-Sixth. Native individuals to be permitted, under certain reftriétions, to profecute the 

officers. of Government, and Government alfo through the medium of its officers in the 

Courts of Juftice, for any injuries which they may fultain in their perfons or property ia 
- eppofition to the exifting regulations. 


1g. Seventh. Britith fubjects (the King’s officers employed in this country, and the civil 
sand military covenanted fervants of the Company excepted) not to be permitted to refide 
-beyond the limits.of the town of Calcutta, unlefs they fhall enter into a bond rendering 
themfelves amenable to the country Courts of Judicature in any civil aétions that may be 
dnftituted againit them by Natives.  All:Britith trbjeéts (not being King’s officers or civil or 
anilitary covenanted fervants of the Company) now refiding beyond the limits of Calcatia, 
awho thall omit or refule to exeerte the bond required, to be obliged to repair to Calcutta at 
.the expiration of:twelve months from the date of the publication of this order, but to be 
allowed to continue in the country upon their prefent footing during the above period, for the 
purpole of fettling their affuirs. . : 


-20. Eighth. A.certain number of authorized Vakeels, or Native Pleaders, to be admitted to 
i the, caufes of {uitors who do not choofe to plead for themfelyes in the different Courts 
-of Juftice, and no other perfons but thofe who may be fo authorized to be pesmilted to aét as 
‘Vakee!s in the Conrts. Ok or more of thefe authorized Vakeels in eacli Conrt to be ap- 
{pointed the Pleader for Government in all {uits i which they may be profecutors ordelendants. 


© 2a, Ninth. The Judgesof the Zillah aad to be empowered Be pronale regulations 
throngh the Provincial Courts of Appeal’ ivifion, to. the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut. 
‘Theféfour Courts of A, pra Bs ere of propesiugsregautians to the Sudder 
Dewsnny Adawlat. In thee 1 Sader wwanny Adawlut to propofe regulations to 
the Supreme Government» ‘T Provineial Courts of Appeal to forward all regulations 
‘that may -be propofed: to them by the Judge the Zillah or-city Courts to the Sudder 
Dewanny Adawlut, although they:thould entirely difapprove of then, with their reafons for 
Such difapproval, The Sudder ’ y Adawlut likewife to forward all propofed regulations 
which they may receive from thi vincial Courts of Appeal, to the Governor General in 
Council. “A preamble to be inferted in all-regulations hereafter enacted that may affect the 
rights or property of the people, cbntaining the reafons for the enaction of them. All fuch 
regulations to-be printed, with traiflates in the Perfian and. Bengal languages. ‘The regula- 
tions pailed in cach year, and the paragraphs or fettions in every regulation, to be numbered. 
At the expiration of'every year the Aineripigiteuisats Heap prets to bind wp in a feparate 
volume the regulations paifed a a and a fuflicient number of copies to be fent 
tothe Secretary of Government to be diftributed to the different Courts.of Juttice, and the 
officers of Government whom they may concern. A number of copies to be alfo fent annually 
2 a a : 


to Bnghind: 


29. Tenth, The Office of P epic of Reports to be abolithed, and the fuperintendence of 
‘the Opiuin Sales to bevtransferred to the Board of'Trate. % 
aati: Es cet offi ‘alt Comptroller to be abatitied. The Salt ‘Department te 

laced under the Boar he Dif lidgelee and Tumlook, the offices ol 
ge, | to , anc a bald by the Sele spent of thole divifions, to 


ore. The fettlement of the lands in Hidgelee and — 
agreeably to the general'regulations. _ : 
the office of Superintendent of the Bazee Zemin — 
to be abolithed. o- >Re aes 
Revenue, and the adminiftration of Juflice in each 
, To abolijh the Mahal Adawluts or Revenue 
Revenue, and the Board of ee all 
to the mere receiving and enforcing 
has triad inthe Mahal 


26. The © 


112, APPENDIN éo fie Sesold REPORT from the Seleé Committee on 


go. Ido not hefitate to pronounce, that whilft this order exifts improvement is not to be 
hoped for; and that the regulations which we are daily framing to promote the cultivatior™ 
of the country, and to raile the value of landed property, will be fcarcely known and fill 
Jefs felt by the body of the people. Z < 


31. There is no‘lafs of men which Government fhould watch with greater jealoufy, and 
over whoin the fegulations fhould have a ftriéer control, than the Officers who are erirufied 
with the collection of the public Revenue. It is neceflary to arm them with powers to en- 
force their demand in the firlt inftance, otherwife individuals, under the pretext of difputing 

_ the jufinels of it, might protra& the payment of what is due from them, and render the 
colleciion of the public Revenue either imprachertie or an endlefs fource of trouble and 
litigation, But.to prevent the ubufe of this power, there fhould be Courts of Juftice ready 
to ponith ead exaction, and the people mutt be fatisfied that the remedy will be 
-cerlaio and effeétnal, and that it can be expeditioufly obtained. The value of landed 
property is regulated by the profit which the poffefiur is certain of deriving from it, If the 
people know that there is a poflibility of any part of the profit arifing from the improvement 
of an effate being extorted from the proprietor by the Officers of Government, tie yalue of 
the poflefion muft be confidered as of a very precarious nature, AS it cannot t fore be 
fappofed that thofe who are moft likely to commit or connive at aéts of injutiice afford 
redrefs againft themfelves, nothing cin be more prepofierous gor give the exclufive 
cognizance of all difputes between the proprietors and cultivators of the lands to the Col- 
lectors of the Revenue. 


. 

$2. Itmay be faid that Government are ever ready to receive complaints of mal-admini- 
ftration preferred againft the Colleétors, and that enquiries of this nature are now depending. 
Let us examine whether this remedy tor the evil is efficacious. The ColleGor unites in his 
vown perfon the high powers of Judge in all matters of property, of Magiflratc, and of 
Receiver of the Revenue; he isthe channel of the information upon which Government 
forms its determination of the Revenue to be affefled on each eftate in his diftri¢t, and 
through which it communicates with its fubjetts; he may fupprefs regulations which affect 
‘their moft valuable rights, and the moft important arrangements regarding property. In 
thee various capacities there is not an individual his dittri€ whofe perfia and property 
is not fome time or other within the reach of his-authority: fuch power velted in aa 
individual,and ata greut diltance from the feat of fupreme controul, excites terror in the 
winds of the people, infterd of infpiriog them with confidence in its proteétion; and as 
they can form no judgment of our Government, butas it is thus fhewn to them in our 
Teprefentative the Colleétor, there is lit Se ae for them when opprefied to rely 
“upon our jultice for relief. By the operation of thele caufes, we are to account for whole 
provinces filently fubmitting for’ yeats to oppreflion, and for the mal-adiinifiration of 
Colleiors having never reached the ear of Government, until Help getting the better of 
the terrors of power, the people flock to the Prefidency to impeach thei oppreffor. When 
the complaint has been troteht before Government, whatis the refult? If the enquiry into 
the conduct of the offender is to be held on the {pol, there is no Court of Juttice in which 
it can be made; the offender hinlelf is the fole and chief Magifirate of the country: in 
this cafe, one of the alternatives is to depute a pexfon to the difiriét, with fpecial powers to 
ire i conduct; but how weak and in t has this expedient Ss in every 


‘it has been adopted. To be feleéted as an inftrument, {¢ fole purpofe 
of bringing to light the condnét of a nv fervant, is confidered an ious tafk, and 
ices to prevent 
a due invefiigation; but whatever may have been the-zexl of the perfon deputed, it has 
feldom proved 


fiould be wile and. upright, the 
agail committed AS ‘one dei 
oppreffions, they’ dread the 
tection of Government 
which cperate fo forei Cli z ‘Yanded property, there muti be 
popewer, allowed to exilt which can be & (0 the means of cppreflion, 
23s I fliould not hefitate therefore, under almoft any circumftances, to recommend the 
adopltiva of the propofition above ftated.. But as the demand upon each individual's efiate 
: x Spt’ a ae is 


“the Afiuirs of ‘The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 3 


s fixed for ten years, and [ trutt in perpetuity, the only circumfiance on which any plaufible’. 
‘argument could be founded in favour of arming thé Collegtors with thofe extraordinary 
powers, no longer exifts. Almott the whole of the Revenuetbeing raifed upon the Jand, the 
difficulty of collecting it will daily diminith, in proportion as the produce ineveafes by improve= 
mient above the amoimt of the public affefiment. The Collector will have little more to do 
than to open the regifter of the rent roll, and to demand the payments at the fixed periods, 
and to have recourie to the property of defaulters for realizing arrears. {t ig not necefiary 
fur the execution of this duty, that the Collectors fhould be either Judges or Mayifirates, 


oats Tt may be ftated againtt the propofition now under difcuffion, Fir, That when the 
leGors are deprived of their judicial powers, they wili lofe their weight and importance 
inthe eyes of the Natives, and that they will not have influence fulficient to enforce the pay- 
ment of the public Revenues. Sccondly, That the landholders will beitfmable to realize heir 
rents from their ryots and under-renlers, when liable to be cited by them at all times 
before a Court of Jutiice, and confequenltigthat they will be unable to difcharge thyg public 
Revenues. — at 3 ‘ ; 


in the 
is con- 


the landholders (and their perfons in the Jatt refort) that are Government's fecurity for the 
punctual difcllarge of the Revenue. ‘This fecurity will be had recourfe to in cafe of their 


fale of the lands or hippetty of the defaulter, or him to be confined in the pubtic jail 
his is 


7+ The fécond objeétion has as little foundation as the firft. 4 %? 


‘individuals who are influenced by a fpirit of litigiouf: 
they found that they could by that means withhold w ought ba fpeedy and 


few. People in general cannot delight in litigation; although there are, ae doubt, fone 
aes 
it fuch frauds. 


i ip; @ Court of Dezwanny 
Adawlut to be likewife continued in cach difiri@, end in the of Patna, Dacca, and 
Moorfhedabad. AU canfes of a civil nature arifing within the jurifdiction le to 
be firjt tried therein; the Judges of thefe Courts to be Magijtrates of ther Ppl 3 


ajd cilics as at prefent. ~ eee Pee 2 
41. The public affe! afcertained 1 fixed, and all pauaiciat 
matters being propofed to be Courts of Jufiice, the of the Colleéior will 


414 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT from the Sele€& Committee on 


.are attached during vacancies or the abfence of the Collector. They are al! upon the fpor; 

. -the transfer, therefore, of the office of Colle¢tor, to fuch of them as may be thought ft 
Bi the fituation, wiil not be attended with the leaft difficulty or interruption to the 
collections, 1% 7 


42. With refpect to fuch of the prefent ColleGtors as may be appointed Judges of the 
Provincial Courts of Appeal, or of the Zillah Courts, whether in the diliridis in which they are 
now fiationed, or in any other part of the-country, they will only have, upon their removal, 
-to make over charge of the colleétions, and the Accounts of the fettlement and other Revenue 
Papers and Records, to the perfons appointed Collectors. The Judges of the Zillah Courts 

will perform the fume judicial duties which are now difcharged by them in their double 
-capacities of Judge and Collector. Having been employed in the conclufion of the fettle- 
ment, they maft of courfe be well acquainted with the regulations refpeting the public 
Revenue, and the rights of all the various deferiptions of Landholders and Cultivators of the 
foil, as defined and declared daring the progre!s of it, and contequently mult be weil 
-qualified to decide upon all cafes relating to itibich will come before them; and as their 
whole time will be given up to the jadicial bufinefS, and they will*have no concern what- 
ever in the collecion of the Revenue, there can be dittle doubt but that they will adminitier 
_juitice with impartialily and dilpatch. sy 

43. Third. A Court of Appeal, confifting of three Judges; to be eflublified at the cities 

Paina, Dave, and Movrjfhedabad, and in ‘cin of Lalculta, The jurifdiction Weide 
“Courts to extend over the feveral collector/hips and the cities now included in the jurifdiction 


of the Qourts of Circuit. 


“the perlons {elected to fill them fho diliingui ¢ their integrity, abilivies, and 


ue 46. The offices of Judges of thefe Cou, ts will be the firft in importance in the civil line 5 
knowledge of the mannersy hm tone 


fk d languages of the Natives; and their allowances 
Ahould be proportioned to the greatuefs of their wut, The decifions of thefe Courts will 
commund refpeét; and, at the fame time that they will give fecurity to property, and afford 
protection to the people, their weight and influeace will contribute ey to the vigour and 
ilability of our internal Government. r 
47. The Judges of thefe Courts, in their capacity of Judges of Circuit, will poffefs ‘exactly 
stke fame powers us the prefent dacs of Gircuit, with this great additional advantage, that 
they will be able to complete the jail deliv@ries in oue half the time in which they are now 
accomplified, 'Rhe fenior Ju fhould amake,the Circuit of one half the ftations within 
their jurifdtétions, whillt the ot two perform the Circuit of the remainder. In addition 


to the gicat advantages of expediting the trials, the duty of the Circuit will be rendered caly 


488 v ey fhauld lic from thefe Courts in their ote ‘to the Sudder Dewanny 
Aduwlut, In their capacity of Judges of Cireuit, they will be fubordinate to the Nizamut 
Adawlut, agreeably to:the cxifting regulations for the department of Criminal Juftice. 


appeal fron} the decifions of the Zillah or City J udges, or the 
40. 


o Colledtors of the Revenue, | Calcutta. The great diftance renders it impoffible for 
"Government to control the condnct of the Judges and Collectors with effect, and deters 
“many fuitors, who think themfelves aggrieved, fromtleabing redrefs. The eftablifhment of 
she propoled Frome Courts Rabeat obviates this defeét; perfons who may think 
themlelves injured by the dec ‘the Zillah or City°Couris, will have an appeal to a 
snott refpectable Court almoft “2s, salle a 
the Records of ‘all the Criminal trials, as * 
the Zillah and City Courts. A gréat part of 
heir decrees; und their decilions on cafes 
Q of time,‘hnve the force of 
i the pretervation’ of the 
are {ubjeét to be removed fron one 
r to change his refidence. For thele 
id fixed place to meet with due form, I 
un 


49. At prefent there is no 


i & 


46 APPENDIN ¢éo the Second REPORT from the Sele& Comniittee on 


»partial decifions, and punifhing the litigious according to the cireumftances of the cafe; and 
-ot by iinpofing a fine upon all fuitors indiferiminately, and then allowing their caofes to’ 
vemain for years undecided. 


56. As fewer fuits will be inflituted, and thofe which may be preferred will be more expedi- 
-tioufly decided, when the time of the Judges is entirely given np to the admiuiftration of 
Jjuttice, it appears to me expedient in every point of view, to dilcontinue the exaction of this 

per centage on the amount of fuits.in future, 


57, The third regulation propofed to be repealed, appears to haye been enaéted upon a fup- 
:pofition that the Court of Appeal would not bave had time to decide upon the number of 
-petty caufes which it was apprehended would have been brought before it, had the right of 
appeal been unrefriéted, Although it appears to me neceflary to preferibe fome limitation 
to appeals in the Jatt refort to the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, Lam at the fame time of 
opinion, that the decifions of the Zillah and City Courts, in which caufes are tried in the 
firft inflance, ought not to be made final in any cafes whatioever. By the above-mentioned 
‘regulation, an appeal is not allowed from the decifion of the Zillah Courts, in caufes refpeci~ 
ing pertonal property, unlefs the value of it excceds one thoufand Sieca rupees. Mach the 
greater proportion of the fuits inftiiuted muti fall below fo confiderable a fum, and confe- 
quently the major part of the fnitors, who confift of the cultivators of theland, manuf&éturers, 
and traders, have no remedy againfi erroneous or unjutt decifions, 


58. The limitation with regard to landed property, appears to me particularly oppreflive. 
‘The decrees of the Zillah Courts refpecting the right to landed property are final, unlels 
4it pays a Revenue to Government of one thoufund Sicea rupecs per annum. — This is a 
-confiderable property, fuppofing it to be affefled at the higheft rate; and it would be found, 
that the greater part of the eftates in the country do not pay this fum: but the amount of 
«the pablic alleffnent is by no means a certain criterion for judging of the value of an_eftate. 
Lands that pay a thouland rapees per annum to Government, frequently yield much more 
sto the Proprietor. This difpropertion between the public aflefiment on an eftate, and the 
aGtual produce of it daily mutt become greater, and the inftances of it be more frequent 
snow that the talooks and finall eftates -have been feparated from the authority of the 
.Zemindars, and that the public demand upon them has been fixed. The above limitations 
afford room for the exercife of a wide and deftructive fpecies of oppreflion upon the 
shufbandmen, traders, and manufacturers, as well us upon all the lower orders of the people; 
but, by allowing an appeal from: the Zillab and City Courts in all eafes to the four Provincial 
Courts, (the Judges of which will have fullicient time to hear the number of appeals which 
smay be expected to be bronght before them) this great defect in the exitiing judicial sytem 
will be remedied, and the furts of the above very valuable orders of the comunity, however 
final may be their amount, will be tried with the fume cireumfpedtion and attention to the, 

_ Principles of juftice as canfes of magnitude. It appears to me neceflary to declare the 
decifion of the Provincial Courts of Appeal final in the cafes propofed, as the time of the 
Sudder Dewanny Adawlut might otherwife be occapied by cautes for a finall amount 

' appealed from litigious or other motives, and the decitior appeals in the lufi refort bein 
oneuaee delayed, to the great prejudice of the faitors, and of the general adminiftration 
OF J) j . 


. + 


59. Sixth, Native individuals to be permitted, under certain refiridlions, to profecute the 
fer of Government, and Government alfo, through the medium of ils Ojficers, in the 
Courts of Jujlice, for injuries which they may fiylain in their perfous or property, in oppofition, 
tothe exiftingregalations. rie 


Lapras of a whi b s 

~ them objects of ferious inveftigation ; befides the delay which is incurred by this procedure, 
an impartial enquiry and report cannot be expedted trom Colleétors in general, if the 
jenmplent is againft themfelves, or the Gfficers dependant on them, When the report is 


defective 
‘ saat Colors will be impartial, but there 
: rin what light they pleale; i 
ieee is perhaps cenfured, or the | 
Party injured, and it affords uo fecuril 


118 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT from the Scle& Cominittee on 


Judges of the Zillah and City Courts perfonally. Their control over them fhould be only 
that of a fuperior Court empowered to revife their decrees when regularly brought before 
them in appeal, 


67. From the high authority of the Provincial Court of Appeal, and the perfonal charac- 
ters of the Judges, who, it is to be hoped, will always confilt of men diftingnithed for their 
ability and integrity, it may be expeéted that any f{pecial enquiry which they may be com- 
niiffioned by the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut to make into charges againfi the Zillah’ or City 
Judges, will be conducted with the greateft impartiality. If it Thoxld appear fkom the refult, 
that there are fufficient grounds for the charge, I would recommend, where, from the circum- 
fiances of the cafe it thall appear advifable, that a profecution be infiituted againtt the 
acculed in the Supreme Court of Judicature, and that the expenfe of the prolecution be de- 
frayed by Government. 


68, With refpeé to the Judges of the four Provincial Courts of Appeal, it is to be prefamed 
that inflances of corruption or mifconduct will be fiill more rare amongfi them; but if any. 
charges thould be preferred againft them to the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, and upon en- 
quity there fhould appear fufficient reafon to believe them well founded, the accufed thould 
be brought to Calcutta, that the enquiry may be conducted by the Sudder Dewanny Adaw- 
Jat, or Coawittonent confifting of the udges of the other Provincial Courts appointed for 
the parole, or other fpecial means be adopted, fuituble to the cireumflances of the cafe. If 
there fhould appear grounds for the eharge, I would recommend, as in the cafe of the 
Judges of the City and the Zillah Courts, that where the circumflances of the cafe fhall 
render it advifable, the accufed be profecuted in the Supreme Court of Judicature, by the 
Law Officers of Government, In this Court he will be certain of meeting with an impartial 
trial. His character will be vindicated, if the charge fhould be groundlels; and fhould he be 
found guilty, he will not only meet with the pauilhment of the law for the offence, but for- 
feit the fervice, und be rendered infamous in the eyes of his country. 


69. Seventh. Britih fubjedls (the King’s Officers employed in this country, ond the civil and 
military covenanted fervants of the Company excepted) not to be permitted to refide beyond the 
limits of the town of Calcutta, unlefs they shall enter into a bond, obliging themfelves to fubmit 
to the jurifdiétion and the decrees of the Country Courts of . Judicature in dny civil'actions 
that may be injlituted againt them by Natives. AU British fubjecis (not being King's 
Officers, or civil or military covenanted f-rvauts of the Company) now refiding beyond the limits 

Calcutta, who shall omit or refufé to execute the bond required, to be obliged to repair to 

Jaleutta at the expiration of twelve months from the date of the publication of this order, but 
to be allowed to continue in the country upon their prefeut footing, during the above period, 
Sor the purpofe of fettling their affairs. 5 

70. The neceffity for adopting this regulation has been Jong felt, and for the reafons 
aligned in the pretiminary remarks to thefe propofitions, it will become more urgent, 
as the reftriétions on the trade between this country and Grest Britain may be lefiened or 
withdrawn. Britith Merchants have a ready means of recovering their claims upon Natives 
Dy application to the Country Courts. But the latter have jode of obtaining redrets 

the former, but by a profecation in the Supreme Court of Judicature at Calcutta, 
ere are many Britifh merchants aud traders refiding in the interior parts of the country” 


fe mot 


qj nizable, efpecially as they 
will have an appeal to the Suprenre ts apace of a Court ‘of Sudden 
Dewanny Adawlut, whenever th difiati the decifions of the Zillah or 

Courts, or (in a i shapes Atall events the interefts 


City 
of the body of the people 
individuals. <8 + 
limits of Calcutta (excepting French fub- 
Courts of Judicature, confequently it is not 
e paceeicat psoyoted to be required fiom Britith 
sw Il refufe to fubmit to the jurifdiction of 
jects above 
not to be. 
Fr permitted 


amade fubfervient to the views of 


the Afuirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, 159 


expectations from the plan propofed by you, and ftated in your Revenue Letter of the 
28th OGober 1783, paras. 17 and 18, of appointing a fubordinate Department for the purpofe 
of colleéting Balances only: if armed with powers to enforce collection, fuch a fyftem mutt 
unavoidably create a divided and clafhing authority prejudicial to the current Revenue, aad 
without them muft be inefficient. & ‘ 


$1. We confider the punctual fupport of the colleétions as depending more upon, and 
only to be enfured by the aétive exertions and honeft zeal uf our fervants employed in 
the Revenue Department, and the permanent fettlement of a reafonable and fair Reyenue, 
for the due payment of which the hereditary tenure of the poffeffor is the beft, and in general, 
the only neceifury tecurity. Ait 

32. But in faying this, we are far from implying an acquiefcence in the rigour of 
Mr. Stewart's propolal, “to inyeft the Superiutendant with a Rage PA! of pulting: 
“up to public fale a portion of the Zemindur’s lands, in & certain number of days (for inflance, 
“ ten) aiter failure in the payment of any Kift.” Ps : $ 


33. The power of depriving a man of bis hereditary property is no light concern, nor 
ought itto be tufted to the diferetion of any-fubordinate merely executive Officer. 
Belides, if the policy of all nations has circumferibed within cautions limits the transfer of 
all landed property, itis tar more necefiary to do eee Bengal, where roportion 
of the land rents has always appertained to the Sovereign, and e moft 
liberal confiruétion of a Zemindarry title, no alicnation cautt be valid unlefs it were recog- 
nized and ratified by a new grant of the Sovereign or his Viceroy. Ne 4 

"i alae, a 
| and. 


34. The forfeiture of a Zemindarry ouzhtnever tot ace without the pre 
of the fuperior Council, and we hope that, after the pofed Metllement ofa FH rf 

moderate Revenue, it will feldom or ever be neceffary to proceed to this exe We 
think it poflible nu plea thould be left for abatements and remiffions ; but we -alfo nfible. 
that cafes may occur where a Zemindar has aétually fallen in arrears from fome peculiar 
calamity of a Jocul nature, and that it may then be advifable to grant him Wepre 
relpite of a portion of bis fixed Revenue, inftead of compelling him to complete his 
engagements by money borrowed at a leavy interett, Pe ehingen 


35. We decline entering into any inftraGions of detail as to the 1s of 
payment of our Revenues or Balances. We truft to our fervants to ¢ 
coercion as are conformable to precedent and ufage, but avoiding and 
out our Provinces every {pecies of cruelty, however authorized by the 
country government. f 


i We ree Neltae 
6. Several of the Rules and Arrangements propofed by the Committee for the fettlement 
of the Bengal year 1188, and which have been continued with litt! 

ceeding years, appear to be judicious. We have alfo ly 

April 14thand May 17th 1784, and thofe of the fubfequent days, which 
ment of the Bengal year 1191, received by the Surprize Packet. | 
to fay, that we approve in gegeral of the principles laid down by the Committee of Revenue 

in their letter of the 12th April 1784, and are much to fee your ferupulous oblery- 
ance and execution ef the Orders you had received fro : Court of Direétors. Pi 


37. Your infirnétions to the Committce to afford every relief and : ce to the Ryots 
and Zemindars, confiftent with the Tee coe eat of the country, are Oe eae 
fatisfaGory to us. We are not equally conyinced of 1 priety of ers ve 
that they fhould encourage the Zemindars to pay their immed 

This indulgence, as it feems to be confidered, is liab 
diminifhes the neceifary controul of the Colleéor, enab! 
their payments, aud obliges them to flation Ageots at U 
felves in intrigues equally detrimental to their principals, wid 
and we fee no advantage in it but the faving that may accrue 
conveying the treafure from the diftricts to Caleutta. ? 


wy 
38. For thefe reafons, although we do not abfolutely prohibit 
incliued to encourage it; and if in any cafe it fhould be admitted, 
panied with adeclaration that it is not intended to carry with it a1 
regular authority, either judicial or general, of the jor or provi 
abufe which often attended the pra: ot Hazoor Jebfub, un 

No perfonal intereft fhould Pai the Members of the Con 

of the Khalfah, to induce Zemindars to pay there rather than in the 
fore direct, that no greater commifliou be charged upon one than upon the 


39. In ordering the fettlement to be made in every practicable infte 


jar, 
we conceive that we adept the true {pirit of the goth feétion of the 1 jeorge 3d. 
Various objections may he againft a Zemindar, which will abfolute from the 
general rule in their favour, fuch as incapacity from pees fex, 01 atumacy or 
notorious profligacy of charaéter. In fuch inftances a difereet and i 
way of Guardian or Dewan, is to be preferred before any tempor or fervant of 


Government. But we know there are great difficulties in this matte that cales may 2 

occur in which the letting of lands to a Farmer is the only means of fecuring the Revenues 

of Government, and preserving the inheritauce of the Zemindar inviolate. eo 
363. S Ss g se 40. Phe 


the: Airs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY: 167 


Holders and their tenants, as in the revenue concerns belween them; and: the regulations. 
they fuggeit for coriecting abufes entitled to mention both froi the fitnels they im general: 
eppear to carry in them, us dictated by experience from the immediate feene of diforder. in 
this view they are extremely interefting, as exhibiting colleétively what we muti judge vo be: 
anauthentic and genuine pictare of the people under the influence of the ald Revenue tyitem 5 
but weeunnot at the fame time help obferving with regret, that with {0 clear a perception of 
exifting abufes, and their caules, fill fo little thould, till latcly, have bee done to remove 
them ; and we muff coniels that in other refpectgwe have been tomewhat difa, pointed. 


9. Afier having poflefled the Dewannce five-and-twenty years, after fo many fueceffive 
invettigations, fich a prodigious accumulation of records, aud the necetlarily improving 
Fie tater of our fervants with the country, we fhould have feppofed that upon fo extra> 
ordinary a call, we might have feew a move general difplay of intinzate local knowledge, imore 
reference to perfonal inveltigation refpecting the ftate, cireminftznces, produce and value of 
the dittriéts, than the reports of the Coilectors have, upon the whole, atiovded. 


10. The very cireumfiunces however of your being-unable in intiny inftances to: procure: 
any other than general and hypothetical information on thofe points, aficr fo winch. tine 
and fo many opportunities for invettigation, muft itfelf be confideved as a Grong additional 
argument in favour of'a rate of taxation fimple and ipyariable. Having made thefe general 
oblervations on your preliminary proceedings, we think itis incumbent upon ns to take pur- 
ticular notice of the comprehentive and malierly Dillertation delivered in by Mr. Shore on 
the 19th June 1789, wherein he has not only exhibitedand iq Howie @ moff material 
part of the Reports trom the Collectors of the Bengal Province. byt at us new.and ims 
portant communications from himfeif, fupplying, ip ara ipecs what they wanted ; 
delineating with great clearnefs the paft financial fyftem a1 Aiftory, rf 5, examinin, 
with candour thole points in it which have beer fabjects of covtroverfy ; inveltigaling will 
patient judgment the bett fyfiem for that countey, the diffivulties. whiel. may: attend it, the 
means of obviating them, andi in fine, propofing from the whole a (gtof regulations for earry- 
ing intoexecution-our orders: retpecting the Decergial Settlement, for ws to feeure juflice 
both to the Goyermnenr and to: the fubject, and) va eee im fatave, Uhole: ebules which 
either exift, or may be apprehended in the details of the collec neh ont ise of 

at 0; ; 


information which this, performance contains relpedti 

ment and our own, the Pe and prefent fate Bait poe and corruption: ia the 
adminiftration of the Revenue, the rights and the characiers, of Juperigr and inferior 
occupants. of the land; fuch a colleétion, the luminous order in whic! BA iged, the vait 
application it evinces,and the good fenle which pervades it, dre all en! Htled to our refpect 
and praife, and willremain a monument of Mr. Shore's fervices to the Company, 


11; We have perufed alfo with much Pattie and inftraétion his Minute of 18th of Sep- 
tember 1789, on the Revenne Affairs and Decennial iettlement of Bahar. Thefe documents, 
bringing into viewthe moft material point relating to a permaneat affeiiment, have: enabled 
us to enter with greater intelligence into your proceedings upon that important tabject, which, 
waving the order of time, we thall now follow to its conclufion, leaving fuck quettions as in 
its progrets fprung from it, to be fpoken to-afterwards. fi 


12. We find that before the Decennial fettlement could be generally made, Mr. Lane had 
in corcefpondence with the principle of that fettlement, brought forward a Mocurrery plan for 
fome Pergunnahs in Bahur; to this plan we have particularly attended; we think that it 
went upon jaft views, and manifefted an attivity, knowledge and humanity, that reflected 
very great credit on the gentleman who propoted ir. It was an effec of the Deceanial 
fettlement in his diftriét, and a meritorious exhibition in practice of our own ideas of letting 
the lands upon a permanent aflofinent. His purfuitof a principle, right and laudable in 
itfelf, feems to have admitted into the detail of his propotals fome articles not perfectly 
according with that principle ;, but here alfo the confiderate judgment of Mr, Shore appeats 
to have fens of ufe. avs 


13. The Mocurrery plan, according to our apprehenfion, afterwards merged in the genera} 
Decennial fettlement that it was extended to, the term of ten years, ih the contingency of 
decoming ide if this was not underfood, we now give it as our opinion that tuch 
should be the footing on which the Mocurrery lands granted by Mx, Lae thou be placed; and 
deciding this, we think it unneceilary to go into a more particular view ef the plan, or the 
difenflions whieh it produced. But as it brought inte early view the principal means and 
effects of a fixed taxation, it is on that aecount, as wellas from the experiment which it fur- 
authed, and the fuceefs of that experiment, worthy of our commendation and applaute. 


14. We have deliberately confidered the inftruétions, which, after all neceflary pre- 
Jiminaries, you iflued for making the Decennial fettlement; firft, thofe of the 2oth Bay 1289, 
modified fublequently by your refolutions of September 1789, for Bahar, and next, thofe of 
February 1790, from Bengal. Regarding thefe infiraétions as forming the a@lual bafis of the 
permanent edifice we wiihed Lo erect, we have endeavoured to eGo ir fitaefs to their 
end, and their conformity to the materials you had before you, the itate and circumfiances 
‘of the country and the people. On the whole, we mult dele them t9 be, in our cpinion, 
well calculated to infpire confidence and remove abule; to and to fecure the rights 
‘of every individual, and, without impairing the authority or diminifhing the Itevenucs of 
eager te fecure to the people a progrels in profperity jnfiead of decline: we eer 
* 363. ce aes 2 


it 


168 APPENDIX ¢0 the Second REPORT from the Scleét Committee on 


do not hefitate to beftow upon them our hearty approbation, not pledging ourfelves in this to 
every particular idea comprehended in a complex code, but as being decided.in our judg- 
mentithat they were in general what practice aud good fentfe, rifting, circumftances, and 
the character of the natives required, to the attainment of the great objects we had in view, 
order, equity, the improvement of the country, the happinefs of the people, and therein the 
welfare of the Company, and the advantage of the national intereft connected with it, _ 


15. It was impoflible, where the cufloms were fo various, the people fo numerous, and 
where fo many diforders had prevailed, toyprovide at once tor every cafe that could arife 
in the courfe of carrying it into execution, a new fyftem intended for perpetuity. We 
therefore tee, without wonder, the frequent appeals made to you upon the occurrence of par- 
ticular cafes, or even upon points of a more general nature ; and as we highly commend that 
candour and folicitude for truth wkich prompted you, upon the firft promulgation of the 
infirudtions for the Decennial fetlement, to invite the obfervations and objections of thofe 
who were to be employed in the formation of it, fo we are extremely futisfied in general with 
the decifions which you paffed. upon the references fubfequently made to you. As thefe 
branched out into considerable detail, it does not fall within the compafs of our prefent 
deat but may be the bufinefs of a future letter to go into a particular furvey of 
them, s 


16. We now therefore pafs on to the refult of your inflru@ions and labours, to the Decennial 
feltlement es (with fome exceptions) formed: and we are glad to fee in one view the pro- 
greilive ftate of it to the month of Anguft 1791. Fromthe clear Report tranfmitted us with 
your letter of 10th Auguft, by the Swallow, we thence find that (exclufive of Chittagong, 
Cooch Buhar, Dacea, Momenfing, Tipperah, and Boglepore, in which places the Decennial 
fettlement was not completed) the net Jumma of 1196, the year preceding the Decennial 
fettlement, Land and Sayer, was - = = - -  Sicca Rupees 2,17,43,327 


and that the net Jumma of the fame difirict for the permanent fettle- 
ment, exclufive of Sayer and Abkarry, but inclufive of Rufluds, or pro- 


reflive increafes for the firft three years, was - = = =. 2,18,20,450 
making an excels, befides the Abkarry to be refumed of, fay = - = 86,132 
We find alfosthe net Jumma Land and Sayer of Chittagong, Cooch 
Bahar, Dacca, Momenfing, Tipperah, and Boglepore, to have been, 
in 1196 - = = = = = = = Sieca Rupees — 41,82,881 
and eftimated to be, in the permanent fettlement, exclufive of Sayer 
_ and Abkarry, but inclufiye of progrellive increalés - = - = = = _—39,17,185 
making adecreafeof ~~ = = = = =) = = = — 265,696 
and on the whole a decreafe in the permanent Jumma, excluding the 
Sayer and Abkarry, fay ey - - 1,790,564 


of which decreafe however the” tag on {pirituous liquors, or Abkarry, 
feparated from the Jumma on pufpofe to be refumed, is ftated to be 


at leatt fafficient for, fo that we may fairly reckon the net Jumma of 
‘ i 196, including Sayer, being as above, fay - - = = = 917,43,327 
ani Sale wee . 2 


- ~ - - - § 41,82,881 


‘in all, fay - 2,59,26,208 


unt alfo of the Decennial feitlement,exclufive of that complex and 
Sayer abolithed, and fated in a fubfe tepact_of the fame Report to 
amount, by the accounts from the Collectors, to no lefs a fuin’ ESivea. Rupees 9,81,192. 

_ 17. We muft theréfore declare aurfelyesto be fatisfied: with this Tettlement as far as it has 
deen concluded, andavith the profpeé given us of its completion. The amount appears to 
be on the whole as much as, exclufive of the alienated lands and the Sayer, could eatily or 
certainly be, in the circumtténces of the country, levied from it; and we are happy that with 
the abolition of a tax fo widely oppreflive as the Sayer is found: toyave been, it can afford a 
permanent revenue equal to the medium of our patt receipts from it, and fuflicient, we truft, 
not only for allexigencies of Government, but for the gr: extinction of our debts abroad ; 
at ithe faine time the, growing improvement territories is provided for, and a fource 
opened, whieh, fronythe progrets of induft ‘the extenfion of commerce, may probably 
furnifh additional articles of revenue in a thape the leaft burthenfome to the country. 


18. Ibis alfo very agreeable to find thaf thd dettlement has in general been made with the 
‘Landholders, or on their behalf; we would hope that by this time it is extended “throughout 
the diftrits, all. the arrangements refpeéting it ee) i, and the whole in a train of 
encouraging performance. 5 


19. We fhall wait with impatience for the fequel of your advices on this interefting 
fubjet, and in the mean time haye given our fentiments upon the rules for the Decennial 
fetilement, and the aétual formation of it fo faras that is known to us. We proceed to.fpeak 
more partieularly to feveral queftions of importance which arofe in the courfe of that work, 
‘and upon which our decifion or opinion is required; they were involved in your proccedin, 
‘With the main fubjeét, but we have thought it more convenient to feparate them, ene firft, 
: = ‘ollowing 


the Affairs of The BAST INDIA COMPANY. > 169; 


following that fabjeét to its clofe, to given diftin confideration to the moft material of 
thofe pots which came into difcuflion in its progrets. 


20. One of the earlieft of thefe was the landed rights of the Zemindars. In former dif- 
patches we have, on different oceafions, conveyed to you our feutiments on that point, though 
we have alfo ftated that we felt the materials before us to be infufficient for forming a 
decifive opinion. On the fulleft confideration we are inclined to think, that whatever doubis 
may exift with refpeét to their original charaéter, whether as proprietors of land or Col- 
lectors of Revenue, or with refpeét to the changes which may in procefs of time have taken 
place in theirdituation, there can at leaft be little difference of opinion as to the aéual con- 
dition of the Zemindars under the Mogul government. Cuftom generally gave them 
certain fpecies of hereditary occupancy, but the Sovereign no where appears to have boun: 
himfelf by avy law or compact not to deprive them of it, and the rents to be paid by them 
remained always to be fixed by his arbitrary will and pleafure, which were conttantly 
exercifed upon this obje&. If confidered therefore as aright of property, it was very im- 
periect and very precarious, having not at all, or but in a very {mall degree, thofe qualities 
that confer independence and value upon the landed property of Europe. Though fuch be 
our ultimate view of this queftion, our originating a fyttem of fixed equitable taxation will 
fufficiently few that onr intention has not been to aé upon the high claims of Afiatic dei- 
potifis. Weare, on the contrary, for eftablithing real, permanent, valuable landed rights in 
onr provinces; for conferring that right upon the Zemindars 3) but ivis juft that the nature of 
this conceffion fhould be known, and that our fubjeéts fhould fee they receive from the’ 

ghtened principles of a Britilk Government what they never enjoyed under the happiett 
of their own. z : 


21. The amount of prefent refources of our provinces has been another principal fubject of 
difcuflion, and it is certainly deferving of the moft attentive confideration in the contem- 
plation of a permanent fettlement. We have found two very different views of it, one given 
by Mr. James Grant in his analyfis of the Revenues of Bengal, and another by Mr. Shore in 
his valuable Minute of 18th June 1789, already quoted. We willingly take this Sppodaniy 
of repeating, that the work of Mr. Grant appears to us a curious and interefting one, 
evincing. both extraordinary difquifitory powers, and a laudable application of them to the 
affairs of the Company, whereby he has at length effected that which ought to have been 
performed at the period of our acceflion to the Dewannee ; for one of the moft proper objects 
of enquiry at that junéture certainly was, the real ability of the diftriéts, and their financial 
hiftory upon thefe tubjects. As fur as the native adminiftration is concerned, Mr. Grant’s 
able and ingenious relearches have thrown more light than all the collected informations 
that preceded them, and they may have been of confiderable ufe in enlarging and amplifying 
difgullions that were important in proceeding to a permanent fettlement. But we mutt, upon 
the fulleft confideration, difapprove entirely of the Mogul principle of taxation, the divifion of 
the actual produce between the Sovereign and the immediate cultivator of the foil, which under 
yarious modifications, has continued to be the bafis of practice unto the prefent time : we are 
convinced there are evils inherent in this mode, greatly obftruétive of national improvement 
and happinefs. We are moreover by no means fatiSfied Ulin our provinces have now 
refources equal to thofe which they poffeffed even when ceded to us; we wilh indeed, that 
we {aw no reafon to apprehend the contrary. From the beft judgment we can form, the 
natural calamities to which the country has been fubjected, joined to other circumitances, 

“have greatly altered its fiate, which at ‘prefent affords no external figns of abounding wealth, 
nor any probable fource of large eucreafe, except the alienated lands, which remain a fubject 
for inveftigation. We-do not mean to enter on that article_at pret farther than to 
obferve, that the outlines of the plan fuggefted by Lord Cornwallis, itr itis iter of 15th Augut 
1790, appear to us to be formed with great wildem and propriety, and we fhall forbear ex- 
prefling our fentiments upon it, more particularly, till we have received the plan itlelf in 
detail, In giving our opinion on the amount of the fettlement, we have been nota little. 
influenced by the conviétion that true policy requires us to, hold this remote dependant 
dominion under as moderate a taxxtion as will coufift with the ends of our Government, — 
But inany cafe, afier all the changes that thirty years nearly have produced and confirmed, 
we mu(t be of opinion that it would be vain to attempt te place things now upon the fame 
footing’ whereon they ftood at any diftant period, or to.eftablith a reform by local feratinics, 
which would be endlefs as well as odious. We fee hence no ftandard or guide for fixing our 
demand, but the experience of a feries of pati years, joined to fuch perlonal and official 
informations as are now procurable. Thee informations, upon an occafion fo fingularly inte- 
refting, we certainly conld have wilhed to have been fiill more intelligent and full than they 
appear to be ; but finding that in this way of proceeding the amount of Revenue, which, after 
due confideration of the ufuai exigencies of our Government, and of the reférve proper for 
extraordinary fervices, we had fixed in our general letter of 12th April 1786, may be ob- 
tained, we do not wifh to expofe our fubjects to the hazard of opprellive practices by re- 
quiting more. i ‘ 


22. The next diftinG point to which we think it neceffary to advert arifes out of the pro- 
ceedings in the Supreme Council, as well as the Board of Reyeaue, upon the fubject of 
Gunges, Hants, Bazars, inland Duties on the tranfit of commodities, and all that fails onder 
the denomination of Sayer, with the queftions that were agitated concerning the right of 
Zemindars to levy tuch impofis; the aflumption of that power into the hands of Government; 
aad finally, the entire abolition of the whole fyitem of internal duties, with the exception of 

> 5 ; sera 


170 =APPENDIN ¢ the Second REPORT Jrom the Selc& Committee en 


certain fpecified articles. We fee, not without furprife, fame of the moft intelligent of our 
fervants regarding the impofition of internal Uixes, duties or cuftoms, as a branch of the pro= 
prietary rights of Zemindars, and obterve in this inftance the danger of adopting into practice 
rigid [vtematical deductions from premiies in Uiemielves impertecily defined. Upon general 
principles, and efpecially the principles of a de!potic Government, we can conceive uothing 
more Incengruous and extraordinary than the iuhere: fluch alegiflative power in a great 
uumberol individual tubjeéts; and we find, that what is thus at variance with probability is 
contradicted in fact by immemorial ulage, which exhibits the privilege of impofing internal 
duties us exelutively belonging to the Sovereign, and fo confiantly esercifed that no Gunge, 
Adeut, or Bazar, could be eliablithed witiuut the authority of the governing power. In agree- 
ment with this practice the Company did, twenty years ago, interpofe, as their adminifiration 
have fince done, in yarious ways to regulate or abolith oppreflive citabliliments.and taxes. of 
shat nature. No right of Gove: at therefore feems to. us’ lef$ difpatable than that of; 
feparating them from the land tenures of the country, and modifyingthem at pleafuse, making 
fuitable ailowances for the rents accruing from fach as were efiabliihed under the fancétion of 
Government. We approve theretore, aud applaud the adlumption of all duties.and taxes 
Whatever, with the power of levying them from the Landholders; and having teen from the 
details in yeur proceedings the cuormous extent aud complication of the abules and opprel- 
fions cominitted under fuch names, with the greatedificulty of eradicating evils become 
inveternte, even under the immediate admiuiliration of the officers of Government, we are of 
opinion, that fince it was deemed impracticable to eftablith inftantly a proper diferimination, 
aid to-collect only what might reafouably be exacted apon certain articles of internal con- 
fumption, fince the advantage derived by the Siute was comparatively finall, and the injuries 
duflered by the trade,and the people of the country grievous, you aéted wilely, as well as 
liberally, in proceeding to the entire abolition of thofe infiruients of internal oppreflion, 


23. We think however, in correfpondence with the idea you, appear to entertain, that. this 
fhould be confidered as a fufpenfion rather than an extinétion of the financial principle of 
internal duty ; that when the whole bufinels of the Decennial fettlement is in a due. train of 
execution, and the time in other relpects fuituble, Government may review this object with 
the defign of afcertaining to what extent, in what form, and under what rules, it may fafely, 
be again made an article of Revenue without the danger of fuch abules againft the State, and . 
againit its fubjeéts, as have hitherto tublitied init. And we think likewife, that this con- 
tingency of its refumption fhould be underftood by the people, that they may the more eafily 
acquielce in fubfequent meatures to that end, 


24, In the mean time we truft effectual care will be taken, that Zemindars and others in 
ieftion of lands do not, by impofing on the credality or fears of the people, continue an 
exactions of this nature. We fee reafon for apprehenfion, when, after fo many and fucl 
fevere prohibitions of Government, even rendering difobedience a capital offence, the country 
thould have {warmed with illicit Chokeys or collecting ttations, an aftonithing fact! which we 
kuow not how to reconcile with due vigilance in our fervants placed over the diftriéts as well 

for the protection of the people, as the fecurity of the Revenue. = 


25. In reviewing your regulations refpecting the perfons with whom fettlements were to be 
coticluded, we oblerve that in certain intianees you have been under the necellity: ef makiogy 
ements with Farmers, but we do not find that in this inftance you have formed any deci- 
nn how thefe lands are difpofed of at the expiration of the period for which they were 
farmed, and we wait to learn your fentiments on this point. Ozr opinion at prefent is, that 
a the initances where the Landholders have at prefent been excinded, the firfi opportunity 
Would neverthelefs be taken of again giving to them or their heirs the option of being rettored 
to their lands according to the general principles now to be eltablifhed. Some: caution 
however may be neceflary, in order to avoid giving encouragement to thofe who may have 
declined entering into the agreement at prefent, in order to profit by the embarraflfment of 
Government. m : 
_ 26. Another feparate objet of attention, and which is conneéted with very important con- 
fiderations, is the queftion which arofe. with refpect to the different defcriptions of Talooks. 
We are not infenfible that, if the new {yfiem produces in procefs of time wil the efleéts which 
may reafonably be expected from it, the wafte landed tenures of which feveral of the Zemin- 
darries confit may become an object of very ferious import, under ditierent, views, to the 
Butt Government in that country ; and this in our opinion conftitntes one of the moft 
weighty realons, though not againft the confirmation of abfolute hereditary landed rights, 
et for all practicable circumipection in. proceeding to the eftablifiyhent of them, Indeed 
e facility with which annexations appear to have been made to Zemindarries, and the mag- 
nitude to which fome of thefe have tase fwelled even by the originating acts of the native, 
SreceeenE itfelf, muft be admitted to furnith fome prefumptive argument againft the notion 
firiét proprietary titles Tn thofe annexations there feems to have been always implied the 
exiftence of a delpotic principle which left every thing fubject to new ‘modification at its 
pleature ; and on this account, the circumftance which probably gave rife to thefe extentive 
polleffions made them lels av object of jeiilouty to Government. But under che Company’s 
Government the cate has sven bee different. The inrpolicy of thele extentive territorial 
pulleflions and jurifdictions, even in the loofe form in which they have hitherto been heid, bas 
not (ath unsoticed. Upon a fyliem of permanent polleffion and ftill more of fixed taxation, 
weniences of thei may be aageediy beumoreveal and ferious. , Wheneyer there~ 
: ‘ fore 


the"Afhits of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. yt 


fore the claims of juftice do not interfere, it muft be extremely defirable to promote fubdiv?— 
tions of the property in the foil; and we think that you confulted both juilice and policy in 
determining to disjuin entively from the Zemindarries thofe Talooks which come under the 
defeription fpecified in the Refulutions tranfinitted in your Revenue letter of the 16th Augutt~ 
4790; 4 wile and important weafure, the offspring of the fame comprehenfive views which 
juve directed the reft of your conduét in this great concern, 


27. With a view to the confiderations here ftuted we are defirous of having before us in 
one view, an Account of the totul number of Landholders of every defeription with whom the 
fettlement has been made in each diftrict, diftributing them into different claffes according to 
the amuunt of the rent which they are to pay, and in the inftances where the lands have been 
farmed, we wilh for a fimilar {pecification. Poflibly the materials which you have tranfinitted 
may be fufficient for forming an abfiraét containing this infurmation, and. we have given 
direGtions for their being curcfully examined for that purpofe ; but on fo interefting a point 
we are anxious to obtain the mof accurate information, and we therefore direét that you will 
lofe no time in preparing and tranfiuitting to us fuch an account. 


28. We have attended to your proceedings upon another quefiion which grew out of this 
deter wination, whether fuch Talooks us were, by a (pecitic claufe in the title deeds for them, 
ftipulated to continue infeparable fiom the Zemindsrry, thould ueverthelefs come under the 
new regulation? It does not appeer to us that a claufe of that nature could in general have 
had the fandtion of the Sovereign or his Dewan; and we mutt think that wherever fact: 
fanétion was wanting, the whole tranfuction refis upon no other legal validity than what 
prefeription may give it. We thall thus not only be of opinion with the Goyernor General, 
that fuch an unauthorized claute contained in itfelf’ an irregular aflumption on the part of 
the Zemindar, but that in fact the title conveyed by him was infufficient in any other view = 
than asa mere Pottab. If prefeription, however, is fuppofed to cure this original defeat om 
one fide, it may alfo be pleaded on the other in favour of the unwarranted claufe ; and thus. 
the queftion may be regarded a8 a relative branch of that much more comprehenfive one 
refpecting lands illegally alienated. 


2g. If our views of this queftion relative to"Talooks of the defeription above tated be 

juft, that the fubitance of the tranfaction, or the grant itfeif was legal, but with the fuper- 

addition of an illegal claufe, then it remains to be contidered whether this claufe thould 

vitiate the grant which prefeription may have confirmed, or Government give up its right, 

which is difregarded in the claufe. On this point we do not feel ourfelves prepared to give 
any pofitive inftraction, and indeed whatever might be our opinion upot it, we fhould feel 
ourfelves precluded from enforcing, during the period of the Decennial Settlement, any 
meafure contrary to the decifion which you have wlrealy announced upon it. “But contider 

ing the doubtful ftate of this queftion, we are inclined to think that if it could be fettled to 
the futisfaction both of the Zemindars and the holders of the Talooks, the moft equitable 
and defirable arrangement would be, that the latter fhould be completely feparated from the 
‘Zemindarry agreeing on their part to pay, as a confideration to the Zemindar, for a limited 
term, fuch a moderate annual fum over and above the Jumma paid to Govermnent, as 
might, under all the circumfiances, be thought reafunable. You will obferve that thele 
fentiments are grounded upon the policy of taking every fair ocealion of dividing the great 
maffis of that permanent property which will be now eftablilued, into fewer hands, than 
thofe among whom it was diftributed while it exitied upon ditferent principles. And perhaps, 
if the Zemindars could feel all the value of the sights and conditions which under this 
Settlement they will acquire, they would be willing to fecure them by the furrender of claims 
Jefs queftionable than thofe of which we have been {peaking What we haye now fluted 
will in part apply alfo to an object which is important in another point of view, and which 
we therefore wilh to tuke notice of; we mean that of the portions of lunds in the pofleffion 
of differeut proprietors which are at prefent let uncultivated. If the different proprietors 
thould be allowed to avail themfelves exclufively of the whole benefit to be derived from 
thefe lands in the improved fate of cultivatioa which the new fyftem hus an evident 
tendency to promote, fuch a circumftance , iu procels of time, add very confiderably to 
the value of pofleifions already too large. It is betides to be confidered, that if it can be 
effected without counteracting the principal object of encouraging induftry, Government 
may fairly pei in due tine tome reafouable participation in the wealth arifing from fuchi 
a fource; and we obferve that Mr. Shore feems to be of opinion, that if luch a participa- 
tion were only to take place gradaally, and at a certain period ufter the new lands have been 
putin cultivation, it would forin no obftucle to improvement, At the faine time, this is a 
fubject_ on which we do not mean to give any fixed opinion ; und we are aware that it iy 
connected with points of confiderable delicacy. 


.g0. If it would be underftood to be in any degree inconGifient with the terms of your fettle- 
ment, we would on no aecount wifh it to be attempted during the period to which that 
fettlement extends; nor fhould we be inclined to udopt it after chat period, if it thould, ou 
due confideration, be thought to break in upon the principle of permanent property in the 
preleat Landholders, or fhould appear likely to difeoutage. or retard the progrefs of cultiva- 
tion, Befides thefe general confiderations, much mutt depend on the local fituation of lands- 
of this defeription. [t eould probably be only where they extend over fepafate ana large 
tras, that the fuggeltion would at any rate be practicable. It could i be applied to 
fuch as are in finail parcels, and blended with lands already in cultivation, without much 

96%, Xx intricacy, 


¥72 APPENDIX lo the Second REPORT from the Seleét Conimittee on: 

intricacy, uncertainty and expenfe. At all events, if any arrangement can be formed upon 

ihe fubject, ibis material that it thould be clearly defined and undertteod, before announeing, 

~- ourfivul decifion refpecting the perpetuity of the prefent fettlement. Having explained to 

‘on our general fentiments, we fhall leave the application of them wholly to your diteretion 

‘on the pot; and we fhall now proceed to that great and important pointwhich is the imae- 
diate and principal objec of thele inftraions. 


og. ‘The difference of opinion which took place between Lord Cornwallis and. Mr. Shore, 
concerned, firlt, the propriety of declaring that the Decennial fettlement, if approved by the 
Courbof Directors, {ould be rendered perpetual, and then, the expediency of the meature 
itfelf, of unalterably fettling the Jumma of Lhe provinces at Une énd of the: firft ten years, or 
indeed in the peculiar ciccumfances of Bengal, of ever fixing at ail an immutable rate of 
affelfiment for it. i : . ) i 


32. We have beltowed the utmoft attention upon the cemutectt advanced'on both fides of 
Aiele queftions, which form in elect but one fubject contiting of feveral parts, all referviblé 
to the fame principles of objection and defence. # v 


93. I is a fubject of High importance, involving the mof momentous interefts of the 
Company, and of, exteufive kingdoms, for the prefent and all future tine. We cannot 
thence Sur feel folicitude in’ being called to decide upot it} but we fee that a decifion is 
nécelliry, and (hall therefore give thé refult of our mott ferious deliberation, conduGed’ with 
iin carnett defive of acting upon the juftett principles of policy, and of promoting the latting 
Welfare of our territories, and of all the interetis contested with them, 


“j4udb afiords us much: fatisfaction that this fubject has received fo ample a difcuffion in 

» Bengal, where every argementand objection can be bett felt and: fated, and frown the 

fire members of cur Government, who have {hewn themfelves poffefled of that intelligence, 

candour, integrity and publit affection, which render them. worthy of managing’{o great a 
queftions, ‘ - ; " 


45. The difference of opinion which has fublified, we find not to relate fo much to 
sen uate as to the application of tiem. That the tax which the dubjed is tu pay 
tothe State thouldnot be arbitrary, but afcertuined and fixed ; that all befides which bis, in- 
duftry can produce to him fhould, as fer as bie, be fecured to bim; and that in order to 
the profperity of acountry, property thould be rendered definite and certain ; Ahefe potitions, 
as general traths, Mr. Shore does not oppofe, but he queltions the propriety of practically 
applying them to Bengal at the prefent time, and in its peculiar fituation, “The ground of 
difciliion is thus narrowetl, not comprehending fundamental principles, but merely quefiions 
of time and/of other circumftances. It is material to us to fee thing thatican be urged 
on the fide (Mr. Shore has efpouled. As his objections are cl of a local and appro- 
by us in all their force ;\ and, as we have 


eShore injuftice not to ackno 
at are advanced with ability, 


rom: 


c ge of our Government as to the figte and refources of the 


the relative tights of the different orders of the people, is to be improved ; 
idence is to be given to them, the mode of fixing ond collecting the rents from 
pS ee h <M ss ire the 


the Aftits'of The EASTIN DIA COMPANY, 173 


the Ryots to be fimplified; due regulations of every kind cftablifhed and enforced ; the people 
by degrees formed to. the new fyficm of certainty and fecurityy inequalities in the afletiment 
difvoyered; -and the firft. period. having thus palied in experiment, practice, and approxima- 
tion to « anent arrangement, advantage tobe tuken of all the.experience acquired in 
it for the fettlement of a fecond period, by which time prefeut doubts will probably be » 
cleared up, and the way opened for the naiuatida, of a perpetual feitement, free of the em- 
Darralfizents which now attend that queftion. y 


38. No confequences more formideble could be prefented to us from the propofed fyfiem 
than a diminution in perpetuity of the Company’s Revenue, with the fill continued tub- 
fifieuce of all or any of thofe diforders in, the mode of impofing and levying it from the great 
body of the people, which have already done fuch effential injury to. the country, and mutt 
ever prove a bar to its profperity, ; 


39. Very clear and folid arguments were requifite to repel the difference which this view 
of the fubject, from fuch an authority, hada teadeney to create, and to encourage us to per~ 
fevere in our original idea of giving a fixed conftitution to the finance and Jand tenure of the 
country. But this fatisfaction Lord Cornwallis has afforded us in his. Minutes of the 18th 
September 178a, and 3d February 1790, which we fincerely regarded as two very valuable 
records, written with enlarged and jutt views upon the foundett principles of policy, with 
perfect fairnefé, great acquaintance with the fubject, and the mof conclufive reafoning in 
favour of a permanent afieflinent. wa) 


4o. In thefe documents, the luft of which, if Mr. Shore had feen it, might probably have 
removed his doubls, as he candidiy fiyles the objettions he left on feo we find it con~ 
vincingly urged that a permasent affeflment, upon the ftale of the prefent ability of the: 
country, mutt contain in its nature a productive principle; that the pofleNion of property, nud 
the fure enjovinent of the benefits derivable from it, will awakeo end fiimulateandaliry, pro- 
mote agriculture, extend improvement, cliablith eredit, and augment the gongral wealth ond 
profperity.’ Hence arifes the belt fecurity that no permanent diminution can be expected iv 
take place, at leaft to any confiderable amount ; eccefioual deficiencies may occur tor a tine 
from the mifmanagement of particular Landbolders, but it cannot be Jnppofed that any of 
the lands will permanently Le leis produétive than at prefeut; and as we have every reaton 
to believe that the Jumma now, formed is moderate iv its tural amount, and properly dite 
tributed, the lands themfelyes will, in moft infiances, ultimately be a fufficient decwrily for 
the proportion charged upon them, With refjpeét to lofles from drou: inundtions, ane 
other cafualties, thet occur alfo in- the prefent fyfiem, and. ufvally, fall: upou the Company 
themfelves ; but it will hereafter be different, becaufe the advautages of proprietaryrights and 
fecured profits in the Landbolder will, on his part, afford meaus to fopport and incite exertivns 
to fupport them ; the deficiencies of bad featons will on the whole be more than eounter- 
balanced by the tiuits of fayourable years ; there will thus be a gradual aceumulation, whilll 
the demands of Government continue the fume; aud in every fiep of this progrellive work, 
sproperty becomes of more, value, the owner of more importance, and the fyiiem acquires 
additional firength : fuch furely, appear to be the tendency and juft confequences of an 
-equitable fixed aflelTment. Ae ah 


41, With refpeét to the objeGions drawn from the diforder and confafion in the collec- 
tions, the uncertainty of their amount, the variable indefinite tules by which they ave levied, 
the exertions and collufions thence tov prevalent, the intricacies in the details of the Reyenne 
-bufinefs, and: the ignorance and incapacity of the Zemindars, Lord Cornwallis charges thele 
-evils, {o far as they exift, (and we think with great juftice) upon the old fyfiem, as a Gnas 
lefective in its principle, and carrying through all the gradations of the people, with mule 
tiplied ill effects, that charaéter of uncertain arbitrary impofition which originated at the 
thead. He therefore very properly contends that reform mutt begin there, and that in.order to 
dimplify and regulate the demands of the Landlolders upon their Tenants, the firkt flep is to 
fix the demand of Government itlelf. — _t 


42. To another clafs of objections formed upon our ftill defective knowledge: of the re- 
dources of the country, the rates, aud the amount of the collections aétually made in it by the 
Zemindars and Farmers, Lord Cornwallis oppofes the long feries of timé and inveftigations 
“already patt, the labours of the colleétors for three fucceilive years in his adminiftration ; the 
communication of all the knowledge they could obtain, their fuperior fitnelS for carrying 
into execution that fyfiem with a view to which they had been to long employed, the im- 
protabiity of fucceeding better with other Collectors and freth reports; from all which his 

rdihip infers, that there remained only the alternative of fisting down paflive and defpond- 
ent under the epee exifting difficulties and diforders, or of acting upon the informution 
already acquired. 7 ge: 


43. Admitting, as we do, the imperfect knowledge of our fervants in the details of the Re- 
-venue, and lamenting it, not without fome mixture of mortification, on confidering the long 
courfe of opportunities which our pofleflion of the country bas afforded, we muit never- 
“thelefs concur with Lord Cornwallis ia thinking that it would be too fanguine to expect 
any futare general improvement in this refpect ;_aconclufion whieh is efpecially fortified by: 
the high principle and energetic character of his Lordthip’s adminifixation, and the Very able 
, alliftance which it has received in Revenue Affairs from the diftinguithed talents of Mr. Shore, 
« Farther acceflions of knowledge muft iadeed fo much depend upon perfonal nee ee 
‘ ; bariahy Upp s 


174 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Seles: Committee on 


foppofe either a whole fet of people to poflefs thofe which are fuitable, or a fucceffion of 
them to take place where they happen once to appear, would be to argue contrary to paft 
experience; and therefore we turn with the greater pleafure to a fyftem that promiles to 
relieve us from éo unproduétive a dependance, 


44. The greateft obftacles to the execution of the new fyftem being, as already noticed, 
the difficulties of eftablifhing an equitable adjuftment sol colleétion of rents between the 
Zemindars and the Ryots, we are happy to fee that Lord Cornwallis'is of opinion the pro- 
pofitions which Mr, Shore himfelf has made for this end, recommending written fpecific 
agreements in-all cafes, would,.if-duly followed, be-cffeéiual, On this-important branch of 
“the fubject we do not yet feel ourfelves fufficiently in poffettion of all the neceflary details to 
-form a final and pofitive- determination. ; 


45. From the materials which have been tranfmitted, we are led to believe that the fitua- 
tion of the Ryots varies in different diftriéts according to local manners, cuftums, or par- 
ticular agreements; and it appears as if in fome infiances the right of Ryots uf different de- 
Yeriptions, though in the fame diftriG, was confidered as more or fefs permanent wnd tecure. 
“The application therefore of any general principles mutt be guided by minute local inveti 
tion, and we thull expect purticular regulations, adapted to all the ditlerent circumtiances 
‘be prepared, and finally fubmitted to ourconfideration. In looking to the ultimate fituation 
‘of the provinces under our Government, we cannot indeed but hope, that under the fyfea 
which we now propofe, the poflellors of lands will gradually learn from experieuce that 
their own interefis ure permanently connected with the fecurity and comtoit of the cul- 
tivators of the foil, und that the time will come when the advantage of every clals of the 

: community will be beft promoted by leaving to every mao the care and management of bis 


own property. * ot 
45. But, as fo great a change in habits and fituation can only be gradual, the interference 
of Government may for a-confiderable period be neceflary to prevent the Landboiders from 
amuking ule of their own permanent pofleflion fur the purpofes of exadtion and oppretiion ; we 
‘therefore with to-have it-diftinétly underttood, that, while we confirm to the Landholders the 
poilefion ofthe diftriéts which they now hold, and fabject only to the rent now fettled ; and 
while we difclaim any interference with refpectto the tituation of the Ryots, or the funis paid 
by them, with any view to'any addition of Revenue to ourfelves, we expretsly referve the right, 
which clearly belongs to us as Sovereigns, of interpofing our authority in midking from time 
‘to time ull fuch-regulations as may be neceflary to prevent the Ryots being improperly dif- 
‘turbed in their poiletfions, or loaded with unwarrantable exactions. A power exercifed for 
‘the purpofes we have mentioned, and which has no view to our own intercils, except as they 
‘ure connected with the geveral indufiry and profperity of the country, cau be no object of 
jealoufy to the Landholders, and inftead of diminihing, will ultimately enhance the value of 
their proprietary rights. Our interpofition, where itis neceilary, feems allo to be clearly con- 
Afifient with the practice of the Mogul Government, under which it uppeared to be a general 
snaxinr that the unmediate cultivator of the foil, duly paying hissent, fhould wot be difpofleffed 
sof the lund he oecupied. This necetfarily fuppofes that there were fome meafures and 
limits by which the rent could be defined, and that it was not leftto the arbitrary determina- 
tion of the Zemiudar, for otherwile fich a rule wouid be pugatory ; and in poiut of Jact, the 
original amount ficas to haye been anuually afcertained and fixed by the act of the 

‘Soveveign. at js d 
/ 47. Having thusexplaived our opinions on the feveral points which have arifen we con- 
“elude by flating to you, thut important and arduous as we conGder the meatire of a per- 
petual fettlement, and irreverfible us it is iv its nature, wes think ourfelves bound, from con- 
fidevatious of duty to all'the interelis which it concerns, to proceed to it. No conviétion is 
fironcer upon our minds than that infiability in the mode of aduiinitiering our Revenues has 
-had the moft prejudicial effects upon the welfare of the provinces, upon our affairs, aud the 
* character of our Government ; and of all the generated evils of unfettled principles of admi- 
nitlration, none bas been more baneful than frequent variation in the affefiment. Lt has 
reduced every thing to temporary expedient, and deftroyed ail enlarged views of improve- 
ment. Impolitic as fuch a principle muft be at all times, it is particu arly fo with refpect toa 
dependant country paying a kits annual tribute, and deprived of many of its ancient fup- 
ports, Such a country requires efpeciully the aid of a prodattive principle of management, 
and itis with folid fatisfaction that we look to the great refources which it yet has iu its un- 
cultivated though excellent lands. But thefe lands muft be opened ; and what have all the 
attempts of nearly thirly years to thisend produced? What are we to expect from {till leaving 
_foom for the principle of fluctuation which has prevailed during that period, though we may 
profefs to place fucceeding change at a remoter diftance? Long leafes with a view to the 
equal ual efiublifhment of a permanent fyttem, though recommended upon the ground 
‘of falety, we mutt think would ftill continue in a certain degree the evils of the former prac- 
tices periodical corrections in the affesiment would be in efie& of the nature of a general 
increafe, and tend to deftroy the hope of a permanent fyftem, with the confidence of exer- 
tion it is calculated to infpire. Had fueh a fyftem been adopted twenty yearsago, and fairly 
followed, it is not to be doubted that the produce, manufactures, and commerce, of the 
country, would at this time have been in a more flourithing {tate than they arc, and the 
Bea Cntr ot a uew order of things, of privileges and profperity unenjoyed before, 
Wor rifen in their character, and felt real attachment to the Government from which 
thote bleilings werederived. That Government too, inftead of being fo much occupied xs 
it 


> the Affirs of The EASTINDIA COMPANY. 175 


it has been in all time patt, by the ing ftruggle perpetually fubGifting thro the 
country for taxes and rents, would, as our Governor Geieral has already fu; 1, have 
had leilure to turn its cares to other functions of the raling power, to the internal regulation 
of the community, the eftablifhment- of wholefome laws, and the due adminiftration of them. 
The principle therefore which would have laid the foundation of this appears the only one 
fill to be adopted; it places the fecurity of the Company’s revenue on the only bafis which 
we can dileover to be a folid one, the growing pra fperity of the country; and hopelels alike 
of better lights than thofe already attained, and of an adminifiration more fitted effectually 
to eftablifh a t reform than that of which Lord Cornwallis is the head, we muft be of 
opinion, with his Lordthip, that to delay the introduction of it, fuppofing always the fir 
fiandard fettlement properly formed, would be to poltpone the commencement of the pro{- 
perity and the happinefs of the country, f 


48. Upon that fettlement, fo far as it has yet come before us, either accomplifhed or in 
profpect, we have already given our opinion; and we therefore now direct you, if uo new 
circumftance of importance has occurred to retard its natural operation, or to threaten the 
defeat of our reafonable expeéiation from it, to declare it, wherever it has been made with or 
on behalf of the Landholders, perpetual, In order to leave no room for our intentions being 
at any time mifunderfiood, we direct you to be accurate in the terms in which our determi- 
nation is announced, and you will be careful to have it tranflated and circulated in the fame 
manner as you have directed with refpect to your own code of Regulations. Having left it 
to your difcretion to decide on the meafures to be adopted relative to the wafte lands, you 
will of courfe determine whether any referve fhould be made in this declaration with a view 
to that object, and you will in a particular manner be cautious fo to exprefs yourfelves as to 
leave no ambiguity as to our right to interfere from time to time, as it may be necedlary, for 
the protection of the Ryots and fubordinate Landholders, it being our intention in the whole 
of this meafure effectually to limit our own demand, but not to depart, from our inherent 
right, as Sovereigns, of being the guardians and protectors of every clal’s of perions living 
under our Government. We are not aware that we have omitted a determination upon any 
article neceflary or important to your procedure to this ee and we fhall be happy that 
Lord Cornwallis, who has done fo much in this ardaous work, fees no reafon to deny himfelf 
the happinels of announcing a new conititution to fo many millions of the Afiatic fubjects of 
Great Britain. : ' ie 

49. There remains but one fabject to mention in this letter; that, however, is a fubject of 
the Jatt importance; he watching over, rearing and maturing of this tyflem ; maintaining 
under future Admin ns the energy which has commenced it. All the benefits hoped 
for from it tothe country and the Company, all its fucceis, muft depend upon this vigilance 
and foftering care of our Government and our fervants. No miliake could be more fatal 
than that of fappofing that it may be left to its own execution, and that all the effects it is 
indeed fitted to produce will neceflarily, and of courfe, agra it. If any conclufion is to 
be drawn from the deferiptions given of the people, it is furely this, that the powerful are 
oppreflive, and the weak fraudulent; having neither wifdom or confidence to act for diftant 
good, and being unreftrained by moral confideration, they are prone to avail themfelyes of 
prefent opportunity. Lt is true that the new fyftem reckons upon their felf-intereft, and this 
Is an excellence in it; bat it will take time to affure them that the fyftein is folid, and to 
difcover to them that their intereft_ is beft promoted by following the dictates of juftice and 
humanity. The bufinets of our Government mutt be to prevent them from violating thefe 
principles, injuring each other, and obftruéting the gradual cere of the effects 
which the new inftitation is calculated to produce. When the effects are become obvious, 
and the people are taught by fenfible demonfiration, the fyftem will then, as we have aleady 
fuggelted, be better able to ftand by itfelf. In the mean time it mutt be the duty @! our 
fervants to watch inceflantly over its progrel’s ; to fee that the Landholders oblerve punétually 
theiragreements with Government and with the Ryots; that they neither pals invented 
claims on the eve of a permanent fettlement, nor fraudulently fhift the burthen of Revenue 
by collufive transfers, nor by any other finifier practices diminith the payment of their flipu- 
lated affeffments; that they likewife uniformly give to the Ryots written fpecific agreements, 
as‘alfo receipts for all payments, and that thole agreements be on the one fide and the other 
fairly fulfilled. In this way, and in this only, can the fyftem be oper to flourith. But it 
is not enongy that complaints are redrefled when they reach the feat of authority ; man: 
injuries in the remoter parts of the diftriGs may thus be committed with impunity, It will 
be the Collector's duty to in{pect every part of the province entralied to him, to fee the fiate 
of cultivation, to enquire into the condition of the Ryots, and thus to afford opportunity for 
reprefentation, and check the propentity to abule. 


50. The fame confequences will not follow from this practice as might have been appre~ 
hhended in the former fyftem ; the invention of numberlefs pretences incapable of invettigation, 
in order to elude the time of payment on the one band, orto enforce exaction on the other, 
under the plea of not fuffering that time to be loft. Written fpecific. agreements mut 
teduce every difpute toa fhort and fimple procefs. It is not our intention to.enumerate all 
the ways in which vigilance is to be exercifed, we mean only to inculcate the neceflity of it, 
and that it muft be univerfal. The interett of the Company, as well as of the country, will 
ablolately require this our demand from the lands ; the great and now almoft the only fource 
of Revenue is fixed; with the exception of any addition which may be made from relump- 
sions, or which may arife from pes et (if that refource {ould be found ayailable) 

363. Be it 


176 APPENDIX ¢o he Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


itis fixed for ever, a moft ferious argument (as for ftriét economy in the expenditure of what 
is limited fo) for the utmoft care on our part ; that our known refources being on the one hand 
reftrained from increafe, they may on the other be prelerved from diminution. Nothing but 
the profperity of the country can effect this, and profperity is to be hoped for only by an 
active and HerigD\ lapenntend ates in the Government, by its pervading influeuce throughout 
the diftrics, difpenfing juftice and eftablithing internal order and peace. Wee thall moft 
affuredly follow, with {trict obfervation, the practical conformity of our fervants in their feveral 
itations to thefe fentiments, and fhall not only confider pofitive unfaithfulnefs, but (where 
every thing depends upon intelligent activity) remillnefs, as a fullicient difqualification for 
employment. 


51. It is atrath of-great importance that the neglect of inftituted regulations has, more than 
the imperfeéiions of former ey been noxious to our affairs. We now eftablith the beft 
fyftem, and thence the mott Bited for execution, but for which conftant attention is requilite, 
and we with therefore that all our fervants may be confiantly awake to this truth, and confider 
theit own immediate intereft and honour, as well as thofe of the Company aud the Nation, 
involved in the profperity of the fyftem of permanent taxation, and in the ttrenuous fupport 
ae splareementy according to their refpective fituations, of ali the regulatious framed for its 

ccels, 


52. Since writing the foregoing Letter we have gone into a diftinét confideration of Lord 
Cornwallis’s Minute of 1ft December 1799, referred to.in your letter of gift January 1791, 
ropofing principles and rules for the ultimate determination of the long depending and 
important queftion refpecting the alienated Lands, The opinion we had before conceived 
from the outlines of his Lordihip’s plan is by this Minute fully confirmed ; he appears to us to 
have, with a wife and happy median, confulted both the rights of Government and the eafe of 
the people; to have made the molt perfect adjufiment between themtha t fuch a cule would 
admit 2 and we therefore give our approbation and fanétion to the final regulations he has 
propofed, 
} We are, 
Your affectionate friends, 
T. BARING. 
j J. SMITH BURGES, 
3 “ ; , JOHN ROBERTS. 
JOHN HUNTER. 
$ ~ THOS CHEAP. 
ea “We EWER. 
va) /W. BENSLEY. 
‘HUGH INGLIs. 
OHN TRAVERS. 
‘ P. LE MESORIER, 
“we ‘T. PATTLE. 
ai) 7 r S. LUSHINGTON, 
Roe URE WM MONEY. 
iy ‘ ») © JOHN TOWNSON, 
NATH. SMITH. 


ae 


ae ; Appendix, No.13. 
MINUTE of the Governor General in Council; dated the 7th December 1792. 
Extract Bengal Revenue Confultations; the 7th December 1792. 
BOARD’s MINUTE. 


TOR the prevention of crimes it is neceflary, Firft, to eftablifh an efficient Police through- 
out the country, that Offenders may be unable to efcape from the hands of juttice. Secondly, 
to proyide for the speedy and impartial trial of Offenders when apprehended, 


The inftitation of the Courts of Circuit and the half-yearly Jail Deliveries, preferibed by 
the Regulations of the gd December 1790, have provided for the latter of thefe important 
objeéis. With a view to the attainment of the former, the Magifirates were required to re- 
port what local eftablifhments would be neceffary for the prefervation of the peace in their 
refpective diftriéts, and to fuggett the belt mode of raifing a fund for the fupport of them. 


The Governor General in Council now proceeds to the confideration of the Reports furnith- 
ed by Bie eines in confequence of the above inftructions, and of the iabject of the 
Police in general ‘3 f 

The rate of the Police of the gory is at prefent committed to the Magiftrates,- 
affifted by the Landholders, who, by a condition annexed to all landed tenures in this 
country, are bound to keep the peace in their refpective efiates, and, in the event of any 
zobbery being committed thereon, to produce both the offenders and the property plundered. 


The 


the Afuits of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 77 


The Police Eftablifhments allowed to the Magiftrates of the feveral difiri@s are detailed 
ain ie Regulations of the 3d December 1700. Some of the Officers compofing thefe 
eftabl Hameo ce ployed in guarding the jail; the remainder attend on the Magifirates 
for the ole of ferving Warrants on pagers charged with crimes or offences, Thele 
flender nls are no proteétion whatever to the extenfive diftriéts which they are 
Ble a to guard. Being colleGted about the perfon of the Magiftrate, except when em- 
ployed on the above fpecial duty, they afford him no means of information of what pafles in 
the interior part of this diftriét, Bands of robbers aflemble with a certainty of not being 
difcovered until they have committed their meditated ac of depredation, and the time which 
then elapfes before information of the event can be lodged before the Magifirate, affords the 
offenders ample opportunity of efcaping with their booty to diftant parts of the country. The 
late robberies committed on the public treafure pafling through Uangpare and Dinagepore, 
with numerous other infiances of a fimilar nature recorded upon the public Proceedings, are 
cafes in point, The robbers having obtained intelligence of the road by which the treafure 
was to be tranfported, aflembled from the different parts of the diftriét where they had been 
concealed, or refided, and after cutting olf the efcort, which confifted of regular troops, carried 
away the treafure, without the Magiltrate being able to trace from whence they came, or 
whither they had fled with this booty; and as the dread of incurring the vengeance of the 
Teaders.of. thele gangs invariably deters the inhabitants of the countries which age ioket 
from informing againtt them, there is no probability of any intelligence being obtained 
sefpecting Uhefe marauders until they again alarm the country by fome new aét of depre- 
dation, which, under the prefent defeciive fiate of the Police, they would certainly accomptifh 
with the fame impunity. ~ ; E Fuh Aaa AT bet i 

With refpe& to the Landholders, fome of the principal of them in Bengal (the Zemindars 
of Burdwan, Naddea and others) have been allowed confiderable dedu@tions in the adjuft 
ment of their Jumma for the maintenance of Tanhalidars and Pykes, for the exprefs pur- 
pofe of enabling them to perform the condition of keeping the peace annexed eit 
tenures, This condition mor ate at fit view to promile general feeurity; but ix 
ence has proved the fallacy of delegating to individuals one ‘Of he moit importa 
Government, t es arg 

Of the Zemindars who have been allowed the above-mentiened deduétions, fome keep up 
no.eftablifhments whatever, whil{t others, inftead of entertaining creditable perfons and allow- 
ing them an adequate. falary, difpole of the falar a tor pecuniary conliderations; as the 
offices afford no fources of emolument, but fuch as are derived from the moft iniquitous 

raétices, it can anfwer to nove but profelled robbers to purchafe them; moti of the 
Teninaldars appointed ‘by the Zemindars are gectdlng ye fons of thiahaatetiption. The 
wnnexed proceedings of the late aéting Magiftrate of Burdwan (the Ll), adi in 
Bengal) will fhew that the Police appuintwents were fold by the Zemindar's Officers to the 
moft notorious robbers, who plundered the country which it - their daty to protect. The 
dame abufes prevail, in a greater or lefs degree, in every Zemindaity the proprietor of which 
3s allowed to keep up a fimilar eftablifiment. ‘i Be hae 


Tn fome parts of the country, particularly in the Eaflern and the Southern Diftrias of 
Bengal, many of the petty Landholders, encouraged by the great difiance of the Magittrate’s 
place of refidence, and by there being no Officers ftationed on the ipot on the part of 
Government for the protection of the country, have from time immemorial been in the 
habit of perpetrating robberies them{elves or conniving at them in others. It is indeed 
notorious that moit of the principal gangs of robbers are in league with fome of the Zemin= 
cok ane generally with thofe in whote diftricis they leaye their families and depolit their 
plunder, : 


At the fame time thatentrafting the Zemindars with the charge of the Police is the fource 
of thefe flagrant abafes, the claufe in their engagements that binds them to produce the 
offenders and the property fiolen, and which appears to bea fecufity, not only againtt any 
abufe of the traft committed to them, but for their difcharging it with fidelity and diligence, 
is altogether nugatory, The nature and extent, indeed, of this obligation hus never been 
defined under our Government. By fome it has been held not to extend to robberies com- 
mitted between the rifing and fetting of the fan, and not even to robberies committed in the 
night-time, it Oe was depofited in the Cutcherry and actually placed under charge 


of the Zemindar’s Officers: “The {iriét enforcement ‘of the law, therefore, would contribute 
little to the public fecurity, at the fame time thatin molt cufes it would operate asa punifhment 
to one perfon for the crimes of another. ‘Robbers rarely commit their depredations in the 
Zemindarries in which they refide, and as their attacks are fudden andl generally made in the 
night, itis almoft impoffible to repel them. To make a Landholder refponfible in fuch a 
ale, merely becaule the robbery was perpetrated on his eftate, is an. arbitrary mode af pro- 
ceeding ; which, however it may be iuited to a defpotic: government, that muft have its 
vidiim if the law be tranfgreffed, is as ili adapted to the temper of a Britith adminiftration 
as to the attainment of the object propofed to be effected byit. From thefe confiderations 
jee claufe has been but feldom enforced, and confequently the public derive no fecurity 
Aroma it. 


To exonerate the Zemindars from all refponfibility would be improper. The condition 
sannexed to their tenure may be converted to the moit beneficial purpofes in aid of an 
eeliabldhed Police, by limiting the operation of it to cafes in which they may be proved to 

haye 


178 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT from the Select Committee on 
have connived at robberies, harboured robbers, aided their efcape, received any part of the 
property ftolen, or omitted to give effectual aid to the Olficers of Goverament in the 
apprehenfion of offenders, - 


Tor the prefervation of the peace of the country, and the due protection of the perfons and 
Boperet of the people, it is neceflury that the Landholders thould be deprived of the 
authority which they now exercife, under the before-mentioned condition annexed to their 
tenure, which, inftead of aulwering the purpofes for which it wus velted in them, has been the 
chief fource of the diforders that have fo long prevailed Sones the country. Police 
Officers appointed by Government muft be flationed in the different parts of the Provinces 
with fuch eee and under fuch regulations as will enable them to bring to punifliunent 
thofe who live by plunder and rapine unlefs they relinquifh that courfe of life, and deter 
others from entering upon it by cutting off all hope of efcape from the hands of juftice. 


Tt would be fuperfluous to enter into any difcuflion to prove how much the profperity of 
the country and the happinels of the people depend upon eftablifhing a general {ecurity of 
perfon and property. - 

The Board therefore proceed to pafs the following Regulations. 


REGULATIONS for the Police of the ColleGorfhip in Bengal, Babar, and Oriila, 
pailed by the Governor General in Council on the 7th December 1792. 


THE eftablifment of an efficient Police throughout 
be deprived of all hope of eluding the purfuit of the Officers of Juttice, being as effential 
towards. deterring people from committing crimes as the {peedy and impartial wial of 
offenders when apprehended, and the claufe in the engagements of the Landholders and 
Farmers of land, by which they are bound to keep the peace, and in the event of any 
robbery being committed in their refpective eftates or farms, to produce both the robbers and 
the property plundered, having not only been found nugatory, but in numerous in{tunces 
proved the means of mulliplying robberies and other diforders, from the collufion which has 
fubfifted between the perpetrators of them and the Police Officers entertained by the 
Landholders and Farmers of land, in virtue of the claufe above-mentioned : The Governor 
General in Council, with a view to afford that protection to the perfons and property of the 
people which is fo eflential to their happinefs and to the public welfare, has been pleafed to 

(3 the following Regulations, which are to fuperfede all exifting Rules repugnant 

ereto. © + o 

i ( 

Firft.—The Police of the country is in future to be confidered under the exclufive charge 
of the Officers of Government who may be {pecially appointe ah t trufi, The Land- 
holders and Farmers of land, who keep eftablithments of ’ ahdars and Police Officers 
for the prefervation of the peace, are accordingly require Beige them, and all Land- 
holders and Farmers of land are prohibited entertaining fuch eftublifliments in future. 

Second.—Landholders an ‘of land are’not in future to be confidered refponfible 
for robberies committ their refpective eftates or farms, unlels it fhall be proved that 
they connived at the robbery, received auy part of the property ftolen or pluudered, 

ured the offenders, aided or refufed to give effectual saline to ae their efeape, 
or omitted to afford every alliftance in their power to the rs of Government for their 
apprehenfion ; ineither of which cafes they will be compelled to make good the value of the 
property ftolen or plundered. 


» Third —The Magiftrates are to divide their dif- 
‘triéts, including the rent-free land, into police 
juritdi@ions. Each jurifdiction is to comprize an 
extent of county not exceeding ten cofs fquare. 
The guarding of each jurifdiction is to be com- 
mitted to a Daro, hor Superintendant, with an 
eftablifhment of Officers. The Darogahs, with their 
eftablifhment, are to be ftationed in the centre of 


country, whereby offenders may 


their refpective jurifdiGions, and the Magiftrates | their ence in any jurifdiétion the 
Scieted te itcarna totocs tbe judi rg eee 

in fuch a manner as to bring the princi s 

Bazars and Gunges in the centre of them, f ita from the 
the Police efiablifhments may ferye for the protec- | Paufbauns, Dufaads, or ydars of 


tion of thefe principal places, as well as the cir~ 


eumjacent country. 

Fourth—The Police jurifdi€tions are to be 
numbered, and to be named after the central 
pl laces at which the Daro; ‘and their eftablith- 


may be ftationed. ‘The Magiftrates are not 


4o change the names or number of the jurifdic- 
tions, or to alter the limits of them, without the 
i the Governor General in Council. 


the villages under his authority. Land- 
holders will be unable to connive at 
robberies or to harbour rol without 
being immediately d and as the 
Darogahs will have a ready communi- 
cation with each other by means of 
their Officers and the public Dawks, the 
alarm of any robbery or breach of the 
that may be comunitted will be 
immediately fpread throughout the 
neighbouring country to a great dif- 
dance; 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 179 


tance, in fo thort a fpace’ of time as to 
render the efcape of the offenders al- 
moti impracticable. By thas cutting 
off all hope of eluding the hands of 
juftice, thofe who now live by commilt- 
ting depredations on fociety maft either 
refrain from fuch mal-practices, or 
sper, fufier the punifhment due to 
their crimes; and the dread of incur- 
ring a fimilar fate will deter others from 
enlering upon the fame courle of life. 
Thefe Darogahs will alfo be extremely 
uleful in aflitting the Courts of Juftice 
‘in ferving procels, and contribute in 
a variety of ways to the prefervation of 
peace and foo order in fociety. 


Fifth.—The Magifirates to nominate the Da- By allowing an adequate falary to 
hs in the firlt infiance, and to fill up all future | the Darogahs, and feeuring them in 
vacancies. They will in confequence be held | their office whilft they conduct them- 
re(ponfible for felecting pertons duly qualified for | felves conformably to the regulations, 
the traft; but no Darogah is to be removed from | creditable pertons will be detirous of 
his office except upon proof of mifconduct to | the appointment; their characters as 
the fatisfaction of the Governor Generalin Coun- | well as their bond will be a fecurity to 
cil; and no perfon is to be appointed a Darogah | the public for their good conduct. 
without giving fecurity for bis appearance in the 

amount of 1,000 Rupees, bimfelt in 500, and two |” ) Wy 
creditable perfons in 250 Rupees each. 


Sisth.—Any perfon having a charge to prefer againft another for murder, robbery, houle- 
breaking, thelt, or othér crime or ofience cognizable by the criminal Courts, and who thull 
not chvofe to lodge it immediately before the seaibeate of the diltriét, thal be at liberty to 
pee it in writing to the Darogah of the jurifdiétion in which the crime or offence inay 

ave been committed ; or if the ‘offender thall have removed himfelf out of that jarifdidion, 
to the Darogah of the jurifdiétion in which he may be found. Such ph rather forthwith 
caufe the party acculed to be apprehended. If the charge fhall be for murder, bouse- 
breaking, theft, or other heinous crime, the Darogab fhall fend the acculed to the Magiftrate 
under fafe cufiody, within twenty-four hours after he fhull have apprehended him. ‘If the 
charge fhall be for any crime or offence on which the Magiftrates are authorized to 
decide, the Darogah fhall require fofficient fecurity from the perfon accufed to appear on 
a fpecifie day before the Magiftrate; if he thali retule or be unable to give fuch fecurity, 
the Darogah fhall fend him ander pitpen cuftody to the Magifirate within twenty-four 
hours after he fhall have apprehended bim. When the party accufed fhal! appear before the 
Magiftrate, he hall proceed againft him in the fame manner as if he hud been apprehended 
‘ontae his own warrant, * i 


Seyenth.—The Darogahs are authorized to apprehend without a written charge, and 
without iffuing a duftuck or writ, perfons found in the aét of committing a breach of the 
peace, or againft whom a general hue and cry fhall have been raifed, or who fhall be detected 
with fiolen goods in their pofleffion, and alfo the feveral deferiptions of perfons {pecified in 
the gth article; in every other cafe the Darogahs are prohibited apprebending any perfons 
without a charge preferred again him in writing, under the feal or fignature of the 
complainant, and without iffuing a dufiuck or writ for his upprehention, under their official 
feal and fignature. i ; * 


Eighth—tThe Darogahs are in all cafes whatfoever to take fecurity from the profecutor 
and _his.witnefles to appear before the Magiftrate on a fpecific day, which fhall be the 
day whereon the party uccufed may be bound to appear, if fecurity fhall have been taken 
from him for that purpofe, or the diy on which he may be expected to arrive at the Magil- 
trale’s place of refidence, if he is to be forwarded thither under cuftody. i 


Ninth.—The Darogah, upon receiving information of any notorious. decoits or robbers 
harbouring within bis jurifdiction, (all apprehend them and forward them under fafe cuftody 
to the Magiftrate; he fhall likewife apprehend and fend to the Magiftrate all Malaches Syr 
Bejuas, or other deferiptions of vagrants or faspected perfons who ina¥ be lurking about his 
jurildiction without aay oftenfible means of fubfiltence, or who cannot give a fatistagtory ac- 
count of themfelves. 


Tenth.—It is to be nnderftcod that the duty of the Darogah, with regard to perfons 
charged with crimes or offences, is to be confined to apprehending and fending them under 
fafe cuftody to the Magiftrate, or taking fecurity for their appearance before him; he is not 
todifcharge the parties acenfed after they are once apprehended, except in cafes in which 
he is exprefsly authorized to releafe them upon fecurity, or upou the purties delivering in 
a Razenamah in the cafe fpecified in the following article; mor’to enquire into or pals 

363. Zz fentence 


150 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Select Committee on 


fentence upon any complaint, or impofe any fine, or inflié any punifhment on the profecu- 
tors or their refpective witnefles, under any pretext whatever. 


Eleventh.—In complaints for petty affaults, and all other cafes upon which the Magiftrates 
are empowered to decide, the iia are permitted to ditcharge the defendant, provided 
the complainant fhall deliver a Razenamah or writing deliring to withdraw his complaint ; 
and the defendant fhall alfo give a Razenamah or writing agreeing to the complaint being 
withdrawn. ‘Thefe Razenamuhs are to be attefied by two creditable witnefles, and are to be 
tran{imitted to the Magiftrate by the Darogah with his monthly Selahut or report. If the 
parties hall notdeliver in fuch Razenamahs, the cafe muft be brought before the Magiftrate. 


Twelfth.—All Pykes, Chokydars, Pavfbauns, Dufaads, Nigalauns, Harces, and other 
delcriptions of village watchmen, are declared fubjeét to the orders of the Darogab. He 
thall keep a regifter of their names, and upon the death or removal of any of them, the 
Lundhelders or others lo whom the filling up of the vacancies fall belong fhall fend the 
namesof the perfons whom they muy appoint to the Darogah of the jurifdiction, that they 
may be regifiered by him as above directed. 


Thirteenth —The Pykes, Paufbauns, and other village watchmen mentioned in the pre- 
ceding article, fhall apprehend aud fend to the Darogah any perlons who may be taken in 
the act of committing murder, robbery, houfe-breaking or theft, or againit whom a bue and 
ery fhall have been railed. Tt thall be their fpecial duty alfo to convey to the Darogah of the 
jurifdiction immediate intelligence of any robbers who may have concealed themfelves in 
their refpective villages or the country adjacent, and alfo of any vagrants or other perions 
who may be lurking about the country without any oftenfible means of fubfifience, or who 
cannot give a fatisfactory accountof themfelves, Pykes, Paubauns, or other village wateh- 
men who {hall not act in conformity to this article, fhall be difinifled from their ftations, 
and fhall be further punifhed as the law may direét, Mhould it be proved that they ailitied in 
harbouring or concealing any of the above-mentioned deferiptions of offenders or fui- 
pected perloys, or connived in any refpect at their mal-praétices. 


Fourteenth.—To enable the Magifirate to obtain fpeedy information of any crimes or 
offences that may be committed within the limits of his diftriét, and for the more expeditious 
circulation of information of any robbery or breach of tie peace to the neighbouring 
Magifirates or Darogahs of Police, orders have been iffued to all the Dawk Offivers in the 
Company’s Provinces to receive and convey, free of poltage, any letlers which may be 
tendered to them by the Daroguhs of Police; fuch letters are to be fuperteribed with the 
name of the Darogah and of the juriidiétion over which he may prefide, with the words 
Kar Sircar, to denote that the letters relate to the public fervice. Any Durogeh who fhall 
infert in fuch letters any matter not relating to the public fervice upon which he is 
employed, fhall be difinifled from his office. In cafes where the Darogahs {hull be ftationed 
at a confiderable diflance from the road by which the Dawk may travel, the foliowing 
directions are to be obferved as far as may be practicable: the Dawk Officer thali deliver 
the letter to the proprietor or head perfon of the village on the road that may be neareft 
to the place at which the Darogah to whom the letter may addrefled {hall refide, and take 
a receipt from him for it, fpecilying the date of its delivery. The proprietor or head perton 
of the village fhall be held refponfible for the letter being delivered to the Darogah to 
whom it is addrefled without delay, unlefs the diftance of his place of refidence fill exceed 
five cofs, in which cafe fuch proprietor or head perfon of the village who received the 
letter from the Dawk Officer fhail deliver it to the proprietor or head perfon of the fir 
village the diftance of which may exceed fiye cofs from the Dawk road, and take a receipt 
for it. Tn this manner the letter Mall be forwarded by the proprietors or head perfous of the 
villages, for the diftance of five cofs each, until the letter reaches the Ottieer to whom it is 
addrefled. Tn like manner, whenever the Daroguhs fo fiationed at a difiance from the ‘Dawk 
road fhall have occafion to fend letters to the Dawk, the proprietors or head perfons of 
villages thal] convey them to the neareft Dawk Choky, in the fame mode as they are required 
to convey to fuch Darogals any letters that may be delivered to them by the Danis 
Officers. As the places of refidence of the Darogahs will be fixed, the names of the villa; 
to the proprietors or head perfons of which it will fall to convey the letters, between 
place where the Dayogohs may refide and the nearett Dawk Choky or ftation, will foon be 
known to the Dawk Officers and Darogahs; who, to prevent difputes arifing between the 
Landholders refpecting the conveyance of letters as above diredted, fhall_write on the back, 
of ull letters the names of the villages by the proprietors or head perfons of which they 
are to be fo conveyed. The Daroguhs thall not only be authorized to difpatch letters by 
the public Dawks to the Magiftrate to whofe authority they are immediately fubjed, and 
the other Baroguhs in his difirit, but alfo to the Magiftrates and Darogabs of any of the 
neighbouring diftrits, to whom they may have oecafion to fend notice of any breaches of 
the peace that may have been committed in their own or any, other jurifdiétion; and the 

wrogahs fhall make it a rule, whenever they. receive intelligence of any murder or 
robbery having heen committed in their own or any other jurifdiéuons, to difpatch immedi- 
zie information of it to all theneighbouring Daroguhs, and alfo to Magiftrates of the adjacent 
diliri@s, unlefs they fhall have apprehended the offenders, All Landholders, Gomattahs,, 
and other head perfous of villages, are required to pay firidt, obedience to thefe orders for 

conveying: 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. — 18 


cone letters of the Darogahs, and the Magiftrates are direGed to fix up copies of 
them in the head Cutcherry of every Pergunnah throughout their refpedtive diftricts. 


Fifteenth.—A concurrent authority is vefted in the feveral Magiftrates and their Officers, 
in the cafes and under the reftrictions following; viz. The Darogahs and Police Oflicers 
dubject to the authority of one Magitirate are empowered, either under his warrant or without 
fuch warrant, to purtue robbers and murderers into the jurifdiétions of other Darogahs, 
whether fubjeét to the fume Magiftrates as themfelves or to the Magifirates of any other 
diliriGs or city. The Magitirates, Daroghas, Police Officers, Landholders, Farmers, Gomat- 
tahs of Vil 3, Cultivators of Land, and all other perfons having authority or refiding in 
the jurifdiétions into which the offenders may be PReees are required to afford every ailift- 
ance in their power to the purtuing Otficers, for the apprehention of the offenders. {t is to 
ve underftood, however, that this concurrent authority vefted in the Magiftrates and the 
Police Officers, is to extend only to cafes in which the crime with which the perfons purfucd 
may be charged, fhall have been committed within their refpective jurifdiétion, or (in the 
event of the crime having been committed in any other jurifdiction) where the offender was 
a@ually within their jurifdiétion when the charge againit him was preferred to tem. And 
it thal! not be lawful for the Magifirate or Darogah of one diftriét or jurifdiétion to iffie « 
warrant for the apprehention of any offender, being or refiding in another dittrié or jurif- 
diGion at the time of the complaint being preferred to them, for any crime or offence not 
committed within the limits of their refpective jurifdiétions ; in fach cafe the complainant 
mutt apply in the firft inftance to the Magilirate of the diflrid or the Darogah of the 
jurifdiction in which the crime fhall"have beeu committed, or in which the offender may 
refide or be found. : 


Sixteenth—Whenever the Police Officers employed under one Magiftrate fhall apprehend 
offenders in the diftrict or jurildiction of another Magiftrate, in virtue of the powers vefied 
in them by thefe Regulations, they fhall immediately deliver to the Darogah of the Police 
jurifdiGion in which the offenders may be apprehended, a lift of their names and a fiate- 
ment of the crimes wilh which they are charged, and the fuid Darogah fhall immediately 
forward fuch lift and fiatement to the Magifirate to whole authority he is fubject. 

Seventeenth.—The Darogahs {hall receive a commiffion of ten per cent. on the value of all 
property ftolen or plundered which they may recover. ‘ 

Eighteenth—It thall be the duty of the Darogahs to proceed in perfon, or to depute one 
or more of their Officers, to the feveral towns, Gunges, Bazars and Hauts, on maiket-days, 
to prevent any difputes or difturbances ariling between the veutiers und purchaters, or other 
pertons reforting to the markets. 


Nineteenth.—The following regulations, paffed on the 15th November 1788, are made 
general; and it fhall be the duty of the Darogahs to feize all boats uled or built in oppofition 
to them, and to apprehend and fend to the Magifirate the artificers employed in repairing 
or building fuch boats, and to report to him the names of the Landholders in whole village 
ae may have been built or repaired, that the penalties preferibed may be entoiced againtt 
them, 


1fi—All perfons, the Magiftrates of difirils excepted, are proliibited building or making 
ufe of boats of the following deferiptions: * 


Covids length, Corids breadi! 
Luekhas - - 4otono = = at to 4 
Jelkars - - goto7o  - = gh to5 * 


Panchwas of Chundpore carrying more than thirty oars. 
od.—The Magiftrates are directed to feize and confifcate all boats of the foregoing 


deicriptions which may be fouad within the limits of their re{pectiye jurifili¢tions. 

3d.—Any Zemindar or other Landholder allowing any boat of either of the deferiptions 
abeve fpecified to be built or repaired within the limits of his Zemindarry, unlels by a written 
order from the Magiftrate of the dittrid, fhall forfeit to Government the village in which 
fach boat fhall be proved to have been built or repaired, 

4th.—All carpenters, blackfmiths or other artificers, are prolibited engaging for, or 
being employed in the building or repairing of boats of the «defcriptions above-mentioned 
(unlefs by the exprets pérmillion of the Magifirate of the difiriét) under pain of being com- 
mitted to clofe imprifonment in the Firizdarry Jail for any period not longer than one 
aonth, or fuffering corporal punifiment not exceeding twenty itrokes with a rattan. 


Twentieth.—The Darogah of each jurifdiGion fhall fend a monthly Report (Selabut) in 
writing to the Magitirates, which (hail contain the names of all perfous whom he may have 
apprehended, their crimes and the date of their apprehenfion; all the date on which they 
were difpatched to the Magiftrate or releafed, either upon bail or in confeqnence of the 
parties having agreed to withdraw the complaint, in the cafes {pecified in the Gxth and 
eleventh articles ; and alfo a circumstantial detail of all ether aéts dene by him in his official 
capacity. Theie Reports are to be dilpatched on the 5th of every month, for the month 
preceding, by the public Dawks ; or if they cannot be fent by that mode of conveyance, by 

foeh 


182. APPENDIX /0 the Second REPORT from the Seleét Committee on 


fuch other as the Magiftrate may direct. Ifit thall be proved that Darogah has apprehended 
any perfon, or iffued orders or done any official aét, which fhall not be inferted and truly ftated 
in his Report, he fhall be difmilfed from his office. 


Twenty-firfi—If the Darogah of a jurifdiction fhall commit any aés of corruptiou, ex- 

tortion, or oppreflion, or any aét not authorized by thefe Regulations, the party injured is 

_ hereby permitted to profecute him, either criminally before the Court of Circuit, or for 

damages in the Dewanny Adawlut. The Judges of the above-mentioned Courts are re- 

quired to take cognizance of all {ach profecutions or fuits as may be brought before them 

under this regulation, and to pafs fach fentence or decree thereon as may appear to them 
equitable upon 2 confideration of the cireumfiances of the cafe. 


Twenty-fecond.—The Magifirates are to fornith the Darogahs of the feveral jurifdiaions 
with a Suannd of Office, and a Tranilate of the above Regulations in the Perfian or Bengal. 
languages. ‘The Sunnud and Tranflate are to be attefted with their official feal and fignature, 


The Board now proceed to confider the mode of raifing the fund for paying the expentes 
of the Police Eftablifhment. y 


The Magifrates were called upon to flate whether it would be advifuble to raife the fum 
required for defraying the expentes of the Police Eftablifhments of their refpedtive diftritts, 
by a tax on the {hops in the principal towns, Bazars and Gunges, or by a duty on articles 
of confumption, - 

The Magiftrates, with few exceptions, concur in the expediency of adopting the firt 
of thefe modes in preference to the fecond, The grounds of this preference are obvious. 
A tax on articles of confumption would full heavieft upon the Cultivators of the Land, who are 
already alfeffed fufficiently bigh. ‘The charges neceffarily attending the collection of a duty 
or tax on commodities would perhaps be nearly equal to the fam required for the expente of 
the Police; the whole fam, therefore, to be railed would be greatly increafed by the adoption 
of this plan. Befides, the additional and unneceffary burden on the people, the extortions 
and abufes which might be practifed by the Officers appointed to colee. the duties, would 
renew all the impediments and obfiractions to the agriculture and commerce 0 


of the country, 
for the removal! of which Government have lately fubmitted to fo confiderable diminution of 
their refourees by the abolition of the Sayer. R 


_ A fall and limited tax upon the wareboufes. and fhops of the Merchants and Tradefmen 
in the principal towns, Bazars and Gunges, is not liable to any of thefe objections. The 
total amount to be paid in each place, and this difiribution of iton each thop, will be known 
and limited. The collection of the tax may be entrufied to one or more of the principal 
Merchants of the town, fo that no expente will be incurred nor abufe practifed in the 
levying of it, If the affeffment is at any time found unequal, it may be varied without 
difficulty ; the amount required to be collected will be incon le, and it will fall imme-_ 
diately upon the clafs of people who are belt able to pay it, viz. the Merchants and Traders 
who fince the late abolition of the internal duties carry on their commercial tranfuctions 
SeereS and pay no immediate tax whatfoever to the State. They are befides more im- 
mediately. interefted in the eftablifhment of an effective Police than any other order of the 

' people, as their property in its trantportation from one part of the country to another is 
more expofed to the depredations of robbers, There can be little doubt, therefore, but the 
Merchants and Traders of the diliric in general will fhew an equal readinefs with thofe of 
Rung and Boglepore, to contribute to the fupport of a Police Efiablifhment.. The 
Board, however, do not mean that it thould be left to the option of individuals, to contribute 
or not as they may think proper; on the contrary, the tax be impofed by the authority 
of Government. o¥ 


With refpect to the fam to be raifed on each diftri@, the Board are’ of opinion that they 
cannot adopt a better tiandard than the amount which the Rungpore Merchants have 
voluntarily agreed to contribute. This diftrictis by no means favourably fituated for trade, 
and in point of opulence it is probably furpaffed by mort of the other principal Colleétorthipss 
and as the Jumma of each difiriét is perhaps the beft general ftandard that can be taken for 
jadging of the wealth of the Merchants and Traders, as well as of the extent of the country 
required to be protected, it may be fairly prefumed that if the Merchants and Traders in 

-Rungpore can contribute the fun which they have voluntarily agreed to pay, withoutincon- 

Nene, a proportiouate fum may be taifed cn the Merchants and Traders af the other 
diltritts. if ers 
er 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, 183 


The following Statement exhibits the eftimated Jumma of the three Provinces for 1198» the 
Sum which the Magifirates have recommended to be saifed when it could be afcentained 
from their Report; and the Amount now propoted to be affefled agreeably to the ruie 
above fpecified. 


Eftimated Jumma | Sum propofed by the | Amount to be raifed 


of Maviltrates, [im each Colletrorthip;” 
Bengal, Bahar and Orift,| as far as can be | SHculsting upon the 
DISTRICTS. for 1198 solieSied from their | ammount to be raifed 
Bengal aud Fu(ly Style. Report, ‘on Rungrore. 
Beerbhoom - - an ga 1,03,184 — — <a Renee 1,044 — — 
Burdwan = - - - - 36,55.978 — — 958: 3778 = — 
Calcutta = - - = = = 1;07,448 — — Pics eer 111 — — 
Chittagong = - = - - 540,822 — — 270 =i 560 — — 
Cooch Bahar - - - - 1,78,402 —-—} = = = 184 — — 
Daccaliya hoe ie inte: 12,97,901 — — - ef ES 1,345 — — 
Dinagepore - - - - - 15:72;439 — — 6—— 1,631 — — 
Tells op aemamas ac 793.954 — — zim SiS iamt 
Momenfing - - - - = 6,37,764— —~ 213 —— 660. — —= 
Moorfhedabad - - - - - 13,65,674 — — 1,623 —'— 1,415°— — 
Nuddeah- - - - - - 13,73,818 — — 2506 — — 1.434 ot 
Purneah - - - = - - 8,91,402 — — 15354 — ORT = 
Patchite and Jelda = = 72877 ——| - - = ‘ala ieee 
Rajefhahy - - - - - 20,72,200 —= — - - 148 — 
Rungpore - - - - - 8,02,441 — — 832 — — het oti 
Rajemahal = - - - & 270,607 — —= LEP phe 280 — — 
Sylhet - - - - = - 2,71,201 — — go2, — — 252 — — 
Tipperah = - =~ = = 998,619 —~—] = - = 3,035 — = 
Twenty-four Pergunnahs - *8,59,820 — — 344 —- — 890 — — 
J 
187.95,215 — — 
Bahar = - + + + + 13,492,066 asieecfh 3 a) te 
Boglepore - = - ~ - 4,05,810 — — 347 tame 
Durrumpore- = = - « 2,25,293 me fe = 
Ramgur ~ - - - - - 73,445 — — a és - 
Saran - = = = = & 13,26,306 — — 294 — — 


Shahabad = = - = - 9575,083 — — x ahs ras 


Tirhogt. ~<a 10,46,161 — — 200 — — 
53:94,164 — — 

Midnapore - - ~ ~ - 10,45,983 _ 18 5 

Salt Diftri@s 2 - ~ - 4,76,526 — - &\ aes 
15,21,809 — — 

P°O TT euts 
Bengal - - - - = - 1,87,95,215 — — 
Bahar - - - - = = 53,904,164 — — 


Oriffa - ----- 15,21,809 — — 
es 
Grand Total 2,57512,188 ——| per Month - 


perAnnum - 


363. 


&84 APPENDIX fo the Second REPORT from the Sele@ Commnittee on 


© Oa this account it muft be obferved, that inftead of adopting the Jumma of 1198 as the 
Nandard for calculating the amount to be raifed in each diftritt, it would have been defirable 
‘tu have taken the year in which the Jumma for the decennial fettlement will be brouglit to 
its full fandard; but as thefe accounts are not yet completed, and as delaying the arrange- 
nrenis would be productive of more prejadicial confequences than can arile from any trivial 
inequalities in the quota of tax to be levied in each diftrict, the Board think it advifable to 
adopt the Jumma of the paft year as the ftandard for the regulation of it. 


The inequalities in the fums propofed to be raifed by the Magiftrates has been occafioned 
by the different principles on which the plans they have fuggetied are foanded, : 


With regard to the proportions in which the fum dirested to be raifed in each diftri& 
‘Thould be alleffed on the feveral towns, Bazars and Gunges, the Board are of opinion that it 
fhonld be regulated by the amount of the annual Sayer colleétions made therein, as flated 
ih the accounts by which the deduétions aud compenfations granted to the proprietors of the 
Gunges, upon the abolition of thofe duties, were regulated. ns 

The. Board accordingly refolye, that the Secretary be direéted to write the followin 
circular Letter to the feveral Magiftrates, inferting in the 5th Paragraph the fam ordere 
fo be ‘raifed in each diftriét for defraying the expentfe of the Police Eftablifhments, a3 
ipecitied in the laft column of the foregoing Statement. - - 


To . z: 1 Ape awit 
Magifirate of 


Sir, 
Lam diredted by the Governor General in Council to defire your attention to the fol. 


lowing Infiruétions. — . $ : 

. 2, Accompanying you will receive a copy of the Regulations which have been pafled by 
the Governor General in Council, for tne efiabiifhment of an uniform fyftem of Police 
through the country, : 

“3. You will proceed to divide your diftriét into Police jurifdi@tions, as direGted in the 
firlt article of the Regulations, aud eutertain the neceflary efiabifhments for the protection 
of them, taking cdre that the expenfe does not exceed the amouat hereafter mentioned. 


_ 4. From a confideration of the Reports furnifhed by the feveral Magiftrates, in confe« 
quence of the Orders tranfmitted to them on the goth Dasber 1799, the Governor General 
in Council has determined that the expente of the efiablifhments of Police Officers fhall be 
xaifed upon the Merchants, Traders aud Shop-keepers, refiding in the towns, Bazars and 
EN both in the Malguzarry and rent-free lands, in the manner hereatler mentioned. 
His Lordthip in Council is of opinion that this expenfe may with equity be.charged upon the 
above defcriptions of people, as from having conftant occafion to tranfport their piepcey 
from one part of the country to another, they are more iminediately interefted: in the 
efiabliiment of an efficient Police, and as by the late general ubolition of the Sayer 
Suniel they carry on their trade free of duty, and pay no immediate tax whatever to 
the State. i ‘ 


~ §. The expenfe of the neceffary eftablifhments of Officers in your diftrict is eftimated at 
R per mouth, ‘His Lordihip in Council conceives that this fum may be raifed upon 
the Merchants, Traders and Shop-keepers, without its operating as a burthen upon them, as 
the fame deleriptions of people-in other diftriéts have voluntarily. offered to contribute a 
proportionate fum, It is uot meant, however, that the amount which you are directed to 
raife, is to be looked ujon as a voluntary contribution; on the contrary, it is (6 be coufidered 
‘asa tax impofed by the authority of Government, aud to fied accordingly. - 


_ 6 With refpedt to the affeffinent of the tax, you will firft adjuft the amount that isto be 
Jevied on each town, Gange and Bazir, and afterwards fettle the manner in whith that 
amountis to be raifed oa the Merchants, Traders and Shop-keepers, reliding the: r 


7. The fum to be affeifed on each town, Gunge and Bazar, is to be proportionate to the 
annual amount of the Sayer collections formerly levied in them, The Jumma, on which 
the deductions and compenfations have been granted to ie Landholders, on account of the 
abolition of the Sayer, is to be taken as the ttandard of their annual-colleétions, The 
Governor General in Council is of opinion that thefe colleétions form the belt criterion 
for judging the extent of the trade carried on in the feveral towns, Gunges and Bazars, and 
coniequenily of the proportion of the whole expenfe of the Police eliablifhments of 
your ditt:iét, which the Merchants, Traders and Shop-keepers, refiding in each town, Gunge 
and Bazar, ought to defray; but (hould any qualification of this rule occur to you, which 
would in youropision render the affelfinenc more equal, you will fubmitit for the confideration 
of the Board. Agreeably to the above principle, the amount to be alfefled on each town, 
Gaage and Bazar, in your dittrict, will be calculated as follows: 2s the total of the former 
annual Sayer colletions is to the total of the fum to be railed for the expenfe of the Police 
of tie whole of your Colieétorlhip, fo is the amount of the former annual Sayer collections 

of each town, Gunge and Bazar, to the fun to be now alféifed upon it. ‘ 


8. Asno colleétions of the nature of thofe now direéted to be levied, can be made from 
Hants held in open places, the Jumma of them is of courfe to be excluded from the 
calculation, 

; g. With 


.. the Mais of The EAST.INDIA COMPANY. —- 185. 


- win refpeét to the mode of levying the fum affeffed on each town, Gunge and ~ 
Bazar, upon the Merchants, Tradeys and Shop-keepers refiding therein, the Board conceive , 
that it may be raifed by a tax on their Warehoufes or Shops, aud in fome places by aflefling , 
a {pecifie fum upon the different defcriptions of Merchants, Traders and Shop-keepers. 
As however the amount to be raifed upon each town, Gunge and Bazar, will not be con- 
fiderable, and the Governor General in Council being defirous that it fhould be levied ins 
which ever of the above modes may be moft agreeable to thofe by whom it is to be paid, 
he directs that you will advife with the principal Merchants, Traders and eyep acre in 
each town, Gunge and Bazar, and adopt which ever of the above modes of raifing the 
money they may think preferable (unlefs it fhall appear to you objettional) ; and that you 
will alfo regulate, in concert with them, the rates of affeflment to be paid by the Merchants, | 
ee ad Shop-keepers, in the towns, Gunges and Bazars, in which they may refpectively 
refide. 


10. When you have fettled the amount to be affeffed on each town, Gunge-and Bazar, 
and the manner in which it is to be raifed, you will commit the collection of it to two or more 
of the principal Merchants, Traders or Shop-keepers, in each town, Bazar or Gunge, deliverin, 
to them a writing under your official feal and fignature, {pecifying i total amount whit 
they are to collect from their refpective towns, Gunges or Bazars, and particularizing the 
rates of the tax, and the amount to be paid bythe feveral oat of Merchants, 
‘Traders aid Shop-keepers, together with the periods of payment. ‘This writing will ferve 
as an authority for collecting the tax to thofe who may be appointed to levy it, at the fame 
ona that: it will be a check upon their committing ‘any abufe in the difcharge of thair 
traft. ; 


11, You will be particularly careful to affure the Merchants, Traders and Uy 
irpole of 


that the fum direéted to be raifed upon them, will be applied folely to the pu 
defiaying the charges of the Police of the dittriét, 


12, Should you be of opinion, after due enquiry, that the raifing the whole of the fum 

above direcied would operate us a heavy burden upon the Merchants and Traders, you will 

~ flate at large the grounds of this opinion to the Governor General in Council, and at the 

fame time inform him what fum you think can be raifed without inconvenience to the 
perfons above-mentioned. mth 


13. Should you find the fum which you are directed to. raife more than fafficient for 
defraying the expenfe of the eftablithments neceflary for the protection of your diftrict, 
agreeably to the plan preferibed, you will affefs on the Towns, Gunges and Bazars, fuch fum 
ouly as inay be fuflicient for paying the requilite eftablifiments. 


. 14. The Governor General in Council is of opinion that the eftublifhment of the Police 
jurildiétions in general thould confilt of a Darogah, a Jemautdar, ten Birkandauzes, and a 
‘Mohurrer; an additional number of Birkandauzes to be‘ entertained, if neceffary, in the 
jurifdictions in which any large towns, Gunges or Bazars, may be fituated. That the Daro~ 
guhs in general fhould be aliowed twenty-five Rupees per month ; and thofe who may have 
the charge of the large towns, Bazars or Gunges, thirty Rupees per month, befides five Rupees. 
per mouth for a Cutcherry, ftationary and other contingencies; the Jemautdars eight 
Rupees, the Birkandauzes four Rupees, aud the Mohurrers five Rupees per month each. 
Should any alteration in the eftablifhments or fularies of the Officers appear to you advifable, 
you will fubmit it for the confideration of his Lordthipin Council. 4 


15. When you have fettled the amount to be levied on each town, Gunge and Bazar, the 
mode in which it is to be railed, and the eftablithment for each jurifdiétion, you will fubmit 
the detail of the arrangements ¢ Board, in the manner preicribed in the annexed form 5 
and when the fame fall have been approved no variation is to be made either in the fum 
affefled upon each town, Bazar or Gunye, or in the mode of raifing it from the Merchants, 
‘Traders and Shop-keepers, without the previous fanétion of the Governor General in Council. 


16, It being effentially neceflary for the peace and profperity of the country that a Police 
fthould be eftablifhed without delay, and as fome tine may elapfe before the mode of raifing 
the amount affefled on each town, Gunge and Bazar, can be finally determined, the Governor 
General in Council defires that you will proceed to divide your diftri into Police jurifdictions, 
and to entertain the neceilury efiablifliments of Officers for the proteétion of them, imme= 
diately; and in the event of the colle¢tions which may be made from the different towns, 
Gunges and Bazars, within the firfi month after the Officers thal] have been entertained, 
not proving fufficient to defray their falary for that month, that you will pay the deficiency 
from your treafury, reporting the fum which you may fo difburie to the Board. 


17- You will report whether the Landholdersin your difirict have been allowed any de 
duétions on their Juoma, or ave in the receipt of any money allowances, or hold any lands, 
either free of, or at a reduced revenue, for the purpofes of keeping up Tannalidars or other 
Police Gfticers; and alfo your opinion whether the whole, or any, and what part of fuch de- 
dudtions, allowances, or produce of fuch lands, may with equity be rouge to the publie 
account, in confideration of the Landholders being now prohibited from keeping up fuch 
eilablithment, and Government having taken upon itfelf the charge of the Police. 


38. The 


186° APPENDIX -to ‘he Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


48. The Governor General in Council defires that you will proceed to carry the above at-_ 
Tangements into execution upon the receipt of this letter, gnd that you will make it an object 
oft your particular attention to complete them with the leaft poflible delay. 


“19. ‘His Lordthip in Council further defires me to inform you, that he fhall expect an early 
reportof the progrefs which you may make in carrying thele Orders into effect. 


Iam, &c. 


2 (No.1.) 
Lifi of the Police Jurifdictions, and Statement of the Efiablifhments entertained for the 
‘ ; proteétion of them, in the Colieétorthip of 


ESTABLISHMENT. 


‘Names of the Computed Extent 


TESS ane Pte Sonali ox Pemgondaba of the Ng is 
egy comprized in the Square of each a2) es 
irae Juriféigiion, Jorifdidtion, a g\3 

No, 1. Goyindpore,] ManomepAtty.| 1. | 10.] 1 


(No. 2.) 
Particulars of the Taxes levied for deftaying the Expenfes of the Police Eftablifhments in 
the Collectorfhip of 


Names of the Towns, Names of the Merchants, Explanation of the manner in which the 


Annual Amount 


Gunges or Bazarsy Taxin each Town, Basar or Gungrislevied 
iowbich  * | ihe erynny er he Taxis |_ OPS 1 by whae dfesiption of Perfons ie ie paids 
‘Taxes are levied, commit omar Asse ta reaeges and the Rates of Affefliment, 


Saves Ram. 


Bue Raye. 


REGULATIONS for the Police of the Cities of Moorfhedabad, Dacca and Patna. 
The pcre Regulations for the Police of the Colleétorfhips have no application to the 


* Cities of Moorthedabad, Dacca and Patna. 

The eftablifhments allowed for the Police of the Cities are fpecified in the Regulations of 
the 3d December 1790, and the expenfe of them is defrayed by Government. They are 
obvivully inadequate to the protection of thefe populous Cities, and confequently robberies 
and other diforders are frequeatly committed in them. ne 

The Board accordingly refolve, that the Magiftrates of thefe Cities be direéted to carry the 
following Arrangements and Infiructions into execution. Fhe 

1 i) 


488 APPENDIX fo che Second REPORT from the Seleé&t’ Committee on 


SPECIAL ORDERS sefpeing the Police of the Diftri@ 
: JESSORE. 


There are fome diftri@s in which, from filuation and lecal circumftances, robbers are more 
frequent than in any other parts of the country, and where the expente of the Police muft 
fail chiefly apon Government. The diftricts in ‘the Sunderbunds are of this defcription, ‘The 
country on each fide of the creeks and rivers being covered with forett, affords a harbour for 
deevits and robbers, who invariably infelt this navigation. Wrom the danger that confe- 
squently attends the pafling through thefe rivers and channels, which connect the Hooghly or 
Calcutta tiiver with the Barampooterand Ganges, the general commerce of the country is 
much impeded; a Police efiablihment is ftationed under a Comuillioner in the vicinity of 
“Backergunge, and alibough itis adequate to the protection of that quarter, it is too far 
diffant io prevent the depredations of robbers in the extenfive tracts of country between 
Backergunge and Calcutta. ‘This country is chiefly under the jurifdiction of the Magitirate 
-of Jefe, who obterves that from Silimabad to the eaft, to Pothhutty and Suffrazpore to the 
avettward-of the Iisamaity, fkirting the Sunderbunds upwards of 100 miles, is under his col- 
deciorfhip, and cowprizes about fiity diftinct efiates. The Girdwards have chiefly been em- 
ployed in thete difiriéts, which from their contiguity to the Sunderbunds become the refort 
of robbers-aud-decoits, and in which from their pumbers and fmallnefs the Police cannot be 
veflectualy preferved. ‘The paflage through the Sunderbunds is effectually protected by the 
Gidwary or guard-boats, but the fuppreition of robberies and depredations in the adjoiuing 
diftiicts, and -ef¥estual extirpation of the robbers, cannot -be accomplithed without the 
efiubliiment of Pannahs.or ftations for the prefervetion.of the Police. The Zemindars are 
declared velponfible for the prelervation of the peace of their difricts, but in particular 
inftances (as in the places I ain now {peaking of) it is totally impracticable. If an offence is 
commited in one of thefe fmali diftri¢is, the perpetrators may be out of the limits of it in a 
quarter of an hour, andthe proprietor of the next affords no afjifiance, perhaps, where there is 
not fome authority to cnforce it. For tie above reatons the eitablithments have been hitherto 
entertained, und in my opinion ought to be-continued. The Magittrate further ftates, that 
having difcontinued thefe Tannah -eftablifiments in confequence of having no farther 
authority to charge for the expenfe of them, many robberies were thortly after committed; 
and in bis letter, of the 31 May 1791, he repeats his recommendation for the eftablifhment 
of thefe Yannals. ‘The above extracts ave fufticient to thew the A a of keeping up the 
Police ettablilhments prepoted by the Magiftrate. The expenfe (as underttated) is contider- 
able, when compared with the advantages that will refult from freeing this navigation from 
the maurauders who infeft it, 


Eftablithment for Tannahs for the- above-mentioned Diftriéts. 


At Hooghly one Tannah, comprizing that Pergunnah, Sultanpore, Remorah, Havilly, 
Khatifatabad, Tolebpore, Nichlapore and Rungden, and other eaftern Pergunnahs of Jeflore 
in the vicinity of Coolnah; at Bazudpore one Tannah, comprizing Perguunah, Jumrah, 
Myheity, Bhulhha, Nuckeypore, Suffrazpore, &c. 


Expenfes of one Tannah. 
Tannahdar per Month Bl eb he 
A Moonflee PS eT es a x 
A Bengal Mohurrer - - - - = 


A Duffadar et Pes Tih Ih ese cas Sols 
6 Birkandauzes, to guard and .efcort prifoners 
2 Dholly Pykes for ie pS ee 
40 —- -- 
For a Boat. 
a Mangee ate 
a Galleah - 
4 Dandees 

Boat-hire  ~ 


Office Charges 


ern 
vtet 
Pek 
ttee 


‘ 
' 
' 


AES - 4-— 


- ———e 
gr a1 Tannah 150 — — 


150 — 


per Month 300 — — 


The Board accordingly dire, that the Magifirate be authorized to continue the two 
“Tannahs Bvementions, at Bazeedpore and Hooghly, for the purpofes of which he recom- 
amended the eftablifhment of them, unlefs upon the completion of the arrangements which 
she is now ordered to execute they would be found no longer neceflary. 


DACCA JELALPORE. 
The Magiftrate ftrongly recommends the continuance of the office of Ghaut Manjee, as 
avell as the tax of one Anna per Rupee on the hire of Boats, upon the ground that Gaut 
. _ Manjees 


the Affairs of ‘The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 189 


Manjees-are neceflury both for providing boats for crofling troops and for individuals 
concerned intyade. To continue this tax for the firft flated object is unnecedfary, as no 
troops ever march that route except the battalions fiationed at Dacca and Chittagong; 
a fufficient number of boats -can always -be procured at the fhortet notice to crofs thele 
final! bodies of men, and the hire of them, as itis at-prefent, fhould be paid by Goveroment. 
‘That the owners of the boats will'not objet to the difcontinuance of the: office and tax is 
apparent, aud as to the Merchants, they and in no need of an Officer of Government to 
procure boats for the tran{portation -of their goods. ‘This tax has been ordered to be 
abolifhed.by the.Board of Kevenue, in-conformity to the general Rezulations; but .as they 
-at the fame -time referred, the Magiftrates tirongly recommending the continuance of it, 
for the.orders of Government, itimay be proper for the Board to fignify their difapprobation 
-of an impofition which, without anfwering any purpofe of public utility, vefts the Gavt 
Mangee with an authority which he hasin geueral made ufe of to oppre{s the owners of 
‘boats, and mutt -confequently-have eontributed to-raile.the hire of them, to the detriment 
-of the internal trade of the country. 


The Board aecordingly refolve, that the Magiftrate be informed that the orders of the 
Board of Revenue, for the abolition of the office of Gaut Manjee-and the tax of one Anna 
per Rupee on-the price of bouts, have-been confirmed, 


TIPPERAH, 

The Magiftrate propofes to affefs only fuch Hauts as formerly yielded a revenue of upwards 
-of 300 Rupees per annum, and recommends that Huats which yielded a Jefs fum be panes 
up. The refolve, that the Magiftrate be directed to affei’s the Merchants and Traders 
in all Gunges.wnd Bazars whatever, but not to bresk up any Hauts; on the contrary, to 
encourage the .eftablifhment of them. The Board further direst, that the Magifirate be: 
ofdered, as feon as the-Police arrangements in his-difiriét are completed, to difcharge the 
Sebundy corps now-kept up in his diftrict, reporting the date from which the pay of the 
people may-be difcontinued, 


TIRHOOT. & 
The Magiftrate entertained ‘eftablifhments amounting to Goo Rupees per month, as 
‘ified in his Letter of the 24¢ July 1791, for the Police of three principal towns in his 
itiriét, Derbungah, Hajifpore, and Mozufferpore; be was authorized to continue thefe 
-eltablifhments until the general arrangements for the Police fhould take place. The Board 
accordingly refolve, that the Magiftrate be directed to difcontinue thee eftablithments as 
{oon as the arrangements now ordered are completed. : 


SYLHET. 

The northern frontier-of this Diftri€t being fubject to the inroads of the Coffeahs and 
-other bill people, the Magiftrate was authorized to entertain an eftablifhment of guards for 
‘the defence of it, at the expenfe of 1,000 Rupees per month, befides 2,000 Rupees per 
-annum for eight guard-boats, from the 1ft May to the gilt Oétober. The particulars of 
thi eRe are {pecified in the Magifirate’s Letter, recorded on the Proceedings 
of the 

The Colleétor recommends, in his Letter of the 14th November 1790, that 20,392 Cowns 
sof Couries, or S* R* 3,623. 3. 18. per annum,be raifed in the following manner : 


Tax on Shops, -. + 9+ Cowns 7,399 
Articles of Confumption. 


Salt goingintoJamleah - = - ~ = 8,000 
On ali Goods going and coming trom Cachar 4,000 
‘On Oranges - = = - ~ = 2,000 

; 20,303 


“The Collestorfirongly recommends the efiabli(iment of the three laft-mentioned taxes, ne 
they are colleéted-on the frontier and therefore cannot obftruct the induftry of the people. 
The Board, however, are -of opinion that it would be unadyiteable to admit even of this 
partial re-eftablifhment of the internal duties, as-it might furnifh a precedent for other 
deviations from the principles which they have laid down prohibiting the collection of them, 
The-tax on Oranges brought from the hills is further ebjéionable, as it would tend to dif- 
courage the intevcourfe between the hill people and the low country, which fhould be 
promoted as much as poilible fo long as they conduct themfélves peaceably. The tax on 
Salt is more particularly exceptionable, as contributing to prevent the exportation of an 
article of our ‘own manufacture, and in which a confi ale. -trade is carried on with the 
ealtern countries. Of the above thirteen thoufand Cowns prepofedto be railed by duties, only 
nine are recommended to be applied to the charge of the Police, the remaining four thoufand 
are recommended to be apprepriated to the paymeut of {mall Pentions, formerly defrayed from 
the Sayer; the payment of thefe Penfions has been fince provided for under the General 
Regulations. The Board accordingly refolve, that the Muagifirate be informed that the 


Poiice efablifiments which heis now directed to entertain, are to be exclufive of thofe he 
bas 


190 APPENDIX fo the Second REPORT from the SeleG: Comimittée on 


has been already authorimed 40 keep up for the proteétion of the northern frontier of his 
diliviét, and whicu wiil of courle render uny additional eitablithments in the country adjacent 


to then aunecedarys 


The Board prefume that the payment of the Prifoners, alluded to in his Letter of the 
24ih November 1790, has been provided for by the Genera! Regulations refpedting fuch 
aliowances. » 

The Magiftrate fhould be further informed, that the expenfes of Repairs to the Roads 
cannot be provided for from the finn now direéted to be ratfed, and that the Bourd do not 
think it advilenbie ‘to authorize the eltablifliment of the duties whieli he lias propoled to levy 
oi Oranges, ou Salt going into Jomleah, and on Goods going to and coming from Canar. 


RAMGUR. 

“The Colledor, in his Letter of the 11th Pebroary 1791, fiates that all the Zemindars in 
his difiriG having got a deduétion from their Jamina cqual to the expenfe attending the 
keeping Chekeydars, Gantwars, &¢. 1 have not permitted, aay of them tobe withdrawn, 
conteguently no additional eftablifliment will be necefary on this account. ¢ 

With refpeet to Officers for fuperintending the Police, Markets, &c. he thinks it udvifeable 
that fome pertous Mould be ettablifhed at certain places fpecified in his Letter, upon the 
new roud, to induce the inhabitants to continue in them for the convenience of travellers, 
who but for this proteetion would often be fubjeét to ill weatment; and confequently defert 
the places altogether, to the great iatermiption ef the inland: trade and of paflengers in 
general, He thinks that one perfon at a flation, with an allowance of four-Rupees per 
month, would be fuficient; but at the tame time obierves, hat in conlequence of the 
extreme poverty of the pedple in that tiountainons part of the country, the aflefling any tax 
upon the few Shops that” may’ be found in Markets or Guinges, would fall heavy, and might 
lie the means of driving ‘the people from them altogether. 7 ft wom 


The Board being convinced of the jufinefs of the above reprefeutations, ‘refolve, that the 
Collector be infirocted to cobtinue the-Zemindasry Tannahs in the Bahar ditiriét as at 
prefent, and lo be careful that the Officers difeharge “a truft with diligence and fidelity. 

- That.he be allowed to flation an Officer in the feveral places on the new road mentioned 
in hig tester, with the monthlyallowance propoted to him, , 7 Ay 
“That in the Bengal portion of his diliriG he ‘carry the General Regulations of ‘this dae 
into execution. ahisaolsjsae way PRE), oad > Syyanate 
COOCH BAUAR. 

The Board direct that the Commitlioner be in!ormed that the Police Regulations are not 
to extend to the independent tesrtoieyoF the Kya of Covel, Babar = ' ; 
vay < j 1 othe angie Geta Bes io 

‘SPECIA L INSTRUCTIONS for the Police of the City of DACCA. : 

The Magiftrate of this City has fubmitted a full detail of the arrangements which he. 
confiders neceflary for the effublifiment of an efficient Police, but many of his propofitions 
are ttmpplieable to_prefent cireuiituneds, and others are iheortpnubhe with the General 
Regulations. ‘The Bout pafs the following Revolutions’ia his létiers Didi 

The circumfances Gaited in This parazraph evince the pecs cen ereining the propofed 
finall efablifhinent: of boats. The, Board ageosdingly.wefplve, - that the Magiltrate be 
authorized to entertain the boats, and to provide for defraying the expente of tem in the 

Ggeccpn: i 


tax which he is diredted to alls upon tue Merehants i 


The reafons affigned by the Magiftrate for extending bie juitdtion jo the oppofite fide 
of the rivercan no longeroperate, as hy the General Regulations for the Police of the 
Collectorthips he will Le empowered to purtue perfons whe have been guilty of robberies or 
vetimes within the City, and to Saihend thea ia the juritdiétion of tie Magilirates of the 
jicent diftrigts, : ae Bros. 

Wil Sayer collections in the City haying bcen abolifhed, the reafons. aligne 
715 lene ici pte en ee er aap iss Man, ae ae 
onger cers. of Government, he tax which they form levied u. the Cv ners 0} 
Boats:tias been-sibolithedsi ulin. 2: aaa Hy ia 


is patac, . 


4 reo bb . > af f "i tx ' 
“The'Board will take Watideritiod ‘any propofals that may be made ative indi= 
vidual ey arcane. M al wheir own dees tia accordingly defive that he will forward: 
ey that may be bmmitted iin. ‘augeb nares Meare ee 


<Thatthe recomintnd to the people to. tile: their houfem, ot to. coves themmwith terraces, 
‘Thar it tuft be left; howexer, to the optica of the people to build fuch hoates as. they may, 
find inoft convenient and fuitable to their eireumftances. ‘That the Board-hope the .nalives 
| “wilbimprove in’their Gyleof building-ne they increale in opulence. testa F 
oggtd sisitee a 
ee 


“the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 191 


Appendix, N° 14. 


Extra&t Letter from) the Governor General in Council at Bengal (Revenue Department); 
“ _ dated gift Auguft izo7.° 


Para, 29. PROM former advices you will have obferved that the produce of the Police Tax, 
‘eftablithed by the egd Regulation of 1793, fell confiderably thort of the eftimated amount. 

» Many difticulties were alfo experienced in making a fair affejlinent of this tax, as no general 
rulé coild be deviled which fhould determine exactly what defcription of peony were 
properly fubjeét to the tax, or in what proportions it fliould be paid by the feveral- towns: 
and Gunges, or progrellively by the individuals of any particular towa or Gange, from whic! 

a contribution was deaaniabie® and we had reafon to believe that the alfeffors and Native 
Collectors often availed themtelves of thefe cireumflances to commit oppreiffon and extor- 
ton. ss 


30. Thefe confiderations furgefted at an early period the propriety of ome modification of 
the tax ; but as We Were unwilling to relinguiflia branch of the public Revenue without pre- 
vioully providing fome other adequate refowrce not fiable to the fame objections, and 25 we 
had not acquired fufficient experience to enable us to determine whether & modification could 
be introduced to obviate all the material objections, or whether thé plain itfelf fhould be-alto- 
gether abandoned, we thought it more prucent to fulpeud tor (ome time any tinal determina 
tion on the fubject. Rafe 


31: Subfequent information, however, having refolved our doubts in this re we deemed. 
it expedient, on the grounds above adverted to, at once to abolith the tax, without tad 
amodification of it, and in purfuance of this refolution Regulation 23 of 1793 was altoge-" 
ther refeinded. nit % 


32. Weat the fame time ed the 6th Regulation of 17973 in which wé lave endea~ 
youred to coinbine the ettablilhment of an unobjectionable, and we teufi productive fource of 
Revenue, with the important object of difeouraging the inftitation of the many vexatious and 
litigious fuits which are fiill brougie before the Courts, from the facility with whieh indivi- 
duals can have accefS to’ them and the inconfiderable expence hitherto attending a judicial 
procefs, : 


33. Befides augmenting the fees on the inftitution of civil fuits and on the filing of exhi- 
bits and papers, and taxing the fees of the licented pleaders, the Regulation propofes to raife 
a Revenue by requiring certain law. deeds and documents to be written on fiampt paper. At 
prefent we have thought it advifable to limit the operation of the Regulation to original deeds 
and law papers; copies of fuch deeds and papers prepared or attelted by the Cauzies and 
other Others; the pleadings in the Civil’ Courts a dee of judicial papers furnifhed by the 
Courts, and of Revenue papers furnifhed by the Collectors and Board of Revenue; Rowan- 
nahs or pailes iffued from the department of Cuftoms; bonds and other pecuniary obliga- 
tions; and the Sunnuds of appointment of the public Pleaders and the Cauzies fiationed in 
the different diftricts. [t is our intention, however, by another Regulation, which is at prefent 
under eonfideration, to extend thevfiamps to licen{es. fale of fpirituousdiquors and 
drugs, and trivial complaints in the Fouzdarry Courts, fiith as petty affrays, alfaults.and other 
mifdemeanors punifhable by the Magiftrates without reference to the Courts of Circuit. 
‘Thefe complaints*are for’ the moft part preferred from vexatious or litigious motives, and the 
enquiry into them oceupies 2 great proportion of the time of the Magifirates without any 
adequate benefit refulting to the public. / 


4. In a financial point of view it appears to us that there is no mode of adding to the 
pabitte refources which to Ielesiabiata etpention than the fisimp dinties noweltblifheds® They 
will not encroach upon the perfonal convenience of the tubject, nor operate partially or 
unequally on property ;.and the collection of them will neither be expentive nor difficult; the 
means of evafion are at the fame time fufliciently guarded againft, and the tax will neither 
afford any opportunity for oppretiion or extortion, nor for fraud aad embezalement.on the 
part of the officers. of Goyerament,, ‘i i fee is , 

35: OF the produce of the Stamps it is impoflible to'form any eftimate; but judgin: z from 
the voluminouinefs of the proceeditigs of the Courts of Judicature, and the populati ni 
wealth of the country, and the practice which uni¥ertally prevails of having recourle to the 
Cauzy for «preparing dveds and infiraments relating to private contracts, we entertain yery 


fanguine expectations that it will be confiderable, and that when extended to other papers” 


and tranfactions which experience may fuggett, it will in courfe of time become one of the 
molt productiveand unexceptionable braaches of the public Revenue. ? 

36. For conducting the detail of the bufinefs, we haye thought proper to appoint a Super- 
intendant, who will act under the immediate authority of the Board of Revenue. gen to 
draw a'commifiion of 2 per cent.on the net produce of the duties, in dieu, of «ll perfonal 
allowances ; and with refpect to the other expentes of the cftublifhment, we have only to 
xemark that every nece(fary utteation has’ been paid to economy. * 


363. ‘ 3c 


Mife* vt 
x > June, 
gth ) 
“Dp? 23d D° 

“4h Augalt. 


fig? «APPENDIN /o-#4e Second REPORT from the Sele Committce cr’ 


Appendix, No. 15. 


- “Extra® Letter fromthe Governor General in Council at Bengal (Judicial Department); 
‘ : -dated goth September 1802. 


‘Pat. 3. ON the proceedings of the Vice Prefident in Council, of the 18th March laft, is 
recorded a Letter from the Governor General, inclofing a Letter addrefied to bim by the 
Honourable the Chief Juftice, and a Proclamation relative to the eftablifhment of a new 

? Court tor the reeovery of fall Debts in the town of Caleutta, in conformity to the provifions 
-of the’ late Act of Parliament. The proceediags of the fame date contain an amended draft 

“of the Proclamation tranfinitted by Sir John Anfiruther to the late Vice Prefident in Council, 
which was publifhed in the Gazeite of the 13th March laft. Meflrs. Ebenezer Coleman, 
Richard Heming, and Anthony Muctier, were at the fame time appointed to be the firft 


sCominiftioners.of the Court. 
4. Onareference.to the Proclamation ycur honourable Court will obferve, that under the 
“authority granted by the Act of Parliament, the juriidiction of the Court has, in conformity 
“to the recommendation of Sir John Anfiruther, been limited to claims nop exceeding one 
Thundred'S*. Rupees, 
5: On-the 16th September the Governor General in Council authorized thie Commiffioners 
5 sto entertain .an eftablifhment-of Officers, to-aflift them in the difcharge of the duties of the 
he Court, amounting to S*. Rupees 1,483 per month. The falaries of the three Commiflioners 
were on the fame day fixed at 800 Rupees each. Information haying however been received 
of the death of the late Mr. Coleman, one of the Commiflioners, the Governor General in 
* Council, on the grounds ftated in his correfpondence with the honourable the Chief Juttice, 
sdotermived that the office of third Commiilioner fhould be abolifhed. Your honourable 
Court will obferve that there is every reafon to expect that the additional expenfe attendant 
on the eftablifment of this Court, will be more than counter balanced by the moos arifing 
from the new table of fees recommended by the Chief Juftice and approved by the Gover- 
mor General in Council. 

6. The Governor General in Council has likewife great fatisfaction in pointing out to the 
notice-of your honourable Court the beneticial effects arifing from the efiablifhment of the 
new Court of Requetts, with refpect to the regularity and difpatch with which the fuits cog- 

_ nhizable by that Court are now decided. 


Appendix, No. 16. 
‘Extrat-of a Letter fromthe Secret Gominittee -of the Cont of DireGiors to the Governor 
~  * General in Council at Bengal ; dated gd November 1787. 


‘UPON « full confideration of the fubject we have come to a refolation, and hereby direct 
you to defift from levying the Government Cuftoms. : : f 


Sayer. Appendix, No. 17. 
Rev, Dept f 
16 Apr.1790. " Extract Letter from the Governor General in | at Bengal (Separate Department); 
tee dae ; ea foe 


= » Par. 29. IN the orders and regulations which have been paffed at different prio refpect- 
ars Cyt. & ing the Sayer collections, the Calcutta Town Duties, and the Government Cultoms, your Go- 
ene svernment has uniformly referved to ittelt; che rightof re-eftablifhing any of'the branches of thofe 
mahieaeys duties which have been abolifhed or the collection of which has been fufpended, or of fub- 
saapeye.: ftituting for thofe duties any other défeription of duties or taxes. ‘The right toimpofe duties 
20. Junerzss. and taxes was of courfe decined to be inherent. in the Government; and the declarations which 
= “have been fo frequently made on this fubject, can be confidered cnly as.an intimation.of the 
Com. Dep, intention of your Goverament to improve the public refources, by the eftablithment of taxes 
«2 Dec. 3704. and duties.on the trade and commerce of the country whenever circumftances fhould xender 
ees at advi to haye recourfe to that meafure. ; : i 
4% Mex aah: _ 90. Having attentively confidered all the proceedings which haye been licld on the fubject 
! a ofthe ee Su ey aay ee mented he ia ig sane an ee was of 
i inion, that in the prefent flourifhing an {perous ftate of the Briti minions in 
_ Pub. Dep. Se aie petal Teafablihment.of the fener Town Duties, the exienfion of a-fimilar 
SoNoy, 1798 yftem of taxation to the cities of Patna, Daeca, Moorfhedabad and Benares, and the re- 
___ ftoration, with .certain modifications, of the Goyernmeut Cuftoms heretofore levied in the 
< oe Dep. interior of the country, would conftitute a productive fource of Revenue, without aflecting the 
16July 1798. commerce or induftry of the country. « . 
47June17a9. : gi. Ia 


» the Mhirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 193 


31. In framing the regulations for the:collection of thefe duties, it has been the object of 
the Governor General in Council, as far as was practicable, to render them in effeét taxes 
-on confumption, and to prevent any injury to the foreign import or export trade of the 
country, ' i 


32 The rates at which the Calcutta Town Duties are to be levied, are tobe the fame, with 
'fome exceptions, as the rates at which thofe duties were collected previoutly to their abolition 
by the 2d fection of the goth regulation of 1795. 


33: But the regulations under which thofe duties are to be now levied, differ from the 
fonner regulations for their collection in the following important points: 


Tirft. Under the former reguiztions the duties were levied on all articles whatever import- 
ed into Calcutta from the interior of the country ; aecorditig to the pretent regulation the 
duties are levied only on certain articles {pecified in the regulations. Care was taken to 
felect thole articles the cuties on which would be molt productive, and wl-ieh would’ be 
levied with facility. “fhe numerous articles of trivial value imported into the town, the col- 
leGion ‘of the duties‘on which occafioned confiderable vexation to the petty traders without 
adding materially'te the public Revenue, are exempted from the dutits as now refiored. 


Secondly. Goods imported into the town of Calcutta for exportation to England, with the 
exception of indigo and raw filk, were heretofore fubjeét to the 'Yown Duties. Under 
new regulation a drawback of thote duties is allow , under certain reftriétions, on all the 
principal articles of export to England. ‘The drawback may Le exteaded to other articies of 
export as circuunftances may hereafter require. “ I , 


34. The Town Duties eftablithed at the cities of Paina, Moorfhedabad, Dacca anit 
Benares, have been regulated on the fame principles as the ‘Lown Duties re-etablifhed at 
Calcutta, and will operate, with litte exception, as a tax on the inhabitants of thofe popu- 
lous and wealthy cities, who now pay no direct contribution whatever to the State. Your 
honourable Court will obferve, that goods in their tranfit through thofe cities, and all 
imported into them and atterwards exported within a prefcribed period, are exempted from 
the payment of the town duties. ¢ L tad ¥ R 


35-.The Government Cuftoms to be levied at the feveral fiations fpecified in Regulation 
11, 1801, will alfo, toa great degree, rate as an internal tax on the confumption of 
the articles charged with the, duties, which may be the produce or manuf.cture of the 
Britith territories in Bengal, and which may not be exported from thofe territories. Your 
honourable Court will obterve that goods, the produce or manufacture of the Britith tenito- 
ries in Bengal, which may be exported by fea, and goods imported into thofe territories from 
England and afterwards exported inland'to any place without thofe territories, will not be 
ablated by that regulation to any additional duty beyond that to which they are now 
iable. 4 & : ane 


36. Tt has Touytbela deemed. BEE indifpenfabl neeeflary to re-eftablith the Guiftorectouts 
formerly maintained at Hooghly, for fubjecting the imports and exports of the foreign fettle- 


ments of Chinfurah, Chandernagore Serampore, to the paynient of duty, and for main- ~~ - 


taining a vigilant controul over the trade of thofe fettlements, ~ 


37- No period of time could be more favourable than the prefent for completely reftoving 
the duties on the foreign trade, the’ foreign fettlements being now all in the poflettion of the 
Britifh Government. The Governor General in Council trufts, that in the event of thote 


fettlements being reftored to. their former poffeflors, care will be takew'to ftipuiate thar ” 


their trade fhall be fubject ‘to the fame duties, and be liable in its conduct to atl the regu- 
lations which may be preferibed for the trade of Britith fubjetis'in Bengal. At all events, 
the right of collecting the former duty of 2} per cent. on the trade of thoie fettlements, will 
remain with the Britith Government, and that right mutt always be exercifed to its fallett 
extent on every principle of commercial prudence and political wiffom. ae 


38. For the details refpecting the duties, and the rules for their collestion, the Governor 
General in Council begs ate to refer your honourable Court to’ the pri ations, 


R 
“The preceding explanation of the (ice principles and policy o8 which the Regulations” | 


have been framed will fatisfy your honourable Court that every reafon exifis to tavour an 

expectation that thelé dutits will produce a large annual’ Revenue to the Compuny, without | 

ailecting the growing wealth dud profpérity of thef territories. : Ae nes 
7 Fe ao 


Appendixy No. 18. Ras 
Extract Letter from Board of Trade, to. Governor Geacral in Council at. Bengal ; date 
5th May 1795- fa RO ae 


Par. 1. DEEMING it a duty incumbent upon us, for the fatisfaition of sourHononrable foan! of « 


Board, and for the readier-mfonmation of the Court of Dizectors, to prefent aur proceedings ‘Trade. 


in the Salt Department in a comnedied point of view, we beg leaves in adiitioa to our 
Reports ta the ordinary courfe of our bufinels, now to furnith the following fimaurary of all 
material tranfactions in this branch of the Company’s affairs, from the commencement of 


‘our management to the prefent time. 5 = ee 
f nformably 


Salt. 


494 APPENDIN /o the Sccond REPORT from the Scle& Committee on 


Muted 22 Feb. Conformably to your original inftrnctions, the Board of Reyenue and the Comptroller 

2793 delivered over charge to us on the 15th March 1793,’and we immediately proceeded to ex- 
by ‘Athine into the aétual ftate ofthe Department; the refult of this exannmation fhewed the 

deveral branches of the bufinefs to have been arranged under the following heads ; viz. 


ift. The Comptroller’s Office at the Prefidency. 
* “ad. Phe manufacture of Bengal Salt. 
3d. The provifion of the Oria Salt. 
4th. Oceafional Supplies of Coafi Salt. 
ath. The h Conyention Salt. 
( Milicit Prade. ¥ 


6th: S cone teations and 
‘UGhokies for preventing: Ticks Trade. 


7 : ary 1793- 
si! Paragraph 4th. “* Yon will report to us as foon as may be practicable what part of. the 
> prefent eftablithnent of the Comptroller's Office can be difpenied with, and what part of it 
. will be neceflary to continue to enable you to conduct the bafinels of the department.” 
~ th. You willanake it an object of your early attention to examine into the ftate of 
. : the Salt Chokies, and td‘propote fuch arrangements as‘ you may deem bei calculated to 
prevent the illicit importation of Salt, or the clandeftine manufaéture of it within the 
provinces.” op 
6th. © You will likewife examine minutely into the eftablifhed and contingent Aurung 
chatges of every defeription, and retrench or reduce fiuch as may appear to you exorbitaut 
or unneceflary.” ° 
7th. “ We farther defire that you will fuggeft to us occafionally fuch regulations as may 
Appear to you calculated to improve this very important branch of the public refources.” 


«4. Purfuant to thefe inftructions, we procceded to examine into the general bufinels of the 


Departments, viz. . 


é Firft.—The Comptroller's Office at the Prefidency. 


or | The Comptroller poffelfed a fuperintending authority over the Agents and all other 
eyo employed in the Salt Department, he arranged the periods and proportions of the 
fales, he ‘gave orders for the delivery of the Salt, he applied for the money neceflary for the 
» department, he made up the general accounts, and carried on the executive bulinets at the 
_ -Prefidency fuhject to your ultimatg fanction through the medium of the Board of Revenue. 
6. A reference to onr letter of the 6th June 1795 ‘Will thew the ee es eat: 
anents we propoled for the future management of the bufinefs of this Office; which having 
‘been approved by your Honourable Board, and no new matter having-occurred refpecting 
it, we ‘only deem it neceffary to remark that, after nearly two. years experience, we are not 
aware any petier arrangement-than that we then propofed eon be adopted for carrying on 
« the currené bufinefs of the Office ; which requires confiant perfonal attendance, as is, ex- 
semplified by the under-mentioned branches of it, which are intrufted to the management of 
-our deputy Secrétary, and which could not be conducted with effect by any perfon not on 
the ees fiace promptnefS in-complying with the applications of the hes ants for Orders 
F -and Rowannahs, when they have made their payments, «i no more than their right; at the 
fume time that it is advantageous'to Government, by bording encouragement to the pur- 
d chafers at the fales. ie fi fea 

re F 7. The branches of the bufinefs above alluded to are, 

a ‘ _ The receipts of Money, for the Salt fold, "nd its remittance to the General Treafury, 
f * The iffuing’ of the Orders to the Agents for the delivery of the Salt, and the granting of 


aba. 
=) the Rowannah to the Merchants. i 3 
____- The Collettor of the depotit from the Purchafers in cafh and paper after the files, the 
charge thereof, and the almoft daily. return of fome of the latter to fuch of the Merchants 
on ae Seno Les in part or completely made their Reels 4 
“a Be er la te ‘ing of frequent Applications made *perfonally-by, and a 
f= - F he iffuing Orders for Sead rae the Cargoes of Coatt Salt, on applications from the 
| ee ct Contractors. - ie ‘ nite 
| ae ae _ 8. With relpect to the eftablifiment of the Office as it now fiands,. we are of opinion 
| SSce Proceedings of that no further reduction can be eflected in it, and that confidering the extent of the bufinels, 
| that Srate, 7 it is upon a moderate fealé. The difference of expenfe, as fiated in our letter of the 6th 
BececuMtah late eee aan Od IE Mea viii 170) See Uti (0. Tn Mie AMD 0 
© Gow dated 7 bes _ Loi which mufibe deduéied a charge fanétioned by you of - 6,000 0 0 
5 pode Bee 5 - * a 
Ei Suns ig Bute $ Net difference perAnnwo + S*R® 60,736 9 0 


* : é ; ‘mich 


the Afairs of The LAST INDIA COMPANY. — sg5 


-much the greater part of which arifes from your abolition of the Comptroller's commillion, See Letter G'Jume 
aud fome from monies: firft brought by us to publie account, as has been particularly ex- 1793. 


plained. 


9. The erection of the Golzhs at Sulkey for the receipt of the coat “Salt having been 
completed, and the Salt being lodged there as it arrives, the office of Gola Keeper, which 
was eftablifhed in April 1793, with the fixed allowance of S* Itt 566 per month for his 
falary and the falaries of the neceifary fervants there, muft-be permanent-as long as the 
prefeiit plan exits. The duties ofthis office are to fuperintend the receipt and deliveries 
of the coaft Salt, of which he-has the charge, and to report the fame regularly to this oftice, 
for onr iuformation. He is alfo. authorized to feize illicit Salt, in-the fame manner a3 the 
Superintendants of Chokies. 


10. The number of Golahs built upon the {pot of ground near Sulkey, which your 
Honourable Board was pleafed to purehafe for that purpofe from Anund Chuud Seat, is 
feventeen, capable of containing five lacs-and.ten thoufand Maunds of Salt. ‘Thefe Golahs 
have coft Sicea Rupees 5,202, but there being fome farther difburfements neceflary, as lately 

ge to you, to render the place complete, the wholeexpente of it cannot yet be 
afcertained, 


Sccond.—11. The-manufedure of Bengal Salt. 
“Under the management of five Agents, fixed at.the under-meniioned flations; viz. 


Hidgellee, 

‘Tumlook, 

24 Pergunnzhs, 
Roymungul, and 
Buiwa aud Chittagong. 

12. An inereafe of the manufacture was not only cur wilh as the primary objedt tohe 
attained, but ipecially enjoined to our attention by the 6th and 7th paragreph of your ine 
fruétion. With that view we very early after we received.charge fe wddvelted circular letters 
to the Agents, calling upon them to give us their opinion on the beft means of effecting an 
increafe of produce; and in cate apy obftructions fhould exit, arifing cither from defects in 
the regulations or from any other cautes, to fate them, and to tuggctt luch meafures as might 
occur tor theit removal, We likewile directed the Agents to propote any changes or variations 
in their eftablifhments, which in their opinion tended to the better execution of the bufinefs; 
and wevecommended avreduction of the eftablithment, fo-far as it might be practicable 
-confiftently with the due difcharge of the duty. 


13, The anfwers we received from the Agents contained various propofitions; om the con- 
fideration of which, and from our fubfequent experience, we were convinced that the object 
propofed was rather to be gradually attained by attention to opportunities and occurrences, 
and by reforms in the management of the bulinefs, than-by generally making thefe propo- 
fitions the bafis of our proceedings. We hope you will be fatisfied that the:relult has jutti- 
fied our meatures in that refpect. 


HIDGELLEE. 


14. We found two principal deferiptions of Molunghees in this agency and in Turnlook ; 
one the Ticka, who worked upon a fyftem of free compact, the other the Adjoora, who 
laboured under a fyftem of coercion, as has been verified by eur fubfequent inyeftigation. 


Various: petitions had at different times ven -prefented to your Honourable Board, 

and to the late Comptrollers,-on the part of the Adjoora Molungees of Tumlook, 2s well as 

Hidgellee,- complaining of the infullieieney of the rates paid-for the Salt they-:manufaGured, 

joliciting to be put upon the fame footing with the Ticka Molungees, and further ftating that 
¢ coerced to: manufacture Salt. Wit 


ie 


you thought proper to infruét us to give our opinion as to the merits of the 
ihe Petitioners to be put upon the fame footing with the Ticka Molungces, and 
fulleft explanation of their-refpective cireumitaaces, to enable you to pals 
upon their requelt. 


17. We accordingly called upon the Agents of Hidgellee and Tumlook, and further en- 
-deavoured, by a perufal of every record we could find relative to the fubjeét, and by 
-perlonal enquiry, to obtain the iniormation-you required ; and had-the honour to report it to 
your, Honourable Board in a letter dated the 28th of September 1794; in which we fiated 

. the following conclufions. % 


1ft—That there are 7,556 perfons, orrather families, in the agency of Hidgellee, and 5,832 
in the agency of Tumlook, who are enrolled in a regifter called the Taunerijah, and are 
coerced to manufaéture Salt for Government at rates confiderably lefs than-are paid to 
perfons making Salt by-eontract or hire, as Sa in the following Table. 

363. 3D 


*Confi i May 7g. 


Minute-—Conf, 
‘Jan. 1795- 

Ses Para’. 20. 51. 
107. 24. 54. 102. 
32. 56.1097. 42. 94. 
and particularly 46. 
95.41. 


Procetdings 18 Sep. 
1794 


APPENDIX ¢o.the Second REPORT from the Sele: Commintee on 


HIDGELLEE. 
jee Tea NS Sta coe Sor ee EE 2 Ss. 1 ee See Gece 
ADJOORA, TICKA, or SYSTEM OF COMPACT ct Amount faid 
or by 3 tobe paid bY | A@ual Dit- 
SYSTEM OF COERCION. HIRE or CONTRACT. : Tieka Mew | rthcein 
Se | MaperisorSans| {Your of the 
aunts of Sale| VE 
7 |Infavour ofthe, of 82 S*W* RID Ne 
| Prices per 100| corp pep | Pees wpon | Prices per 100) sect nop | Prices upo® | Ticka People | fur full W* Rs 
Bangs M“ PFF | 100 M* of 62] Bangs M“ T} 100 met 52 | per 100 Sale} the Adjooras + 
Re eh. SWS SR [100 MA) ype MS of S* WE] zet Cur nothing.| ‘ 


eens fesse es oral 


ARiewewsl - 

jnamootal, 44.8 05 16.12.10.2 | 51.10.13.1 | 20 
‘Seljamootuh . r 
Tellamownia 16 1 15.14. 7 | 51, 3. 64] 19.20 ‘The Fickn Mend t 
guanah pay for Fucl, but 


~ Derovdumnaum 85. 3.19.3 y W7.14.10 | 57. 10.15.4 | 20 the Coft is not afcertain- 
: able. 


TUMLOOK. 


Myfadul 19.13. 3 | 46 38.56. 3 86 4.7, 21/14 4.3.3 
~Gomny - 49. 6.111 | 46.42 4.2 38.15.11 9493] da6 Be] tht att 
Terrapakia 19. 4. 3 | 46. 6.17.4 98.41, 1 6.18 2.15.11.1 | 16. 7 6.3 
 Goomglnr 162.9 | 45: 5.62 37.12. 9 | 21.90 $14 4.2 | 17.11.15.9 


2d.—That the parties enrolled in each Agency are affefied orrated to furnifh certain quan- 
“titics of Salt, for the iculars whereof, as well as for the defeription of the different claties 
into which thele Molungees are fubdivided, as given by the then Agent at Hidgellee, Mr. 
Hewitt, wemutt beg leave to refer to our Report of the 18th September, laft before-nentioned. 

3d.—'Phat the Adjoora prices fiated above are not proportioned to the ordinary rate of 
Mabour in the country, and that a man cannot earn fuflicient by them to fupport a family, or 
-even hiinfelf in health or firength. i 

4th —Phat the Adjoora Molungees have not any compenfations or adyantages adequate to 
the lownels of their earnings. ~ 7 

§th.—That the Agents maf poffefs additional powers of confiderable authority to be able to 
smaintain the fyfiem. 

6th.—That we thould haye been glad if we could have traced the origin of the Adjoora 
fyfiem, but is loli in obfeurity. It appears to have exifted for many cehturies, and af, in 
edefatilt in inform; it may be allowed to have recourfe to conjecture, it feems probable 
that invancient times and when money was fearce, lands were fet to the peafantry for a 

payiient in Satr, aod moft likely by a fair compaét, which would allow the renter to fell 

for his Gwe benefit fuch Salt ag he made more than the quantity fufficient to pay his rents. 
In proces of years the terms of the bargain were: nearly fight-of; exactions arole, 
fome payable in money, others by further demands of Salt, till all the Salt the manufacturer 
‘could make was required of him. Depreiled and {piritlefs peafantry had not means of refift- 
‘ing the powerful landlords; the defpetic Native Government in turn preffed the landlords, 
and the burdens became permanent and grievous to the community. 


18. It appearing that an abatement of Revenue upontands held by the Adjoora Molun- 
gees; was one plea for the coercion exercifed to make them manufacture Salt at low 
‘rates ; and it appearing that they did not enjoy this, or indeed any adequate compenfation or 

we {ubmilted to your Honourable Board, that the Collector fhould be directed 

he circumfiances of fuch lands, and to take fuch Revenue as might be jaftly 

a, without any confideration of the Molungees being manufacturers of Salt. 

that the bufigefs of the Sait Department thould be rendered. fimple, clear, 

and diftingt; that Revenue might not be abated upon a plea of a man’s making Salt, nor Salt 
be paid for at a low rate under an idea of Revenue being abated. : 


ig. A reference to the documents that accompanied our faid Letters of the 18th Sep- 
tember 1794, will furaiih the fulleft explanations upon the fubjeét, and thew the grounds 
_ upon which we made our Report. i 


20. Under date the 26th September 1704, vour Honourable Board expreffed your opinioa 
hat the inveftigation we had made into ail the circumfances relating to the Adjoora tenure 
left yo room to doubt of its being a fyftem of coercion; confequently equally repugnant to 
-the fpirit of the Regulations and to the digtates of jutiice and good policy. You ee 
ny 


. | “the Mfiits of The EAST INDIA ‘COMPANY. 197 _ 


ingly diretted that the Adjoora fhould be abolithed in both Agencies, and that we fhould 
proceed to make engagements with the Molungees, who had hitherto provided Salt under 
this {y(tem, on terms fimilar to thofe contracted with the Ticka Molungees. In the execution 
of this arrangement, you were fatisfied that we would exert the moft unremitting endeavours 
to induce the Molungees to engage fuch an additional quantity of Salt, as CR ity compentate 
for the advanced price which would in future be paid to them; and you further informed 
us that you had communicated the above Refolutions to the Board of Revenue, and had 
dred them to make the neceflary modification in the engagements of Zemindars with 
jovernment. 


_ 21. A copy of your letter, refolving upon the abolition of the Adjoora tenure, having 
been imiined btaly communicated to the Agent at Hidgellee, Mr. Chapman, with inftruétions 
for the Settlement to be made in confequence, he addveifed us under date the 2oth Odtober 
lft, lating that he bad fully explained to the Molungees the alteration that had taken place 
in their fituation, with the expectations that were formed in confequence; that the intelli- 
gence was received with every poflible mark of fatisixétion, and the firongeit aifurances 
that every exertion would be made by’ them to prove how much what had been done would 
tend to the advantage of Government as well as of themfelves. 


22. Mr. Chapman at the fame time reported the price he had propofed for the Salt to 
‘be delivered by the late Adjoora Molungces, which he rated at the price paid to the Ticka 
Molungces in the difirits where the Adjoora men refided, and which were the loweit prices 
is agency. The men themfelves defired to be paid to the higheft price of the Ticke 
men, who it appeared refided in places lefs proper and conveniently fituated for the manw- 
facture; but in the end agreed to his propotals, only flipulating that he fhould tranflate and 
forward to us a Petition whick they meant to draw up. The Agent alfo obferved, that with 
the price fettled, the late Adjoora Molungecs underitand that they are to pay their Calary 
rents in the fame manner as the ‘Ticka Molungecs. 


25. In anfwer to the Agent's letter, the purport of which is above ftated, we wrote to 
‘him, that as from his local knowledge he was belt able to judge of ail the circumfiances 
which caufed the variation of prices in the different Pergunnahs, and as the rate he had 
dettled appears moderate, and the grounds he ailigned for fixing it feem juft, we entirely 
acquielced therein; and that with refpect to any claims which might be made upon the 
Molungees for Calary rents, we fhould xefer the mutter for the decifion of your Honourable 
‘Court, if any were made. 


24. We have the pleafure to obferve that in November laft Mx. Chapman forwarded to 
vus an amended eftimate of his provifion of Salt for the current year, in whice there was an 
increafe of thirty thoufand Maunds, ftated to be in confequence of the abolition of the 
Adjoora tenure and of the engagement he had made with the late Adjoora Molungees. 


25. Having fully treated of the provifion of the Oriffa Salt now entru@ed to the 
‘management ef the Agent at egies under its proper head, we muft beg leave to refer to See Par. 64. 
that head for every information refpecting the Salt. 


26, The feparation of the Revenue from the Salt in this Agency, rendered the formation 
of a new Salt eftablifhment unavoidably neceflary ; and we accordingly fubmitted one to 
your Honourable Beard in December 1792, which you were pleaied to approve, and at the 
dame time to allow of its taking place from the firft of October preceding. 


TUMLOOK. 

27. The Agent, in anfwer to our circular letter, ftated it as his opinion, that no increafe of yetter dated 
‘the namufactare could beeffected. Eight and a half lacs of Maundshad been produced in. 94 June 1793. 
avery favourable feafon; fince which the difiriés had been vifited by the calamities of Proceedings 
it and inundation, followed by ne, Which had carried off a great number of the 1g Sep.1794- 
inhabitants. Government, on his reprefentation, had in confequence granted the Ryots a 
remiftion of Sicca Rupees 51,269. 3. 3.3 but fubfequent to this remiflion, they had again 
fuffered much from a recurrence of calamitous feafons. The Agent neverthelefs made 
various propofitions to us for the improvements of the manufacture, with the detail of which 
itis unneceilary to trouble your Honourable Board, though they attracted due attention froin 
usin our proceedings. 


28. On our calling upon the Agent of Tustoox for his explanations relative to the 

Petition of the Adjoomt Molungees, conformable to your orders, he in bis anfwer denied that pated 6June. 

the Vackeels were arthorized to make any complaints on the part of the Adjoora Molun- proceedings 

gees of his diftricts, and fent us a declaration of fundry Ticka and Adjoora Molungees, 12 Sep. 

ftating that they never defired the Vackeels to complain ; that the Vackeels incurred Darbar 

expeufes for them ; that they had no complaints whatever. The Vackeels on the other hand yide Boards 

contended, that they were daly authorized to complain, and offered to go into evidence of etter to 

athe truth of their allertion, 4t is to be obferved, that the declaration contained a denial on Gov. Gea. i 

the of the Ticka Molungees, concerning whom there wes no queftion. It is farther to Coun 
be obferved, that the Molungees afferting that the Vackeels incurred Durbar expenfes for 11 Sep. 17°4- 

them, feemed to imply fome connexion and correfpondence; fince they might wholly dil- 

regard any charge for the Durbar, or any expenfes upon account of the complaints, if not 

employed by them, 


ag. Tie 


4S APPENDIX do fhe Second REPORT from the ScleB: Cominitice on 


<9. The Agent farther informed us, the Adjoora Molungées appeared perfedily fatisSed 
wwith their fituation ; yet fhortly after ke propoled “putting the Adjoora Molungees upon a 
more equal footing with the Trekas that equalizing the Sait Jumma in infiances where it falls 
sheavy, and reducing tle Serf, would give univerial fatisfaction to the Kyois in general.” 
go. He alfo infifted that “ the abolition of the Adjcora tenure would decreafe the manu- 
Fadiure ; that the idea of the Adjoora Molun, manuladturiag a certain-quantity fhould 
never be given up; if it was, there would a decreafe in the quantity of Sait, and he 
sthonght a difficulty in procariag an equal number of Ticka Molungees: that he fhould 
srecommend to siealiee them more, but full bold the Adjoors teaure.” 


1. The Agent's arguments failed to convince us of the folidity of his opinions; on the 
scontrary, they led to an obyious inference that there was fone degree of coercion upon the 
Adjoora people, or the decreafe he apprehended could not happen ; or why, if the Ryots, as 
che faid, were peviedily fatisfied, {ould he propote aa alterauoaavhich fhould give univertal 
“fgtisfaction to people already periecily fatistied. 

92. We did not deem it neceffhry to afcertain-the fat of complaint afferted and denied. 
“The complaints fiom Hidgellee- were certains the cafe of tye Adjoora people at both places 
appeared, ay it has fince proved, aualegous; the enquiries on foot-wonld thew what their 
*fituation was, and determination would follow accordingly. Upon this view of ihe queftion. 
oyour Honourable Board yere pleafed to refolve, thut-the Ravers venure fhould be abolifhed 
in Tumlook as well as in Hidgelice. i 


$3. We duly communicated your refolution to the Agent, taking care to notice to him 

-thatae trufted he would fulél the expeétations of your Honourable Board, for manufacturing 

ore additional quantity of Salt as. would compeatate for the advanced price to be paid in 
uture. 


34. The Agent has fince reported the fettlement he in confequence matte for his provifion 
-of the year; tocertain parts of which.we object, becaufe the terns he has concluded appeared 
-to. us to place the late Adjoora Molungees on a fiperior footing to the Wicka, which was 

ually contrary to our intention and your orders. We neverthelefs furaifhed bin with his 
pe ices, that the bufinels might not be impeded. In reply he gave explanations ; he urged 
that the agreements he had made were to the bett of his judgment the mult equitalile for the 

Company andthe manufacturers, and in to increafe of produce, he declined holding 
~out an papetaton if itfhould prove groundlets. He further remarked, the jivitem was new, 
req) 


anne uire utleaft a year’s expericace before any. judgment could, be formed on it; 
at the fame time he us of every exertion on Iie sa to effect an increafe. At prefent 
che willed not to meption any quantity, though he by it pleafinre in jaforming us that 
the manufacture was gin ‘on as well as he could poftib! a jand if the feafon would but 
turn out favourably he hud no doubt of being able to resilize our expectations. ‘The Agent's 
explanations, however, had not altered-our opinions of his feitlement; but unable for want of 


local experience to inc on an ameadwent, aud unwilling to rifk a check to the 
-manufacture, we have permitted the bufinets to proceed, though under our diffatisfuction, on 
the grounds we have intimated. pee 


35- The fame feparation as that mentioned under Hidgellee having neceflarily taken place 
at this ageacy, a newcftablifhment for it was formed, amounting to Sicea Rupees 41,271. 13- 
_per annuin; fad it was fanétioned by your Honourable Board to cominence from the 1ftof 
OUdlober 1793. 
TWENTY-FOUR PERGUNNAHS. 


36, The Agent, in anfver to our circular letter, informed ars thatthe produce of his 
ediflriéts had certainly decreafed. ‘This he attributed in fome meafure-to the alteration of 
Syfiem, in relieving the people from-the coercion ander which they heretofore manufactured 
“Salt;.an altevatioa which eannot be too highiy applauded. 

(37+ The Agent ftated the deereafe to have arifen chiefly in the Barbonny, or thofe Collarics 
that work in the woods. On the alteration of fy{tem it was found necetiary to increafe the 
price paid to the Molungees, but the amount of itwas fiill extremely inadequate to the 
-atval cofi of the Salt; the natural confequence followed, that the Agent always found 
himie iged to make advances of additional fams, for the indifpentable dithurfements 
mannfadluce, or the people could not procure the materials wherewith to 
rv work. -Phefe advances have of late years uniformly been carried to the Dead 
it, es inrecgvereble balances due by the Molungees. Infiead of this money 

tothe head of advances, it fhould have been-an inereafe of price, for it 

was in faét all difbarted for the purpofes of the manufacture; confequently it could only be 
-contidered the fair cot of the Salt, and fhould have been charged as fuch. The Agent verified 

chis alfertions by fhewing, = y 4 2 

48. That the quantity of Salt which the Molungees agreed to manufacture, average about * 
“218 Maunds Amdai 2 mayeor 327 Maunds Weteht, ee sw Geen Colin preniy 
hex , with the ereeptoniet a aes) few inftances, the poflibility of what could be made. 
“The value of the Salt fhort delivered of the quaz uy agreed for, became an_outftanding 
balance. No excitement was held out either to the Molungees; for if by exee exertion 
staey thould completé the quantity, the total net earnings to each man would only be fix 
: ; “Rupees 


y, cethe Affairs of The EAST INDIA°-COMPAN YS = 199 


Rupees for feven ‘anda half months: labour, which was. about the time he was employed in 
the woods; this.was paid him in advance, and went to fubGift his: family during his ablence; 
while he himfeif lived upon the proviGen farnifhied to him: by the Company.’ From thit 
itatement of the fituation’of a Molangee, it will evidently-eppear that be-was paid a baré 
fubfiftence; that-he not only could not bring any thing home with binr on his return’ from bis 
toils, bat would molt probably be loaded witha heavy debron account of tlie Salt thort 
delivered of the quantity agreed for. Upon thefe grounds the Agent deemed the price inade- 
quate, and propoled to us to increafe it to.77 Sieva Rupees per too Amdanny-Maunds, of 
150 Maunds Sale Weight, and to fix'the “Salt to be manufactured -at-each Collary at 156 
Amdanny Maunds inflead of 2:8, a quantity which in his opivion could be manufacured 
with facility; ‘and Further, to pay-ut’ the fame rate on the Moluirgeés return i¥om' the woods, 
for‘any furplus quantity they nmght manufacture. aS eis 
39. The Agent further propofed a fimilar ineveafe to the Defly and Taffals: the maaufac- 
ture in the Deily he faid had been reduecd in conlequence of «the inatequate price paid fot 
the Salt, as he verified by infiunces he quoted of his having lofi che provition in, the Pergun- 
nals of Bullia and Bullunda, which ufed.to be about 30,000 Maunds; and he further diated 
the increafe of price as likely not “encourage tie people to renew the manuiadlure in 
thefe Pergunnahs, but call fore thé ons generally to effect an incréafe in all the Dells 
Collaries. In refpedt to the Tefta!s‘he had uot the fame expectations; they laboured dader 
difadvantages;-and indeed a quéeftion concerming them has fince o¢ ) that utakes it a 
matter-of confideration oa what’ footing “they thould be ‘hereafter placed, or whether they 
fhall'be altogether abolithed ; but We have not yet- made up our minds upon this fubject, 


; wie » = Sule Weight, 
‘40. The Agent computed his whole provifionat | -  - . - . Maunds. 609,000 
Deduct Serf 50 per cent. - - - - - - - ~  2,09,000 


Amdanny Maunds, or quantity on'Which the Molungess receive payment 4,090,500 

* At 77 Sicca Rupees per 160 Maunds, ‘the price. propofed for the future _- 3,08,000 

At 55 Sicca Rupees, the price heretofore, paid Syl cuschie GEA ae 4 Faas aD 
Eftimate of total increafe of expenfe_ ee So ah Sea raat B8,000_ 


41. The Agent aflirmed; an amount exceeding the half of this increafe annually remained: 
eurttanding in irrecoverable balances, due fromthe Barbonny-alonc. He fated the aétual 
increate to be about 30,000 Rupes; fo that in fact the amount was incontiderable; and even’ 
admitting it were confiderable, the Company would-be amply indemnified by their profit on 
the increale of produce, of which he was confident, if-his planewas carried into-eflect. 

42. On the clear expofition above furnifhed by the eel we could not do otherwife, 
than aequietee in his propofitions; we accordingly recominended them to your Honourable, Proceedings 
Board, and having been approved by you, itnow only remains to Bape the refult, which we g Jan. 1794. 
have the honour to do in the following Extract of'a Letter from Mr. Goodlad, dated the 
ioth November 1704. 3 el 


« The object of the plan T laid before you was to increafe the produce, by affording ‘the Proceedings 
“ manufacturers a fullicient compentation for their labour, and to reduce the balances; and 1-2 Dee. 1794 
“ affured you, eftimating the produce of the agency at fix lacs of Maunds, that I would in- 
“fure you, if the feafons were favourable, a lac of Maunds ineteafe. In this made an excep-, 
“tion to the Talkis, which would not be effected by the plan. * In judging therefore of the 
“ effeéts of the plan you are to confider the Taffals as totally difiing from it.” 


« However fanguine my e: tions might have ‘been when Thad firt the honour of 
“ addielling you on the fabject, [ am happy to fay thofe Pera have been exceeded. 
“In the accounts now before you, you will perceive that I have, during the year 1200, ex- 
«clufive of the Taffals, manufactured feven Ines feventeen thoufand and eighty: 
© of Salt, with a balance of only four thoufand nine hundred and ninety-two Rup 
“when you confider iid eninber of people employed and the value of the commodity, 
“©very triflirig ; and even fmall as this fum is, it would have beemadiminithed one half if the 
“uncommon heavy rains had not defiroyed a part of the Salt in the woods before {could 
““lodge it in the Golahs.” a e ‘ 

“Ta my letter of 27th June (reckoning the produce of the Agency at fix lacs of sree ‘ 
“informed yon that, according to the pian { propofed, the increate in the price of Salt would - 
“not exceed thirty thoufand, ghee; from Hetnereate oF the manufaéiure, and the reduc- 
‘tion of the balatices, the Salt is abfolutely cheaper now than if was before; the average 
“produce of the whole Agenty, as per amount yaluation for the three preceding years, - 
“1197-98 and 99, is 5,70,000 Maunds, and the coft afd baldnces’ made it amount to 
“ sak 13A*. oP. per %, Maunds, this year, including the balances of the Taffuls: Batbonny 
“Cand Delly, it comes to 54.4. and-the increafe.of produce, on theaverage of the three pre- 
“ ceding years, is two lacs and four thotfand: Maunds.> als - 

'« By placiig the ‘Salt of the Defly and Barboriny on its prefent footing you have increafed 
““the produce of the Agency, which woild otherwife have annually diminifhed; for although 
“Timagined, as 1 may day, artificially to preferve the agency, by advancing money to the 
“ Molungees at thofe periods of the year when pone waoit in want of it, yet it was evident, 

363. 3 “ while 


200 - APPENDIX 0 the Second REPORT from the Scleét Committee on 


Vide Letter dated 
19 July 1793. 
Procetdliigs 2 Jan. 
3795+ 


Note.—This in- 
cludes ull Charges 
and outftauding 
Balances, 


Sce Board's Letter 
_aath Dec late. 


“ while ‘the Salt yielded them lef: than they could earn by any other labour, that it was a 
He ae that could not laft ; and that whenever grain became fo cheap that the people could 
 fubfift without the aflifiance of the Agent, they would quit a bufinefs that did not give 
“them an adequate compenfation for their labour. Had not the inereafe of price been 
“ granted, Government would this year have fuffered great lofs. I draw my conclufion from 
“ the comparative ftate of the Tatfals, which [ told you would not be affected by the plan, 
“and the reft ofthe agency in the Barbonny; I have not lofta Collary, and in the Deily f 
“ have even an increafe on latt year; while in the Taffals, according to prefent appearances, 
three-fourths of the people have quitted the bulinefs.” i 


# The Barbonny, before you adopted the plan of laft year, had 218 Amdanny Maunds of 
* Salt each Collary to deliver, to clear its advances; 2 quantity that deterred the people 
“from all exertions, and they feldom averaged more than 130 Amdanny Maunds each 
“ Collary. By the plan you adopted, the quantity of Salt to be delivered by a Barbonny 
“ Collary to clear its advances, was reduced to 156 Maunds; the confequence was, that the 
 laft years averaged me 220 Maunds a Collary. From this it is evident the people will not 
“ exert themlelves unlefs they have fome advantage to look forward to.” 


““ During the laft year I fettled all difputes relating to the lands yielding fuel: the only 
“ part of he Agency that materially wanted regulation was in the Pergunnah Moragotcha, 
“where the boilleg is carried on with paddy ftraw. The Ryotts were dillutistied, from the 
“«« Molungees not paying them their due; [have therefore in future engaged to pay them 
“ myfelf, and deduct it from the Molungees advances; being by this means aflured of re- 
“ ceiving what is due to them, they have engaged the enfuing year for vx increafe of four 
“thoutand Begahs of fuel, which will be almott as much as [can ute, and infure me an 
“ jncreafe of five or fix thoufand Maunds of Salt.” 


ROYMUNGUL. 


The Affiftant at this ftation, Mr. Hamilton, replied to our circular letter in confequence 
of indifpofition of Mr. Mackenzie. He reprefented the fituation of the Aurung to be ex- 
céedingly bad; the manufacture he informed us was carried on in an uninhabited country, 
during iome months deftitute of frefh water, unhealthy from the thicknefs of furroundin; 
woods, at the diftance of many days journey from the houfes of the manufacturers, ani 
sacceffible only by water. It is not any common inducement that would engay people to 
~wenture to fuch regions; yet it would appear, from an infpection of the efiablifhment, that 
the compenfation to the contractors and labourers was not only precarious, but at the beft 
inadequate; particularly, that the allowance to the labourer was calculated below the common 
price of labour in the inhabited country. Thus much it was neceflary to premife, in order to 
anticipate any comparifon of the rates already fubfifting in this Agency, with thofe eftablith- 
ed in other Agencies; there both contraétors and laboaees ferde during the whole year 
with their families; their engagements are not incompatible with the cultivation of their 
Jands, nor a variety of family occupations; they are not pert to the expenies, incon- 
veniences and dangers, which unavoidably refult trom the local fituation of the Aurungs under 
this Agency. From the above delineation, it would probably rather excite furprize by what 
means the maoufaciure had fo long fubfitted, than that obfiacles fhould occur to its improve- 
anent. Z 


44. Mr Hamilton having premifed thefe remarks, proceeds to fu; eft various propofitions 
for the edhe wibungenhe oF the bufinefs, which may furnifh fome aerateauot in our future 
arrangements. 


. 45. Mr. Hamilton fhortly after refigned his tation, and much correfpondence paffed-with 
Mr. M. C. Horfley, who fuceceded him, and fome with Mr Mackenzie hiinfelf, on .the, fiate 
of the bufinels; and we are forry to fay, the refult has correfponded but too truly with what 
might have been éxpeéted, from the reprefentation with which Mr Hamilton, furnifhed us 
of the fituation of the Agency; thé caute is alfo further imputed to the, fevere indifpofition 
under which Mr. Sackenctae laboured having incapacitated him from exertion, and the 
contideration we wifhed to fhew to his unfortunate fituation, in the hope.of his recovery; not 
neglecting at the fame tim® every means in our power to excite his ailittant to-a zealous dif 
charge of the dutics of the fiation. The conclufion of the laft feafon fhewed the whole 
produce to be Maunds 2,38,371, purchafed at the enormous price of above S* R* 245, per 
100 Maunds. ; Rey } oe 


46. It is ncedlefs to trouble your Honourable Board further on this difagreeable fubjed, 
‘the circumfiances refpeéting it have been already fully reprefented ; you were in confequence 
pleace to abolifh Roymungul as a feparate agency, and annex fe bufinefs of it to the 

ivifion of the Twenty-four Pergunnabs; in due courfe we shall have the honour to report 
the refult of Mr. Goodlad’s proceedings. 4 : 


62. In the inftances wherein, fince we had tt of the depattment, the sper 
of ihe price has been eftablifhed, viz. the Adjoora Molungees of Hidgellee and Tumlook, 
and generally thofe of the Twenty-four Pergunnabs, your Honourable Board have; beea 
pleated to authorize fuch an increafe of price as was deemed reafonable, and we tuft sbe 
good effects thereof will be felis, 4 » sah 


the Affaies of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 201 
Appendix, No. 19. 
Extra of a Letter from the Cae eae oe at Bengal (Revenue Department); 


Para. 2. OUR advices from the public department will have apprized you of our deter- 
mination to difcontinue the eannorat opium in. Bengal, and seer gare ‘to prohibit 


‘the cultivation of the poppy throughout that province. 


93- This prohibition was fubfequently extended to the part of the province ef Bahar which 
is included in the Zillah of Boglepore, the eee provided in that Zillah having been always 
included in the Bengal contract ; and the reafon which induced us to ditcontinue the provifion 
of the Bengal opium, being equally applicable to the opium of this part of Bahar. 


Appendix, No. 20, gs hye, vy 


F Thee nia ’ 
LETTER from the Governor General in Council at Bengal, to the Governor in Council 
at Vort St. George, dated 31ft December 1799; together with Extraét Letter from 
Marquis Wellefley to Lord Clive, dated the 8th January 1800. P i 
To the Honourable Edward Lord Clive, Governor in Council at Fort St. George. 
‘My Lord, iy % J 

Batee ts THE Right Honourable the Governor General has recorded in Council at this 
Prefidency the Report of the Board of Revenue at Fort St. George, dated the 2d September 
1799, in reply to the orders of your Lordthip in Council, requiring (in confequence of the 
ip(trucitons of the Governor General in Council of the 6th Auguft 1798) their fentiments on 
the introduétion of the fyfem of internal government eftabliflied in Bengal into the Britith 
polleffions on the Coaft of Coromandel. , - 

2. It is unnecefiary to retrace the very able and ample detail given by your Board of 
Reyenue of the fiate of the northera Circars, and of the other ancient poffeilions of the Com- 
pany on the Coaft of Coromandel. : 

3- It will be fufficieat to fiate, as the grounds of the inftruétions which we now have the - 
honour to convey to your Lordfhip, that we find thofe valuable poffeflions to be deftitute of 
every inftitation which can either promote the eafe and happinets of the people or the effi- 
ciency and vigour of the Government. Berre 

4. Itisa of great fatistaction, however, to know that we can now Pastis to apply 
the remedies to this, defective ftate of the Government ef the Britifh poffeilions fubjeét to” 
your immediate authority, under the moft juft expectations of fuccefs. _ 

§. The annihilation of the late hoftile power ef Myfore has impreffed the inhabitants, of 
thole pollellions with that confidence in the fiability of the Britifh power, and in the fecurity 
of the country from foreign inyafion, which was indifpenfably neceffary to the eftablifhment 
of any regular fyftem of Government. The principles which are now to be applied to-the 
reform of your internal Government have Tain the mof ample difcultion in Bengal. 
Weare in poffellion of the feutiments of the Honourable Court of Directors on the whole 
fubject; we havehad the mott ample experience of the beneficial effect of all the meafures 
adopted in confequence of thofe difcuflions ; and the fimilarity of cuftoms and ufages in the 
territories under the two Prefidéncies, leaves no room to. doubt that fimilar meatures will 
be productive of the fame benefits in the Company's poffeilions under your immediate 
authority. (i ale 

“6. We fhall therefore d to furnith your Lordthip in Council with our inftru@ions — 
-on the feveral general detailed in the 75th paragraph of the Report of your Board of 
Revenue; our decifion on which is required, to enable you to form the de ‘regulations 
which are to conftitute the bafis of your new Conttitution. 

7- The defeription of the Zemindarry tenures inthe Northern Circars, contained in thefe 
paragraphs, correfponds exaétly with the nature of thofe tenures in Bengal. All the argu- 
ments which were adduced in fupport of the policy of declaring the Zemindars in Bengal the 
proprietors of their lands, apply with equal force in favour of a iimilar declaration with refpedt 
to the Zemindars and other defcriptions of independent Landholders in the territories under 
your immediate Government... : ’ i . , 

8. Your Lordthip in Council has accordingly our fanction to confider the acknowledg- 
ment of the proprietary rights of the Zemindars and other detoriptions of independent Land- 
holders as the fundamental principle-of the new fettlement to be hacmsd with them. _ : 

9. The acknowledgment of this proprietary right-in the Zemindars and Landholders fhould 
not however be allowed in any. relpect to affect the sights of the Kyots or others who have 
hitherto been in any re{pect fubjett to the authority of the Zemindars or other Landholders ; 
nor is it to be contirued to preclude Government from pailing any laws or lations which 
may occafionally be deemed expedient for the protection of the rights of the Ryots or of 
other perfons, or for any other purpotes which may be deemed effential to the good govern- 
Meat of the country. 

to. It will therefore be neceflary that the declaration, acknowledging thefe rights to be 
velied in the Zemindars and Landholders, fhould be accompanied by reservations and reftric~ 

= tions 


-a commi 


202 
mys 


yea Thi c 
with the approbation of the Court of Direétors. 
- 14. We have no doubt that the Honourable Court will in. all cafes confirm in perpetuity 
the fettleme::t which your Lordfhip in Council may form:with the Landhollers. It is, how- 
ever, neceflury in the firft inftance, abfolutely to enfure to the Landholders the poffellign of 
their lands for: a confiderable'term of years, for the purpofe of inducing them to enter into 
engagements on the moft favourable terms which the prélent fiate of the country will admit, 
cand of Seca themto adopt meafures for the improvement of their lands. 

15- On this Lit is‘{ufficient to obferve, that no iy Appears to extending to your 

aa 


Prefdeiiey the rules regarding Talookdars, adopted in never thofe rules may be 


applicable. 
16. The exifting regulations in Bengal refpesting difqualified Landholders, may be gencrally. 
extended to the Landholders of that defeription tent Prefidency, as Mieeeettch’ by aie 


rd of Reycnue. 3 
-17- Confiderable incoavenience, however, having been experienced from the part of thofe 
regulations which relates to the fituation of the Managers of the eftates, we recommend that 
the M: ya be Officers felected and haps by your Government, and that they be allowed 
SF he res catmained da.the Lighth Megslationy wall’ Beogal in 3709, ri vega 
- 18. The rules contained in tion, Pin in 1793, with regaré 
to Seana beaten Hae the Revenue, may be seek to Lal fader 
lency, wi di ne prédicam i “by your Board of Revenue. 
The tands of thee L f aed A in far ‘oeararoll ork vara ‘or in particular 
cafes for a fhorter term, or be held Anianie as may be found advifable. “= 
io. For the reafons ftated by your Board of Kevenue (which 
rience in Bengal) the Governor'General in Council is fatisfied that no benefit would arife 
from pottponi he. t fettlement, in the es on of obtaining more accurate 


ds with our expe- 


Giincosenik of tie metidl veto srety ofitie eoutaysthiles keel PR i aEAGY at ou ofa” 


fion. We haveno hefitation, therefore, in authorizing your Lordthip in Council to conclude a 
eleaneat f the Northern Circars, on the bafis of the calculations fubmitted by your Board of 
venue, fubjectto fach variations ait fhall. be found expedient to make in the progrets of 
concluding the fettlement. oy riety SEMEL ONG US fe 5B 
_ 20, Your Lordthipin Council will adopt fuch of the rules contained in the eighth Regula- 
tion, pailed in Bengal in the year 1793, and in any fubfequent Regulations, for the-fecurity of 
Tal Babs crease, farmers and-Ryots, as may be found applicable to the territories 
under your Prefidency. i é + rae 
ie Ve enter ‘ten doubt that in every point of view it willbe good policy to relinquifh 
a ims to old balances dive from the Zemindars,and to confine the demands on them, with 
to arrears, to a provifion for the difcharge of the balances of the year preceding that 


f tom the commencement of which the new fettlement may take place. 


‘The adoption of this principle as a gencral rule thould not, however, prevent the demand 
for the payment of balances of an anterior date, in particular cafes, in which the parties in 
arrear may eae the means of difcharging the demand without encroaching on the 
refources of the future Revenue, fi 

_ 23. The payment of any balances, which may accrue after the conclufion of the permanent 
Ee tiement, fhould be 


chiefly from the difficulty of determi 
| the proportion of the fixed affeffment on the whole tthe Zemindarsy af the dene, vehicn 
ought to be on the } ion fold. We. 


ined —* 
maces 


96. The. 


ihe Attire ‘of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 203 


-°26. The affeflment on the rae of the Stateaghlpated of at public fale mutt neceffarily 
hecome unalterable. It is evident, therefore, that unlefs effe@ual means be taken to charge 
thofe Pes a the due proportion of the fixed affeflment on the whole eftate, it will be eaty 
forindividuals, by connivance with the public Officers, to effeét the difpotal of E peenortion of 
their eftates at an overcharged affeflment, and toretain the remainder of an affefiment  preatly 
under-rated. The provifion made by the fecond claufe of the 29th fection of the 7th Regula~ 
tion of 1799, with regard to fabrications on rot errors in the accounts, by which the aflef~ 
ment on portions of eftates difpofed of at public fale may bave been regulated, is calculated to 
prevent abufes of this nature as far as is practicable. 

ate Tn tract of time the progreffive operation of this abufe would effentially affect the 

uiblic revenues. * 
x 28. The principles above fuggefted, with regard to the balances of the Zemindars now in 
the poffeftion of their Zemindarries, fhould be extended to thofe Zemindars whofe eftates are 
now under the immediate management of the Board of Revenue, folely on account of failure 
in payment of the ftipulated Revenue, and a fettlement may be concluded with thefe Zemin- 
dars under the general rules for forming the decennial fettlement. Any particalar cafes, in 
which the temporary or the permanent exclufion of any of thefe Zemindars may appear to 
your Lord(hip in Council advifable, may be made an exception to this rule, 

29. With refpeét to fuch of the Zemindars as have been difpoffefled of their lands for 
rebellion or acts of contamacy, it will be a queftion for the confideration of your Lordihip in 
Council, how far any of thefe Zemindars can be fafely reinftated. With Mae disse 5 

30. With refpeét to the Sayer collections, your Board of Revenue are of opinion that the 
terms on which they propofe to conclude the nent fettlement with the Landholders, 
fhould be confidered to comprehend the compenfation for this branch of their collections ; and 
we fee no objection to the adoption of their fentiments. j is 

31. The private credjtors of the Zemindars having hitherto poffeffed no means of enforcing 
payinent of their demands, and many of thofe demands being fiated to be ufurioys, or con~ 
tracted for improper peri it follows that any provifion for the difebarge of any part of 
thole demands, muft be confidered as a matter of mere diferetion. liaise 

32. We requeft to be favoured with the fentiments of. sie Lordfhip in Council with re- 
4pect to the principles to be obferved in the liquidation of thefe claims, m order that provifion 
may be made for the difcharge of {uch as may be deemed juft. A clanfe might be inferied 
in the engagements of the Zemindars, binding them to abide by an adjuttment of their debts, 

to be made by Government. This adjuftment thould be made fo as not to affeét their landed 
property, excepting in cafe of their failing to perform the termsof the adjutiment. 
33. As fome limitation mutt neceffarily be eftablifhed with regard to thefe claims, we are 
of opinion that the propofed adjuftment fhould not extend to any debts which are of 
fianding than twelve years. ‘This period of limitation may, we conceive, be pro- 
bee ly with regard to future claims, fubject to the qualifications in the regulations now in 
jorce on this head in Bengal. We requefi to be fumithed with the fentiments of your Lord~ 
thip in Council on this fuggeftion. oe TE Sif 
34. We alfo recommen that fome limitation be adopted with refpe@ to the intereft on 
all paft and future loans to be made by Zemindars or other Landholderse D 
35- Your Board of Revenue having {tated the regulations eftablifhed in Bengal with 
segard to lands of this defcription, as applicable.to the territories under your immediate 
government, your Lordfhip in Council has our tanction for the adoption of thofe regulations, 
with any rad ine iota which may appear to you advifable. > Pore 
36. The produce of thefe lands forms no part of the exifting affets on which the decen- 
nial fettlement is to be formed, confequently the Zemindars or others by whom thofe 
alienations have been made, can have no claim té the Revenue of thefe lands in the event of 
zefumption. As to the right to the pofleflion of the land, it muft be confidered as transferred: 
in perpetuity to the perfon in whofe favour the alienation may have keen made. It was on 
sthe/e principles that we determined generally to convert upon refumption fuch lands as had 
deen alienated without anthority into Zemindarry effates; fome qualifications, however, of thefe 
principles will be found in the regulations regarding alienated lands. wo 4 
37. The reply of the Governor General in Council to that part of the Letter frony the 
Honourable the Court of Directors, dated the agth September 1792, in which the Court 
exprefs an expectation of deriving an additional fource of Revenue from the watte lands in 
Bengal, is ftated by your Board of Revenue to be equally applicable to lands of that deferip- 
tion which are included in the Zemindarries or otlier landed tenures in the country fubject 
to your Government. We have no héfitation in giving our authority to your Lordthip in 
Council to adopt the principles laid down in that reply as the rules tor your guidance with 
tegard to waite lands. Hy ¥| ne 
» 38. The arguments adduced in the extraés from the difeuffions which pafied in Bengal on 
this queftion, prove that, under a penanaD fettlement, the indulgence of Government will 
heletsneceflary in cafes of drought or inundation, than under yourprefent fyftem of colledi- 
ing the Revenues: all individual engagements of 2 permanent nature mutt neceflarily be 
formed without reference to general and temporary calamity. In fuch extreme cafes, the 
people muft depend on the jufiice and liberality of the Government. It would be impotiible 
ty make any fpecial provifion for contingencies indefinite and uncertain in their nature. 

39. We entertain no doubt that the value which landed property will immediately acquire: 
ander the propofed permanent fettlement of the public Revenue, will render the lands fut- 
Ecient fecurity for the payment of the public dues charged on them. 

363. 3k 40. From 


204 APPENDIX (o thc Second REPORT from the Scle& Committee on 
ps 40. From the 7th Regulation of 1799, paffed in Ben ut will have obferved (as already 
noticed) that we have judged it ieieobiel to poftpone he of lands until the clole of the 


year. i 

41. The whole or a part of the Jands of the defaulters (according as circumftances may 
require) may in the mean time be attached, to make good the deficiency. 

42. In order to point out to your Lordthip the moft advifeble plan for the difcharge of 
arrears of public Revenue, it willbe fufficient to refer you to the regulations paiied in Bengal, 
for the ils regarding the fales of land. é z saa 

43. The regulations paffed in Bengal, which related to this head, may be adopted at Fort 
St. George, in cafes to which thof regulations thal] appear applicable. 

44. According to the principle of the Mahomedan Government, ali penfions of this de~ 
feription are taken fromthe public Revenue, and are fuppofed to be granted under the fanc- 
tion of the ruling power. 

. 43, Previous te the conclufion of the decennial fettlement in Bengal, thefe penfions and. 
| allowances were pair by the Zemindars, or the perfon in the immediate charge of the col- 

leétion of the public Kevenne of the country on the part of the Government, and an adequate 

deduction was made from the refources on which the public Revenue was calculated. 

46. Many pentions and allowances of this nature, which were payable under valid grants, 
were frequently withholden, while new penfions were often fraudulently inferted as 
chargeable on the refources of the country. x . 

47- With a view of enfurmg the punctual payment of all juft penfions, of precluding all 
future defaleations from the public refources, under the pretext of fraudulent pentions, and of 
sagucine tp Government the reverfion of all expired peafions and allowances, it was deter 
‘mined that an increafe, proportionable to the amount of thefe penfions and allowances, fhould 
be made in the engagements of the Landholders, and that the penfions and allowances fhould 
a paid from the public treafuries, under the regulation referred to by your Hoard of 

evenue. $ ‘ 

48. We recommend that a fimilar arrangement be made with regard to all fuch penfions, 
and allowances as may be chargeable on the relources of the texritorics under your immediate 
Government.” Fibs ' i 

49. The regulations eftablifhed in Bengal applicable to this head, and the arguments on 
which thofe regulations were founded, being fiated by your Board of Revenue to be equally 
applicable to your Prefidency, it only remains to exprei3 our fanction to their adoption, and 
to. your making fuch provifion for any /perions affected by their operations, as fuck perfons 
may appear to you to merit. , 

$0. Such of the re is relating to this head as are in force in Bengal, and as may be- 
applicable to the territories under your Prefideney, may be ae 
951. the 7th Regulation of 1799, your Lordfhip in Council will obferye that thefe 
regulations have not only afiorded the moit compl: Oe the Hiyots and other under- 

-but have enabled them to withhold the juft demands of thole who beiore exercifed 
ahe moft unlimited powers of exaction. $4) 
_ 52. We were in confequence obliged to” -to the Landholders and Farmers a more 


fum means of ng payment of their rents. - \“ 

Pa 8 fome inconyenience has arifen from this operation of the regulations, the 
complete protection enjoyed by the Cultivators of land has produced the moft beneficial effect 
in the ovement of pa country. 

54. Itis with great fatisfaciion we obferve that the regulations regarding the provifion of 
the Co y's invefiment in Bengal, are recommended to be extended to the territories 

sod pauins heneadiits f fubjecting the public Officers employed in th 

55s , the necefity of fubjectin, ic ers ‘ed in the 

P oa Boat as race nag a ie the fatal i ia the Courts of Sidiee; for all 
their official aéts, is apparent. ‘The commercial Officers may at firk be fubject to fome incon- 
venience from this input reaapesteded that this regulation, by compelling the com- 


weavers and other manufacturers, will prove highly beneficial both to the invetiment of the 


2S, Conferable traéisof country at diferent periods have been} sind care. ll holdem 4 
Company in Bengal, which correfpond exactly with the Havilly or Demefne lands in the 
territories under your immediate authority, and many of which have been acquired by the 

“fame means. i 2 : ‘ 


57+ Government has always been under the neceflity of employing its owm Officers, or of 
Bap eraconese to paeipa ti ng, it of thee 3 Moke s and Farmers 
haying no permanent intereft in the improvement of the lands, often. )a temporary: 
advantage in committing frauds and abufes ; and it wasinvariably found that the lands belong~ 
. ing to the Government, although very advantageouily fituated, were worle cultivated than 
the contiguous lands of ee * , ’ ¥ 
was on thefe as well as in confideration of the injuftice committed againfi 
| Zemii , in the grant of thefe lands to the Company, that we reftored to the 
| the Twenty-four Pergunnahs or Diftricts, commonly called The Company’s Lands, 
which furrounded Calcutta, the Zemi: Hight in which was granted to the Company (to 
the exclufion of the former Proprietors) by Jaftier Ally Khaun. 
§9- No confideratiou could with juftice have beea demanded by the Company from thofe 


the Afbirs of The EASTINDIA COMPANY. 205 


paces for the reftoration. of rights of which they were originally deprived by an att of 
injuitice. ity ed 

60. With regard to the Haviily lands under your Prefideney, as detailed in the g2aft, 320d, 
end 323d paragraphs of the Report of your Board of Reveaue, we entirely concur 
opinion with that Board, that thefe lands fhould be parcelled out into eftates, and that they 
thould be difpofed of gradually as may be found ‘icable, aad converted into Zemindarry 
tenures, fubjeét to the payment of a definite and perpetual Revenue, in the event of the 
amount of that Revenue being approved by the Court of Diredtors. The terms of fale 
would include a referve in favour of the eftablifhed rights and cufloms of the immediate Cul- 
tivators and inhabitants of the lands; and the new Proprietors thould of courie be declared 
fubject to all the refervations and reftritions preferibed in the oth and 10th paragraphs of this 
Letter, with regard to the Zemindars and: Proprietors of land in general. 3 

61. ff no purchaters for thefe lands fhould appear, we ave fatished that it will be for the inte= 
refts of the Company, of the occupants and inhabitants of thet lands, and of the country at 
Jarge, that the londs fhould be granted to individuals of acknowledged property; who would 
take them as Zemindarries, fubjeét to the payment of a fixed Revenue to 'Goyerament ia 
perpetuity. This Revenue might be eftimated for the prefent according to the prefent aflets, 
and be fubjected to fuch progreflive incveafe as from the extent of watté land or other 
circumftances might be reafonably expecied. : : fe 

62. The Governor General in Council however concars in opinion with the Board of 
Revenue, that no gratuitous grant fhould be made of the lands until it fhall be afeertained 
that wey cannot be difpofed of by fale. Until this point be determined, the rents may be 
collecied from the lands in fuch manneras cireumftances may render advifable. 

6g. Although fome difference would appear to exift between the tenures of the Meerafidars 
in the Jugheer and the Cultivators inthe other Huvelly lands, we are ntyerthelels of opinion 
that the arguments on which are TR sa ieee of your Board of Revenue, with 
regard to the difpofal of Havelly lands, ¢ 'y are equally applicable to the tenures of thefe 
Mee particular care howeyer {hould be taken to fecure them in all their exifting 
rights. : ei fi pee ine 

64. It is alfo onr defire that thefe orders, with regard to the difpoful of the Havelly lands, 
and the converlion of them into Zemindarries ata fixed Revenue, {liould be extended to the 
countries lately conquered from Tippoo Sultann, as foon as a fatislactory fatement fhall have 
been obtained of the refourees of thole conqueits. { 

65. We are perfunded that no increafe of Revenne, beyond the prefent refources of thofe 
countries, ean be expected from the fy{tem of bpd ead under annual or periodical affefl 
ments. On the other hand, by conveiting thefe lands, as well as thelands ceded by the late 
Sultaun in 179%, into Zemindarry tenures, and fixing the Revenue in per ra ee a fair 
eflimate of the prefent SENS of the country, we! be cer of ‘ing Revenue 
in perpetuity, of inducing thofe by whom’ it may be paid to improye the country, and of 
decuring the attachment of our new fubjeéts. ‘ pte) Shir 

66. We approve of the propofitions of the Board of Revenue with regard to the tenures 
included in the eeyy lands, under the denomination of Enaum, Agraharam, and Shotrum, 
the lands appropriated for religious endowments and charitable pacts and the Jan 
alienated by renters and Revenue fervants without any authority; and Glfo the grants of land 
obtained before or after the Cee Government, which aie exempted entirely from the 

payment of public Revenue, or afleffed at a fixed rate, but reduecd rate of Reyenue. ‘Tenures 
of a fimilar nature exift in Bengals and the propofitions of your Board of Revenue, with 
regard to them, oer with the Regulations now in force im thefe provinces, and may be 
adopted by your Lordthip in Council. . * a ap aby Gas 
67. The Governor General in Council, on further confideration of the’ inveftigation which 
has been inftituted at Fort St. George, for afcertaining what teriures are holden under valid 
grants or otherwife, entertains great doubts of the policy of that meafure. ; 

68. On general principles no other authority than a Court of Juftice ought to be vefied 
with fo delicatea power as that of conduéting a ferutiny into the titles by which individuals 
hold their property.” The Siate, fo far from benefiting by ferutinies fo conduéied, ofteit 
fuffers Re: atthe fame time that the invettigation is frequently converted into an inftrament 
of oppreilion. % . y e 4 t 

69. Thofe who are confeious of the invalidity of their titles, will ufe every endeavour to 
fupport them by fraud and corruption; on the other hand, thofe whofe titles are good, who 
mult neceffarily be uncertain with re{pect-to the refult of an investigation not conducted by a 
Court of Juftice, ma; ly be compelled to purchafe the fayour ot the Officarsappoiated | to 
Feport upon their titles. r , ah. aa 

7o. Thefe are not the only evils/arifing from fuch ferutinies ; befides preventing the State 
from the recovery of its juft dues, the property ittelf is renticred of Jeis value to the indi- 
viduals, as the apprehention of the recurrence of fimilar ferutinies’ will deter the holders of 
the lands from improving them. eee 

71. Good pdlicy, and the principles of the fyftem which is abattto be introduced into the 
derritories_ under your Lordthip’s immediate government, demand that no individual fhould’ 
be difpoffefied of property whith hé actaally holds, until his title to it fhall have been proved 
invalid by a regular fait in aCourt of Juttice. In all queftions refpecting property betweew 
the Government and its fubjeéts, the Government ought to proceed for the recovery of its 
rights under the law by the iame procels as is preferibed in fimilar caies to individuals. x 

72. No 


206 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sclott Cotnmiittee on 


” 72. No poffible injuries can arife to the public interefts ‘from the adoption of thefe prin- 
ciples. The Government in its legiflative capacity, by framing the jaw in the firft inftance, 
welcribes the itandard of the public rights. It is equally for the interefts and honour of 
overnment that it fhould leave its rights to be determined by that fiandard in the Courts 
of Juftice. 

73- Thele principles ought not to be confined to the cafes of alienated lands, but ought to 
be extended to all cafes whatever in which Government may be parties with individuals in 
matters of property. ¥ 

74. We therefore direét that the inveftigation ftated to be commenced into the titles of 
the holders of lands exempted from the payment of Revenue, be fufpended; and that you 
frame a regulation, declaring the fpecific rules by which tenures fhall be deemed valid or 
otherwife ; and that it be made the duty of the Board of Revenue, and of the Officers under 
them, to profecute in the new Courts of Juftice for the refumption of fuch tenures as may 
appear to be holden under invalid ts. 

75: The adoption of this principle will give fecurity to all valid tenures, at the fame time 
that it will !ead to the difcovery, according to regular procefs of law, of thofe tenures which 
have been fraudulently abesined: 

76, Thefe in{tractions indeed correfpond with the Regulations in Bengal for the inveftiga- 
tion of the titles of the holders of alienated lands, which wehave already authorized your 
peat Council to adopt as the general rules for your guidance. 

77. With regard to the amount of the affeflment of the Havelly lands, the date for the 
affelfinent of thofe lands, as well as of the other parts of the Company’s potfefiions (exclufive 
of the recent conquefts) referred to by your Board of Revenue in the g82d, 383d, 384th, and 
985th paragraphs, and detailed in the Statements marked B and C, annexed to the Report, 
appear to be founded upon the moft correct materials which you can hope to obtain, and 
fhould therefore be le the bafis of your proceedings. 

78. The obfervations of the late Collector of the Jagheer, on the introduction of the pro- 
poted fyftem, are founded on principles of the moft erroneous policy. We entirely concur in, 
the remarks of your Board of Revenuc on thofe obfervations. 

79: Your Lordfhip in Council having already received our infirnétions for forming the 
fettlement of all Poligar countries on the bafis of your infiructions to the Board of Revenue 
under date the oth November laft, we have at prefent pore} further to add on this head, 
than that your Lordfhip in Council has our fanction to extend the principles of the inftrac~ 
tions contained in this r, tothe permanent {ettlement of the Poligar countries, as far as 
thofe principles Lapplicable. The quettion a peeing his Highnels the Nabob 
of the Carnatie’s account of the Defha Cawal Tee, will be hereaiter confidered in 

“a fepnrate difpatch, ee, Le ; 

~ So: Your Lordship has alf6 our fanétion to proceed to form a decennial fettlement of the 
country of Tanjore, to be eventifally declared perpetual. The principles preferibed in. this 
a 


ier, for forming a fettlement of the Company’s immediate pofieilions, fhould, as far as they 
be applicable, be adopted as the bafis of the fettlement of Tanjore. . 
. 81. The ts ufed in Hee relative to the expediency of refuming, from the Land+ 
holders and ail other individuals, the right of cole eing, the Sayer or internal duties, and of 
fubfequently abolifhing thofe duties, are equally applicable to the countries fubject to the, 
immediate authority of your Lordfhip in Council, and you haye our fanction for the adoption 
of the meafures. ~~ 

82. Thofe arguments, however, do not apply to the continuance of the colleétions of the 
Janel. Cuftoms at Fort St. George, and at the different towns and ports on the fea coals, In 

sry of continuing thofe collections we entirely concur. 

83: On the grounds fiated by your Board of Revenue, no neceflity appears to the Governor 
‘General in Council to exift, for granting’any compenfations on account of the refumption and 
aoe cE ‘the Sayer, excepting in the cafes referred to in the 434th paragraph of the 

's Report. 

84. As conneéed with the fubject of the ‘Sayer duties, we think if proper here to obferve, 
that the calamities which the. hern Cirears and particular purts of the Carnatic have at 
different periods fuffered from 'y of grain, may be aicribed to the decay of the tanks, 
refervoirs, embankments, and er works of a fimilar nature; to the extreme poverty of the, 
lower claffes'of the Cultivators of the lands, and to the obftruéiions exifiing to de free tranfit 
of grain throughout the Carnatic. ~ ° 

fe The permanent ‘ae the Land Revenue, and the operation of the new fyftem 


of Government, will, we are perfuaded, remove the two firlt of thefe caufés in the difiritts to 
which the fyfiem fhall be . ‘The operation, however, of thefe benefits will be but 
partial, even within thofe diftriéts, towards preventing the return of the fame calamities, unlefs 
all impediments to the tranfpert of grain, throughout the countries in the Peninfula fubiect to 
the immediate authority or inffnence of the Britith Government, fhall alfo be completely re- 
anoved, fo that the furp! BU aig ofthe country, in which the harveft may be plentiful, may 
ueeiey be transf to thofe countries iu which the crops may in any degree have 
hited. v4 te 
86. The Governor General in Council is aware that the chief obfiaclé to the general 
_ adoption of this arrangement, will be found in the perverfe and unaccommodating {pirit of the 
Council of his Highnefs the Nabob of the Carnatic. But his Lordfhip in Council deems the 
free tranfport of grain to be of fuch effential importance to the future profperity of the Com- 
pany’s pofleilions, as well as of the territorics of the Rajah ef Myfore, of the Nabob of the 
Carnatic, 


the Afhirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 207 


~ Caruatic, and of the Rajah of Tanjore; that we think it proper to direét that you make it an obje® 
of your particular attention, to carry this arraugement into eitett throughout the while of the 
Caraatic, Tanjore, Myfore, the Poligar diftcitts, and the Nortnera Cirears. Vor this purpoi 
it will be necesJary to declare, as foon as circumftances fhall admit, that grain of all deferip- 
tons fhali be univertally exempt from duty, and from ali moleftation whatever in its pallage 
throughout the territories of the Company, including Tanjore and the Poligar counties; 
and your Lordihip in Council will be pleated to direét the Relident with the Rajah of Myfore 
to take the necellary fieps for exes the arrangement to the territories of that Prince, 
‘The Right honourable the Governor General will immediately addrefS the Nabob of the 
Carnatic, urging him to adopt the arrangement throughout his territories. : 

57. On a confideration or the Quettion ftated in tie 436th and 437th paragraph of the 

Board Report, we fee no objection to the colleéion of the fame rates of duties on the export 
of the refpeétive Prefidencies, with this qualification, that fuch articles, the produce of either 
Prefidency, the growth or manufacture of which it may be deemed an object to encourage, or 
which it may be for the benefit of the Prefidency importing to admit tree of duty, fhall be 
exempted from all duty at the Prefidency at which they may be imported. " 
, 88. Under this rettriétion the Governor General in Council will have no objeétions to your 
collecting duties of 2} per cent. on imports from Bengal, aad we fhall take into conliderstion. 
‘the application of fimilar principles to the imports at this Prefidency from Madras. 

89. Your Lordfhip in cc i} is already apprized of the articles af esos export which it 

Coromandel. To 


ounce 
is our with to continue exempt from duty on importation on the coaft n 
thefe may be added any other articles which, from confideration of local convenience, you may 
with to continue exempt from Sar 

90. We requeft that your Lord{hip in Council will tranfimit to us a lift of any articles, the 
produce of the’coaft of Coromandel, the exportation of which it may be an object to you to 
encourage. To thefe we fhall add fuch other articles as it may be an object, ox contideration 
of local convenience here, to admit free of duty. 5 

91. We cntirely approve the plan of rendering the fale of {pirituous Tiquors and intoxi- 
cating drags a fource of public Reyenue under your Prefidency. As the confumption of 
theie articles canuot be abfolutely prevented, they fhould be taxed fo high as to preclude, if 
pollible, the immoderate ufe of them, = s Saisie La eae ti) 

g2. Wearenot aware of any local objection at your Prefidency to your adoption of thik 
principle to the fullef extent. 

9 ‘The expediency of adopting the experiment recommended by your Board of Revenue 
i a paragraph, is’a quefiion which your Lordfhip in Council will be moft competent to 
ecide. 7 : eiaee’ 
“94. The large Revenue which is now realized with fo much facility in Bengal from the 
‘exclufive right of manufaciuring Salt referved by Government, night be u ‘ally injured 

by admitting the cdait Salt on any other terms than thofe on which it is now admitted. 

“os: We fhrotld not deem it prudent, without the moft deliberate confideration, to adopt 
any incafure tending to affect fo material a branch of the permanent réfourees of the Com- 
‘pany in Intl; we'thall, however, give the queftion the moft ferious attention, "The objects 
whieh thé plin‘has ia view, namely, the reduction of the fervice of Salt in Bengal, and the 
nprovemeit oF the“refourees of the Britith territories under the immediate government of 
your Lordihip in Council, are of great importance. ey: 8 
, 96. We have no kefitation, however, in authorizing you to form your permanent fettlement 
‘onthe principle, that the Company will, at fome period of time, pofliefs the exclufive right of 
Panufacturiig Salt from Ganjam at Cape Comorin. Ne EE 

*"97. Sinée ‘ehs yy concluficn’ of the lace treaty with the Rajah of “Panjore, no other 
abiixcte exifis to the accomplifhment of this Patt important arrangement for improving 
‘the refourees of your Revenue, than the defettive rights of the Company within the diftricts 
of the Nabob of Arest, delet sw Sas 

of. The Right honourable the Governor General will immediately addvefs his Highnefs, 
urgiig him to relinguifh to the Company the manufacture of within his territories, 
credit béing allowed in his kifts for the full amount of the Revenue which his Highnefs has 
enjoyed from this article, on an average of years. WR Petied 
99: We fhould hope that the Soria ingonfiderable intevelt sg his Highnefs in a 
-queltion, will not infizence hitn to oppofe any obitacle to the adoption of an arrangement w! 
alone might be expetted te defray hs aflaidonal ‘charges of the new {yitem of your te 

Govermnent. : : , 

“100. But if his Highnefs fhould refufe to accede to this arrangement, the Govemor 
‘General in Council is of opinion that it will not be the lefs ey yetain exclufively in 

¢ territories under your 


208 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sele®& Committee on 


their eflates. . But it appears to us preferable that the abatement fhould be granted in the laft~ 
mentioned mode, as it wili bean alteration cf the afleffinent of the tard. 

i102, Both financial and political confiderations reader it advifabie that the privilege of 
manulaéturing Saltpetre fhould be reieryed exclufively to the Company. 

193. In Bengal the Cultivators of Beetle and Tobacco pay the eftablithed rents for the 
Jands on which thefe articles are produced to the Proprietors of the eftate. If exported 
beyond the Company's provinces, thete articles ave charged with the eftablithed duties, but 
nz Reyenue is-at prefent levied on the. retail vend of thefe articles within the Company's 
provinces, in any fate. We are of opinion, however, that a Reyenue might be derived from 
thele articles in Bengal, fo as to operate as a tax oa the confumption of them; and the fubject 
has been for fome time paft under the confideration of the Governor General in Council. 

io4. A tax levied on thefe articles; under the propoled plan, could not be confidered to 
initio in any refpeét with the engagements fablifting between Government and the Land- 

olders. 

105. As,it appears, from the Report of your Board of Revenue, thata Revenue, in the form 
of a tax on con{umption, is levied on Tobacco and Reetle, both at Fort St. George and at the 
dubordinate tations, and as we are of Spier that thele articles, as well as Ganja, are proper 
objects of taxation, we concur in the fentiments of that Board that the fale of Beétle and 
‘Tobacco fhould be fubjected to regulations calculated to render thofe articles productive 
fources of Revenue. But no necellity appeats to us for any reference or exception to thefe 
auticles in the engagements of the Landholders, who thould be allowed to collect the efta- 
Diithed rates of rent affeiJed on Beetle and Tobacco grounds, which cannot interfere with 
‘the tax upon the retail or vend of thofe articles. 

106, The Mint Cuftoms are connected with the objec of the coin ; and the rate of the quit- 
rent of the gardens in the vicinity of Madras, and of the ground-rent in the Black Town, are, 
we prefume, fixed and require no regulation. * ta ee z 

107. The abufes in the coinage in Bengal correfpond with thofe ftated to exift on the 
coaft, and haye yet been only partially remedied. nd 

108. The firft meafure necellury, with a view to the reform of the ett cat your Prefi- 

-dency, would be to eftablith ane exclufive mint. We are perfuaded that the Hajah of Tape 
would readily reftriét the coinage of his mint, fo as to rendcr it merely a nominal appendage 


of foyereignty. 4) hers che i 
zi Paes fimilar arrangement with regard to the mint of the Nabob of the Carnatic would 


| for the manufacture of Salt fhould be made 
P eageyies ether coin fhould be confidered as a tender of 


payment, A fir rence to thefe principles, and facility afforded to individuals, in the 

cape cheap recoinage of lig Heat or coinage of bullion, would foon remove the 
“ ards, y nage, . 

F satse, Wah i seer the een Sees for the gold coin be not 


Ri apenty flees coin to pafs in exchange for the gold thould be left to find its propor- 


Lordthip in Council to judge how far it would be pragicable f 


115. It is of no effential importance to the fecurity of private rights. and property that ¢ ° 


Judges of which are bound by folenin oaths to adminifter the laws impartially between 
ord. By mrbmelgotiny abprok af Sh legitadie’repellinstsind hy fubjeting the Gor 
116. By promulgating in pris our legiflative regulations, and by fubjecting the Govern- 
ment itfel an its eee ty to the, panies thofe regulations, we afford to the 
i nts of thefe provinces the beft fecurity compatible with our fituation in the country 
oe enaction of falutary laws for the protection of the powers, rights, and property of the 
Be, and for the due adminiftration’ of the law. ‘In addition to the check ‘impofed on the 
gillative power by the publigity.of its proecedings jn India, thefe proceedings (as oblerved 


‘by your Board of sesénne) bome Seeulany, under the aupertee of the public. authorities at 
’ aay Phe ~ 


Rome, who thereby poffels the means ofan efficjent contro! 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 209 


117. The powers and conftitution of the Courts of Judicature, a5 founded on the principles 
aboye ftated ; the limitations to the authority of the executive Officers, particularly ‘the fub- 
jection of the Officers entrufted with the coileétion of the Revenue to the jurifdiction of the 
Courts; the mode of deciding petty fuits, as well as the forms of proceeding; are ampl, 
detailed in the feveral regulations referred to under this head by your Board of Revegue, 2 
in the fubfequent modifications of thofe regulations, as contained in the printedcode. Thefe 
laws, being founded on general principles, are no doubt, as ftated by your Board of Revenue, 
applicable in their general {pirit to the territories under your Lordihip’s immediate govern- 
ment. - : 

118. The pypoinlnen of licenfed Pleaders has fully anfwered the ends expected by the 
inftitution. The perfons who may be felected for this office in the Courts to be eftabiithed 
under your Lordihip’s Government, will be as well qualified as the perfons originally felected’ 
in Bengal: at all events, an early feleétion will tend to produce perfons properly qualified. 
Perfons more competent will never be found at any future period, until the new conftitutioa 
thall open a channel for the employment of their talents: individuals muft be introduced inte. 
the profcilion in order to acquire the neceflary qualifications for the exercife of it. _ 

119. It is a queftion of the greateft importance to determine what law fhall be adminiftered 
in the Courts to be jnftituted under ol Larcibig's authority. i 

120. In civil cafes little difficulty occurs; in queftions of inheritance, marriage, caft, or 
other matters affecting religious prejudices, the law of the parties muft of be made 
the rule of decifion, as in ence: With refpeét to other civil cafes, and to the forms of 
Peay it will be fufficient to refer your Lordfhip in Council to the regulations enacted 
in Bengal. oR fT ct 

rete ‘The Mahomedan criminal law, with certain modifications, has been made the rule of 
Aecifion in criminal cafes throughout the Company’s poffeilions in Bengal, including the city 
and diftriét of Benares, although that city is confidered as the metropolis of the Hindoo 
religion. % 5 a t 

aa We are. perfuaded alfo that (with few exceptions) it will be adyifeable to adopt 

-the fame law in. the territories {ubject to the immediate government of your Lordfhip in 
Council, under fuch modifications as experience may fug; , io 

123. We are-not aware ‘that the Hindoo criminal law hms in any inflance heen adopted - 
sue practical fyftem, nor would it, we believe, anfwer in any refpect the ends of public 

uftice. : f mat Sp 
124. This objection to the introduction of the Hindoo law as a fyftem of eriminal jurifpru- 
dence, renders it not only unfit to be adopted as a general code, but even as a rule for the trial 

of offenders prong Hindoo religion. The adoption of this law would be particularly 
-offentive to the Mahomedans, who have been accuftomed to impofe their own laws, inftead 
of being fubjected to the laws of other countries. Wig h ra. S  ER ni, 

- 425.°The introduction of the Englith criminal law, under whatever modifications, would, 
-we are confident, be equally ulgultige ee every clafs of our fubjects. It would be in yain to 

expect that either Mahomedans or Hindoos would ever Linea ee ‘that law, 
-or that they would ever be attached to its principles; independent of thefe objections; infur? 
mountable obfiagles would arife to the due adminiftration of that law, from the want of 
sperfons com) to its adminiftration. ae APN G 
126. The Mahomedan criminal law was the rule of the adininiftration of se through- 
out the Mogul Empire. We hi that law was often ill adminifiered, and in fome placce 
proehy neyer adminiftered at it was ueverthelefs the avowed law of the country, as 
applicable to criminal cafes. : i i ‘ 

+ 127. This obferyation is more particularly applicable to the Northern 
and all the countries ceded by Tippoo Sultan, or conquered from that Prince. — r " 
128. Whilft thefe countries were fubject to their former Mahomedan rules, criminal cafe 
were decided with reference to the tenets of the religion of the Sovereign and to the-efla- 
-blithed ufages of the Mogul Empire. rai $ Pian 

129. Having found this law eftablifed (however imperfectly or ¢ y adminiftered) as 
r on, it will new form 


the Jaghire, 


the rule for the trial of offences when the couatry came into our 
the moft natural bafis of our criminal code. ; ae ae 
130. We are certain that this law will be moft congenial to all our Mahomedan fubjects; 
and the Hindooecannot object to its exercife, as they have been y amenable to the * 
Mohomedan criminal courts in every part of India to which the .Mahomedan power has 
extended. ee SR Se toma 4 
131.' It is. to be prefuined that this law, with which the Hindoos are well acquainted, and 
which théy have always ‘the means of ftudying, will be preferred by them to."the Engli 
common law, with which it is {carcely poflible they thould ever become conyerfant. .) + ** 
192. Perfons-tkilied in the Mahomedan law can always be obtained from thete provinees, 
(if they canhot be found in the Peninfula) to affif in. its adminifiration. Thi td 3 
oe Supreme Englif) criminal law, or any code immbdiately fouaded- 
ado} ‘ PRC : + seg oP sree 
Pig indapeuteat of thefe confiderations, the introduéFion -6f- dn” entirely Hew code of 
sriminat Jaw might, excite ferious alarm throughout our péfieliions.. “Phe meafuré would be 
repugriant to. the fundaméntal principle of our policy in India,-which has been to+ddmis” 
nifter to ives théittowirlaws-in'the mild and Deneroiesetpine ef the Batith Confti-+: 


ve NO 


134. Affuming 


‘gro APPENDIX vo the Second REPORT jram the Sele& Committee on 


34. Affluming therefore, asthe bafis of our criminal code, a: law confecrated by the ve- 
n of one clafs of our fubjects, and familiar to all the inhabitants of cur dominions, 
stience and practice have enabled us in Bengal to temper and ameliorate the adminittrs-, 
tiomot thatlaw, by the gradual introduction of improvements derived from the principles 
éf Brtifh jurifprudence, and occafionaliy from thefe of the Hindoo code. We are fa- 
tisfied that the fame courle may be purlued by your Lordthip iu Council with profpedts of 
qqnal advantage. t % 
+5285. Weare aware that in Tanjore and the Polygar countries (as in Malabar) the Maho- 
medan law may never have been adininifiered. In thofe places the law of the deiendant 
may be made the rule for the guidance of the Criminal Courts, with any modifications which 
thay be deemed neceflary to adapt that law more effectually to the purpoles of jut 
This principle has been adopted in Malabar, and we herewith tranfimit a copy of the Crini- 
nal Cade formed for that provinee. . 
» 136. We ere of opinion, however, thatthe Mahomedan law, with the alterations adopted 
in printed Regulations for Bengal, ought to be made the general rule for the admi- 
niftration of juttice in criminal cafes in the territories under your Lordfhip’s immediate go- 
+; excepting in the particular inttances above tiated, in which logal circumftances 
tay render a deviation from the principle adviteable. t 
+ 1372 The Governor Genera! in Council contiders it to be of the greateft importance to the 
maintenance of peace and order, as well as to our political fecurity, that the 
‘Deel of the country fhould be fuperintended by Officers efpecially nominated by the Go- 
ernment. 5: ee : 

138. The exercife of this important branch of the public authority in the hands of indi- 
vidual: icularly objectionable in the territories undér your Prefidency, as 
tonding to keep alive thofe sentiments of independence which have charagteribed the Land- 
holders, and which nuft be completely extinguithed before they can become ufeful and good 
fubjects. While any portion of public authority is allowed to devolve to them by inheritance 
in virtue of their pollefitons, they wiil never be brongit to confider themifelves as mere Pro- 
prictors of teftates. f 

139. Independent of thefe i t confiderations, to abandon the charge of the Police 
of the country to ‘the Landholders mutt always give rife to the moft flagrant abufes. In 
the enquiries which preecded the relumption of this charge from the Landholders in Beagal, 
it was eftablifhed, that the offices of Police were held chiefly by moft notorious robbers, whe 
im large fms of money to the Zemindars, or to ther Officers and dependants, for 
oe (e-fituations; the ffettion of which enabled them to carry oa their depredations with 
Pogo. “The arrangement fuggefted will not prevent your Lordfhip in Council from ‘deriving 
every afliftance from the Landholders, in maintaining the peace of the , in their in« 
dividual “eapacity of proprietors of efiates ; on the contrary, a claufe flrowld be inforted in 
their: a ee to convey to the Magifirates or to their Officers the earlieft 
infor of every circu 

to” 


E circumftance affecting the good order of the country; and they dhould 
be fubjected to punithment, extending in certain cates of-enormity to the forfeiture of their 
“eltates, if it fhould appear that they had connived at robberies, or protected robbers or other 
difturbers of the public peace. ; “4 uy 
14. The | iftrates, and the Officers‘aéting under them, fhould ee ‘the moft. abfolute 
control over allthe village watchmen of every.defeription. “At the tame time, thefe watch- 
‘men fhould be carefully tecured in tie lands, fees and allowances; of which they are ftates, in 
the 571ft paragraph of the Report of the Board of Revenue, to bein the enjoyment, fo.as to 
tender their fervices efficient to the original purpoles of their inftitution. Thete perfons will + 
no doubt become extremely wieful in preferving the peace of the:country under ‘the reforms 
propofed by-your Board ot Revenue. - SPINS pate St 
19a. ‘Ltis the ‘peitiaryidaty and intereft of the Sovereign of every country ‘to provide for 


svill be ineusred in applying this principle tothe Company’s poffcitions uader immediate 
canthoriy, sibbemreu oportion to ¢ loffes now fetabed hess the Donbeadveocdcialetion 
Resenze, hoe e 


‘any fettled 2 of civil or criminal juftico, and without any rule for the decurity of the 
poet the lives of its fubjetts. | a ¢ : 

144. If no confiderable increate inthe Land Revenue be obtained immediately, we fhould 

that a progre!live augmentation of all your refources imuft be the gradual effect of. 

‘fyitem now to beuntroduced. Atall-eveats, the refources which may be.reatonably expected 
‘to arile from the fale-of the Havilly lands, from the tax on fpiritacusJiquors and‘drugs, and 
from the refervation of the exclufive right of manufacturing fait, together with the reduttion 
‘of all ufctets cftablifmnentsant charges, aud.the adoption.ot the other ee ee meen 
‘bythe Board of Revenue with a view to meet the increafeot expenfe, will more ‘than-com- 
Fee for the immediate charges attending the efublithment ‘of the new confiitution. 

‘nefe points oflasdable enonomy dLthe mott minute attention, andwe-ase fatished that. 
they willreceive the ruileft cuufideration froin your LordShip in Cowneit: x sad OP 


2 ea 245. Under 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. ~ zn 


145. Under this conviction, and perfuaded that without avowed and liberal allowances to 
the public Officers no fyitem of government can prove efficient or pure, we direct that the 
allowances of the Judicial and Revenue Officers be fixed on the teale fuggefied in the 
Report of the Board of Revenue, provided that feale fhall appear to your Lordthip to be 
contormable to the principles ftated in thefe paragraphs. 

146. The number of Zillah Courts of Adawlut to be ereGed, as well as, the eftablifhments 
of Minifterial Officers to be attached to each, will of courfe be queftions that will require your 
Lordthip’s particular care. ‘i 

147. Having turaifhed your Lordfhip in Council with our fentiments on all the material 
points ftated in the Report from your Board of Reyenue, we fhall ftate the titles of the 
several regulations which appear to us neceflary to be paffed, in order to eftablith the firft 
foundation of your internal (sovernment, and to render its conftitution as perfect a8 may be 
practicable in the infancy of the propofed reform. ; 

148. The titles of the feveral regulations may be varied, and other regulations relating to te | 
points to which we may not have adyerted, may be added as may be found neceffary in the 
progrefs of the fyftem. wir 

149. Werequeft your Lordfhip in Council will be pleafed to tranfmit to us the regulations . 
of which the titles are {tated in this Difpatch, preparéd jin the moft accurate and formal 
manner for promulgation. When we receive the regulations in this flate we thall be able 
to form a competent judgment of the expediency of enacting them, ce: 

150. The correfpondent regulations eftablified in Bengal in 1793, and the modifications | 
of them by the regulations patfed in fabfequent years, will in general furnifle the details of 
moft of the regulations for your Prefideucy, of which we now proceed to enumerate the 
titles. 

151. “ A Regulation for forming into a regular code all regulations which may be enacted Reg. 41 of 1793. 

“ for the internal government of the Britith territories immediately fubjcét to the Prefidency ] 
“of Fort St. George.” By } ] 

152. This regulation fhould correfpond with the 41ft regulation paffed in Bengal in the 
yet 1793, and fhould fiand as the firft regulation in your code; in which place itonght to 
have fiood in the code for Bengal. 3 ; 

We with it to be underftood that all regulations which fhall be hereafter paffed by the 
Governor in Council, thall be tranfinitted to the Governor General in Council, and receive 
his*fanction poe to their final adoption and bares, at Fort St. Geor; 

153. A {irié attention to this regulation, and to the regulation the title of which is here- 
after ftated, for empowering the Courts of Judicature and the Boards of Reyenue and Trade 1 
to propofe regulations refpecting matters coming within their cognizance, is of the moft | 
cffential importance. On the operation of thefe regulations will depend both the confervation , 
and the i ese improvement of your new conttitution. Ji as E n nee 4 of 1993. 

154. “ A Regulation for the eftablifhment of Courts of Adawlut, for the tri caufes 8 of 1794. 
“in ae iethasey see BR ee oes qeite conte xe.” x, eh MH t 

155. The conttitution an ywers O! fe Courts wil roughout the Con &55 of 1795. 
pang territories, including he’ ‘Tanjoreand Polygar difiricis, although there may be eae 4, ab 13 of 
of local laws neceflary in the parts of the country in which the Courts maybe ey 2,3 of 1798, 
eftablifhed; one regulation therefore will be fufficient for defining the powers of thet 59 of 1799, 
Courts, as far as thofe powers can in the firft inftance be fettled. eae eh Reg’. a4 

156. “ A Regulation for eliablifhing two Courts of Appeal, for trial of Appeals in civil 5 Of 1793. 
« cafes, from the decifions of the Zillah Courts.” rT tl 5 Of 1794. 

147. The confiitution of thefe Courts of Appeal being the fame, the rules for their 37,38 &550f1795- 
guidance may be included in one regulation. =" RL 4 «of 1790. 

158. As the regulations defining the powers of the Zillah Courts ‘in Bengal will. furnith ag. of 1797. | 


Courts of Appeal at this Prefideney may be applied to the Courts of Appeal at Fort St. aS 
George, with fuch alterations as your tad, in Council may, i Hick» Reg 
der Adawlut or Civil Court of Judicature for 6 of 1793. 
“ trying Appeals, in the laft refort, froyg the decifions of the Provincial Courts of Appeal.” 5 of 1704. | 
Sudder Dewanny: Adawlut at Fort William will teryeias a\ 32 © 16 etl | 
a, F 798: | 


\ 


u gnitude of thofe in which an appeal lies from the Sudder < dgat 4 

Dewanny Adawlut in B in 4 nai 0 ook, Cope } 
162, A Regula a firates in apprehending pérfons charged 9 of 1703. 
“with crimes or offences, a1 cing OS NS ae Se a ee | 


for this Regulation. . ath. * 
164. Withregard to the fyftem of Police, it may be advifuble to have a diftinét regulation 
for the Police of the different parts of the country in which there rhe avariation in local 
pea Se Thete rules will guide the Magiftrates whofe pei may extend over 
thofe diftriéts. ALAN SB i a 
165. The followingtitles are given with a view to thefe local confiderations. Reg’ | 
165. “ A Regulation for the efiablifment of ‘an efficient Police in the Circars of \Chi- 22 © 23 sf ree | 
» “ cacole, Rajamundry, Bllore, Muitaphanagur and Moortezanagur.”. iz? ih of ie: 
5 i Jedine® Regulation for the eftablifiment of an efficient Poliee in the Company's a oxa of 3797: 
P2963. 3H a6 * 68. # A Rege- “id 


163. ‘The regulations for the Ziliah Magifirates. in Bengal will furnith moft of thedetaile. 13 of 1797+ ) 


Reg’. 
9 of 1793. 
7 of 1794- 
9 of 1796. 
3) 4 & 17 of 1797- 
3, 8 & 10.0f 1799- 


Reg’. 9.0f 1793- 
a 6 of 3796. 
14 of 1797+ 


Reg’. 20 of 1798- 


Reg’. 7 of 1793- 
i H of 1796. 
8 of 1797+ 


«Reg. 12 of 1793- 
* Reg 13 of 1793- 


x Res, 18 of 1793+ 


Reg: 46 of 1793. 
Reg: 47 of 1793. 


Reg’. 40 of 1793- 
35 of 1706. 


: Reg, 96 of 1793. 


Reg. 15 of 1793- 


Keg’. 28 of 1793. 
11 of 1797. 


Reg. 38 of 1703« 
* Note.—If no fuch 
Roles exitt the Title 
muft be altered ac- 
cordingly, and mutt 
declare the Rules to 

_ benew enasted. 


212 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT Jrom the Sele& Committce on 


468. “ A Regulation for the eftablifament of an efficient Police in the Barramahal, and 
€ Salem and Coimbetore.” 

360. “ A Regulation for the cftablifiament of an efficient Police in the country of 
« Tanjore.” 

170. “ A Regulation for the, eftablifhment of an efficient Police in the countries of the 
« fouthera and weftern Polygars fubjected to the authority of the Company’s Govermnent 
“ by the treaty with the Nabob of Arcot of 1792.” 

1 ee “ A Regulation for the eftablithment of an efficient fyftem of Police in the country 
* of Canzra.” ¥ 

172. “ A Regulation for the eftablifhment of the Courts of Circuit for the trial of 
“ Offenders in the divitions of (here infert the names of the two divifions).” 

175. The rules for the Courts of Circuit in Bengal will probably in fubftance be applicable 
to thefe Courts. 

174. If it fhould be ultimately determined, that the law of the defendant, with any modi+ 
fications which may be judged necefiary, fhould in any particular place be made the rule of 

unithment, it will be nécellary to infert claufes to that effect for the guidance of thole 
rts. 

175. “ A Regulation for efiablifhing a Sudder or Chief Criminal Court for the trial of 
“ the criminal cafes in the latt reiort.” : 

176. The regulations for the Nizamut Adawlut at Fort William will ferve as a model for 
conftitution of the Sudder or Chief Criminal Court at Fort St. George. 

177. The law by which offenders may be tried before the Courts of Cireuit, will of courfe 
pe the rule by which the final fentence of the Chief Criminal Court will be re- 
gulated, 

178. “A Regulation for empowering the Judges of the Zillah Courts, the Magiftrates, the 
Judges of the Provincial Courts of Appeal, the Judges of the Courts of Circuit, the Judges 
of the Sudder Civil and Criminal Courts of Adawlut, and the Board of Revenue and the 
Board of ‘Trade, to propofe Regulations regarding matters coming within their cognizance 
eipectively.” 

179. This regulation fhould correfpond with the twentieth regulation in Bengal paited 
in 1793, with this addition, that the Boards of Revenue and of (as intimated by the 
preamble) fhould alfo be empowered to propofe regulations to the Goyernor in Council, 
exprefsly limiting, however, this power to matters coming under the cognizance of sheir 
relpective departments. . 

180, “A Peat for the appointment of Vakeels or Native Pleaders in the Courts of 
“ Civil Judicature in the territories under the immediate government of the Prefidency of 
« Fort St. George.” : 

181. “ A Regulation for the appointment of the Hindoo and Mahomedan Law Officers of 
“« the Civil and Criminal Courts of Judicature.” 4 

182. “ A Regulation for the appointment of the Minifterial Officers of the Civil and 
Criminal Courts of Judicature.” 

183. “A Regulation for preferving complete the Records of the Civil and Criminal Courts 
« of Judicature, and for requiring the Zillah and City Courts to tranfmit monthly Reports of 
« the Suits decided by them, to the Provincial Courts of Appezl, and for requiring the Pro- 
« vincial Courts of Appeal to fubmit mouthly Reports of the Appeals and Caufes decided by 
« them, to the Sudder Adawlut.” 

184. “ A Regulation for admitting Perfons of certain defcriptions to fue in the Courts of 
« Civil Judicature as Paupers.” 

185. “ A Regulation for providing for differences of opinion between the Judges of the 
“ Provincial Courts of Appeal and Courts of Circuit, and pretcribing rules with regard to 
“ other matters connected with their official fituations.” 

286. “ A Regulation for granting Commiffions to Natives to hear and_decide Civil Suits 
“ for fais of Money or pertonal property of a value not exceeding 50 Sicca Rupees, and 
& preening rules for the trial of the Suits and enforcing the decifions which may be pailed 
“upon them.” . 

187. “ A Regulation for eftablifhing a Regiftry off Wills, and of Deeds for the transfer or 
“ mortgage of real property.” < 

188. “A Regulation for gaa the Rates of Intereft on paft and future Loans.” 

189, “ A Regulation for prohibiting Britifh Subjects (excepting Mis Majefty’s Officers 
“ ferving under the Prefidency of Fort St. George, and the Grea coyenanted Servants of 
“the Company, and their Military Officers) from refiding at a greater diftance from Fort 
“ St. George than. miles, unlefs they render theildlves amenable to the Courtsof 
“ Dewanny Adawlut in Civil Suits-which may be inftituted againft them by any of the 
“ defcription of perfons mentioned in Seétion Regulation _ and for enabling 
< Britith Subjeéts to recover any demands recoverable under the Regulations which they may 
“ have upon fuch perfons.” 

ago. “ A Kegulation for re-enatting with modifications the exifting® Rules which prohibit 
“ coyenanted Civil Servants of the Co:npany, employes in the adminiftration of Juftice or 
« in the colleétion of the public Revenue, from lending Money to Zemindars or other Land- 
“holders or Farmers of land holding Farms immediately of Government, or to the Under 
« Farmers or Ryots of the above-mentioned deieriptions of Proprietors and Farmers of land, 
“orthe Sureties of any of them; and for re-enaéting with alterations the cia Rules pro- 
« jubiting Europeans ‘of any deicription from holding poileflion of Lands which maybe 
; “ mortgaged 


the Affiirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. ~ 213 


“mortgaged to them, or purchafing or renting Lands for erecting Houfes or Buildings for 
“ carrying on Manufaétures or other purpofes, without the fanction of the Governor in’ 
“ Council.’ 

« A Regulation for the trial of Perfons charged with Crimes againft the State.” Reg, 41 of 1799- 

“ A Regulation for referring Suits to Arbitration.” Reg, 16 of 1793- 

“ A Regulation for the guidance of the Courts of Juftice in cafes of a difference of opinion Reg. 10 of 1796. 
“ on the meaning and conitruction of the Regulations.” : 

191. For the details of the regulations to be formed under the fourteen preceding titles, 

it will be fufficient to refer your Lordthip in Council to the correfpondent regilations pafled 
in Bengal in 1793, and to the regulations pafled in fubfequent years. 
’ 192. A Regulation for announcing the determination of the Governor in Council to Reg. 1 of 1793- 
“form a fettlement of the Land Revenue of the Britith poffeffions under the immediate 
“ government of the Prefidency of Fort St. George, and tor declaring that the faid fettle- 
“ ment fhall be perpetual in the event of its being approved by the Honourable the Court of 
“ Directors.” 5 

193. This regulation fhould be formed on the model of the proclamation inferted in the 
firtt regulation, paffed in Bengal in 1793. 

194. We conceive that nearly the whole of the ftipulations contained in that procla- 
mation, from their general nature, will apply in fubitance to all the territories under the 
Prefidency of Fort St. George, and the regulations fhould declare thofe ftipulations to be 
the befis of all the fettlements to be formed. 

193. With regard to the details of the fettlements, the difference in local circumftances 
in the feveral parts of your territories may render it evpelen that the rules for the fettle- 
ment in each diftri& or divifion, in which peculiar cut and ufages with regard to the 
Revenue prevail, fhould be formed into a feparate lation. 

196, Each of thefe regulations fhould refer to the ftipulations in the general regulation 
above fuggefted, announcing the eventual permanency of the fettlement, and fhould fj city 
the details of the agreements between the Government and the Zemindars or other Lau - 
holde:s or Farmers, and alfo the rights of the Ryots and Cultivators in their refpe@ive 
lands, as faras your prefent information on the fubject niay extend. 

197. The titles of the regulations which it appears to us fhould be formed on this principle 
are the fix fullowing: . 

198. “ A Regulation for forming a decennial fettlement of the Circars of Chicacole, Reg. 8 of 179% 

“ Rajamundry, Ellore, Muftaphanagur and Moortezanagur; and for converting the Com- 
* pany’s Havilly lands in thefaid Circars into Zemindarries, and forming a decennial fettlement 
“ of tne fame; and for declaring the {aid fettlements perpetual in the event of their being 
“ approved by the Honourable the Court of Direétors.” 

igg. “ A Regulation for converting the Lands in the Company’s Jaghire into Zemindarries, 
“ and. for forming a decennial fettlement of the faid Zemindarries. : 

200. “ A Regulation for converting the ceded and the conquered countries of Barramahal, 
“ Salem and Coimbatore, into Zemindarries, and forming a decennial fettlement of the fame ; 
“and for declaring the faid fettlement perpetual in the event of its being approved by the 
“ Honourable the Court of Directors.” . 

201. “ A Regulation for forming a decennial fettlement of the country of Tanjore, and 
“for declaring the faid fettlement perpetual in the event of its being approved by the 
“ Honourable the Court of Dizectors.” 

202. “ A Regulation for forming a decennial fettlement of the countries of the fouthern 
“and weftern Poligars {abject to the authority of the Company's Government by the treaty 
“ concluded with his Highnefs the Nabob of Arcot under date the goth July 1798 

‘203. “ A Regulation for forming a decennial fettlement of the country of Canara, and 
“ for declaring the fetrlement perpetual in the event of its being approved by the 
“ Honourable the Court of Directors.” 7 

204. “ A Regulation for preferibing rules for the conduét of the Board of Revenue.” Reg’. 2 of 1795. 

205. As the general rule for the conduct of the Collectors throughout the country will be 38 of 9795: 
the fame, one general regulation containing thofe rules applicable to all the Collectors 
will be fufticient. The feveral rules contained in the fecond regulation paffed in Bengai 
in 1793, will perhaps be found, with ome alterations, applicable to the Board of Revenue 
and to the Colleétors at Fort St. George. : 

_ 206, “ A Regulation for eftablithing in-each Zillah an Officer for keepitig the Records in Reg’.21 of 170%. 
“ the native languages, which-relate to the public Revenue, and prefcribing rules for the 15 of 170% 
“ conduét of the Keepers of the Records.” & 

207. The twenty-firft regulation paffed in Bengal in 1793 will affift your Lordthip in 
Council in traming this Regulation. : 

208. “ A Regulation for the recovery of Arrears of the public Revenue affeffed upon the Reg'.14 of 1793. 
“lands, from Zemindars and other Proprietors of lands, and Farmers of Jand holding. farms got iggs 
“immediately of Government.” ee 35 of 1705+ 

209. The fourteenth regulation of 1793, and the: alterations fubfequently made in that 7 of 1799. 
yegulation (as detailed in the regulations paffed in fubfequent years) will furnifh your 

hip in Council with full information as to the means adopted in Bengal for enforcing 
payment of the public ducs. Pea fo : 

210. Lt will be a queftion for your Lordfhip in Council ta confider, how far it will. be 
‘expedient to declare Zemindars ‘and other Proprietors of Jand exempt froin perfonal confine- 
sent on acconnt of arrcars of Revenue, as is the cafe in Bengal. A 


air. This 


214 APPENDIX #o the Second REPORT from the Sele Cominitice on 


211. This exemption was granted to the Landholders from the confideration that their 
Jands mutt always prove a fuflicient fecurity for the difcharge of the public dues; that the 
character of a Landholder was thereby rendered move refpeétable, and that landed property 
would become more valuable, and 2 more detirable fpecies of property than it had ever heen 
before efteemed when the poffeffors of land were fubject to every {pecies of degrading 
-eocrcion. Thefe expectations have been fully anfwered. 

212. If your Lordthip in Council fhould deem it expedient to allow a fimilar exemption 
from confiiement in the countries under your immediate authority, it might at the fume 
time be advifable, under the prefent character of the Landholders, to qualify the general 
sule, by referving to Goverament a power of confining defaulting Landholders in fpecial 
cafes, in which, from ciscumtiances, you may find it neceflary to have recourfe to that mode 
of coercion. : \ 

q 3. 213. “ A Regulation for empowering Landholders and Farmers of land to diftrain and fell 
Regs, wet Hie “ the perfonal property of Snider Fanners, Ryots, and dependant Talookdars, and (in certain 
“7 of 1799 “ fpecified cates) their Surctics, for arrears of rent or Revenue; and for preventing Landholders 
“ aad Farmers of land confining or inMicting corporal punifhinent on their Under Farmers, 

“ Ryotts, and dependant Talookdars, or their Sureties, to enforce payment of arrears.” 
_. 214. The rales contained in the feventeenth regulation of 1793, with the amendments, 
founded on experience, contained in the th: h regulation of 1705 and the icventh 
regulation of 1799, are calculated to enable duals of every defeription to colieét their 
juft dues, without at the fame time giving them the means of committing abure and op 
xellion. Thefe rules, with modifications adapted to local cireumftances, may, we conceive, 

made general throughout the feveral diflricts under your Lordthip’s authority. 

Reg. 24 of 1793" 215.“ A Regulation for determining the continuance of the 'Feaiions heretofore paid by 
“ the Proprietors or Fariners of lands, ‘but included in the Jumama or Revenue payable te 
“Government.” 

Rog? 1&27 0f1793- 216. “ A Regulation for the refumption and abolition of the Sayer, or internal dut 
“taxes, throughout the territories immediately under the government of the Presidency 
“ Fort St. George, and for granting compenfations to fuch perimns as mey be deemed 
“ entitled to any compenfations in confequence of the faid meature.” 
Reg’, 42 of 1795 oi 7, & A Regulation for the collection of the land and fea Cuftoms at Fort St. George, 
39 i igh “ and the feveral ports and places on the fea coatt. 
10f 179% “938, “ A Regulation for enabling the Colleétors to recover from native Officers employed 
Reg. 3 of 1794+ « under them, public money or papers which fuch Officers may embezzie er retain.” 
219. The wales adopted “in Bengal for the purpotes fiated ‘in this title will be found in 
Regt.1 & 45 0f1793+ the third regulation of 1704. : 
20 of 1793- 220. “ A Regulation for difpofing of Lends fubject to the payment of Revenue, and of 
5&12 of 1796. “ Lands held exempt from the payment of Revenue, at public fale, purfuant to tne decrees 
7 of 1799: “ of the Courts of Juftice.” 
“ 221. “ A Regulation for the divifion of Eftates paying Revenue to Government, and for 
Reg’.1&95 of 1793 « allowing two or more Proprietors of thares of an Eltate to hoid their ihares as a joint ua- 
« divided Eftate.” 


and 


Reg?.1 & 19 of1793- 
58 of 3795 


Reg?.1&37 of 1793+ 
58 = of 1795. 


leg. 48 of 1793. , 224 “ A Regulation for forming a Quinquenrial Regitier of the Zemindarries and other 
Reg. 44 of 1793. 225. “ A Regulation for prohibitiug the granting of Leafes or Pottahs fora term execeding 


Reg, 49 of 1793. 226. “ A Regulation for preventing Affrays refpecting difputed Boundaries.” 
Reg. 33 of 3793- 


Reg’. 
he wk a - Ne 228. “ A Regulation for the eftablifhment of a Court of Wasds for the management of the 
Reg 279°" «¢ Eftates of difqualified Landholders.” ? eee , 
34 of 1793. ~~ -22g- “ A Regulation for levying a Tax upon alll intoxicating Liquors and Drugs, and for 
1 of 1794, “ preventing the illicit manufacture or vend of them.” 
7 & 10 0f 1797 ago. “ A Regs- 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 215 


230. “ A Regulation for referviug to Government the exclufive privilege of manufacturing Rex’. 29 of 1793. 


“Salt, and preicribing rules for the conduct of the Collectors or other perfons appomted to 
* fuperintend the ima: urc, and of all pérfons employed or concerned in the provifion 
* of Salt on account of Government.” e 

231. “ A Regulation for preventing the illicit manufacture or importation of Salt.” 

232. “ A Regulation preicribing rvies for the conduc of the Commercial Refidents and 
bs Agents, and all perfons employed or concerned in the provifion of the Company’s inveft- 
“ ment.” 

233. “ A Regulation for the reform of the Gold, Silver, and Copper Coinage, in the Britith 
“ territories under the immediate government of the Pretidency of Fort St. George.” 


Reg. 30 
40 & 52 
Reg. 31 


Reg. 35 


234. From, the connection which necefiarily fubfifts between the different regulations ~ 


which collectively are to forin the new conttitution of your internal Government, it will be 
tequifite that all the. regulations the titles of which are above ftated, as well as any 

ional regulations which you may find neceffary to form the firft foundation of the 
tem, fhould bear the fame date, ia fuse manner as the regulations paffed on the 
-eftablithincut of the new conftitution in Bengal in 1793.- 

235. It will be neceffary, however, that the fettlement of your Land Revenue, or at leaft 
of the important branches of it, fhould be concluded before your Courts of Judicature can 
tbe eftablihed, or the general fy ficm be introduced. 

236. The premature introduction of the judicial eftablifhments, if not detrimental to 
their object, would at leaft be cumparatively afelets, and the expente of them would be un- 
necellarily incurred. aeees Ba hohe fe 

237. A great proportion of the moft important rights and privileges to which the new 
Couris are ravended to give fecurity, are to be conceded by the terms of the fettlement; and 
the grant of thote rights and privileges in the firft inflance will beft explain to your native 
fabjedis the obje@ and advantages of the new judicial inftitutions, and of the whole frame 
of your refonned Conttitution. < 

238. With thefe favourable impreffions they will be lefs liable to be alarmed or to be dif- 
-fatistied at the fubfequent cfiablifhinent of any parts of the fyftem, of which they may be 
aunable, from ancient prejudices and habits, to form a juft comprehenfion. : 

239. Although the regulations in no refpeét reltri¢t the executive autkofity of the Govern~ 
ment, in forming the fettlement of the Land Revenue in the frit inftance, it is advifeable 
that the Agents employed to make that fettlement fhould unite all the powers of Goyern- 
ment in their own perfons, in order to obviate the embairafiments which might be oceafioned 
by interefted or ill-difpofed individuals, were any means aflorded of counteradting the 
eltabliflment of the fyitem. - 

240. Independent of thefe confiderations, the execution of a meafure of fo much imn- 


portance to the public interefts, and to the happinefs of the numerous body of people _ 


concerned in tue cultivation of the country, ought to be confided only to-the moft abic and 
experienced of your civil fervants, whofe time aud exertions it will fully engage. x 
241, During the progrefs.of the fettiemcut, your Lordthip in Council will bave time to 
prepare all the different regulations which are to conftitute the fytem, and fo obtain the 
finai fanétion of the Governor General in Council for their adoption. When that fettle- 
ment hall have been concluded, the Courts of Judicature may be-eftablifhed,.and the whole 
fyftein be brougit into operation. ‘The moft able and experienced of your fervants in the 
department of Kevenue will then be-transterred to the judicial offices, for which the know- 
ledge neceffarily acquired by them in the formation of the fettiement wiil reader them more 
eculiariy qualified; the charge of managing and collecting your Revenue in its different 
ranches will then properly devolve on the civil fervants, whole appointments to the fervice 
axe of more recent date. 
Yort Wiliam, We heve the hononr to be, &c. 
the 31ft December 17¢9. + 


Extra& of a Letter from the Right honoursb!e the Governor General to the Right 
* . -honourable Lord Clive, &e: dated the 8th January 1800. 


1, After the fulleft confideration of the Report of your Board of Revenue, I now have the 
honour to. tranfinit to your Lordfhip a detailed plan for the preliminary arrangement of a 


new fyftem of government for the territories {ubject to your immediate guthority, This. 


pian is contained ia the Difpatch from me in Couneil of the gift December 1799, and I truft 
it will enable you immediately to. commence the falutary work which it has been referved 
for your Lordthip’s happy adminifiration to aecomplifh at Fort St. George. The very able 
and comprehenfive Report of your Board of Revenue, and the intelligent and fatistatory 
Letters of Mr. Webbe to Mr. Barlow, afford abundant proof that your fervice can fupply 
both knowledge and talents fufficient to thé execution f the great plan im my contein- 
platioa, without the aid of any perfon deputed from Bengal, ad without requiring the 
attendance of Mr. Cockbume or of any other of your public Officers at this Prefidency. I 
am fatsfied that I fhall not find the zeal and diligence of your fervice interior to its other 
qualifications ; much of both will be required at the firft troduction of a reform adverle 
to the prejudices, habits and interefts, of fo many of your fubjeéts, as well European as 
native. The Ditpatch of the 31ft ultimo coniprehends the whole outline of the fundamental 
points of your propofed. conititution; the detaiis mult be filled up at Fort St. George; and 
‘one reference to me avill probably caable your Lordfhip to fix the fettlement ov its firk 

363. . 31 principles. 


of 1793. 
of 1795. 


of 1793. 


of 1793. 


#16 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT from the Scle& Committee on 


principles. You will neveffiarily frame your proclamation (after due enquiry) as the foundas 

tion floxe of the whole fabrick, and you wili trantinit it to me previous to publication, when 

I will return it to you without delay. . 

i have not fent Mx. Tucker to-you, not only becanfe Tam perfuaded his prefence at Fort 

Gcorge is unncceffary, but becawe L with to leave to your fervice the fuil and undivided 
credit of its own refo 1 traf that this motive will be duly appreciated at Fort St, 
George, and that alacrity ant ardour will be fiimuiated to fuch exertions as thall, fatisfy the 
world that you are not lets equal to the arts of pesce, i polity, and wife government, 
than you have proved’ yourfelves to be to the moft cxtenfive and vigorous military 
operations. “If, however, you fhould ultimately with for any afliflance from hence (either 
native or European) { will readily contribute whatever can be fpared. 

3. 1 with to meet the queftion of increafing the general {cale of allowances at Fort 
St. George on the faireft and broadeft principles. Your Civil fervice mutt be rendered an 
object of honourable ambition azd competent avowed profit, before it can-become a proper 
inttrument of pure goverrment over a large empire. Lordthip will perceive that my 
oflicial Difpaten of the 31f atiords you the opportunity of bringing the queftion before me 
in detail, and I fhall not fhirink from its decition. | It is for narrow views and fhort fighted 

__peliey to practice that fallacious economy which leaves to the public Officers no alternative 
but poverty or difhonour. But it will be more wife, as well as a more juft and moral 
principal of ftate, to confider the great increale of Revenue ch the providentia} iffue of 
the war bas placed in our hands, as a fund defined to the improvement of our fervice and to 
the profperity and. happinefs of our fubjets of every defeription, as well thofe who have fo 
Jong futfered under the imperfections of our own Government as thofe whoin we have 
recently’ refeuctt from the Barbarous defpotiiin cf our cn No better rete 

. made by us for the ‘igual fuccefs of our arms, than to convert the refources dirved 
our conquelts to the purpofe of purifying the adminiftration of eivil and criminal juftice, of 
founding and fecuring the rights of property, and providing fafeguards for the lives and 

of thofe fubjecied to our power. Power fo yfed muit be durable; while the pur-- 

oppofite maxims, would be little fhort of a difgualitcation of ourfeives for the 

fe of fovereignty. I will not at prefent trouble your Lordthip with any further 

ion on this intercfting fubject, imtending foon to communicate to you feveral, fug- 

> geftions intimately connected with it; but not of fo prefling a‘nature as to require any deiay 
of this Difpatch, which I forward by fea and land. ‘ 

4. 1 cannot, however, conclude without offering to your Lordthip my congratulations 
on the profpeét now opened to you of-contributing io effentially to the welfure or the people 
committed to your particular charge, and without exprefling my fatisfaétion and conndence 

- in being enabled to convey my {éntiments on this moft important” and arduous occafion,, 

. through. fo honourable and fecure a channel as that of an adminifiratiod conducted by 
you. ; e e 


< 


(A true Extract.) ‘ 
(Signed) B. Wyatt, 
Atlist, 


Appendix, No. a. 


TREATY with the Nabob of Surat, dated 13th May 1800. 


Articles of. Agreement between the Honourable Eaft “India Company and their Succeffors,: 
and the Nawaub Nafur ud Deen Khan, &e. &e. and his Heirs and Succetlors, for the 
~ bettcr‘acdminiftration of the Government of the City of Surat and its Dependencies. 

WHEREAS the Honourable the Englith Eaft India Company have been fubjected to a 
heavy expente for the protection of the city of Surat; and whereas the exifting fy{tem of inter+ 
nal governinentin the faid city has been found inadequate to the*protection of the perfons and 
properfy of the inhabitants; and whereas the Right honourable the Earl of Mornington, 
Governor Geueral of the Britith pofleffions’ in India, and the Nabob. Nafur ud Deen, &e. 
are mutually defrous of providing more effectually for tie external defence of the city of 
Surat, and for the fecurity, cafe, andhappinefs of the inhabitants; the following Articles of 
Agreement are concluded, on behalf of the Honourable Engtith Company and their facceffors,. 
by tae Honourable Jonathan Duncan, Governor of Bombay, velted with full powers for that 
purpofe by the faid Governor General on the one part, and by tire Nabob Nafur ud’ Leen 
and his heirs and fucceffors on the other part. 

Firft.—The friendthip fubfitting between the Honourable Englith Company and.the Nabob 
Natuz ud Deen Khan, &e. &c. is hereby firengthened and coniirmed; and the friends and 
the enemies of one fhall be confidered to be the friends and the cueanies of the other, 

Second.—The Nabob ud Deen agyees that the management and collection of the 
Revenues of the city of Surat, and the territories, piaces, aud other dependencics thereof, 
the adininiftration of civil and criminal juftice, and generaily the whole civil and military 
Government of the faid city and its dependencies, fhali be velied for ever entirely and cxciu- 
fiveiy in the Hoaourable Englifh Company. 

. Third.—It isagrecd that the Nabob fall be. treated on all occafions with the fame refpect 
and diftinclion as his prevecedfors. : 
Fourth. 


‘the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 207, 


‘Fourth —The Englith Company agree to pay to the Nabob Nafur ud Deen and his heirs, 
wut of the Reyeoues of Surat and its depcudeacies, in four equal quarterly payments, one 
Jack of Rupees annually ; which fhall be confidered to be the firft harge payabie from the 
faid Revenues. The Company alfo engage to pay to the faid Nabob and his heirs,.in 
addition to: the above-mentioned lack of Rupees, a proportion of one-fifth of the annual 
Revenues now atifing, or which may hereafter arife from. the faid city and its dependencies, 
after deduéting the {aid lack of Rapecs, the fum payable to the Mahrattas, and the.ch: 
of collection. The refidue of the Revenues, after the foregoing deductions, fhall be at. 
the difpofal of the faid Company. - 

Fifth—In order that the Nabob may at all times have full fatisfaGion in refpe@ to the 
Revenues of Surat and its dependencies, he the. faid Nabob fhall be at liberty to infpedt all 
the accounts thereof from time to time, or to {tation a Vakeel or Accountant, at his own 
expenfe, in all or any of the cfficcs of colleétion, for the purpofe of taking and tranfinitting 
to his Excellency copies of all or any of the accounts of the faid Revenues, 

Sixth.—Courts fhall be eftablifhicd for the due adminiftration of Civil and Criminal Juftice ; 
which Courts, agreeably to’ the ftipylations in the fecond article, fhall be under the fole 
authority of the Englith Eaft India Company.- The faid Court fhall. he compofed of 
Officers to be appointed by the Governor in Council of Bombay for the time being, and fhall 
be condnéted according. to fuch ordinances and regulations “Gramed with.a due regard to 
the exifting laws and ufages of the country) as fhall from time to time be publi by the. 
faid Governor in Council. of 

Seventh.—In complaints brought before the Courts of Juftice, ii which it dhall appear 
either by the application of the. Nabob, or the reprefentation of the defendant, at or before the 
time of’ giving inbis or her anfwer, or by the petition of the complainant, that both partics 
are relations or fervants of the Nabob, it is agreed that fuch parties {hall in the fir iiftance 
be referred for juftice to’ the Nabob, or to any perfon he may appoint to difpenfeit. Any 
complaint againft the relations or immediate fervants of the Nabob, by perfons of a-different 
aAefeription, fhall jn the firft inflance be made to the chief Civil Servant at Surat, whe hail 
refer it to the Nabob; who .hereby engages to order an immediate inveftigation to be made; 
or in cafe the parties thould defire it, to order the difputes to be referred toa proper arbitration, 
the Nabob engaging to bring it to a direét iffue, and to carry the fentence or award, if unfi- 
vourable, to his relation or fervant, into immediate execution. i 

By order of the Right honourable the Governor General in Coancil. ‘ 
? si (Signed), G.H. BARLOW, 
: _ Chief Secretary to thé Govern’: 


Appendix, No. 22. 


(Political Department); dated 19th February 1794. : 
Para.12. AN’ upright and fteady adminiftration of juftice is above all others the fir 
ronfideration in forming a fy{tem for the. happ' of thofe new fubjects, and with that view 
we tranfinit you a copy of the Regulations which have been propefod by Lord Cornwallis, 
and fubinitted to our confideration as applicable to the provinces under the Bengal Govern- 
ment, and you will report to us how far.the principles: they proceed upon appear to you 
applicable to the fubjects either formerly or recently brought under our Govtmment of 
Bombay. We indeed flatter ourfelves that. the knowledge Ms, Duncan and Mr. Boddam 
have of thofe regulations, and their attention having been drawn to the fubject by the Inftrue- 
tions of Lord Cornwallis, will have induced the Commiflioners to have anticipated our wifhes 
in-this refpect. ; 


Extiadt Letter from the’ Court of Directors, to the Governor in Council at Bombay, . 


Appendix, No. 23. 


TREATY or A gteement with the Nabob of Oude, as {pecified in Extra&t Letter from the 
Governor-General in Council at Bengal (Seerct 3 t); dated 17th May 1787; 


a i’ ; 
with Enclofure, and Letter from the Nabob, dated oft Juiy 1787. 


Paza, 5. No. 2. is a Tranflation of a Letter from Lord Cornwallis to the Nabeb Vizier, 
containing bis. Lordfhip’s erangements with Hyder Beg Khan. The following are the heads 
of the agreement which we-confider as fettled. “ 

6. That the troops: fiationed: at Futty Ghur fhall continue, and that the Vizier thall dif. 
ch:¥ze fo much of his own Army as'will allow for that additional expen’. 

. 7. That after the 1ft March latt, the whole fum to be paid annually by the Vizier to the 
Company thall be 50 lacks of Fyzabad fixteen Sua Siccx Rupees, including the charges for 
the brigades, thofe of the Refideney, the allowance to Sandut Ally Khan, and the fipends of 
the Rohillas. There is to be no excefS, ualets the Vizier fhall demand more forces trom thé 
Company. In that cafe the iaereafe is to be provided for on a fair eftimate. If either of 
the two brigades or corps of cavalry fhould be recailed, or any confiderable dismsations it 

ty 


218 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT frei the Seles Committee on 


their numbers fhould take place, the Company are to allow the Vizicr for the decreafe-of 
the expente trom, the fum of 50 lacks, agreeable to a fair valuation. 

8. ‘The arrears due to the Refidency, to the troops, to Saadut Aily Khan, to thé Rohillas, 
and to Lieutenant Anderfon, arc to be paid to the 1ft March; but the other arrears charged 
to the Vizier are to be firuck out, and no longer confidered as a demand of this Govera- 
ment on his Exccilency. ‘ : ; 

g. A Refident is to remain at bis Excellency’s Court, but itbeing a fyftem now declaredly 
and pofitively eftablifhed, that the Company fhall not interfere in any refpeét in the dé- 
tails of the Vizier’s Government, firiét orders are’ to be fent to him neither to interfere him- 
{elf nor to fuffer any interference for any public or private claims of Britith fubje@s, or 
Peron’ under our authority. ‘fhe whele management of the Vizier’s country is left to his 

Excellency and his Minificrs, and no appeals from any of its inhabitants are te be received 
by this Government. No European is to be permitted to refide in the- Nabob’s dominions, 
without the written permifiion of the Governor General. 

10, The fourth article of the treaty of Chunar relative to Furruckabad ‘is to he adhered te, 
that is, the Englith Refident is to be recalied from thence, either now or at the end of the 
year, and no other appointed in his ftexd. The Nabob Vizier is to pay due regard to the 
rights of the Nabob Mozuffer Jung, atid allot a fuflicient fim from the Revenues cf the 
country for his honourable maintenance; and, as the mothcr of the Nabob Muzuffer Jung, 
his brother Dil Dilure Khan, and Deep Chend, late Dewan, have given proof of their at- 
tachment to the Company, and Dil Dilure Khan has become an objeét of the Nabob’s re- 
fentment on this account, a provifion or penfion is to be fettied on them out of the Revenue, 
fo as to make them independent of the Nabob, and the faine is to be paid them by the Refi- 


dent at Lucknow. 


To the Vizier. 


[Written 15th April 1787.] 

The treaty conciuded between the Englith 
Company and the Nawab Sujah ul Dowlah, 
Was founded on contultations of mutual ad- 
vantage to both partics, and the fame prin- 
ciple ras continued to operate in confirming 
and improving the friendfhip and alliance 
between the Company and your lixcellency ; 
a connexion formed with a view to the 
interefts of both Governments ought to be 
perpetual: for this reafon, fince my appoint- 
ment to the control over affairs here, my 
intentions have been directed towards men- 
fares tending to fuppert and ftrengthen this 
friendly fyftem. 

As Y confider the Company's territories 
and thofe of your Excgiiency as the fame, 
the protection of your Excellcncy’s dominions 
is abfolutely neceffary, as from its fituation, 
the boundary of the whole, it is more ex- 

. pofed to foreign attacks. This protection 
cannot be effected in a propce manaer with- 
‘out the affiftance of the Company's troops; 
and I therefore beg leave to reprefent to your 
Excellency {uch cirewmftances as have after 
mature reHection occurred to me. With re: 
fpcét to the troeps ftationed at Fatty Ghur, 
which had béen withdrawn as ftipulated in 
the treaty of Chunar of 1781, L advife that 
they fhall not be recalled, but continued. 
make this propofal upon _a conviction that, 
from the extent of your Excellency’s domi- 
nions, the Englith forces now ftationed there, 
are requifite for their defence. Although 
there is no profpect of any attack on your 
Exellency’s territory at prefent, its fecurity 
inuft ultimately depend upon the firength of 
the force ftationed for its protection, and 

_ While this is fufficient, no one will dare to 
entertain views of, hoftility again your 
Excellency. Although the bravery and ditcip- 
line of the Englith troops on all occafions 
are well knowa, and have been proved even 
when their enemies have been on the pro- 
portion of twenty to one, and by the bleiling 
of God they will always triumph over their 

enemies ; 


Trom the Nawaub Vizicr to Earl Cornwallis. 


[Received 21f July 17873 

Your Lordfhip’s friendly letter, every word 
of which breathes firengtit of friend(up, and 
every fyllgble contains a performance of the 
duties of intimacy and clote connection, ar- 
rived. in a happy hour, and afforded me 
infinite fatisfaction. Its contents are, that it 
isthe intention of the Company, and alfo 
your Lordthip’s finn refolution, that there 
thould be no interference in the detaii of my 
overnment. That the refident at Lucknow 
thouid receive a pofitive order, that neither 
from himfelf nor from any other gentleman, 
nor from any perfon concerned with your 
Lordthip’s Government, fhould any kind of 
interference take place; that leaving my ad- 
minifivation entirely to myfelf and my Mini- 
fters, all interference from others fhould be 


ftopped, and reprefenting the particulars of: 


every matter which was contained in your 
Lordihip’s heart, the Nawaub Hyder Beg 
Khan has fully explained to me the particu- 
lars of your Lordfhip’s kindnefs and magnani- 
mity, which form the ground of your Lord- 
thip’sfettlement of my aftairs,and has occafion- 
ed me an excels of pleafure and happinefs. I 
who have day and night received fuch happi- 
nefs from a recollection of your Lordthip’s 
goodneis, now enjoy fuch /pleafure from per- 
ceiving your kindneis, and am {o thankful for 
it, that 11 would require volumes to exprefs a 
finall fhare only. It is well known, that from 
the life-time of the deceafed Nawaub until 
the day of his death and the commencement 
of my adminiftration, the friendthip with the 
Engiith gentlemen has been perfect, ftrong, 
and fincere, and by the help of Providence 
will every day increafe. At this time that fo 
great a Chiet, poffelfed of divine wifdom and 
underftanding, is arrived with tull power and 
authority for the arrangement of this country, 
it may be very well conceived that [ under- 
ftand {uch an arrival to have happened fimpiy 
from my own ‘good fortune, and entertain 
the moft periect confidence that all miy « 
will be fettled to my own fatisfaction, V 

: : Teipect 


. 


the Affairs of The EAST 


enemies; yet fince at all times 
is doubtful, prudence and wifcom require 
that every poilible means fhould be ufed to 
determine it in our favour. Your Excellency’ 
mutt be fenfible that there is no comparifon 
between the troops of the Company and 
thofe in your Excellency’s fervice, and that 
without the afliftance of the former, your 
dominions and authority would Le infecure. 
1 am convinced that if your Excelleacy con- 
fiders thefe opinions, you will be fenfible of 
the propriety of my propofition, and approve 
the continuance of troops whofe valour and 

difcipline can be relied on, in preference to 
thofe who ave unfkilful and_undifeiplined ; 
and I doubt not but your Excellency will 

agree ‘to the additional expenfe of eflective 
troops, where the object is tie defence of the 
country. For this reafon I do not hefitate 
to recommend to your Excellency to dif- 
charge fo much of your own Army as will 
allow for the additional expenfe attending 
the continuance of thefe cifective troops: 
your Excellency muft-alfo be fenfible tha! 

the fums neceflary for the ‘pay of thefe troops 
are expended in your doiminions. 

The fole object of this. propofition is to 
provide, in an effective manner, for the de- 
fence of your Excellency’s country ; and your 
Excellency thutt be convinced of the benefits 
derived from our prote@ion ; fince, whiltt all 
other parts of Hindottan have been involved 

“in war, and expofed to the devattations at- 
tending it, your Excellency’s dominions have 
remained in the falleft enjoyment of peace 
and fecurity. Many other arguments of the 
greateft weight might be urged in fupport of 
any propofition; but fuch is my opinion of 
the force of thofe [ have alledged, that I 
truft they will make the fame impreffion on 
your Excellency, and that there” is ‘no ne- 
ceflity to urge others. “ : 

It is my frm intention not to embarrafs’ 
your Excellency with further expenfe than 
that incurred by the Company, trom their 
connection with your Excellency, and for 
the protection of your couatry, which by the 
accounts, | find amounts to 50 lacks of Fyza- 


bad 16 fun Sicea Rupees anvually. In this 
fun are concluted ‘the allowance to the 


Nawaub 


Snadut Aily Khan, the ftipend of 
Has, and the expenfes of the Refi- 
the part of this Government; in 
utention, from the date on 
greement. thall take place, 
liency {hall not be charged with 
mm of 50 lacks of Sicca 
jai no further demand thail be 

ixeelleney hereatter shall find 


to demand any. es from 

iy, your Es i pay the 
.excefs upon a fair eftimate, nther of 
the two ‘brigades or corp ry thall be | 
recalled; or any coufiderable di tion ‘in 
their foreé fhall take place, T will ailow for 
the decreafe of the expente from the fum 


agzced to by your Excetioncy, agreeable toa 
fair calculation. In order that ‘no grouds” 
for a difference in opinion or ddubt ‘meaty: 
main as to the real. meauing. of, this article, 
Vehink it neceflary to, inform yo cellency, 
that. whenever there is a necelli 
alteration in the arrangemeat of thét® troops, 
1963.0 ck green 


INDIA COMPANY. 219 
refpeé to the continuance of the troops 
ftationed at Lutteghur, which your Lordfhip 
has written with {uch greatnefs and magnant- 
mity, that they may remain as heretoiore, [ 
have perfeGtly underfood. Notwithttanding, 
from the great weight of expenfe which my 
Goverament has experienced every year from 
thefe troops, and the negociations which 
have pailed with former gentlemen on this 
fubject in particular, aud the manner in 


which this matter was fettied after fo ruci: 


come to this quarter, which is the g! 
defire of my heart, and from which [ receive 
the greatcli pleafure, 1 have poftponed any 
mention of thefe matters until that happy 
time ; and now confider it neceflary firlt to 
procure your Lordthip’s good will, afterwards, 
that you will mention from your great good- 
nefs and grandeur, which is univerially known 
and gives fatistaGtion and cafe to my heart, 
that which will tend to my profperity and 
happincts, and mect with your approbatio 
therefore, with a view to preferve your Lord- 
fhip’s geod will and fatistaétion, 1 agree”to 
the continuance of the troops how ftationed 
at Futty Ghur and Cawnpore, and to their ¢y- 
penfes, and the ftipend of my bréther Meer 
Saadut Ally Khan Behader, the Tuncaws of 
the Rohillahs, the difburfements of the Kefi- . 
dency at Lucknow and other gentlemen, and 
the-Refident with his Majefty and Scindia, 
the expenfes of the Dawk, ie which your 
Lordihip has fixed at 50 lacks annually for me 
to pay. Your Lordfhip has alfo faid that my 


-expenfes fhould not exceed the fum of 50 


lacks of Rupces, and that nothing farther 
fhould be demanded of me; and that whenever 
either of the two brigades or corps of cavalry - 
fhould be ‘recalled, or. any material diminu- 
tion fhould take place in thofe troops, ade- . 
duction fhall. be made agreeable to eflimate 
from the fum of 50 lacks; Lagree to this, and 
fend the Kiftbundy’; and f am well convinced 
alfo that your Lordtbip will be kind and 
favourabie towards me in whatever will tend 
to my cafe and profperity. 1 bave not 
anfvered every particular of your Lordihip’s 
kind letter, becaute [have heard that your. 
Lordship pofitively means to come to this 
and when we meet every matter will 
red in a moft friendly manacr ; now 
ng acquictcence to your Lordthip’s 
orders and preferyation of your pleafure, as, 
the principle of friendthip, 1 have complied. 
Your Lordthip writes with refpect to Fur 
ruckibad, that it fhall. be and continue‘as 
before under ne; and.that the Englith Refi- 
dout there, either now or at the end of the 
Fear 1104: Fuffely, fhall be recalled, and > 
after that period he fhall notremain, por any 
otticr be appointed ; agd you order me to ba 
‘kind ‘and jaft towards ‘the rights of the 
fawaub Mozuffer. Jung; and that in what - 
loser manner it may be neceiary to fetile and 
farrange the affairs of -that difin@, 1 thould 


Jor any igite afitable allowance to the Nawaub Mo-. 


fier Sung; and as the, Nawaub’s- mother, 
ees pee and 


‘ther by increafing or diminifhing the 
'y or infantry, this article does not tend 
p le it, provided the whole force thall 
nat be confiderably decreated, and that no 
additional charge be made on your Excel- 
Tency on account of {uch alteration, 
A Refident, as at prefent, will remain at your 
i ‘out, but as it js the intention 
npany, aud my firm refolution, that 
ce fhall take place in the details 
of your Exeellency’s Govern- 
crders fhall be fent to him, that 
he fhall ni r interfere himdelf nor fuffer 
jaterference, by publi¢ or private claims of 
exemptions of duties, or in any other mode, 
from any Britifh fubject or perfen under the 
authority of this Government; in fhert, leay- 
ing the whole management of your country 
to your Excellency and your Minifters, 
will put a ftop to the interference of others ; 
and in order to carry this effectually into 
execution, [ propofe to your Excellency not 
to fufler any European to refide in ‘your 
dominions without, my written permiflion ; 
Yn cafe that fltoald be granted, a copy of it 
thall be tranfmitted to you. 

If any European thall refide there without 
my permniflion in Writing, your Excellency. 
thall oblige him.to quit the country; or, if 
demanded fend him, tg the Relident on the 
part of the’ Company. 

A retrofpect into pait'tranfactions, and the 
friendfhip ‘fo.well known ‘to exifi between 
your Excellency and the Company, indnce 
ine to fiate the following circumftance. That 
for feveral years the inhabitants of your 
Excellency dominions, from motives of felf- 
intereft, have. appealed to this Government; 
and this has been a fource of injury to the 
aflairs of your Government. Lam determined 
to put a ftop to this practice, and to difregard 
their ‘apptications. But as the connection 
between the two Governments is univerfally 
known, firidt attention to juftice on your part. 
vill add credit and renown to both. 

With refpeét. to Furrnckabad, the 4th 
article of the ftipulation of Chunar (hall be 
obfervedon my part,and the Englifh Refident 


there, cither now or at the end of 1194 Faf- | 


ley, fhall be recalled; and xfter that period, 
he fhall not remain nor fhall any other be 
appointed. On this fubjeéi, in confequence 
of the interference hitherto affumed by this 
Goverament in the affairs of that province, 
i think it neceffary to inform your Excel- 
Jency that it is incumbent on me to recom- 
mend feveral matters to your Excellency’sat- 
tention; that, in the firit inftance, you pay due 
regard to the rights of the Nawaub Mozufter 
Jung, and under any circumftances that may 
become neceffary fur the management of the 
affaizs of Furruckabad, your Excellency fhall 
¢ to allot from the Revenues a fum 
cient for tie honourabie maintenance of 
the Nawaub Mozufter Jung; and as the 
nex of Mozuffer Jung, .and his brother 
ze Khan, as teil as Deep Cound, 
late Jrewan, have given pronfs of their at- 
tachment to this Governinent, it is therefore 
expedient tnat fome provifion thould be 
made for them, independent of Mozuffer 
Jung. It is weil known that Mozuffer Jung 
conliders then ag inimical to him, and fron 


APPENDIX (0 the Sccond REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


and his brother Dil Dilure Khan and Roy 
Beeb Chund, late Dewan, have thewn their 
zeal to your Government and to the Company, 
ry to fix fome allowance for them, 
independant of the Nawaub Mozufier Jung. 
That it is well known the enmity which the 
Nawaub bears towerds them, and that in 
coalequence of the confidence of yourGovern- 
nent, p don Dil Dilure Khan, it is much 
to be feared that, unlefs he is protected, he 
will experience diftvefs from the camity of 
the Nawaub Mozuffer Jung; that f therc- 
fore caufe to be paid to them a proper allow- 
ance out of the amount paid to Mozuffer 
Jung, through the Refident at Lucknow. In 
this: manner [ will a@ as your Lordfhip has 
ordered, and will caufe to be paid to the 
mother of Mozufier Jung, and_his brother 
Dil Dilure Khan, and Roy Deep Chund, allow- 
ances through the Re&dent at Lucknow, and 
will aflift and protect Dil Dilure Khan, the 
mother, and Roy Deep Chund. Until the 
honour of an interview 1 hope to be honoured 
and made happy with friendly letters from 
your Lordfhip. 


ENCLOSURE. 


Kiftbundy or Inftalment for the Company’s 
Money, on account of the expentes of 
the troops ftationed at Cawnpore, Fut- 
ty Ghur, and Lucknow; the ftipend of the 
Nawaub Saadut Ally Khan ; the Rohillas ; 
the expentes of the Refident aud other 
gentlemen at Lucknow; the expenfes of 
the Dawk afd the gentlemen ftationed 
with his Majefty and Scindia; from the 
month of March 1787 to February 1788 
inclufive, under the {eal of the Vizier. 


March 1787. - - - - 3,25,000 — — 
April - + - - = = 3,25,000 — — 
AY > = = © =. 3,25,000 — — 
June - + - - = = 3,253,000 — — 
July + - ee + = 3,25, — oe 
ne ae 
n Money - + 3,25,000 
In drafts on ed 
Cateutta ¢ ~ 500,000 25,000 — — 
September " - = =~ =~ 3,25,000 — 
October + ~ -'- - 3,235,000 — — 
November - - - + + 3,25,000 — — 
December ~ + - - - 3,25, -— 
January 88 - - - = 3,25,000 — — 
February 
n Money at 
Luckwow } 3:25,000 
In Drafts on 6 
Caleutea ¢ 00,000 . 
9,25,000 — — 
Total 50,00, eats 
aaa ee 
In Specie - - - = 39,00,000 ——+ 
In Drafts - ete Seances, 
50,00,000 — — 
—= 
Fifty lacks of 
Sun Sieca Rupees = - 23,24,25 & 26 
From Hyder Beg Khan. 


[Received 21ft July 1787.) 
T have already tranfinitted your Lordfhip. 
an Arzie, mentioning my arrival at Lacktow 
wi 


‘the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


the truft vefted in Dil Dilure Khan by this 
Government, itis much to be feared that, if 
left unprotected, he will fufler from the 
yeientment of Mozuffer Jung: I therefore 
expeét that your Excellency will engage to 
caule fpecific penfions to be paid to thefe 
perions, at the expenfe of Mozuffer Jung, 
through the Refident of this Government. 

By the accounts fubfifting between your 
Excellency and the Company, a large ba- 
lance is ftated tobe due trom your Exceilency; 
neverthelefs, in conformity to the principles 
I have fo expreffedly declared, 1 am not 
willing to embarrafs your Excellency with 
any other demands than what are abfolutely 
neceflary ; I-propofe, therefore, that your 
Excellency fhall liquidate fuch part of the 
“fated arrears as may be due to the troops 
employed in your country. The Refidency, 
the Nawaub Saadut Ally Khan, and the Ro- 
hillah Chiets, on the date from which this 
new agreement fhall be declared in force, as 
well as the arrears due to Mr. Anderfon, and 
the remainder, whatever it may be, fhall be 
ftruck out of’ the account, and be no longer 
confidered as a demand of this Government 
on your Excellency. 

‘the fubftance of what is here written has 
been difcuifed in frequent converfations with 
Hyder Beg Khan, who has fhewn himfelf a 
faithful fervant to your Excellency, and a 
friend to both Governments.. As he is fully 
scqusinted with your Excellency’s interefts, 
and is your moft confidential fervant, and 
Prime Minifter, I have confidered him as 
empowcred to fettle any arrangement for the 
mutual benefit of the two Governments, and 
-have accordingly communicated to him with- 
out referve, all that has occurred to me, to pro~ 
mote this object, in the fame manver as if your 
Excellency were prefent; neverthelefs, as 
your Excellency’s concurrence and approba~ 
tion are neceflary to give a final fanction to the 
articles agreed upon by Hyder Beg Khan, 
T have thought proper to mention the heads 
of them in this letter, and the Nawaub Hyder 
Beg. Khan will: fully explain all the particu- 
jars to your ‘Excellency. 


2ah 


which has doubtlefs been perefed; an anfiwer 
from his Excellency the Vizier is now fent 
to your Lordthip’s kind letter; from it your 
Lordthip will learn the particulars of his 
Excellency’s inclination to preferve your 
Lordfhip’s pleafure. Your Lordthip bas fhewa. 
kindnefs and favour in the affairs of his Ex- 
cellency, and there is no doubt but will always 
fhew kKindnefs towards them, becauie his 
Excellency entertains great. hopes from your 
Lordthip. A Kiftbyndy for the money for the 
expente of the troops, &c. goes enctofed in 
his Excellency’s letter, and | enclofe a drait 
for the amount ftated by. Mr. Wombwell to 
be due to the troops up to February 1787, 
together with two other drafts on account, 
the amount due to his Royal Highnefs, and 
and the ftipend of Nawaub Saadat Ally 
Khan to February 1787. ‘They will be feen 
by your Lordthip; as a long period elapfed 
during my journey, diforder has taken place 
in feveral modes in the affairs, and delay and 

ination have crept into the payment 
of the public money; and now that I am 
arrived, is the feafon for cultivation, &c. I 
am.engaged in the affairs of the Sirkar, and 
under the bleffing of God,.and your ‘Lord-: 
thip’s profperity, every matter will be ar- 
ranged, and the - arrears ,due to. Colortt 
Harper and other geatlemen, whatever, after 
inveftigation, they may amount to, to the 
end of February 1788, hall be paid atthe 
expiration of the time, The amount of the 
i its or Kiftbundy of the Company's 
money,on account of the difburfements of the. 
troops, Sic. has been paid into the Treafury 
from March 1787 to June 1787, and by 
God’s help it will be paid in future, agree- 
able to the Kiftbuady, monthly. £ hope te 
be honoured with letters from your Lord- 

ips oe 
, ENCLOSURES. © 


Billdrawn byCathmeery Mulland Bukhrageon__ 
Sheopertand and Beileffer Dofs, on account 
arrears due to the ationed at Cawn- 

re and Futty Ghur; and the battalion at 
acknow, to February 1787, amounting to 

In 23, 24, 25 and 26 Sun 


For ‘the reft, your Excellency may have} ~ pvecg eee 
ihe molt are confence that 1 will mot pinta by De on D* eee 
faithfully y engagements of | “on account the money of 
the part of the Honourable Company. his Royal Highnefs oe 204173 — — 
Ditto drawn by De on De 
on account the money 
of Nawaub Saadut Ally 
Khan, arrears to Feb- 
ruary 1787, Lucknow, 
Sieca - - - = = = 1,00,000 —~ —~ 
Appendix, No. 24. a 


AGREEMENT with the Nabob of Oude, dated 2oth March 1797. 


Tranflation of an Agtcement entered into by his Excellency the Nawaub Vizier, with the 
Honourable thé Governor General ‘at Lucknow, executed gothi March 1797. 


THE Governor General having 


reprefented “to his Excellency the Vizier, the late very great 


increafe cf the Company’s Military Eftablifhment, by the addition of feveral'regiments of 


cavalry both Europea: 


a and Native, and in compliance with the 


any’s orders, folicited 


his Excellency’s affiftance to defray the confequent additional expenfe; hix Excellency, inthe 
fallet reliance that the Company’ troops are ever ready, in con‘ormity to exifting engage- 


nents, 


222 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


menis, to proteé and defend his dominions againft the attacks of all enemies, agrecs as 
follows: 

‘That he will annually defray the actual bon’ fide expenfes of a regiment of European, and 
onc of Native Cavalry; that is to fay, two regiments (the ainount of which expenfes, however, 
the Governor General cannot at_prefent {pecity) provided they fall not exceed upon every 
aecount, five lacks aud a half of Rupees per annum. ‘The amount to be defrayed by monthly 
iialments, of which the firlt fhall commence with the month of Byfaac of the prefent 

‘uly year. 


(A true Tranflation.) 
(Signed) - B. Edmonftone, 
Perfian Tranflator to the Government. 


Appendix, No. 25. 
TREATY with the Nabob of Oude, dated 21f February 1798. 


Treaty between the Nawatb Vizier Saadut Ally Khan Behader and the Honourable the 
Englith Eaft India Company. : 


WHEREAS various treaties have been concluded at different times between the late 
Nawab Sujah ud Dowlah Behader and the Nabob Aloph ud Dowlah Behader, and the 
}onourable -the Englith Latt Lndia, Company, to theanutual advantage of their retpective 

dominions; the. Nawaub Vizier ul Momaluck.Yemcen ud Dowlah Nazim ul Muik Saadit 

Ally Khan Bahader Mobaruz Jyng, and Sir John Shore, Baronet, on the part of the 

Honourable.the Eatt India Company, with a view to perpetuate the amity fubfifiing be- 
tween the two States, and the advantages reciprocally refulting from it, now agtee to the 
following Articies : 
‘inft—That the peace, friendfhip and union, fo Jong fabfifting between the two States, 
thail be perpetual;-the friends and enemies of either thall be the friends and enemies of. 
both: and the contracting parties agree that all the former treaties and agreements between 
the two-States now in force, and hot contrary to the tenor of this engagement, fhall be con- 
firmed by it.” : 

Sceond.--By the exifting: Treaties between the States, the Honourable the Eat India 
Company. ate bound to defend the dominions of his Highnefsthe Nawaub Saadut Ally Khan 
againit all enemies; and with a view to enable them to fulfil this engagcment, and at the 
dame time provide for the protection of their own dominions, the Engitifh Company. having 
Jargely increafed their military eftablifhment by the addition of new levied regiments, both 
of infantry and cavalry, the Nawaub Saadut Ally Khan in confideration thereof agrees, in 
addition to the annual Subfidy paid by the late Nawaub Afoph ud Dowlah to the Englifh 
Company, being Rupees fifty-fix lacks feventy-feven thoufand fix hundred and thirty-eight, 
to pay In, perpetuity the further fam of Rupees nineteen lacks twenty-two thoufand three 
hundred and fixty-two, making altogether the fum of feventy-fix lacks of Rupees; the faid 
Rupees to be Oude Sicca Rupees of the prefent weight and ftandard. 

‘Third.—The above fubfidy of Oude Sicca Rupees feveaty-fix lacks is to commence from 
the twenty-firft day of January one thoufand feven hundred and ninety-eight, the date of 


~That the arrears of Subfidy duc’ upon former engagements, to the twenty: 
January one thoufand fevea huadred and nincty-cight, alio be inamediately dit 


that an annual allowance of one lack fifty 
er Ali Khan, and agrees to pay the aiount, 
hundred Rupees, to the Englifh Company, who 
Ali Khan aslong as he fall continue to relide in ‘the dominions 


aub Saadut Ally Khar 
Sicca Rupees, be mad 
sof twelve 


d Princes at Benares, amounting to Rupees two 
uckabad penfions, amounting to Kupees twenty~ 
t, are included in the above fum of feventy-x 


Sir John Shore, Bart. on the part of the Eaft 
aintained in the country of Oude for its 
and men, including” Buropeans' and Natives, 
time it thould become neceflary to augment 
ne Limnber cf thirteen thoufand men, inelud- 


Sy t at any 
the troy doth 
ing 1 
aggrees to 


Fighth.—As 


the Affuss of Tho EAST INDIA COMPANY. 223 


Fighth—As the Enel'th Company are not poffefled of any fortrefs in the dominions of 
Onde, the Nabob Seauut Ally hen having the fulleft reliance on the f likip of the 
English Company, agrees to make over to their exelufive pofletiion the fort ef Allehabad, 

its buildings and appurtenanc nd the Ghauts immeciarcly dependant upon the 

er with a3 much land farrounding y be necotiary tor the purpeta 
ompany agreeing to le to the Nabot for the amount 
ed from the teid Ghats ; 
be necetli 


Onipan 
of this fort, 


aying the expenfe to which it is applicable; 
, for the fame reaions, furtier agrecs to advance 
repairing the fort of Futtygaur, withia fi 
ment, a fum net exceeding on the whole three lacks 


dominions of the Nawanb Ssadat 
le to change the prefent lations of the troops at 
Nabeb Saadut Ally Khan contents thereto, and 
2 places as i jadgod moft adviitble and convenien:, 
de attending tmoval and making cantonmeiis for the 


Ally Khan it thou! 
Cawapore and Fu 
troops fhe! 
and that he 


id 


y have incurred a confiderable expen fe by their exertions 
o of the Nabob ut Ally Khan, the faid Naboo agrecs, in coa- 
fideration thercof, to pay’ the Company the fum of twelve lacks of Oude Sicca Runces. 
Bleventh.—As the piyment of the Compony’s trcops in Oude depeads upon the rege! 
difeharge of the fubiidy fteted in qre od and gd articles of the ‘Freaty, tie faid hs 
engages to exert iis utmoft endeavours to difcharge the fipulated Kilts with punduality 
but if, contrary to the fincere intentions and exertions of the thid Nabob, the paymentof tae 
Kifts fhould fall into a , the faid Nabob Saadut Ally Khan engages and preinifes that he 
then give fuch fecurity to the Company, for the difcharge of the exifiing arrears and 
the future regular payment of the Kitts, as thall be deemed fitistaciory. 
—Whereas by the engagements now entered into between the Nabob Vizier 
and the Company the amount of the fubfidy is confiderably increafed, and many other per- 
manent charges upon his Excellency are iacurred, on a comparifon of his diiburfements 
with the affets of his country, it becomes neceflzry to make fuch reduétion in the {aperfluous 
charges of the public eftabliihments, fervants, &c. as may be requifite, and are contiftent with 


cclieney’s dignity and convenience; to that end, the faid Nabob agrees to confult 
‘ gn.ty g! 


ith the Company’s Government, and in concert with them devife the proper obje@s of 
fach reductions and the beft means of effecting them. 

‘hirteenth.—As the political interefts of the Nabob Saadut Ally Khan and the Englith 
Company are the fame, it is.expedient and agreed that all correfpondence between the 
Nabob Saadut Ally Khan and any Foreign Power or State thal! be carried on with the know- 
ledge and concurrence of the Company; and the Nabob Saadut Ally Khan agrees and pro- 
me that no correfpondence contrary to the tenor of this article thall be carried on 

nim. 

*Vourtcenth.—As the ftipulations in the commercial Treaty between the two States have 
not been enforced with due atteution, particularly in the dominions of the Nawaub Vizici, 
the contraéting parties agree to exert their utmoft endeavours to give force and cifect 
to them. 

Fifteenth —The Nabob Saadut Ally Khan engages and promifes that he will not entertain 
any Europeans of any defeription in his fervice, nor allow any to fettle in his country with- 
out the confent of the Company. 

Sixteenth—The Nabob Saadut Ally agrees that a fuitable maintenance fhall he provided: 
for the repated children of his brother, the late Nabob Atoph ud Dowiah, and willingiy 
promises to take them under tis protection. 

Soventcenth.—The Nabob Vizier ul Momaluck Saadut Ally Khan Pchader, for himfelfand 
his heirs, and the Governor General Sir John Shore, Varonet, on the part of the Eat India 
Comp: refpeétively promife to obferve fincerely and firicily all the articles contained and 
fettle:! ‘ui the prefeat Treaty, and they both agree that they will give the greate‘t attention to 
maintain between themielyes, their dominions and their fubjects, this preient Treaty, and ail 
the articles tettled by it, that all the tranfactions between the two States fhall be carried on 
with the greatett cordiality and harmony on both fides, and that the faid Nabob thail poitets 
full authority over his houihokd aflairs, bereditary dominions, his oops and his fubjects. 


Kiftbundy (or Initalment) for the payment ef the annual Subfidy. 


uft. Kift for the month ef January, payable on the 1% of February - 6,3 5.4 
ad. Kitt for the month of February, ik of March - 6,33,333 5 4 
gd. Kift for the month of March, payable on the iff of April - - - 633,333 5 4 
4th. Kitt for the moath of April, payable on the aft of May - - - 633,338 5 4 
he Kift for the month of May, payable onthe iit of June" = - - 693,333 5 4 
Kit for the month of June, payable on the iftof July - -.- 633,333 5 4° 
7th. (Sift for the-month of July. payable on the rf of Auguit = - 6,32.333 05 4.4 
363. 3b gh. Nit 


224 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


8th. Kift for the month of Auguift, payable on the 1 of September - 54 
oth. for the month of September, payable on the 1ft of O@ober - 54 
roth. for the month of October, payable on the 1ft of Noveruber  - 54 
1ith. Kift for the month of November, payable on the fief December - 5 4 
eth, Kift for the month of December, payable on the 1ft of January —- 5 4 


Total - S* R* 76,00,000 — — 


Signed and_fealed by Sir John Shore on the part of the Company, and the Seal of the 
Nawaub Saadut Ally Khan affixed to the Pertian copy, 21{t February 1798. 
(A true Copy.) 
(Signed) G. H. Barlow, 
Sec’. to the Govt. 


Appendix, No. 26. 


TREATY with the Nabob of Oude, dated 20th November 3801. 


Treaty between the Honourable the Eaft India Company and his Excellency the Nawaub 
Vizier 001 Mamaluck Yemeen oo Dowlah Nazim ool Moolk Saadut Ally Khan Behader 
Mobaurez Jung, for ceding to the Company in perpetual fovereignty certain portions of 
his Excellency’s Territorial Poffeflions, in commutation of the Subfidy now payable to 
the Company by the Vizier. 

WHEREAS by the ‘Treaty now fabfifting between his Excellency the Vizier and the 
Honourable the Eaft India Company, the Company hate engaged to defend his Excellency’s 
dominions againft all encmies ; and to enable them to fulfil that engagement his Excellency 
is bound by the afrocfaid Treaty to pay to the Company in perpetuity the annual fubfidy of 
feventy-fix lacs of Lucknow Sicca Rupees, and is further bound by the faid ‘I'veaty to defray 
the expentfe of any augmentation of force which, in addition to the nunber of troops ftipulated 
in the Treaty, fhall be judged neceflary to enable the Company to fulfil their engagements 
of defending his Excellency’s dominions againft all enemies : And whereas it is advifable that 
the funds for defraying thefe charges be eftablithed on a footing which {hall admit of no 
flu@uation of either increafe or decreafe, and fhall afford fatisfaction and fecurity to the 
Company in regard to the regular payment in perpetuity of all fuch charges; the following 
‘freaty, confifting of ten Articles, 1 Toncluded on the one part by the Honourable Henry 
‘Wellefley and Lieut. Col. William Scott, on behalf and in tae name of his Excellency the 
moft noble the Marquis Wellefley, K. P. Governor General for all affairs, civil and military, 
of the Britith Nation in India, by virtue of full powers velted in them for this purpofe by the 
faid Governor General; and on the other part by his Excellency the Nawab Vizier ool 
Mamaluck Yemeen oo Dowlah Nazim ool Moolk Saadut Alli Khan Behader Mobaurez Jung, 
on behalf of himfelf his Heirs and Succeffors, for ceding to the Honourable the Englith Ea’ 
India Company in perpetual fovereignty certain portions of his Excellency’s Territorial Poffef- 
fions, in coinmutation of the former and augmented Subfidy, and of all other fums of Money 
‘hargeable to his Excellency on account of the Company’s defenfive engagements with 
cecllency, 

i= 


is Excellency the Nawaub Vizier hereby cedes to the Eaft India Company in 
perpetual fovereignty the ander-mentioned portions of his Territorial Poffeffions, amounting 
ja tne grots Revenue to one Crore and thirty-five Lacks of Rupees, including expeaies of 
coltections, in commutation of the fubfidy, of the expenfes attendant on the additional troops, 
and of the Benares and Furrackabad penfions, 


Statement of the Jumma. 


Chuckiah Corah Kuwah and Chucklah Etawah 
«L others - - - of oe - 
adand others = =e 
rand others - 2 2s 
ur and others, Azinghur Mownat Banjan 
pore and others, { Goruckpore - 5,090,853 8 
and Butwal Butwil- - - 40,001 — 
Soobab of Allahabad and others - - - = 
Chucklab Barelly Afophabad and Kelpory - = - 
Nawab Gunge Rehly and others - - ad 
Mohaul and others, with the exception of the Talook of Arwul 


- | 55:48,577 21 9 
= 5,33:374 = © 


4,50,001 —= — 
2,10,001 — — 
695,621 7 6 
549,854 8 — 
9:34,063 1 3 
43)13:457 12 3 
1,19,242 
1,638,378 


Ct oo ae er 
’ 
' 


Total Jumma - - L¥R*! 1,95,93,474 8 3 


t 


‘The above-mentioned Mahals being ceded to the Company as held by the Aumils in the 
year 1208 Fufly, no claims are to be hereafter made on account of villages or lands which in 
former years may have been added to, or feparated from the faid Mabais. yore ° 
: sticle 


the Affirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. | ° 223 


Article 2d.—The fubfidy which by the fecond article of the Treaty of +708'his Exédlldtte 
‘engaged to pay to the Company, now that territory is affigned in lieu thercof, and of 
expentes of the additional troops, is to ceafe for ever ; and his Excellency is releafed frota the 
~»bligation of defiaying the expenfes of any additional troops which at any time may be 
xequired for the protection of Oude and its dependencies, whether of the countries ceded to 
the Company, or the territories which thall remain in the poflettion of his Excelleney theVizier. 

Article d—The Honourable the Eaft India Company hereby engage to defend the territories 
avhich will remain to his Excellency the Vizier againtt all foreign and domeftic enemies, pro- 
vided always, that it be in the power of the Company's Government to ftation the Bnitifh 
troops in fuch parts of his Exccilency’s dominions as fhall appear to the faid Goverament 
anoft expedient; and provided further, that his Excellency, retaining in his pay 4 battalions 
sof infantry, 1 battalion of Nujeebs and Muwattees, 2,000 horfemen, and to the number of 
00 Golandaaze, fhalldifmifs the remainder of his troops, excepting fuch numbers of armed 
Peons as fhall be deemed neceffury for the purpofes of the collections, aad a few horfemen 
-and Nujeebs to attend the perfons of the Aumils. 

Article 4th.—A detachment of the Britifh troops, with a proportion of artillery, fhall at alt 
times be attached to bis Excellency’s perfon, 

Article 5th.—That the true iutent and meaning of the firft, fecond, third and fourth articles 
of this Treaty may be clearly underftood, it is hereby declared that the territorial ceftion being 
in lieu of the fubfdy, and of all expenfes on account of the Company's defenfive engagements 
with his Excellency, no demand whatever fhall be made upon the Treafury of his Excellency 
‘on account of expenfes which the Honourable Company may incur by affembling forces to 
repel the attack or menaced attack of a foreign enemy, on account of the ‘detachment 
attached to his Lxccllency’s perton, on account of troops which may occafionally. be furnifhed 
for fuppreiling rebcllions or diforders in his Excellency’s territories, on account of any future 
change of military fiations, or on account of failure in the refources of the ceded diftriéts, 
arifing from unfavourable ‘eafons, the calamities of war, or from any other caufes whatever. 

Article 6th.—The territories ceded to the Honourable Company by the firft article of thig 
Treaty, fhall be fubject to the exclufive management and control of the fuid Company and 
their Officers, and the Honourable Eaft India Company hereby guarantee to his Exceltene¥ 
the Vizier, and to his heirs and fucceffors, the poffeflion of the territories which will remain to 
his Excellency after the territorial ceflion, together with the exercife of his and their aathd- 
rity within the faid dominions. His Excellency engages that he will eftablith in his refervéd 
dominions fuch 2 fyftem of adminiftration (to be carried into effect by his owls Officers) a3 
dhall be conducive to the profperity of his fabje€s, and be calculated to fecure the Hives and 
propert of the inhabitants ; and bis Excellency will always advifé with and a& in conformity 
to the Council of the Officers of the faid Honourable Company. 

Article 7th.—The diftridis ceded by the firft article of this Treaty fhall be delivered ovér to 
the Company’s Officers from the commencement of the Fuily year 1209, correfponding 
with the 22d of September, A.D. 1801; and his Excellency will continne to pay the fubfidy 
and expentfe of the additional troops from his Treafury, in the fame manner as hitherto ob- 
ferved, until the Company's Officers fhall have obtained complete poffellion from his Ex: 
cellency’s Officers of the countries fo ceded. The Company will not claim any payments of 
fubfidy from his Excelleneys Treafury after their Officers fhall have obtaincd poffettion of 
the faid diftritts from the Officers of his Excellency. 

Article 8th.—The contracting parties, with a view of eftablifhing fach a commercial inter- 
courle between their refpective dominions as fhall be mutuatly beneficial to the Subjedls of 
both States, hereby agree to frame a feparate Commercial Treaty. In the mcantiuie it is agreed 
that the navigation of the Ganges, and of all other rivers where they may form the mutual 
boundaries of the two States, fhall be free and uninterrupted ; that is to fay, that no boats 
patting up and down the Ganges or other rivers, where they form the mutual boundaries of 
oth States, fhall be ftepped or molefted for duties; ior fhall any duties be exacted from boats 
which put toia the poffeftions of either of the contracting parties without intention of landing 
their goods. It fhall, however, be in the power of both Governments to levy fauch duties as 
ahey may think proper on goods imported into or exported from their refpeétive dominions, 
not exceeding the prefent ulage. It is further ftipulated, that no exemption from duties on 
articles purchafed ut his Excellency’s referved dominions, for the confumption of the troops 
Gituated within the ceded territories, fhall be claimed after they fhall have been delivered 
over to the Company's Officers. 

Article 9th.—Ail the articles of former Treaties for eftablithing and cementing the union 
and friendfhip fubfifting between the two States are to continue in full force, and all the 
articles of the Treaty concluded by the late Governor General Sir John Shore, on the part of 
the Honourable the Eaft India Company, and his Excellency the Vizier, in the year 1798, 
not annulled by this treaty, are to remain in force, and to continue binding upon both con- 
aracting parties. 

Article 10th_—This Treaty, confifting of ten articles, having been fettled and concluded in 
the city of Lucknow on the :oth day of November in the year of our Lord 1801, correfpond- 
ing with the fecond of the month of Rejeb of the year twelve hundred and fixteen Hejira, 
the Honourable Henry Welletley and Licutenant Colonel William Scott have delivered to 
the faid Vizier one copy of the fame in Englith and Perfian, fealed and figned by them; and 
his Excellency the Vizier has delivered to the Honourable Henry Welleiley and Lieutenant 
Colonel Willian Scott another copy alfo in Perfian and Englith, bearing his fea and figtature } 

ant 


226 APPENDIX ¢0 the Second REPORT from the Scle& Commitice cw 


Seatt engage 


and the Honourable Henry We 
to procure and to deliver to. hi 
copy of the fame uader the feal 
Geacral, when tie copy under their foul 


{A true Copy, 


» withia ti 
celeucy the moti nob, 
atares thal be returned. 


eveacy the Vidi 
eof hi 


ned) N. B. Edmonjicn, 
Sec’, to Govt. 


Appendix, No, 27. 


Proclamation of the Lieutenant Governor and Commiffioners of the Ceded Provinces 
in Oude, dated 14th Juiy 1802. 


WHEREAS it is the intention of the Britifh Government to adopt, atthe expiration of the 
prefent Vaily year, fuch a plan for the fettiement of the landed Revenue of the Ceded Pr 
vinees, 2s may be moft couducive to the profperity of the country and to the happi 
the inhabitants: And whereas it is of tae utinoft confequence to the faccels of toe meature, 
as well as to the interefi of the Zemindars, 'Talookdars, and all others concerned, tuat tie 
nature and terms thereof fhould be made known as e: as poflible ; 


Notice is hereby Given, 

tft. At the commencement of the Fully year 1210, the Scyer of every denominatio: 
be feparated from the Mal, or land Revenue, and a fettlement for the latter only con 
in ail: practicable cafes, with the Zemiadars or other actual Proprictors of the foil (x 
when diiqualified by notorioufly bad characier, or other good and fufticient caule) for a 
period of three years, at a fixed, equal, and annual Jumma; it being underitood that fuch 
Zemindars as are Huzzoor Tchteel, or allowed to pay their Kifts immediately to the Col 
lector of the Zillah, are to be refponfible for the police of their refpective Zemindarries. 

diy. At the expiration of the three years another fettlement will again be made with the 

fame perfons (if willing to engage) for three years, at a fixed, equal, aunuai Jumma, which 
Jumma fnall be formed by taking the difference between the annual amount of the firft ieaie, 
and the actual yearly produce of the land at the time of its expiration, and adding two-thirds 
of {uch difiercnce to the snnual rent of the firlt leafe. 

gdly. At the expiration of the fixth year a new fettlement will be made with the fame per- 
fons (if willing to engage) for a further period of four years, at a fixed, equal, annual 
Jumma, formed by adding to the anuual rent of the fecond three years, three-fourths of the 
net increafe of Revenue during any one year of that peried. A 

4thly, At the end of, thefe ten years a permanent fetthement will be concluded with the 
fame perlons (if willing to engage, and it no others who have a better claim fall come 
forward) for fuch lands as may be in a fufficiently improved fiate of cultivation to warrant the 
niecafure, on fach terms as Govcrament fhall deem fair and equitable. 


Appendix, No. 28. 


TREATY with the Nabob of Arcot, dated 12th July 1792. 
Treaty between the Honourable Eaft India Company and the Nabob of Arcot, 12th July 1 


WHERESS a certain Engagement entered into between the Honourable Eaft India Com. - 
pany aud his Highuefs the Nawaub of the Carnatic, bearing date 24th February ayy. . 
purpoie of cemcating an everlafting friendfhip with each other, and of contr.but y 
towards thedetence of the Carnatic and countries dependant thereon, whereby itwas fy wied 
that the faid Company fhould maintain a military force, and that the faid hawaub tiouid 
nnualiy a certain fam of money arifing from the Revenues of the Carnatic, and 1 
furnith fufficient and fatisfaétory fecurity, under certain conditions exprefed in the 
Engagement, for the regular payment of the fum ftipulated to the faid Company; and wi 
it appears, by the reprefentations of the faid Nawaub, contsined ina certain Letter adureiied by 
him to the Governor General, &e. &e. dated the 18th of the month Shawal 1206, Heyree 
(correfponding with the oth June 1792) that the refources of the Carnatic are not competent 
to enable him to perform the ftipulations in the faid engagement; and whereas it further 
appears, that the fecurity which the faid Nawaub agreed in the above-mentioned engagement 
to furnifh, for the duc payment of the ftipulated fam to the faid Company, is in its nature 
inadequate to the end intended; and whereas certain agreements have’ alfo been entered 
into, between the frid Company and the faid Nawaub, for the difcharge of certain debts 
i y the faid Nawaub to private perfons; it has been mutually agreed, in confequence of 
ove-written circumftances, that the Engagement aforefaid fhall henceforth be con- 
fidered by the contraéting parties as annulled, and no longer of effect or in force: and in 
lieu thereof, the Right honourable Charles Earl Corawallis, Knight of the moft noble Order of 
the Garter, Governor General, Ke. &e. &c. invefted with full powers on the part of the faid 

: : Honourable 


the Afirs-of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 297, 


Honourable Englith Eaft India Company, to dife& and control the affairs of the faid 
Company in the Eaft Indies, in the name of and for the {aid Company their heirs and. 
fucceifors on one part, and the Nabob W allajah Ameer wl Maik, Afoph ul Dowlah Unevah 
ul Deen Khan Behader Zufter Jung Sepah Salar, Nabob of the Catnatie, in his own name, 
and for himfelf and his fueceiior, his eldeft fon, Nabob Omdut ul Oronrzs Necjeen ul Mulk 
Affud ul Dowlah Haffan Ally Khan Behader Zcol Sircar Zang, aad his heiis and fuceeffors 
on the other part, agree to the following Articles; which fhall be binding on the reipsétive’ 
contradting parties for the purpofes contained therein, notwiilitianding all or any of the 
conditions ftipulated in, the Engagement dated 24th February 1787, to the contrary. 

Article 11t.—The friends and enemies of cither of the contracting parties ‘fhall be con- 
fidered the friends and enemies of both. 


Article 4th.-The Nabob Wallajah agrecs to pay to the faid Company, for the purpofe of 
mutual defence, the fum of nine lucks of Star Pagodas annually, as bis thie of the expenfe 
for the military force; and alfo, in confequence of certain agreements entered into by him 
with the faid Company, and guaranteed by the Parliament of Great Britain, for the perpole 
of liquidating certain debts due by the faid Nawaub, a farther fum of 6,21,105 Star Pagodas 
annually; which further fam of 6,21,105 St Pags fhall ceafe oa the full liquidation of the 
debts above mentioned, and the fum of 9,00,000 of S* Pagodas only {hall continue to be 
paid by the faid Nabob.to the Company. . 

Article 5th—The faid Nabob having agreed to pay the aggregate fum of 15,21,105 
S' Pag? as mentioned in the 4th Article, determines that the tributes or Peithcuth payableby 
the Poligars, as more particularly mentioned in the Schedule No 1. hereunto annexed, {hail 
be coll by the faid Company ; who agree to make the ‘colleGion thereof at their own 
expenfe and rifk, and that they will not increafe the demand on the faid Poligars beyond the 
{um mentioned in the faid Schedule, except in the cafe hereinafter mentioned, nor charge to 
the faid Nabob either the expenfe atiending the faid collection or any deficiencies that may 
arife thereon; but will give credit to the faid Nabob annually for the aforefaid tributes or 
Peifheuth, in part payment of the fum of nirie lacks of Star Pagodas above mentioned, 
without any deduction whatever. Although the contraéting parties have in the prefent 
Inftrwnent agreed, that the {um of 2,64,704 Pagodas 20 F. 26 C. be deduéied from the tum 
of nine lacks of Pagodas, as the amount of the tributes or Peifhcuth from the Poligars, yet 
fiould it on future enquiry appear that the faid Poligars ought, by virtue of any exifting and 
lawful engagements, to pay a larger fiun, it fhall be demanded of them; and any addition 
that fhall thus be made to the fuins mentioued in the faid Schedule, fhall be deduéted from 
the funy of nine lacks, in like manner with the fum of 2,64,704. 20. 26, and a fimilar deduc- 
tion {hall in confequence be made in the. Kifibundy hereinafter meniioned. It is. however 
mutuaily agreéd, that the diminution of this aggregate fum, which {hall take place on the fall 
liquidation of the debts as {pecified in the 4th Arucie, fhall make no change in this Article, 
which fhall, notwithftanding fuch diminution, remain in full force. eS 

Article 6th.—The faid Company, defirous of prelerving the. rights of fovercignty over 
the faid Poligars to the taid Nabob, engage. to the utmoft of thcir power, and confifient 
with the realization of the tributes or Perthcufh from them, to enforce the allegiance and 
fubmiifion of the faid Poligars to the faid Nabob in cuftomary ceremonies, and in furnifhing 
the Poligar Peons, according to eftabiifhed cuftom, for the collection of the Revenues, 
the {ujport of Government, and for the protection of the ‘property of-the inhabitants of 
the faid: Nabob’s couutry ; promifing that all aéts ‘of authority fhall be exercifed, and all 
accounts of Revenue (of which accounts the faid Nabob, if he fo withes, thall be annually 
furniihed with copies) thall bear his the faid Nabob’s namc. For the better execution of 
“this and the 5th ‘Tricle, the faid Nabob promifcs to furnifh to the faid Company, that is to 
fay, to their repretentatives the Prefident and Council of Fort St. George, the necellary 
orders, under his feal and fignature, addreffed to each Voligar, and to the purport hereot, 
without delay. . : r 

363. 3M... Article 


2x8 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT ‘from the Scle& Committee ox 


® Z 
Article 7th—After dedu@ing from the above-mentioned fum of inine lacks of Star- 
Pagodas, which forms a part of the aggregate fum of 15,21,105 Star Pagodas mentioned in 
the 5th Article, the amount of the tributes or Peifhcufh trom the Poligars, as {pecified in the 
Schedule No. 1. the faid Nabob agrees to pay. annually the ‘remaining {um, being 
635,205. 15. 54. together with the further fuin of'6,21,105 for the purpofe mentioned in the 
ath Article, making the fum of Star Pagodas 12,56,4o0. 15. 54. at the following periods : 


Ou the1ft September - = - - - 1,00,000 — — 
ft October - - - - ~ 1,009,000 — — 
aft November - - - - ee 1,00,000 — + 
1ft December - - ~ - - - 4,00,000 — — 
ift January - - - - - - 1,00,000 —— — 
at February - - = - se 1,00,000 — —~ 
aft March - - - é - - 150,000 — — 
aft April - - - - - - 1,5§0,000 — — 
aft May’ - - - - - - - 2,009,000 — — 
ii dune - - - - - - - 4,56,400 15 54 


Star Pagodas 12,56,400 15 54 


And it ts mutually aereed, that on the full liquidation of the debts before mentioned, when 
zhe payment of the tum of Star Pagodas 6,21,105 fhall ccafe by virtue of the 4th Article, 
@ reduétion in equal portion thail take place in the above iuftalments. 

Article 8th.—The taid Nabeb cugayes to make good to the {aid Company the payments 
of the fuis according to the ini ats of K contained in the 7th Article; and 
if, contrary to his fincere intentions and exertions, any of the fuid fums fhall not be full; 
paid at the expiration of fifteen days from the time limited, in that cate the faid Nabob. 
agrees that the faid Company fhall aflume-the management of aud. make the collection 
of the Revenues from the diftria&s mentioned in the Schedule No: 2. hereunto annexed, ac- 


the Oifice 
Firt. 


pales hereinafter mentioned, bearing an intereft of 8 per cent. par annum, ketween the taid 


the ten Kifts, and fhail be 
diftriéts, the faid Company continaing to ¢: ¢ authority in and to make the collections 
from the fame, until in contequence of the full Jiquidation of the debts and dimination of the 
anaual fun to he for that purpole paid by the Nubob to the fai Company, according to the 
4th Asticte, the faid balaace account fhali be. equal on the debit and credit fide, and nothing 
dhall remain due to the faid Company ; then the fuid diftriGt or diftridis. fhall revert to the 
management of the faid Nawaub. 

Third. Whenever the faid dif 
the above condition, it is agreed that in 
the deduGion of the fum of: 6,21,105 
6,35,295. 15-54) be not paid 15 days after the 
Company {hall potlets equal power to aflume the diftri€is mentioned in the faid Schedule, 
No. 2. as in the firft inftance, and thall accor ly affuine fuch difiriét or diftridis, the 
Revenue of which, after deducting the charges of collection, fhall equal the amount of the 
Kift which thall have fallen in arrear ; from which they fhall realize the balance that fhall 
have arifen in the payment ef the Kifis, and shall give eredit to the faid Nawaub for the 
furplus and fubfequent net Revenues, in part payment of the fum of Star Pagodas 
6,35,295- 15.54. And in this’ cafe the management of the ditirict or diftricts thus aflumed 
fhall for ever continue in_the poftcition of tic faid Company, any thing contained in the 
3¢ Articte of the prefent Engagement to the contrary notwithftanding ; and the faid Company 
agree to give the Nawaub ercdit for the Revenue arifing therefrom. 

Fourth. tn order to prevent any lois ariting to either party from this meafure, it is 
anutually agreed, that the ditisi@ or dittri ich fhall thus be affumed by the faid Com- 
pany, ibali be entire, as metitioned in the faid Schedule, and not parts of difrids, 

Fifth. In confequence of this meafure, whereby the difiricts mentioned in the Schedule 
No. 2. become refponfible for any arrears that may aceruc in the payment of the above 

ftipulated 


or difiricts thas affumed thall be reftored according to 
fe of any of the Nits for the fum remaining (after 
‘1 that is to fay, for the fum_ of 
limited, the faid 


the: Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY: 229 


Hipulated Kitts, the faid Nawanb agrees that.he will not grant Tunkaws gi afi its on 

any account on the Reverues thereof; and if, contrary to this condition, any Tunkaws or 

aflignmnents fhould. exift where the Taid diftriéts or any of them Shall be aflumed: by the faid 

Company, fuch Tunkaws or affignments fhall be declared by the faid Company and the faid 
~ Nawaub tobe of no value, nor Tall they remain in effect. : 

Sixth. It is agreed between the contracting parties, that the above-defcribed Balance 
Account fhall be annually adjufted, and a Committee confifting of four refjpeCtable and capable 
perfons, of which two fhall be nominated by the faid Company and _ two by the faid Nawaub, 
thall affemble on the Pf day. of Augutt.of every year, commencing with 1793, for the pur- 
pole of adjufting and drawing out a fair and cquitable ftatement thereof. 

Article 9.—In cafe the faid Nawaub fhall at any time haye occation for any number of 
troops for the collection of his Revenues, the fupport of his authority, or the good order and 
poonet of his country, the faid Company agree to furnith a futlicient number of troops 

for that purpofe, on public reprefentation being made by the faid Nawaub to’ the’ Prefident 
and Council of Fort St. George, of the neceflity of employing fiich troops, and of the objects 
to be obtained thereby ; and the faid Nawaub agrees to lelray the additional expenfe oftuch 
troops fo long as they may be employed at his requeft;. this additional expenle being the 
fam over and above the expenfe of fuch troops while in garrifon or at fixed quarters: and 
it thall be at the option of the faid Nawaub to reimburte the faid furplus expente, either on 
tthe conclufion of the fervice on which fich troops may have been einployed, in money, or 
to add it to the debit fide of tue account called Balance Account, and more particularly ex- 
plained in the fecond condition of the 8th Article. 

Article 10.—The faid Nawaub fhall receive regular information of a negociation which 
Shall relate to declaring war or making peace, wherein the {aid Company may engage, and 
the interefis of the Carmatic and its dependencies may be concernéd; and the faid Rawaub 
hall be confidered as an Ally of the faid Company, in all Treaties which fhall- in any refpe@ 
affect the Carnatic and countries depending thercen, or belonging to cither of the contradi~ 
ing parties contiguous thereto; and the faid Nawaub agrees that he will not enter into a 
negociation or political correfpondence with any Europcan or Native Power without the con- 
fent.of the faid Company. ‘This ‘Treaty, coutitting of ten articles, and having two Sebedules 
annexed thereto, marked No. 1. and No. 2. fall be in force and have effect from. the 12th day’ 
of duly 1792, (correfponding with the 22d day. of thé month Zekaida 1206 Hejire) and the 
contracting parties having aflixed their refpective feals and fignatures to two counterparts.on 
the dates under-mentioned, that is to fey, the Right honourable Charles Earl Corn- 
wallis, K. G. Governor General, &c. &e. Kc. fhall_aftix his feal and fignature te one 
counterpart, on the part of the Honourable Englith Eaft India Company, and the Nawaub 
Walla Jah Behauder, Nawaub of the Carhatic, fhall affix his feal and dgnature to-another 
counterpart ; fhall be exchanged. = K e . i 

{A true Copy.) 
Signed and fealed. at. Chepauk Houfe, , 
this aed day of Zekaida 1206, and - (Signed) G, F. Cherry, 
zath day July-1792. : : Perfian Teanllator to the Governor 


Schedule, No. 1, 


Lit of POLLG ARS, with the amount of their refpeQive TRIBUTES, or PREIS H- 
CUSH, as mentioned and referred to ‘in the 5th Acticle of the accompanying Treaty, in 
force from iath day July 1792, correfpouding with the 22d day-of Zekaida 1206 Hejira. 


‘ S. Pag? B.C. 
Camor Yachum Nair - “ - 21,653 10 64 
Vencataput Nair- -- - - se 10,775 — — 
“Tappaty Rammanaud ©- - 6,000 — — 6,600 ~— — 
- = = | 32,586 9 
10,000, — — | 2,857. 5 at 
12,003 12 — F 
8,598 12 — . 
10,483 12 — 
11,731 4 — 
“9,555 4 — 
0,400 —= -— 
642 2— 
Maduram Sing 60,505 14 — 1] 16,154 26 20 
Pettaputty~ < 
ee 62,857 512 


utporam 


Woariar 


230 APPENDIX ¢o the Second RERORT from the Sclés&t Committee on 
Schedule, No. 1—(continued.)- ° 


Warriar Tawer Mapilla, in 
- the room of the Iianee,?} Shevegungo - - ~ ccs “ 
and Infant Heirels of = - 

Polygars of the Diftridt- -} Madura -_ - u 
Varayoo Narana Vanuyam|} Sheirgherry - = = 
Yefrapa Naik - - = -| Ellaporam- - - - 
Madurapah Taven - - -| Wootamaley - - - 
Cotala Taven - - - - -| Nadoorvarcoocky  - 
Indora Yalwen - - - -| Talwencotta -"- - 
Saule Tatewen - - ~ -] Soumden - - - - 
Tady Talewen - - - -| Candombar- - - - 
Natta Cooty - - - - - Tinguinputty - ee 
Chaturoyen - - + - -| Woorcad - - - - 
.Choca "Talevan - - - -| Moucutry - - - - 
Cataboon Naik - - -. -} Panettem Country - 
Androoconda Vunnyan = - | Ettyarumpuny “- - 
Numja Naik - -- - -| Mafemondy “- - - 
Etapa Naik - - - - -|-Negataporam  - - 
Sevemaul Naik - + - -| Candelloody’- - - 
Pedenna Naik - - - -{ Attengherry - - - 
Chenoum Naik. - - - ~-} Munnarcotta - - - 
Avalapa Naik- - - - -| Pawaly- - - - - 
Reddy Cody Nanayen - -| Aligoopoory.- - - 
Geokellapa Naik “- -.-}| Gottaputty- - - - 
Cotingada Gundon: -_- -| Cattarputty ; - -| 
Prinnamunga Tavers - -{ Chocumputta - - - 
“Comur Naik - ~ - - -| Saupetoor - - - - 
Gotapa Naik - - - - - Laudvoor - - - - 
Ena Chinnama Naik .- -| Zelmurry - - - - 
-Tottapa Naick --- + =] Punnulgoody - - + 
Awwechy Naick - - - .-| Colatoor - - - - 
iTomeetry Naick - -.- -| Paroor - - - - - 
‘Triffeanada Tawen - - -| Shatoon - - - - 
Paule Taleren - - - -| Qvideabporam = -- - 
Vanda Tawen - - - -| Gottengundon + ~- 


“‘Cliuckrams a ee oe 


Total Star Pagodas| 2,64,704 29 26 
——— 
Signed. and Sealed at 
. Thepaulc Houfe, 
this 


(A trae Copy.) 


Signed and ‘Sealed at Fort (Signed) G. F. Cherry, - 
Af illiam in Bengal, Perfian Tranflator to the Governor General. 
this 


SchedaliN 


Lift of the DISTRICTS, with the Amountof the Net REVENUES from each, at which 
they fhall be eftimated, and aflumed according to the 8th Article of the accompanying 
‘Treaty, in force from 12th July 1792; (correfponding with 22 Zekaida 1206 ‘Hejira). 


Tinnevelly' - + NetRevenue ~- ..- - 
adura’- = ee Socata. 
Trichinopoly, including Warriore, Pottom, and Arrialose 
Nellore -  - =. 2-5-5 + 7 
Ongle - - - 2 -. + 
Palnaud a Sie «ee eh 
Northern Divifion of the Arcot Province 


perenne 


Star Pagodas 


By 


the Misics of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, ——231- 


By the firft condition of the 8th Article of the faid Treaty it is agreed, that the faid 
Company fhalt affume the management of fuch diftriét or diftris, the Revenue of which, 
after deduding the charges of colleion, fhall equal the amount of the Kifts which fhail 
have fallen’ in arrear. The faid Company, th re, by virtue of this condition, fhallaffume 
a diftri@ or diftri@s: from among the above-named, the net Revenue of which fhall be as 
rear as poflible equal to the amount of the Kift which fhall have fallen in arrear. ; - 

i and fealed, at 

. Chepauk Houfe, & 

this 


Signed and fealed,’ at- ; - G@igned) —_-G. F. Cherry, 
; For William in Bengel, Z : SPerian ‘Trans* to the Gor General. 
"Appendix, No. 29. 


TREATY with the Nabob. of Arcot, dated 3af.July 1801. 


"'Wresity for fettling the fucceffion to the Soubahdarry of the Territories of Arcot, and for 
vetting the adminiftration of the Civil and Military Government of the Carnatic Payen, 
Ghat in the United Company of Merchants of England trading to the Eaft Indies. _ 


“WHEREAS the feveral Treaties which have been concluded between the United Company 
“of Merchants -of England trading to the Eaft Indies, and their Highneffes heretofore 
Nabobs of the Carnatic, have been intended to cement and identify the -interefts of the 
-eontraCting parties; and whereas, in conformity to the fpirit of the alliance, the faid Company 
-did, by the Treaty concluded on the 12th July 1792 with the late Nabob Wallajah, relinguifh’ 
extenfive pecuniary advantages acquired by the previous Treaty of 1787, with the view and 
~on the confideration of lithing a more adequate fecurity for the interefts of the Britith- 
Government in the Camatic; and whereas fabfequent experience has. proved that the 
intention of the contracting perties has not been fulfilled by the provifions of any of the’ 
“Treaties heretofore concluded between them; and whereas the Mutiud of ibe soukaninnty UE 
Arcot having’ become vacant, the Prince Azeem ul Dowlah Behader has been eftablit 
by the Englith Eaft India Company, in the rank, property and poffeffions, of his’ anceftors, 
Heretofore Nabobs of the Carnatic; and whereas the faid Company and his Highnefs the 
faid Prince Azeem al Dowlah Behader have judged it cxpedient that additional pro-- 
-wvifions fhould at this time be made, for the purpofe of Supplying the defects of all former 
engagements, and. of eltablifhing the connection between the faid contractin ies on a’ 
permanent bafis of fecurity, in all times to come: Wherefore, the following is now 
eftablithed ‘and concluded by the Right honourable Edward Lord: Clive,- Governor in 
Council-of Fort St. George, by and with the fan@ion and authority of his Excellency the . 
moft noble the Marquis Wellefley, K. P. Governor General in Councit of all'the Britith 
polelfions in the Eat Indies, on behalf of the faid United Com iy, on the one part; and by 
is Highnefs the Nabob Wallajah Ameer ul Dowiah Madarul Mulk Ameer ul Hind Azcem’ 
ul Dowleh Behader Shawkut Jung Sepah Salar, Nabob Soubahdar of the Carnatic, on his 
-own behalf, on the other part; for {ettling the fucceffion to the Soubahdarry of the Territories 
-ef Arcot, and for vefting the adminiftration of the Civil and Mili Jovernment of. the. 
‘Carnatic in the United y of Merchants of England trading to the Eaft indies, - 
Article 1ft—The Nabob Azcem ul Dowlah Behader is hereby formally eftablifhed in 
the fate and rank, with the’ dignities dependent thereon, of his anteftors; hetetofore Nabobs 
-of the Carnatic, and the pofleffion thereof is hereby guaranteed by the Honourable Eaft- 
India Company to his faid Highnefs Azeein ul Dowlah Behader, who has accordingly 
fucceeded to the Soubahdarry of the Territories of Arcot. . Ne ee 
Article 2d.—-Such parts of the Treaties heretofore concluded between the faid Eaft India 
Company and their Highneffes, heretofore Nabobs of the Carnatic, 2s are caleulated to 
firengthen the alliance, to cement the friendthip, and to identify the intcrefts-of the con- 
traGting parties, are‘hereby zenewed and confirmed, and accordingly the friends: or enemies 
-of eithet are the friends or enemies of both parties.: ate pig eng Bey 
Article gd—The Honourable Company hereby charges itfelf with the maintenance and 
fupport of the military force necetlary for the defence of ‘the Carnatic, and forthe protection 
‘of the rights, perfon, ‘and property of the faid Nabob. Azeem ul Dowlah Behader; and with 
the view of reviving the fundamental principles of the alliance botween his ancettors and the 
Englith nation, the faid Nabob Azcem‘ul Dowleh ftipulates and a that.he will not 
enter upon any negociation or correfpondence with any European or Native Power, without 
the knowledge and confent of the faid Englith . gh ie 
Article 4th.—It.is hereby ftipulated and agreed, that the fole and exclufive adminiftration 
of the Civitand Military Government of all the territories and dependencies of the Carnatic 
Payen Ghaut, together with the full and exclufive right to the Revenues thereof, (with the 
esoeption of {uch portion of the faid Revenues seh be appropriated for the Santen 
363 : : : 3 eae eg 


232 APPENDIX fo the Second’: REPORT jrom the Sclv&t Committee on 


of the faid Nabob and for the fupport of his dignity) fhall be for ever vefted'in the faid 
Englith Company; and the faid Company fliall accordingly poffefs the fole power and 
authority of conitituting and appointing, without any interference. on the part. of the fiid 
Nabob, all Officers for the collection:of the Revenues; and of eftablifhing Courts for the 
adminiftration of Civil and Criminal Judicature. ‘ ie 

Article 5th..—It is hercby ftipnlated and agreed that one fifth part of the net Revenues of 
the Carnatic thal be annually allotted for the maintenance and. fupport of the. faid Nabob 
end of his own immediate family, including the Mahal of his late. Highsefs the Ameer ul 
“Omrah ; the faid Gfth part fhall te paid by the Company in monthly inftalments of twelve 
thoufand Star Pagodas; and whatewcr cireumftance may occur affecting the net Revenues 
of the Carnatic, the faid inftalmente thall not be lefs than twelve thoutand Star Pagodas. 
‘Whatever balance of the fuid fifth may remain due at the expiration of each year, fhall 
be liquidated upon the fettlement of the accounts, and the faid fittlx part thall be at the free 
difpotal of the faid Nabob, confiftently with the principles of the faid alliance. 

Article 6th_—The fifth. part of the Revenues, as ttated in the preceding Article, thall be 
calculated and determined in the following manner; viz. all charges of every defcription - 
incurred in the collection of the Revenues, the amount of the Jaghire lands, ftated in the oth 
Article in the Treaty of 1787 at Star Pagedas 2,13,421, and the fum of Pagodas 6,21,105, 
appropriable to the liquidation of the debts of the late Mahomed Ally, {hall in the firt 
inltance be deduéted from the Revenues of the Carnatic, and after the deduction of thofe 
three items fhall have been made, ‘one fifth bert of the remaining net Revenue (including 
the Polygar Peifheufh, which fhall always be calculated at the fum of Star Pagodas 
2,64,704. 20. 26. according to the Treaty of 1792) fhall be allotted for the maintenance.of 
the {aid Nabob, and for the fapport of his Highneti’s dignity. 

Article 7th. W Bereas it was ftipulated by the 4th Article of the Treaty of 1792, that the 
fum of fix lacks twenty-one thoufand one hundred and five Star Pagodas fhould annually 
‘be applied to the difeharge of certain regiftered debts due by the late Nabob Mahomed Ally 
to hepeieate creditors, under agreements concluded between his Highnefs and the Honour- 
able Company, and guaranteed by the Parliament of Great Britain, until the faid regiftcred 
debt fhould be liquidated; the Honourable Englifa Company accordingly hereby charges itfelf 
with the annual payment of 621,105 Fagoda trom the Kevenues of the Carnatic, until the 
zpmainder of the faid regiftered debt thall be liquidated. 

Article 8tb.—W hereas certain debts are due to the faid Company by the anceftors of the 
faid Nabob; and whereas it is expedient, in order that the prefent Treaty may include a 
somplete arrangement of all affairs depeuding between the faid Company and the faid 
Nabob, that an adjnftment thould be of: the afore-mentioned debts; wherefore the faid 
Nabob formally and explicitly icknow] the debt commonly called the Cavalry Loan, 
amounting, with its intereft, to Star Pagodas 13,24,342. 6. 47. and alfo the ion of the 
regiftored debt herctofore paid by the faid Company to the Creditors of the late Nabob 
Wailijah (according to. the anneyed Schedule) to be juft debts; and whereas, exclufively of 
the above-mentioned debts, other unadjufted debts alfo remain, which were referred to the 
adjuftment and decifion of the Governor General in Council of Bengal; and whereas the 
faid unadjutted débts have not becn determined according to that intention, the faid Nabob 
hereby engages, that whenever the faid determination fhall be made, his Highnefs will 
acknowledge to bea juft debt, the amount of the balance which fhall be fo declared to be due 
to the faid Company. {tis not, however, the intention of this Article, to caufe any’ 
diminution from the fifth part payable tothe faid Nabob; but on the-contrary, it is {pecified, 
that no deduction fhall be made trom the Revenue on. any account sehatever, excepting the 
three items itated in the 6th Article, previoufly to the determination of his Highnelt’s 

roportion. 

e rticle oth—The Englith Company engages ‘to. take into confideration the actual 
‘ fituation of the families of their Highneffes the late Nabobs Wallajah and Omdut ul Omraht 
Behadcr, .2s well_as the fituation of the principal Officers of his late Highnefs’s Govern- 
ment; and the Britith Government fhall charge itfelf with the expenfe (chargeable on the 

Reveaues of the Carnatic) of’a fuitable provifion for their relpedtive maintenance. 
amount.of the bore: mnentonel expenics tobe defrayed by. the Company, fhall be difiributed, 
with the knowledge of the faid- Nabob, in fuch manuer as fhall be judged proper. 

_ Artie 1oth—The fgid Nabob Azeem ul Dowlah Behader fhall in all places, on all 
occations, and at all times, be treated with the refpeét and attention due to his Highnefs’s 
rank and Gtuation as an Ally of the Britifh Goverment, and a fuitable guard all be 
appointed from the Company's troops, for the protection of his faid Highnets’s perfon and 

alace. 

Pa ticle 11th.—The entire defence of the Caraatic againtt foreign enemies, and the main- 
tenance of the internal tranquillity and police of the country, having been hereby transferred 
to the Britith Goverament, his ‘faid Riehnets engages not to entertain or employ in his 
fervice any armed men without the confent of the Brith Government, who will fix, in con- 
cert with his Highnefs, the number of armed men neceffary to be retained for the purpofes 
of fiate. Such armed men as his Highnefs may in.confequence of this Article engage in his 
fervice, {hall be paid at the exclufive coft and charge of the faid Nabob. . 

, Article 12th.—The Honourable Eaft India Company fhall, in conformity to the’ ftipula- 
sions of this Treaty, enter upon the exclufive adminiftration of the Civil and Military Govern- 
meant of the Carnatic, on the 31ft day of July 18013 and his faid Highnefs the Nabob fall 
iffae orders to all his Civil and Military Officers, to transfer the difixt or diftricts aoe their 


the Miits of The BAST INDIA-COMPANY. 333. 


refpedtive-charge, to fuch perfons as fhall be appointed by the faid' Company. to manage the 

Hid dif, and alfo: to deliver to the perfons eppointed all records, aaootks, and Sfiial 

Papers belonging to their refpective Cutcherries or offices. “ ° 

is Treaty, bearing date the ot day of July, A. D. 1801, and confifting-of twelve Articles, 

having been executed by Edward Lord’ Clive, Governor in Council:aforefaid, on the one part, 

and His Highnefs Azeem ul Dowlah Behader on the: other is. hereby mutually inter- 

changed, the faid Edward Lord Clive engaging that a copy of the faid Treaty-fhall be tranf- 

, mitted to Fort William, for thé purpote of being ratified by his Excellency the mof noble. 

the Marquis Wellefley, K. P. Governor General in Council ; and that ae foon as the ratified 

‘Treaty fhall be received from Bengal, it fhall be delivered to his faid Highnefs, who will then 
return to his Lordthip the copy which he now receives, 

: 4Signed) CLIVE. 


Chief Secretary to Government, 


J. STUART. 
WM PETRIE, 
: ‘ E. W. FALLOFIELD. 
By the Right honourable the . ; 
Governor in Council, (Signed) J. Webbe, 


SCHEDULE of the Acceunt referred to in the 8th Article of this Treaty. 
Amount paid by the:Company to his Highnefs the Nabob’s Creditors, on ac z 
count of the ‘confolidated Debt efa77z- ttt te 26,4 7,388 
is DEDUCT i 
Receipts of Revenue from the Carnatic furplus to the fixed. Military, 
Subady, in the Fufly years 1260 and 1201 - te %} 8,29,481 
‘Tntereft at £6. per cent. for 43 years -. - = - ‘= = 2,239,060 
Ee . 10,53,444 
Balance due by the Nabob  - = 5 + or = + = 5 3593040 | 
ADD Es . 
Tntoreft for 4 years and 41 months at 6 percent ~~ - ~ ~~ ¥ 470,218 


Adual Balance, 8° Ps 20,6454 
Gigned) CLIVE. 


By the Right honourable the &, W. FALLOFIELD. 


Governor in Council. . 
(Signed). J. Webbe, 
; ” Chief Secretary to Government. 
<A true Copy.) 
(Signed) J. Webbe, 
Chief Secretary to Government. 


Separate Explanatory Articles annexed to the Treaty for fetiling the faoceffion to the 
Soubadarry of the Territories of Arcot, and for veliing the admailiration of the Civil 
and Military Government of the Carnatic Payenghaut in the United Company of 
Merchants of England trading to the Ealt Indies. : eee 


Article 1f.—Whereas it is ftipulated by the 3th article of the Treaty that the furh to be 
appropriated to the fupport of the dignity of his Highnefs the Nabob Azeem ul Dowlah: 
auder, thall be calculated at one fifth part of the net- Revenues of the Camatic; and: 
whereas the improvement of the faid Revenues, which under Providence may be ex; 
to arile from the effets of the prefent arrangement, may render the {aid fifth part greates 
than will be neceflary to the purpofes intended by the contraGting parties, it is ex. 
plained, for the better underftan ling of the fifth Article of the Treaty, that whenever the whole 
net Revenue of the Carnatic, including the fums to be deducted according to. the fixth 
article of the Treaty, hall exceed the fam of twenty-five lacks of Star Pagodas; then and in 
that cafe the fifth of fuch farplus fhall be applied to the repair of fortifications, to the 
-eftablifhment of a feparate fund for the eventual exigencies of war, or to the military de- 
fence of the Carnatic, in fuch manner as may be determined by the Governor in Council of 
port St. George, after the previous communication to his Highnefs the Nabeb Azeem ul 
lab. : : 
Article 2d-—Whereas it is ftipulated in the fixth Article of the Treaty, that the fum of 
Hagolas 6,21,105, on account of the private debts of the Nabob Mahomed Ally, fhall be 
from the amount of the net Revenue, previoufly to the determination of the pro- 
pote’ be paid to his Highnefs the Nabob, it is neverthelefs hereby explained, that it 
not be incumbent on the Honourable Company to -appropriate lands yielding a 
Revenue to the faid amount 2,13,421 Pagodas, but that ‘the faid Company fhall be at liberty 


to exercife its diferetion in the mode and on the exteat of the provilion to be made accord- 
ag 


234° APPENDIX #o.the Second REPORT from the Sclo& Committee on 


ing to the oth Article of the Treaty, for the fupport of the family and principal Officers of - 
the Nabob Mahomed Ally, and of the Nabob Omdut ul Omrah.’ Aud it is further explained, 
that notwithftanding the liquidation of the private debt of the Nabob Mahomed Ally, or of 
sthe debt dug to the Honourable Company, the faid fum of Pagedas 6,21,105, fhall always 
be deduéted from the net Revenue, and thall in no cafe be included in the net Revenue, 
previoufly to the determination of the.fhare to be allotted to his Highnefs the Nabob Azeem 
ul Dowlah Behader; it being the intention of the contragting parties that the faid fum of 

~ Pagodas 2,13,421, and the faid fum of Pagodas 6,21,105, hall be confidered to be permanent 
-dedutions in all.times to come fromthe Revenue of the Carnatic, : 

Signed) CLIVE. 


J. STUART, 
‘WM PETRIE. 
By the Right honourable the 4 : E. W. FALLOFIELD. 
Governor in Council. ie oie 
jigned) 7 
Chief Secretary to Government. 


“(A true Copy.) 
‘ (Signed) J. Webbe, 
Chief Secretary to Government. 


Appendix, No. 30. 


ExtraG Letter ‘from Governor ‘in Couticil_ at Fort St. George (Political Department), 
: ae _ dated 20th September 1793. 


44. WE informed your Honourable Court, in our Addrefs of the 2d May laft, 

-of the iteps we had taken with regard to the Tanjare country, and of the doubt we enter- 
ceca: of the propriety of entrufting the Rajah with the charge .and management of the 
public Revenue. i ‘ 
arr On this dccafion-we judged it expedient to refer to the decifion of the Supreme 
‘Government, who obferved to us in reply, that although they had no pofitive, reafon at 
prefent to entertain a much more favourable opinion of the Rajah of Tanjore than when 
they wrote to us on that fubjeét in December laft, yet as they had not heard -of any late 
irregularity in his condué, they were of opinion that under. all’ the <cireumftances in which 
the queftion was involved, it would-be more fuitable to our national charaéter, to hazard an 
error on the fide of lenity, than to expofe ourfelves to the imputation of having treated him 
with-exeeflive zigonr. : : <= oh oe 

46. They further obferved, that when the reference was made‘to. them in December laft, 
-on the Rajah’s offer to undertake the management of his country on the terms which he at 
firft rejected, he had juft before-been guilty of feveral thocking outrages; and exclufive of 
all other confiderations; -if his reftoration had immediately fucceeded his mifdeeds, it might 
‘have been doubted. whether our Government had feriowfly difapproved of thofe enormities, 

47. That as the Rajah had for fome time felt the moft pointed and public marks .of our 
-diftatisfaCtion, and of our abhorrence of bis conduct, as the Company by the-terms of 
the propofed Agreement would be ultimately fecured in the receipt of the ftipulated Revenue, 
and would befides obtain an_abfolute tight of affam ing. the management of the country 
‘whenever the Rajah thould fail in his engagements, the Supreme Government recommended 
that his Excellency’s offer to execute the ‘Treaty that was propefed to him, .fhould be ac- 
cepted, andthe management of his country red to him at-the conclafion-of the current 
-revenue year, : 

48. In conformity with this recommendation we refolved that the country fhauld be de- 
livered up onthe 12th July, and notified this intention to the Rajah. His Excellency in 
<confequence-figned.the Treaty, and is now in complete poffeilion of-his former, autharit 
We have likewife made over to him, as we had done in fimilar circumftances to the Nabol 
-all the balances outftanding in the Tanjore country, for which fecurity had not been pre- 
‘widufly given, or which had not.been in a courfe of collection piior to the aforefaid date. 


Appendix, ‘No. 31. 


“TREATY with the Rajah-of Tanjore, dated 12th July 1793. 


“WHEREAS a certain engagement was entered into between the Honourable Englith Eat 
‘Tndia Company and-his Excelleacy Ameer ‘Sing, Rajah of ‘Tanjore, bearing date the 10th 
day of April 1787, for the puipofe of cementing an everlafting friendfhip with each other, and. - 
of contributing mutually towards-the defeace of the Carnatic and conntries depending, 
thereon, whereby it was ftipulated that the faid Company fhould maintain a military force, 
and that the faid Rajah of ‘Fanjore thoald pay annually a certain fum of money, arifing from 
the Revenues of his’ country, and fhould furnith fufficient and fatisfaCtory fecurity under 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. . 235 


certain conditions expreffed in, the faid Engagement, for the regular payment of the fum 
flipulated to the faid Company ; and whereas it appears that refources of the faid country of 
Tanjore are not competent to enable the faid Rajah to perform the ttipulations in the faid 
Engagements; and whereas it further appears that the Jeculy which the faid Rajah of 
Tanjore agreed in the above-mentioned engagen:ent to furnith for the due payment of the 
Aipalated fum to the faid Company; is in-its nature inadequate to, tle end intended; and 
whereas certain agreements have alfo been entered into betwcen the faid Company and the 
faid Rajah, for the difcharge of certain debts due by the faid Rajah to private perfons; it 
has been mutually d, in confequence of the above written circumflances, that the en- 
gagement aforefaid fhall henceforth be confidered by the contracting parties as annulled, and 
no longer of effet or in force ; and in lieu thereof, the Honourable Sir Charles Oakley, Bart. 
Prefident and Governor in Council of Fort St. George, on behalf of the United Cumipany of 
Merchants of England trading to the Eaft Indies, their heirs and fucceffors, on’ the one part, 
and his Excellency Ameer Sing; Rajah- of Tanjore, in his own name and for himfelt his 
heirs and fucceflors, on the other part, agree to the following Articles, which fhall be binding 
on the refpective parties for the purpofes contained therein, notwithftanding all or any of-the 
conditions ftipulated in the Engagement, dated 20th April 1787, to the contrary. _ 


Article 1{t.—The friends and enemies of either of the contrafting parties thall he confidered 
the friends and enemies of both. 


Article 2d.—In orderto execute the foregoing Article, in its.full extent, the Honourable 
Englifh Eaft India Company agree to maintain a military force, aud the Rajah of Tanjore agrees. 
tocontribute annuallyacertain fum of money, hereinafter mentioned, as his thare of the expente, 
ofthe faid'military force; the faid Rajah. further, agreeing that the difpofal of the faid tum, 
together*with the arrangement and employments of the troops fupported-by it, fhall be left’ 
entirely to the faid-Company. 

Article 3d.—It is hereby alfo agreed, for the further fecurity and defence of the countrics 
belonging and fubject to the contracting parties in the Carnatic, &c. that all forts thal! be 

ifoned by. the troops of the faid Company ; and in the event of war breaking out in the 
Gxtnatic and countries appertaining to either party, and dependent on the Cariiatic or con- 
tiguous thereto, it is nerenl for the better profecution of it, that fo long as it fhall laff, the faid. 
Company fhall poffefs full autliority over the Tanjore country, and’ fhajl- collect the Revenues 
thereof, ‘the faid Company hereby engaging that during fuch war they will pay to the faid-. 
Rajah. one lack of Pagodas. (2000 per annum, and one fifth fhare ‘of the net Revenue 
arifing therefrom,, that at the conclifion. of the war the Tanjore country fhall be veftored. 
to the Rajah, except in certain cafes, which are hereinafter mentioned. 

Article 4ta:—The Rajah of Tanjore agrees. to. pay to- the faid Company, for the purpofe 
of mutual defence, the tum of three lacks and fifty-thoufand. (3,50,000) Star Pagodas aunually, 
as hig flare of the expenfe for the military force ; and _alfo, in confequence of an agreement 
between the faid Company andthe: Nabob of the Carnatic, a further dum of. Star Pagodas 
one lack fourteen thoufand twe hundred and eighty-five (1,14,285) annually, on account of 
ethe Peifhcuth payable from Tanjore to the ‘aid Nabob, and by him transferred in abfolute 
right to the faid Cor y ; and the faid Rajah further engages to pay the fum of fixty 
thoufand (60,000) Star Pagodas per annum, towards the difcharge of certain debts, fandtioned 
by the faid Company, and fpecited in the Schedule hereunto annexed, No. 2. which further 
{ato of fxty thoufand (60,000) Star Pagodas thall ceafe on the full liquidation of the faid 


Article 5th.—Although the fams above mentioned conftitute the regular ftated payments 
for which the Rajah of Tanjore is to be accountable, under the heads of fubfidy, Peiheuth,- 
and private debts, yet the faid Company confidering the actual ftate of the Tanjore country, 
which has for many years been declining in its Revenue, and defirous of affording the faid 
Rajah as much prefeut relief as may be confiftent with the abfolate neceffities of their own 
Government, in the confidence that he will turn it to the improvement of his country and the 
-eomfort of his people, agree that a temporary fnfpenfion fhall take place with relpeét to a 
part of the annual payment fated in the foregoing Article, that is to fay, for three years, 
‘commencing with the prefent Fuily, or 19th Faly laft, they conient the annual demand of 
Star Pagodas one lack fourteen’ thoufand two hundred and eighty-five (1,14,285) on 
account of Peifheuth, fhall be pottponed ; and that the amount which at the expiration o} 
that period will become due, being Star_Pagodas three’ lacks forty-two thouland eight 
hundred and fifty-five '(3,42,855) fhall_be added to the arrears owing by the faid Rajah on 
+his former engagements, and the thid Rajah agrees, towards the liquidation of this agaregate 
balance, to pay fifty thoufand (50,000) Star Pagodas per annum, commencing from the 12th 
July laft, and to be continved till the whole thall be difcharged; and after the expiration 
of three years, to pay his annual Peiflicath of one lack fourteen thoufand two hundred and, 
eighty-five (1,14,285) regularly as it becomes due. Thus the whole fam to be. paid after 
expiration of three years, will be Star Pagodas five lacks fourteen thoufimd two hundred 
and eighty-five (5,14,285) for account of the faid Company, and Star Pagodas tixty 
thoufand (60,000) per annum, for account. of the private creditors. 
Article 6th—In order to. make good the fum ftipylated to be paid annually for three 
years, namely, Star Pagodas three lacks and fifty thoufand (3,50;009) on account of the Ra- 
jah’s thareof the military expente, fifty thoufand (30,000) Star Pagodas on account of arrears, 
aad ‘fixty thoufand (60,000) Star Pagedas on account of private debts, the faid Rajah agrees 
363. 30 1° 


ae 


236 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


to pay the amount of the faid three fums, being four lacks fixty thoufand (4,60,000) Star-. 
Pagodas, into the Company’s Treafury at Madras, at the following periods: ; 


1ft November - = = 30,000 
aft December - - - 40,000 
aft January - - . - 40,000 
aft February - = = = - 50,000 
aft March” - = - = == ~—-50,000 
aft April-  - - *+ =~ 50,000 
aft May - + = = 50,000 
it June oe = = 50,000 
at July - - (+ + 1,060,000 


Star Pagodas 4,60,000 


And it is mutually agreed, that at the end of three years, when the additional payment of 
ene lack fourteen thoufand two hundred and eighty-five (1,14,285) Star Pagodas per annum 
is to commence, a proportionable increafe fhall take place in each of the above infialments, and 
that on the liquidation of the private debts before mentioned a proportionable deduction 
thall be made on that account. * 

Article 7th.—If, contrary to the intentions of the faid Rajah, any Pact of the fums 
mentioned in the inftalment or Kiftbundy fixed by the foregoing Article, thall not be fully 
paid at the expiration of fifteen days from the time limited, in that cafe the faid Company. 

all aflume the management of, and make the colletion of the Revenues from the diftricts 
mentioned in the Schedule No. 1. hereunto annexed, according to the following conditions, 
and for this the prefent En: ment fhall be confidered fufficient authority the faid Com- 
pany, through their Prefident in Council at Fort St. George, giving immediate and explicit 
information, according to the tenor thereof, to the faid jah, who fhall on the arrival of 
the Company’s Officers in the faid diftriéts, recall all his Officers except one in each diftrict, 
which Officer fhall remain at the Sudder Cutcherry, and fhall be furnifhed annually by the 
Officer of the faid Company with the copies of the Sudder Cutcherry accounts of’ the grofs 
collections, and of the net receipts, under the atteftation of the Officer of the faid Company 
and of the Sudder Omlah of the diftrict. 

Firft.—The faid Company fhall affume the management of fuch diftri@ or diftri€s, the 
Revenue of which, after deducting the charges of collection, fhall have fallen in arrear. 

Second.—The faid Company agree that a deduction thall take place proportionably from the 
amount of the nine Kifts above mentioned, equal to the amount of the net Revenue of the dif- 
trict or diftriGs which fhall have been affumed as above, fuch deduction commencing from the 
day that the affmption fhall take place. It is hereby alfo mutually agreed, that an account 
called Balance Account fhall be immediately opened, for this and other purpofes hereinafter 
nientioned, bearing att intereft of eight per cent. per annum, between the faid Rajab and 
the faid Company, in which the {aid Rajah thall be debited for the balance in his 
above ftipulated payments, and alfo for the amount dedutted as above from the nine Kifts, 
and thal be credited for the net Revenue collected from the faid diftri@ or diftrids, the faid 
Company continuing to exercife- authority in and to make the collections from the famé, 
until in “confequence of the full liquidation of the private debts-and- diminution of the 
anaual fui to be for that purpofe ‘pal by the faid Rajah to the faid Company, according to 
athe 4th Article, the faid Balance Account {hall be equal on the debit and credit fide, and 
nothing fhall remain due to the faid Company ; then the faid diftrict or diftris thall revert to 
the management of the faid Rajah. As 

‘Third—W benever the faid diftri€t or diftriéts thus affumed fhall be reftored according 

. to the above condition, it is agreed that in cafe any of the Kifts for the fum remaining due, 
after the deduction of the fum of fixty thoufand (60,000) Star Pagodas, that is to fay, for 
the fam of five lacks fourteen thoufand two hundred and eighty-five (5,14,285) Star Pagodas, 
be not paid fifteen days after the expiration of the time limited, the faid Company fhalt 
poflefs equal power to affume the diftricts mentioned in the faid Schedule No. 1. as in the 
firft inftance, and fhall accordingly affume fuch diftri@ or diftricts, the Revenue of which, ° 
after deducting the charges of collection, fhall equal the amount of the Kift which thall have 
fallen in arrear; from which they fhall realize the balance _that fhall have arifen in the pay- 
ment of the Kitts, and hall give credit to the faid Rajah for the furplus and fubfequent net 
Revenues, in the part payment of the fum of five lacks fourteen thoufand two hundred and 
eighty-five (5,14,285) Star Pagodas. And in this cafe, the management of the diftrié or 
diftriéis thus affumed, fhall for ever continue in the. poffeffion of the faid Company, any 
thing contained in the gd Article of the prefent Engagement to the contrary notwithftanding; 
nee we faid Company agree to give to the faid Rajah credit for the net Revenue arifing 
therefrom. 

Vourth.—In order to prevent any lof arifing to either party from this meafure, it is mutu- 
cally agreed, that the dire or diftriés which fhall thus be affumed by the faid Company, 
frail bg entire, as mentioned in the faid Schedule, and not parts of diftriés. 

_. Fifth—In confequence of this meafure, whereby the diftriGs mentioned in the Schedule 
No. 1. become refponfible for any arrears that may acerue in the payment of the above 
ftipulated Kitts, the faid Rajah agrees that he will not grant Tankaws or aflignments, on any 
account, on the Revenues thereof; and if, contrary to this condition, any Tunkaws or aflign- 
: 2 meats 


« the Affairs of The EAST. INDIA COMPANY... .... 237 
seeta ER: 

ments fhould exift, when the faid diftri@s or any of them fhall be affumed by the faid 

Company, fuch Tunkaws or aflignments fhall be declared by the faid Company and the faid 

Rajah to be of no value, nor fhall they semain in effect. ‘7: 

ixth—It is agreed between the ‘contracting parties, that the above-defcribed balance 
account fhall be annually adjufted, and a Committee ‘confifiing of four refpectable and 
capable perfons, of which two fhall be nominated by the faid Company and two by the 

, faid Rajah, “thall affemble on the firft day of Auguit of every. year, commencing with 
1798 i the purpofe of adjufting aud of drawing out a fair and equitable ftatement 
thereof. * 

Article 8th.—In cafe the Rajah fhall at any time have occafion for any number of troops 
for the colfection of his Revenues, the fupport of his: authority, or the gogd order and 
government of his country, the faid Company agree to furnith a fufficient number of troo] 
for that purpofe, on public reprelentation being made by the faid Rajah to the Prefident in 
Council of Fort St. George, of the neceflity for employing fuch troops and of the objects to 
be obtained thereby; and the faid Rajah agrees to dehy the additional expenfe of fuch 
troops fo long as they may be employed at his requeft, this additional expenfé being the 
fum over and above the expenfe of fuch troops while in garrifon or at fixed quarters; and it 
ihall be at the option of the faid Rajah to reimburfe the faid furplus expente, either on the 
conclufion of the fervice on which {uch troops may have been employed, in money, or to add 
it to the debit fide of the account called Balance Account, and more particularly explained in 
the 2d condition of the 7th Article. é 

Article gth.—The faid Rajah fhall receive regular information of all negociations which 
fhall relate to declaring war or making peace, wherein the faid Company may engage, 
and the intereft of the Carnatic and its dependencies may be concerned ; the faid 
Rajah fhall be confidered as an Ally of the faid Company in all Treaties which fhall in any 
refpeét affect the Carnatic and countries dependant thereon, or belonging to either of the 
contracting parties contiguous thereto; and the faid Rajah agrees that he will not enter 
into any negociations or political correfpondence with any European or Native Power with- 
out the confent of the faid Company. + 

Article 10th. —The faid Rajah agrees to allow for the fupport of Serfogec, the adopted 
fon of the late Rajah Tulagee, deceafed, the fum of Star Pagodas eleven thoufand (11,000) 
per annum, and for the maintenance of the widows of the laid Tulagee the further fam 
of Star Pagodas three thoufand (3,000) each pe annum; which payment fhall be made 
by equal monthly inftalments into the hands of the Company, or whomfoever they 
may appoint to receive them, and applied to the above purpotes, according to their 

cretion. 


This Treaty, confifting of ten Articles, and having two Schedules annexed thereto, marked 
Nos. 1. and 2. hall be in force and thall have effect from the r2th day of July 1792, corre- 
{ponding with the 22d day of the month Zekaida 1206 Hejira; and the contracting parties 
having affixed their refpective feals and fignatures to two counterparts on the dates under- 
mentioned, that is to fay, the Honourable Sir Charles Qakeley, Bart. Prefident and 
Governor in Council of Fort St. George, ihall aflix the feal and fignature to_one coun- 
terpart, on the part of the Honourable Englith’ Eaft India Company, and his Excellence 
Ameer Sing, Rajah of Tanjore, fhall affix his feat and fignature to another counterpart, thal! Sic Orig: 
be exchanged. ‘ 


Signed and delivered at 


Schedule, No. 1. 


Litt of DISTRICTS, with the amount of the Net REVENUES from each, at 
which they fhall be eftimatcd and ailumed, according to the 7th Article of the ac 
companying Treaty, in force from the 12th July, correfponding with the 22d Zekaida 
ag 


Hejira, 

Mannargoody - - Net Revenue - - = | 2,45,198 
Trivady woe es - jee es = = = | 1,49,6 
Mayaveram - — - - - Do - se - e608 
Putticottah - - - - De - - - 27,638 


Star Pag’ } 5,87,113 


By the firft condition of the 7th Article of the faid Treaty it is agreed, that the faid Com- 
iy fhall affume the management of fuch diftri@ or diftriéts, the Reveaue of which, after 
leduéting the charges of colleétion, fhall equal the amount of the Kift which fhall’ have 
fallen in arrear. : 
The faid Company therefore, by virtue of this condition, fhall affume a diftri@ or diftrias 
from among the above-named, the net Revenue of which fhall be, as near as poflible, 
equal to the amount of the Kift which fhall have fallen into arrear. 


Signed and fealed at 


238° APPENDIX fo‘the'Séeond REPORT from the Selest Comimittée on 
Nola 
_, Schedule ‘of ‘Private Debts. 
{Referred to in the ‘4th Article.} 


. - te ue Principal, 
Mi. Alexander Brodie - - + + = Star Pagt| 99,254 
Mr. Duncan Baine -  - - 6 2 += = =] 30,600 
Sir George Ramfay - - = + + - = =|. 20,000 
Collén Maclekan - - - - - - - - 72,000 

_ Major (or Captain) Buttows - 2 ee = sf 26,200 
ir. Whyte’ a ee re 5,706 


Received = 1,000 


a . . . ——|. 4,706 
Mr. Swartz, for Money fubfcribed by: Gentlemen for} ahr 
the benefit of Orphans -  - - +) - 


Star:Pagodas |" 
4 * ——— 
‘The above debts bear intercft at the rate of 12 per cent. per annum. 


Appendix, No. 32. 


ae x m 
ExtraG@ Letter from the Governor in Council at Fort St. George (Political Department); ‘ ~ 
* dated 15th Oétober 1798. : 


-Par. 34, HAVING received the directions of yout Honourable Court, for reftoring Serfojee, 
the legal heir to the Mufaud of Tanjore, we fhiall forbear to prefs upon your confideration our 
correfpondence with the late Rajah, which is a'repetition of complaint on our part, and of 
evafion pn his, relative to the ruinous fy! of meafures'purfued by his Excellency and his 
Mini 3. but thall proceed to relate the fteps taken for carrying thefe important orders into 
.execution. : a fa 

‘Conl.27Febd. . 35+ Previous to the receipt of thofe orders, we bad been compelled to remove Mr. 
Alexander Macleod from the Beoation of Refident at Tanjore, the particulars of which pro- 
ceeding your Honourable Court will obferve in our difpatches of this date from the Public 
Department, and we had chofen Mr. Benjamin Torin to fucceed that gentleman at Fanjore. 

36. The Earl of Momington thought it advifeable to pofipone the ultimate inftructions to 
‘us, upon the modification of the manner of carrying the directions of the Secret Committee 
into effect, and on the 23d June we accordingly received his Lordfhip’s detailed infiructions 
for this. purpofe. 

€onf.25June. . 37. The Sapreme Government have entered into the reafons which induce them to think - 
it neceflary to the attainment of the fubftantial end of juftice, that a Commiffion of Enquiry 
fhould be inftituted, as a meafure preparatory to the eftablithment of Serfojee on the Mufnud; 
and in order to obviate the difficulties attending fuch an enquiry, they determincd that 
Serfojee thould be immediately placed upon the throne, leaving the neceffary inveftigation 
into the ftate of the country to be made after his accefiion. 

€.C.N%, gg _ 38. Upon this occafion the Governor General furnifhed us with letters from himfelf to 

& 100, Ameer she and Serfojee, to be prefented to them at the time of announcing the decifion of 
the.Company, communicating to the former the grounds of the judgment m favour of the 
rights of Serfojce, and afuring him that his pe fhould be protected, and that whatever 
might be adjudged to be his private property thould be fecured to him, together with a {uit- 
able provifion, and informing the latter of the decifion in his favour. 

39. The,Governor General in Council alfo furnifhed us with a Proclamation, to be pub- 
Tifhed immediately after Serfojee fhould be placed upon the Mufnud; ia which are ftated the 
opinions of the firlt Pundits it favour of Ameer Sing; the circumttances which led to doubts 
of the integrity of thofe opinions ; the meatiires in confequence taken for afcertaining the 
legality of them 3, and fini iy, the grounds upon which the deciGion of Sir Archibald Campbell 
had been fet afide, and the claims of the rightful heir afcertaincd, acknowledged, and 
-eftablithed. 

40. On the delivery of the letter to Serfojee, the Governor General in Council required 
that he fhould affent to certain ftipulations for fecuring the objects of the Committion, for 
continuing in force the Treaty of 1792 uhtil the permanent arrangements directed by the 
Secret Conimittce fhould be carried into effect, and for affording full protection and a fuit- 
able maintenance to Anicer Sing and his family. a 

41. Confidering the diferders which had prevaited in Tanjore during the adminiftration 
of Ameer Sing, tic little experience which Serfojec could be fyppofed to poifefs with refpect 
ito the management of his a ‘sire, and his want af proper Officers for the condaét of buiinets, 
added to the heavy demands which he muft difcharge immediately upon his acceflion ; the 
Supreme Goverinent were convinced that it would be equally conducive to his own interefis 
as to thofe of the Company, that Serfojee fhould confent to transfer the management of his 
whole country to the Company’s Government for a period of one or tivo years, Eos rex, 

jowever, 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 239, 


however, founded upon the interpretation which might be given to fuch a meafure, and which, 
had been anticipated by the Secret Committee, the Governor General in Council did not 
think it proper to direct us to make a propofition of {uch a nature to Serfojee; but if the 
Rajah, fenfible of his inability to enter upon the immediate management of his country, 
thould for that reafon exprefs a defire that we flould affume a temporary charge of it, his 
Lordthip in Council fan@tioned our acquiefeence in his Excellency’s withes. 

42. The Supreme Government recommended that the Commiflion which was to be 
appointed fubfequent to the inftallation of Serfojee, fhould confit of three perfons, and as they 
were fatisfied this Government were equally fenlible with themfelves how deeply the honour 
-of the Company and of the Britith Nation was concerned in repairing the injaries which the 
country of Tanjore and its lawful Prince had fuftained by the uturpation of Ameer Sing, and 
how imuch the attaiument of this important object muft depend upon the condué of the Com- 
million, they had the fulleft confidence that we fhould feicét for it thofe fervants of this 
eftablifhment who were bett qualified to difcharge fo facred a truft. Ms 

43. As we judged it of the greateft importance that there fhould be no delay in carrying 
their inftrudtions into exceution, we immediately trenfinitted our orders to the Refident at 
Tanjore, for the accomplithment of the feveral objeéts pointed out to us by the Secret Com- 
‘mittee and the Supreme Government. For the particulars of them we beg leave to refer Conf.a5 June, 
your Honourabie Court to our Proceedings, noted in the margin. ‘4 

44. We had very toon the fatisfaétion of recciving a Report from the Refident, Mr. Torin, Do. 17 July. 
that he had in communication with the Commanding Cllicer, Colonel Afton, carried the 
whole arrangement for the depofition of Ameer Sing, and the inftallation of Serfojee, into 
effec without the finalleft commotion or difturbance, and that Serfojee had affented to the 
feveral ftipulations required of him. 

45. Upon this occafion Serfojee adverted to his own inexperience, and to the affiftance 
which he required from the Company’s Government in undertaking the adminiftration of 
his affairs; but was immediately apprized by the Refident, that this was a fabjeé which 
would require very ferious confideration, and that as he (the Refident) was not authorized 
to make any propoftion relative to it, whatever his Excellency might have to propofe muft 
be the voluntary and deliberate refult of his own reflections. : 

46. In atew days the Refident tranfinitted to us a formal and exprefs application, written Conf.17July, 
by Rajah Serfojec himfelf, that on account of his inexperience in publie buGnefs, and the 
difficulty of retrieving his affairs from the embarraflment into which they had been thrown, 
he requefted that his country might be taken under the managenient of the Company 
for a period not exceeding two years. 

47- In executing this delicate and important commiffion, we thought ourfelves fortunate 
in having upon the {pot two gentlemen of fuch known character and integrity as the 
Refident (Mr. Torin) and Cotonel Afton, the Commanding Officer, and we have no doubt 
that the detailed Reports will imprefs your Honourable Court, as they have impreffed us, 
witha high fenfe of their conduct. ¢ 

48. We were no leis fatisfied with the perfonal addrefs of Mr. Torin, in conveying to 
Rajah Serfojee fo juft an eftimation of the Company's juftice and faith, as well as of the 
fituation and circuinftances in which he himfelf was placed, as to fatisfy him of the expedi- 
grey and good policy of requefting the afliftance of this Government in the adminiftration of 

Ns ailairs. 

49. Upon taking this important queftion into confideration, our Prefident; Lieutenant Conf. eoJuly. 
General. Harris, delivered in a Minute, in which he bas ftated his reafons, at confiderabie 
dength, for thinking it an inexpedient meafure to take the country under the Company’s 


“« the mott prompt execution of juftice, uch as the ita} 
advice and attittauce of the Commiliion, could accom Bs 
50. Upon thefe grounds alone, and the recoliection of the evils infeparable from fuch 
frequent tranfitions of authority, the General hefitated to repeat his opinion of the propricty, 
of taking charge of the country, but when he reflected upon the impreffion which may be 
received of the Company's conduct, in contequence of fuch a transier, and upon the cireum- 
ftances which had been difplayed fince the tranfiniffion of our e@ions to tie Refident, he 
had no longer any doubt upon the {abject ; for though the ftipulations under which the 
Supreme Government had autiorized xs to accept tiie transi¢ uefionably juft and 
honourable, General Harris feared that even the Native Princes in alliance with the Coni- 
pany, from being fo much accuftemed in their own conduct to confound the poffeffion of 
power ‘with the abufe of it, would with difficulty be brought to belicve that the propofed 
extention of the Companys authority in the ccuntry bad taken place from any other 
fuggeftions than thofe of benefit to themielves, while thofe Powers difaffected “to the 
Company would reprefent the transier to have been the fecret condition of Serfojee’s 
elevation. : Z : 
51. Under thefe circumtftances, the General was of cpinion that the enquiry which the Secre: 
Commitice and the Supreme Government had direGed to be made, would be better accom- 
plithed by permitting the country to remain under the Kajah’s management, aided by the 
363. “3P . advice 


240° APPENDIX so the Second REPORT from the Sele6t Committee on 


advice of the Commiffion, and thereafter of the Refident, than under the temporary govern- 
anent of the Company. 
Conf.20July, 52. In compliance therefore with the recommendation: of General Harris, we ftated thefe 
doubts, of the expediency of afluming the management of the country, to the Governor 
General in Council, and have requetted, his ultimate inftrations upon this important point. 
In the mean while we directed Mr. Torin to take fuch meafures as might beneceflary for the 
management of thofe diftriéts not already under the-management of the Company’s fervants ; 
and as this arrangement would only be of fhort duration, we called upon the Rajah Serfojee. 
to give his entire confidence and ‘co-operation to Mr. Torin, for the promotioa of his Ex- 
celleney’s as well as the Company's interetts. ‘i ; 
Confo7Suly, 53° Mr. Saunders thought it necoffary to explain, in a feparate Minute, the extent of his 
7 * concurrence in this reference to the Supreme Goverament ; his reafons for thinking the affump- ~ 
tion of the Tanjore country ineligible for a period of only two years, were entirely confined to 
financial confiderations, and to the lofs which we are likely toiuffer in our immediate reccipts. 
from that country ; but as the political of the fubjecthad been fully inveftigated, and con- 
fidered upon a more enlarged feale by thofe who were moft competent to judge of its 
importance, he limited his concurrence to the financial pert of the queftion. 
-54. We proceeded at the fame time to fele&t fuch of the Company's fervants as we judged 
capable of difcharging the duties of the Commiflion, under the injunétions of the Secret 
Committee and the Supreme Government, and we have in confequence appointed the Com-- 
miffion to confift of Mr. Benjamin Torin, Mr. Charles Harris, Mr. George Stratton ; for 
the particular inftru@tions with which we have furnifhed them for their guidance, we beg leav2 
Conf, 25 Sep. to refer you to our Proceedings, noted in the margin. 
Dd Jut 55-_We have grarited the Commillioners each a falary of two hundred and fifty (250) 
+34 “WY+ Pagodas per mont! daring the time they may be employed upon this enquiry. 
* 56. We have the fatisfaGion of acquainting your Honourable Court, that fince the change 
of affairs at ‘Tanjore, the neceflary arrangements have been made for appropriating to Amcer 
Conf.28 Aug, Sing his perfonal property, and for putting Serfojee in poffellion of tuck part of the litle 
% roperty which was found in the Palace’ as was atcertained to belong to the Sircar; this 
divifion was made by means of confidential perfons from both Princes, under the infpection of 
the Refident, and has received their entire concurrence ; a difpofition ‘has alfo been made for 
the future accommodation of Ameer Sing in a part of the Palace’ of Tanjore, which he bas 
chofen, with the confent of Serfojce, for his refidence; and 9 temporary provifion bas been made 
for the depofed Prince and his family, until, by the determination of the Supreme Government 
upon the queftion of affuming the temporary management of the country, we fhall be enabled 
to propofe a fixed ftipend for the fupport of Ameer Sing. 23 as ae 
57. During thefe tranfactions at Tanjore, Rajah Ameer Sing appears, by the Reports of the 
Refident, to have manifefted an entire refignation to this important ‘change, and Rajah 
Serfojee to have thewg a moft commendable degree of moderation in himfelf, and a difpofition 
to relieve, as much ag poffible, the fall of his rival. 


Appendix,.No, 33° 


TREATY with the Rajah of Tanjore, dated 23th, O@ober 1799. 


‘Treaty for cementing the Friendfhip and: Alliance ‘between the Honourable’ Company 
and his Excellency the Rajah of Tanjeie, and for eftablifhing the Governmeut of 
Tanjore on a permanent foundation, - : 


WHEREAS the ftipulations and conditions of the Treaty of 1792, concluded between the 
Honourable Sir Charles Qakely, Bart. Governor: in Council of Fort St.George, and his 
Excellency Ameer Sing, laté Rajah df Tanjore, have been found inadequate to the intentions 
of the contracting partics FAnd whereas his Excellency Maha Rajah Serfojee, Rajah of 
Tanjore; has, by “a, certain inftrument under his fignature, previous to his elevation to the 
Mufhud of his ‘anceftors, engaged to confent to fuch arrangements as may be ‘deemed 
expedient for the better management of the country of ‘Tanjore, particularly for the — 
due adminiftration of juftice; and alfo for fecuriig to the Honourable Englith Eaft India 
Company a regular difcharge of their exifting and future demands on Tanjore ; wherefore 
the prefent Treaty is concluded between his Excellency- Serfojee, Rajah. of Tanjore, on his 
part, and-Benjamin Torin, Efquire, Refident at Tanjore, on behalf of the. Company, being 
invefted .with full powers by the Right honourable the. Earl of Momington Behader, 
Governor General of Bengal, according to the following Articles: 


Article 1ft.—Such parts of all former Treaties, with the former Rajah of Tanjore, as are 
intended to eftablith the friendfhip and ‘alliance betwéen thé Honourable Company and his 
Excellency the Rajah of Tanjore, afe hercby ftrengthened and confirmed, and the contracting 

ties mutually agree, that the friends and enemies of either fhall be confidered to be the 
friends and enemies of both. ¢ é ts *. 

Article 2d.—The feveral proyifions heretofore eftablithed, for enabling the contracting 
puties to carry the fpirit and intention of the preceding Article into execution having 
proved, defective, and the refult of an onquiry inftituted by the authority of hed Ri, hs 

é : : “honourable 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. a4 


honourable the Governor General in Council, with the previous written confent of his 
Excellency Maha Rajah Serfojee, for the purpofe of afecrtaining the actual ftate and con- 
dition of the country of Tanjore, having proved that it is become ‘indifpentxbly neceffary to 
eftablith a regular and permanent fyitem for the better adminiftration of the Revenues of the 
faid country; it is ftipulated and agreed, that all former provifions for fecuring a partial or 
temporary interference on the part of the Honourable Company, in the Government, or in the 
adminiftration of the Revenues of the country of Tanjore, fhall be entirely annulled, and that 
in lieu thereof'a permanent fyftem, for the collection of the Revenue and for the adminifiration. 
of Juftice, fhall be eftablifhed in the manner hereafter mentioned. 


Article 34.—The Honourable Company fhall be at liberty, as foon as poffible, to afcertain, 
determine and eftablith, rights of property, aud to fix a reafonable affeffment upon the feveral 
Soubahs, Pergunnahs, and vi of the country of Tanjore, and to fecure a fixed and per- 
manent Revenue; and the faid aifeflment, fo afcertained and fixed, fhall not be liable to 


Article 4th.—A Court or Courts hall be cftablifhed for the due admniniftration of civil and 
criminal juftice, under the fole authority of the Englith Katt india Company. The faid 
Courts fhall be compofed of Officers to be appointed by the Governer and Council of Fort 
St. George for the tine being, and fhall in no iuftance whatever be fubjeé to the control, 
authority, or interference of the faid Rajah, but fhall be conduéted according to fuch 
ordinances and regulations (framed with due regard to the exifting laws and ufages of the coun- 
try) as fhall from time to time be enaéted and publifhed by the faid Governor in Council. 


Article 5th.—The Revenues fhall be collected, according to the rates of affeffiment to be 
‘eftablifhed by the 3d Article by the faid Governor in Council for that purpofe; and the faid 
Rajah fhall exercife no control whatever, nor in any manner interfere in the adminiftration 
of the faid Revenues. 


Article 6th._— Whereas it is ftipulated and agreed by the 5th Articie of the Treaty of 1792, 
that the payments to be made to the Honourable Company, by his Excellency the Rajah, thall 
amount to five lacks, {eventy-four thoufand two hundred and eighty-five Pagodas per annum, 
under the different denominations of fubfidy, Peifhcuth, public and private debts, it is now 
ftipulated and agreed that thefe diftinétions fhall for ever ceafe, and that the whole Revenue 
fhall be colleéted and accounted for by the faid Company in the manner hereafter provided ; 
the faid Company charging themfelves with the payment of that part of the regiftered private 
debts which has not already been transferred to their account. 


Article 7th.—In lieu of the faid ftipulations in the 5th Article of the Treaty of 1792, it is 
hereby ftipulated and agreed, that his Excellency the Rajah fhall in all cafes receive annually 
onc lack of Star Pagodas, which thall be confidered to be the firft charge payable from the 
net Revenues of Tanjore. In ‘addition to the faid {um of one lack of stat Pagodas, his 
Excellency fhall receive a proportion of one-fifth, ‘to be calculated on the remainder of the net 
Revenue, after deducting charges of collection of whatever defeription; the charge 
fpecified in the following Article. 

Article 8th.—It is ftipulated and agreed, that the fum of twenty-five thoufand Star Pagodas 
fhall in all cafes be appropriated to the fupport of the late Rajah Ameer Sing, and fhall be 
coufidered as a charge on the Revcnue, to iM deducted previous to the calculation of the pro- 
portion of one-fifth above mentioned. ‘The refidue of the Revenues, after the foregoing deduc- 
tion, thall be at the difpofal of the faid Company. 


Article gth.—It is ftipulated and agreed, that the Rajah fhall be treated on all occafions, in 
his.own toritories as well as in thofe of the Company, with all the attention, refpeét and. 
honour, which is due to a friend and Ally of the Britifh Natioa. 


Article 10th, 


Whereas his Excellency the Rajah has had occafion to complain of incon- 
venience to his Hency and his fervants, from, the preleat mode of ganifoning his Ex- 
cellency’s hereditary fort of Tanjore by a part of the Honowable Compiny’s troops ; it is 
fipulated and agreed, with a view to the accommodation and fatisfaction of his Excellency, 
that the {aid fort of Tanjore thall be evacuated by the Company’s troops entirely, and that 
his Excellency hall be at full liberty to garrifon the faid fort in fueh manner as to him fhall 
fhall feem fit. Provided always, that in the event of an invafion of the territorics of the Com- 
pany or of their Allies, or in the event of any failure inthe due performance of the engage- 
ments contracted by his Excellency the Rajait, the faid Company thall again have power to 
oceupy the faid fort as a military poft, for the protection and mutual intcretts of the contracting 
parties ; the faid Company bin ing themfelves to evacuate the faid fort as foon as the 
reafons for re-occupying it fhall no longer exitt, 


Article 11th.—His Excellency the Rajah ftipulates and agrees, that the faid fort fhall in no 
cafe whatever become an afylum for public. offenders, or for perfons defirous of efeaping from 
the jurifdiGion of the Courts of Civil and Criminal Juftice, or from the authority of the 
Revenne Officers, or from any other branch of the authority of the Honowrable Company ; 
and his Excellency the Rajah further agrees to deliver up ail fuch perfons without delay, on 

ication from fuch Officer or Officers as the Governor in Council of Fort St. George 
appoint for the purpofe, J 


Article 


242 APPENDIX fo-tie Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


Article 1¢th.—In coi 
appear either 
the ume of ¢ 


aints brought before any of the Courts of Juftice, in which it fhall” 
the Rajah or the reprefeatation of the defendants, at or before 
1, or by the petition of the Complainaat, that both parties 
spendants of his Excellency, or inhabitants ufualiy refident 
palated and agreed, that fuch parties fhail in the firlt infiance 
may appoint to difpenfe it; any com- 
8, or others, refiding in the fort of 
t deicription, fhatl in the firft initance be made to the Com- 
pjore, who fhali refer it te his Execilency. The Rajah hereby 
mediate inveftigation to be made in his Court of the juftice, or in cafe 
the parties thould defire it, to order the difpute to be referred to a proper arbitration; his 
Excelleacy engaging to bring it to a direct iflue, aad to carry the featence or award, it un- 
favourable to his relation or fervant, into immediate execution. 


Lanjore, by pei 
pany’s Kepreientat 


Article 15th—In order that his Excellency the Rajah may have full fatisfaétion in refpet& 
to the Revenues of the Territory hereby dubjeéted to the management of the Company, his 
Excellency fhail be at liberty to inipect the ‘accounts of the heud Cutcherry, or Collector's 
‘freafury, from time to time, or to ftation a Vakeel or Accountant at his own expenfe, for the 
purpofe of taking and tranfinitting to ‘his Excellency copies of any or of all the accounts 
which fhall be recorded in the head Cutcherry or Treafury of the Collector. 


Article 14th.—Whereas a certain annual Peificufh, amounting to Cuuckrums 2,000, is 
payable by the Danifh Government of Tranquebar, for lands held of the Kajahs of Tanjore in 
the vicinity of that place, it is ftipulated and agreed that the faid Peithcuth thall continue to 
be received by his Excellency the Rajah, without any deduction from his Excetiency’s pro- 
portion of the Revenue, as hereinbefore fiipulated. 


Article 15th—~And whereas it is neceffary to the convenience and comfort of his Excel- 
lency the Rajah that certain {upplies of rice, gram and other Brain; thould be fupplied tor the 
ufe ofhis Excellency, the Company bind thenifeives to fumith the Said fupplies as often as the 
Rajah fhall find it neceffary to apply for this purpofe; his Exceliency binding humieif to pay 
for the faid grain, with the charges of tran{portation, at the rate of the current prices for the 
time being. 

This Treaty, confifting of fifteen Articles, being fettled this day, the 25tlr Oétober 17909, 
corre{ponding to the 12th of Alpefhy, in the year Sedhartey, by Kenjamin ‘form, ttq. 
on the part of and in the name of the Right honourable Kichard, Earl of Mor 
Governor General aforelaid, and by his Excellency Maha Rajah Sertogee Rajah ou bis 
own part, the faid Benjamin Torin, Lig. has delivered to his Exceliency Mata Rajah 
Serfogee Rajab one copy of the fame, figned and fealed by himfeif and uis Cxcelieucy, 
Maha Rajah Serfogee has delivered to Benjamin Torin, Efy. anotaer copy of tue tame, 
fealed and figned by himfelf; and Benjamin Torin, Efq. engages that the fait Treaty 
fhall be ratified by the Right honourable the Governor Geacrai, under his teal and 
Gignature, within forty-five days from the date hereof. 


(Signed) SREE RAMPRETAUP. 


Seal. 


(A true Copy.) 


(Signed) Benjamin Torin, 
i: Y Refident at Tanjore. 


Appendix, No. 34. 


TREATY with Tippoo Sultaun, dated 18th March 1792. 


DEFINITIVE Treaty of perpetual Triendthip, for the adjuftment of affairs between the 
Honourable the Englith Eaft India Company, the Nawaub AfophJab Behader and Row Pundit 
Purdhaun Behader, and Tippoo Sultaun, in virtue of the authority of the Right honourable 
Charles Earl Cornwallis, Knight of the moft noble Order of the Garter, Governor General, &c. 
invefted with full powers to dire and control all the affairs of the faid Company in the Eaft 
Indies, dependent on the feveral Prefidencies of Bengal, Madras, aud Bombay}; and of the 
Nawaub Azeem ul Omrah Behader, poffeiting full powers on the part of the Nawaub Afoph 
Jah Behader and Hurry Ram Pundit Taulea Bchader, poffefling equal powers on tie part of 
Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader; fettled the 17th day of March 1792, of the Chriitian wra, 
anfwering to the 23d day of the month Rejeb 1206 of the Hejira, by Sir John Kenaaway, 
Bart. on the part of the Right honourable Charles Earl Cornwallis, Kaight. of the moft 
noble Order of the Garter, &e. and Meer Aulum Pehader on the part of the Nawaub 
Azeem ul Omrah Behader, and Buckajee Pundit on the part of Hurry Kam Pandit Taulea 
Behader, on one part; and by Golaum Ally Khaua Behader and Ally Reza Khan, on b 

of TippooSultaun; according to the under-inentioned Articles; which, by tie biefling dy 
fhall_be binding on their heirs and fucceffors as long as the tn and moon endure, and the 
conditions of them be invariably obferved by the contrasting partics, o 

Atti 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 243 


le 1ft-—The friendizip fubfifting between the Honourable Company and the Sircars of 

xuun, agreeably tofuriner Trea thefirft with theiate Nawaub Hyder Aily Khan, 
bearing date 8th Augufi 1770, and the other with Tippoo Sultaun, of the 11th"of March 1784, 
is hereby congimed and increafed, and the Articles of the two former Treaties are to remain in 
full force, excepting fuch of them as by the prefent engegement ere otherwile adjufted : and the 
Sth Article of the fedond entioned Treaty, dated th rch, 1784, correfpondin g 
with the 18th of the mouth of Rubbee Ulaeny 1108 Helira, confirming all the privileges 
and iminunitics of trade which the dgcealed Nawab Hyder Aly Khen granted to the faid 
Company by the Treaty entered into In the year 1770, isalto by virtuc of the prefeut Treaty 
renewed and confirmed. 


Article 2d.—In._ the fourth Article of the Preliminary Treaty entered into between the 
Allied Powers and the faid Tippoo Suitaun, dated the ead February 1702, correfponding 
with the 28th of the ninth Jemadie ul Seuny 1206 F it is writtea, until the due 
performance of the three foregoing Articles (tf fir ing the ceffion of half 
the country ; the fecond, the immediate payment ef b tum of moncy agreed’'to Le 
paid, and the remainder, in {pecic only, at three inftulments not exceeding foer mouths each 
inttalmeut ; and the third engaging for the releafe of the prifozers) “two of the fors of the 
“ faid Tippoo Sultaun fhall Se detained as hoitages :” avhich Articles are confirmed by the 
prefent Jultraiment; accordingly the faid Tippoo Sultaun fheli divide the fin agreed to: be 
paid at three inftalments above mentioned, into three equal parts, cud fhall pay to the faid 
three Powers their refpeetive fhares, at the exchange affixed for the ameunt to be paid, .im- 
nicdiately, at fuch places on the boundaries of the Allies as fhail be determined on by 
them; and after the performance of the remaining twe Articles akeye mentioned, that is to 
fay, the ceflion of onc half the country, and the releafe of -prifoncrs, in cafe the ameunt of 
the inftalments be paid by Tippoo Suitaun to the three’ Powers, prior to. the expiration 
of the period ftipulated fer it, the faid fons of ‘fippoo Sultaun-fhail be immediately dif- 
miffed, and all pecuniary demands between-the contracting parties fhall ceale and be at an 
end. - i 


Article 3d.—By the firft Article of the Pr 'y Treaty it is agreed that one half of 
the dominions which were in the poffefiion of the fiid Tippoo Suitaun at the commence- 
ment of the War, thall be ceded to the Allies adjacent to their refpective’ boundaries, and 
fubject to their {election accordingly. Tike gescra! Abfirné of Countries compofing half the 
dominions of 1 Sultaun, to be ceded to the ss agreeably to their refpedlive fhares, is 
hereunto fubjoined, and the detail of them is iaferted jaa feparate Schedule, bearing the teal 
and fignature of Tippoo Sultaun. . 


Diftriéts ceded to the Honourable Englith Company. 


Calicut, 63 Talooks - = = + = = 18,48,765 5 43 

Palgautcherry ee 000 

Dindigul and Puluavier Packthy,2Talooks - = - | 92,000 ~ — 

Salen - - - - = - - - - | 24,000 — — 

Koork - = = = a6 2 ah oe 8,000 — — 

Namuil - = - 16,000 — — 

Sunkagurry - = - 40,000 — — 
Barra Mahal, 

Barra Mahal ais 

Coveriputtun - = 

Verbudderdroog = = i 

Raycottah = + = | 

Kangoondie - - }1,34,000——} 

Darampoorcy = = = i 

Pinnagar - 2. 

‘Tingry Cottah - + 

Coveripoor = = 

Abtoor Anuniguny- = = =F 18000 — 

Punouttic - ose - = = =] 14,000 — — 

Shadmungal - + = - = 8 2} 20,000 — — 

Yamloor - - - oe _ -| 16,cco — — 

Pagodas - | 13,26,765 5 48 
eed 


363. 30 Dittridts 


244 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


Diftri@s ceded to the Nawaub Affoph Jah ‘Behauder. 


Talook Kurpah, 61 Talooks; the 
Doab, 15 Talooks - =  16,48,099 3 2 


Dedu@ as fellows, 

in the Peifhwah’s 

fhare - - - - 13,06,666 6 10 
Remains with Tip- 

poo Sultaun, Ana- 

goondy - --- 60,101 ~— — 


1 3,66,767 610 


2,81,931 6 8 
41,804 9 8 


Remains to the Nawab Afoph Jah 
Banyaupilly and Chenchinulla, 2 Talooks 


Singputtun and Chilwara - + += = =] 20;000 — — 
a - 7 - - - - - - - | 20,000 — — 
lanwuntgoon -~ 5 = = = = =] 15,000 — — 
‘Wimpelly Vemla - tte ee wf 12,565 — 
Moaka = ~.-- © + «© © = 12,162 6 14 
In Gooty, 4 Talooks, viz. 
arpa 7“ = = 19,055 = 4 
‘annevt -~ = 2 = = 13,072 8 — 
Velanoor” a 800 -—— 
‘Sengemmully - ~~ sm 10,855 — 


51,782 8 4 


- : - - =| 5s — 


Befwapoor - - = 
Bulkarykoor, &e. 2 Talooks = = 35,000 — — 


Remains with Tippoo Sultaun, 2 Talooks, 
Koorkoor and oor = = 12,000 —— 
". © Remains to Nawaub Afoph Jah, 
In Koorkoor - = - + * + + - - 
- Pagodas - 13,16,666 6 11 


ee 
Diftri&ts ceded to Row Pandit Purdhaun Behader. 


TheDoab,15Talooks - - ~ 16,48,099 3 2 


Dedad 
Remains with Tip- 
poo Sultaun, aa 6a) 
goody, 1 Talook - 101 — — 
In the hare of the 
Nawaub Afoph 


Kooeol,8Talooks 106137 3 
Koopool,8Talooks 1,06,13' 
Kinehgurry, ido. ~ apie 3 2. . 
InGunjunderGhur 96,094 2 15 


2,81,332 6 8 


341,432 6 8 


Remains to Row Pundit-Purdhaun, viz. 
Danwar, 8 Talooks 1,38,536 8 5% 
Havanoor, 2 D° - 30,604 3 2 
Dummoor - - - 15,394 6 6} 
Bamkapoor, 16D°- 2,50,426 6 7 
Serbutty - 4D°- 64,843 7 10 
Kilow ~ - 11 De- 1,43,397 4 3 
Gudduck - 4D°- 45,207 1 gf 
Jaluhal - 5 De- 73,185 — 14 


In 


the Affsirs of The RAST INDIA COMPANY.. 245 
Diftri@s ceded to Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader—continued. 


. hy “ 
In coast} so1g77 9 sf 


Deduk& 
In_the fhare of the 
Nawaub Afoph 


Jah- - = 96,094 2 15 


Remains to Row 
Pundit Purdhaun 5,883 6 73 


From Gooty—Sundoor - - - - . 
13,16,666 610 
39,50,098 8 ot 


Article 4th—W hatever part of Namuel, Sunkagurry, Salem, Caverepoor, Attoor and Per- 
mutty, which, as above ftated, are comprized within the divifion ceded to the aforefaid Com- 
pony fhall be fituated to the northward and eaftward of thé River Cavori; or if there fhould 

any other Talooks, or villages of Talooks, fituated as above defcribed, they fhall belong 
to the faid Company, and others of equal value fhall be relinquithed by the faid Company to 
Tippoo Sultaun, in exchange for them; and if of the above diftriéts there fhall be any Talooks, 
or villages of Talooks, fituated to the weftward or fouthward of the faid River, they fhail be 
relinquifhed to Tippoo Sultaun in exchange for others of equal vatuc to the faid Company. 


Article 5th—On the ratification and mutual exchange of this Definitive Treaty, fuch 
diftris and forts as are to be ceded by Tippoo Sultaun thall be delivercd up without any 
cavil or demand for outftanding balances ; and fuch Talooks and forts as are to be relin- 
quifhed by the three Powers to Ti Sultaun, fhall in the fame manner be delivered up; and 
orders to this effect, addreffed to the Aumils and Commanders of forts, fhall be immediately 
prepared, and delivered to each refpectively of the contracting parties. On the receipt of 
which orders, the difcharge of the money ftipulated to be paid immediately, and the releafe 
of prifoners on all fides, of which the contracting parties, confidering God as prefent and a 
witnefs, thall releafe without cavil all that are in exiftence, and fhall not detain a fingle perfon. 
The Armies of the Allied Powers fhall march from Seringapatam ; fuch forts and places, never- 
thelefs, as fhall be in the poffeffion of the Company, and on the record by which the fuid 
Armies fhall have removed the ftores, grain, &c. and fick which are in them, and fhall have 

fed them on their return, as: far"as poffible, no delay fhali be allowed to occur in the faid 
res, &c, being removed. 


Article 6th.—Whatever guns and thot fhall be left by Tippoo Sultaun in the forts which 
the faid Tippoo Sultaun has a; to cede to the Allied Powers, an equal number of guns and 
fhot fhall be left in the forts which the Allied Powers have agreed to reftore to Tippoo Sultaun. 


Article 7th.—The contracting parties agree, that Zemindars and Aumildars being in balance 
to either party, and repairing to the country of either party, protection fhall not be given them, 
and they fhall be reftored. If hereafter it fhould happen that any difputes arife on the bown- 
daries of the Allies and the faid Tippoo Sultaum, fuch Cifputesthall be adjufted with the know- 
ledge and approbation of all parties. 


Article 8th.—The Poligars and Zemindars of this country, who in the courfe of the prefent 
war have attached themfelves and been ferviceable to the Allies, fhall not on that account, in 
any fhape or nianner, be injured or moleited by Tippoo Sultaun. 


Whenever thtce copies of this Treaty, confifting of eight Articles, thall be delivered by 
Tippoo Sultaun, bearing his feal and fignature, accompanied by three Schedules, alfo under 
the feal and fignature of the faid Tippoo Sultaun, {pecifying the detail of the Countries ceded 
te the three Powers; one to the faid Company vith the Schedule ; one to the faid Nawaub, 
Afoph Jah Behader, with the Schedule; and one to the faid Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader, 
with the Schedule; three counterparts thereof, and of the Schedule, thall be delivered to the 
faid Tippoo Sultaun by the Allies; that is to fay, one counterpart with the Schedule on the part 
of the EO Company, bearing the feal and fignature of the {aid Earl Cornwallis ; one with the 
Schedule, on the part of the faid Nabob Afopi: Jah Behader, bearing the feal and fignature 
of the faid Nawaub, and of Azumed Omrah Behader ; and one with the Schedule, on the 
part of the faid Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader, bearing the feal of the faid Row Pundit 
Pardhaun Behader, and the fignature of the faid Hurry Kam Pundit Tantea Behader. 

Signed and fealed in ‘Camp near Seringapatam, this eighteenth day of March one 
thoufand feyen hundred and ninety-two. 
(Signed) CORNWALLIS. 
(A true Copy.) (L. S.) 
(Signed) G. F. Cherry, 
Perfian ‘Tranflator to the Governor General. 
(A true Copy.) 
(Signea) George Parry, 
Aéting Deputy Secretary. 


246 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT from the Selc&t Committee on 


Jummabundy of the Countries which are ceded to the Honourable Englith Eaft India 
Company, by Tippoo Sultaun, according to the following detail, dated the 16th March 


1792, correlponding to the 22d Rejeb 1206 Hejiza. 
Talooks appertaining to Calicut, 63 Talooks, viz. 
Talook Cufba Calicut-3 Talooks. 


- -38,236 8 — 
- -. 8071 7 12 
- § 863 — — 
‘Culpa - - - - - - - - 12,725 — 4 
Kolecacit - 5 ee eee 18,037 3 5 
a a es ee 
ct Fe ee 17015 9 — 
me em em 12,513 8B 
- ee eee = = 10,535 7 2 
- ee ee me 11,564 8 8 
a : 94,943 2 14 
. Talook Peludnayr, 10 Talooks. 
Colbe ee t 1796 1-14 
Mylatoor - aoe - - - - ~ 12,192 4 15 
Angary Poor - - - oe = ee - + 13,615 4 5 
Kulkundela =~) = = = = 4 34d 
Shumayr = - - - - - - - 10,98 9 11 
Poontawny “- - = +2 *- = - + 14073 7 5 
Kootay -. ‘=... - - - - - - 8159 4 5 
Womayrgurs = ee 2 - = 6986 2 14 
Kaaput =~ = = = = 2 = + = 5,480 2 4 
_ Wy Kitty Cote - oe ee 16,701. 7 10 
ks " Talook Warutnayr, 4 Talooks. 
Cuba = et ee ag ae 
Mallpoor- —- - - - - - Ce - 6008 7 6 
Moreypoor - 7° e 5 = *= 6 = 24,117 93 2 
‘Wulla Carycote. = : - - - - - 10,130 — — 
1,371 — 124 
ae Talook Shaudgur, 11 Talooks. ae! = 
Cuba - = - = = ~ = = = m2,954 —~ 8} 
Wummrg Kulky Parah - - - - = .- 12,466 2 9 
Ralkynayr - - - - - - - = 12,445 6 6 
Kolekathynayr - se eee 10,549 9 2 
Korungeloor - = - - - - = 9,117 g 148 
Suuye - - - + © = - -  -) 9,567 6 14 
Turunganayr - = = ee - - - 13,584 2 6 
Hadnallekduth a 3910 7 
Kurumputa -9 = = = = = = = 700 — — 
‘Turlatta - - - + - - oe - = 10,304 5 15 
- = = = = = = 8,328 8 of! 


Kowal Parah - 


‘Talook Enweynyr, 2 Talooks, 


Cuba - - - = 2 = =) = = 11,430 3 4H 
Kullaye -) - = © = = = = = 4470 4 33 


Pa 


1,16,025 9 43 


ime 


Talook Cherkul, 5 Talooks. BISON E 


Coa - - = = = = “= = -= 21,173 — 6 
Puttoon - - - - 3 : = 2 - 19,499 3 23 
canals em et ee 28,137 8B 1 
jowaye = = - - - 32,170 — 10; 3 
Numye - ee ee ee 3 é 


Talook Cote Angtia, 3 Talooks. 80,472 . 5, +08 


Cufha Kudroor’ - - - - 7 34,518 7 2f 


Patchy - ie. = : os e 3 a aglegg 
Cootyary - - Bis hae a eee te 19898 5 H 

Talook Kurupnayr, 3 Talooks. ~~} 40,001 2 10h 
Cufba Kootapoor - i tae i. «Pacey - = 18,777 5 of 


Yergurah - 5 sm em 18,192 3 154 

Kawil - = = 7° 5 © 2 = fe 18,139 _ 5 
——_—— Sg 142 

Talcok Canianoor,1Talook - - = ae er es ts is0s005 es of 


‘the Athirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. aay, 


Talooks appertaining to Calicut—-continued, 


Talook Cochy, 14 Talooks. 
Toorfhmerow - - ~ - 
Mukuntpoore - 
Cotcherry - 
Ainamaguil - 


Pane wra + 
Chaalkurea- 
Oiloornumaary 
Chittoor Tatmungul 
Alunggaar- 
Paroor - + 
Koonutnayr  - 


Shaadnumgul - 


peeerrrecenet 
Cer cretregad 
poy been nencaeg 


1,00,000 — — 


Profits on Black Pepper, Mint, and- 
Duties on Timber, &c. 


Farm of the Timber Duties - 
Dutieson Tobacco - - —- 
Mint ..- - 
Black Pepper, Cocoa Nuts, &e. 


Talook Palgautcherry " = - = 


Dindigul and Pulnavurpuckthy, 
2 Talooks. 


Dindi; - = 8 
i a 


Salem -. 
Koork  - 
Namkul - 
Sunkagury | 
Aimnetgury 
Parmutty 

Vamloor 

Shadmungul 


’ 
‘ 


Ree ore 
Peeareane 
Pepevever 
Pern enee 
ry 


Burrah Mokal, ¢ 
Burrah Mokul - - 
Caveripoor - 
Caveriputtun - 
Verbudderdroog 
Rageotta 
Kungoondy 
Daatampoory 
Pumagur - 
Tingrecolah 


ed 


1 
a 
Pavan nas 
prep vrena 
Prete ennnse 


he Villages of the above-mentioned Talooks fhall bé relinquifhed, and retained on an 
invettigation on the fpot. : 
(A true Copy.) 
(Signed): G. F. Cherry, 
Perfian Tranflator to the Gov’ Gen!. 


(A true Copy-) 


Dated in Camp near Seringapatam, this fixieenth (Signed) — George Parry, 
day of March, one thoujand feven hundred wud AGH. Dep’. Sec’. 
ninety-two, : 


363. 3k 


“248° APPENDIX to the Second REPORT Srom the Scte& Comutitice on 
Appendix, No. 35. 


TREATY of Partition with the Nizam and the Peifhwa, dated 22d June 1799. 


A Treaty for firengthening the Alliance and Fyiendthip fubfifting between the Englith 
Fatt India Company Behader, his Highnefs the Nabob Nizam ud Dowlah Afoph Jah 
Behader, and the Peithwa Row’ Pundit Purdhaun Behader; and for effecting 3 
Settlement of the Dominions of the late Tippoo Suitaun. 


WHEREAS the deceafed Tippoo Sultaun, unprovoked by any act of aggrefion on the 
part of the Allies, entered into an offenfive and defeufive alliance with the French, and 
admitted a French force into bis Army, for commencing war againft the Honourable Engtith 
Company Behader, and its Allies Nizam ud Dowlah Afoph Jah Behader and the Peiliwa 
Row Pendit Purdhaua Behader; and the faid Tippoo Sultaun having attempted to evade 
the juft demands of fatisfaction and fecurity made by the Honourable Enghith Company 
and its Allies, for their defence and proteétion againft the joint defigns of the faid Sultaun 
and of the French; the allied Armies of the Honourable Englifh Company Behader, and of 

his Highnefs Nizam ud Dowlah Afoph Jah Behader, proceeded to hoftilitics in vindi- 
cation of their rights, and for the prefervation of their refpective dominions from the perils 
of foreign invafion, and from the ravages of @ cruel and relentle!s enem 

And whereas it has pleafed Almight God to profper the juit caute of the faid Allies, the 
Honourable Englith Sompany B er, and bis Highnefs Nizam ud Dowlah Afoph Jah 
Behader, with a continual courfe of victory and fuccefs, and finally to crown their arms 
by the reduétion of the capital of Myfore, the fall of Tippoo Sultaun, the. utter extinétion 
of .his power, and the unconditional fubmilfion of his peeple: And whereas the faid Allies, 

* being difpofed to exercife the rights of conqueft with the fame moderation and forbearance 
which they have obferved from the commencement to- the conclufion of the late fi ful” 
war, have refolved to ufe_ the power which it has pleafed Almighty God to place in their 
hands, for the purpofe of obtaining reafonable compenfation for the expentcs of the war, 
and of ettablifhiug permanent fecurity and genuine tranquillity. fer themfclyes_and their 
fabjedts, as well as for all the Powers contiguous to their yefpective dominions: Wherefore 
a Treaty for the adjuftment of the Territories of the late. Tippoo Sultaun, between the Englith 
Eat India Company Behader and his Highnels the Nabob Nizam ud Dowlab Afoph Jah 
Behader, is now concluded-by Lieut. General George Harris, Commander in Chief of the 
Forces cf his Britannic Majetty, and of the Englifh Eutt lodia Company Behader, in the 
Carnatic’ and on the-coafé of Malabar; the Honourable Colonel Arthur Welletles, the 
Honourable Wenry Wellefley, Lieut. Col. W™ Kirkpatrick, and Lieut. Col. Barry*Clofe, 
on the part and in the name of the Right honourable Richard Earl of Moraington, K. P. 
Governor General for all Aftairs, Civil and Military, of the Britifh Nation in India; and by 
the Nabob Meer Allum Behader, on the part znd’ in the name of bis Highnefs the Nabob 
Nizam ud Dowlah Afeph Jah Behader, according to the under-mentioned Articles ; which, 
by the bleffing of God, fhall be binding upon the heirs and fucceffors of the contraéting 
parties as Jong as the fim and moon fhall endure, and of which the conditions thall be 
reciprocally obferved by the {aid contracting parties, ‘ 

Article 1ft—1It being reafynable and juft that the Allies by this ‘Treaty fhould accomplith 
the original objects of the war, (viz. a duc indemnification for the expenles incurred in their 
own defence, and effediual fecurity for their. refpettive pofleflions, againit the future defigns 
of their cnemics) it is dtipulated ‘and agreed, that the DiftriGs {pecitied in the Schedule A, 
hereunto annexed, together with the heads of all the Paffes leading from the territory of the 
Jate Tippoo Suitaun to any part of the poffeffions of the Englith Eatt [adia Company 
Behader, of its Allies or ‘Tributaries, fituated between the Ghauts on either coaft, and ail 
Forts fituated near to and commanding the faid Paffes, fhall be fubjeéted to the authority and 
be for ever incurperated with the dominions of the Englifh Eaft India Company Behader; 
the faid Company Behader engaging to provide effectually out of the Revenues of the fuid 
Dittricts for the fuitable maintenance of the whole of the families of the late Hyder Ali 
Khan, and of the late Tippoo Sultaun, and to apply to this purpofe, with the relervation 
hereinafter ftated, an annual fum of not lefs than two’ lacks of Star Pagodas; making the~ 
Company’s fhare as follows: 


Eftimated value of Diftriéts enumerated in the Schedule A, according to the 
Statement of Tippoo Sultaun in 1702, - = - ‘+ Canterai Pagodas —_7,77,170 
Deduét Provifion for the Families of Hyder Ali Khan, and of Tippoo Sultaun, 
.2 lacks of Swr Pagodas in Cantcrai Pagodas “ 2 e as 


2,40,000 


Remains to the Eaft India Company = =- = - = §,37;170 


Article 2d.—For the fame reafon ftated in the preceding Article, the Diftricts fpecified in 
the Schedule 13, annexed hereunto, fhall be fubjeGed to the: auttiority and for ever united 
to the dominions of the Nabob Nizam ud Dowlah Afoph Jah Behader; the faid Nabob 
having engaged to provide liberally, from the Revenues of the faid dittriéts, for the fupport 
of Meer hummer ud Dien Kban Behader, and of his family and relations; and to grant. 
him for this purpote a perfonat Jaghire in the diftri@ of Gurrumcondah, equal to the 
annual fum of 2,10,000 Rupees, or of 70,000 Canterai Pagodas, over and above and 

exclufive of a Jaghire, which the faid Nabob has aifo agreed to aflign to the fad Meer 
uunmer 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 249. 


Kummer ud Dien Khan, for the pay and maintenange of a proportionate number of troops 
oe employed in the fervice of his faid Highnels; making the hare of his Highnefs as 
follows: : 
Eftimated value of the Territory fpecified in Schedule B, according to the 


Statement of Tippoo Sultaun in 1792 - - 4 - + - 6,07,332 
Deduct perfonal Jaghire to Meer Kummer ud Dien Khan, 2,10,000 
Rupees, or - + = = = = Canterai Pagodas 70,000 


Remains to the Nabob Nizam ud Dowlali Afoph Jab Behader — - 5.377332 


Article 3d.—It being farther expedient for the prefervation of peace ané tranquillity, .and 
for the general fecurity ou the foundations now eiiablifhed by the contradin parties, that 
the fortrefs of Scringap: thould be fubjeGed to the faid Company adur; it is 
ftipulated and agreed that the faid fortrefS,_and the ifland on which it is fituated (including 
the finall tract of land ov ifland lying to the wefiward of the Main ifland, and bounded on 
the weli by a Nala, calied the Myfore Nulish, which falls into the Cauvery near Chenegal 
Ghant) fhail become part of the dominions of the faid Company, in full right and fovereigaty, 

r ever, 

Article 4th.—A feparate Government fhall be eftablifhed in Myfore, and for this purpofe 
it is ftipulated and agreed, that the Mabarajah Myfoor Kifhnarajah Oodiever Behader, a 
defvendant of the ancient Rajahs of Myfore, fhall poficts the Territory hereinafter deferibed, 
upon the conditions hereinafter mentioned. 

Article 5th—The contraGing Powers mutually and foverally agree, that the Diftridés 
fpecified in Schedule C, hereunto annesed, thall be ceded to the taid Maharajah Myfore 
Kifhnarajah, and fhall form the feparate Government of Myfore, upon the conditions 
hereinatter meationed. F 
Article 6th.—The Englith Eaft India Company Behader fhall be at liberty to make fuch 
deductions, from time to time, from the fuins allotted by the 1f Article of the prefent Treaty, 
for the maintenance of the families of Hyder Ali Khan and 'Tippoo Sultaun, as may 
proper in consequeace of the deceafe of any member of the {aid families ; and in the event 
of any hoftiie attempt on the part of the faid family, or any member of it, again the au- 
thority of the coatracting partics, or againft the peace of their refpeétive dominions, or the 
territories of the Kajal of Myfore, then the faid Englifh Ealt India’ Company. Bebader 
fhall be at liberty to limit or fufpend eatircly the payment of the whole or any part of the” 
Stipend herein-before ftipulated to be applied to the maintenance and tupport of the faid 
families. . 
le 7th.—Ilis Highnefs the Peifhwa Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader fhali be. in- 
cede to the prefent Treaty; and although the faid Peithwa Row Pundit Purd- 
haun Behader bas neither participated in the expenfe or danger of ‘the late war, and there- 
fore is not entitled to fare any part of the acquifitions made by the contracting parties 
(namely) the Englhth Eatt India Company Behader, and his Higknefs the Nabob Nizam 
ud Dowlah Afoph Jah Bebader) yet for the maintonance of the relations of friendfhip and 
alliance between the faid Peifhwa Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader, the Engiith Eaft India 
Company Behader, his Highnels the Nabob Nizam ud Dowlah Afoph Jah Bebader, and 
Maharajah Myfoor Kifhnarajah Behader, it is ftipulated and agrecd, that certain Diftriéts 
ipecified in Schedule D, hereunto annexed, fuall be referved for the purpofe of being 
eventually ceded to the faid Peifhwa“Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader, in full right an 
fovercignty, in the fame manner as if he had been a contraéting party to this Treaty; pro- 
vided, “however, that the faid Peifhwa Row Pundit Purdbaun Behader fliall accede to the 
prefent Treaty, in its full extent, within one month’ from the day on which it fhall be 
formally communicated to him by the contraGing parties; and provided ‘alfo, that be hall 
give fatisfaction to the Eaft India Company ‘Behader, and to ‘his Highnefs Nizam ud 
Dowiah Afoph Jah Behader, with regard to certain points “now depending between him 
the faid Peithwa Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader and the faid Nabob Nizam ud 
Dowiah Afoph Jah Behader; and alfo with regard to fuch points as fhall be reprefented to 
the fiid Peithwah, on the part of the Englifh Tat India Company Behader, by the Governor 
General, or the Britith Refident at the Court of Poonah. z 
Article Sth.—If, contrary to the amicable espedation of the contraGing parties, the faid 


Peifhwa Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader thall refufe to accede to. this ‘Treaty, or to give 
fatisfaction upoa the points to which the 7th Article refers, then the right to and fovereignty 


of the feveral diftriéts hereinbefore referved for eventual ceflion to the Peithwa Row Pundit 
Purdhaun Behader, fhall reft jointly in tie faid Englith Eaft India Company Behader 
and the faid Nabob Nizam ud Dowlah Afoph Jah Behader, who will eitner exchange 
them with the Rajah of Myfore, for other diftriéts of equal value more contiguous to their 
refpective territories, or otherwife arrauge and fettle refpecting then as they fhall judge 


proper 
} d me oth.—It being expedient for the effectual efiablifhment of Makirajah Myfoor 
Kifhnarajah in the Government of M yfore, that his Higlmcfs thoald be aftifted with a fuitable 
fubfidiary force, it is ftipulated and agreed, that the whole of the faid force fhail be furnithed 
by the Englith Eatt India Company Behader, according to the terms of a feparate Treaty, 
to be immediately concluded between the fitid Englifh Eaft India Company Behader and 

his Highnefs the Mahzrajah Mytoor Kithuarajah Qodiaver Behader, 
Article 10th.—This Treaty, confifting of ten Articles, being fettled and eoucinded this day, 
the 2ad of Junc 1799, (correfponding to the 17th of Mohurrum 1214 Aano Hejire) by 
jeutenant 


250 APPENDIX fo the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


Lieutenant General George Harris, the Honourable Colonel Arthur Wellefley, the Honour- 
able Henry Wellefley, Lieutenant Colonel William Kirkpatrick, and Licatenant Colonel 
Barry Clote, on the part and in the name of the Right honourable Richard Earl of 
Mornington, Governor General aforefaid ; and by Meer Allum Behader on the part and 
-in the name of his Highnefs the Nabob Nizam ud Dowlah Afoph Jah Behader; the faid 
Lieutenant General Harris, the Honourable Colonel Arihur Welleiley, the Honourable 
Henry Wellefley, Lieutenant Colonel Wm. Kirkpatrick, and Lieutenant Colonel Barry 
Clete, have delivered to Meer Allum Behader one copy of the fame, figued and fealed by 

V Mecr Allum Behader has delivered to Lieutenant General George Harris, 
able Colonel Arthur Wellefley, the Honourable Henry Wellefley, Lieutenant 
liam Kirkpatrick, and Liextenant Colonel Barry Cloie, another copy of the 
fanie, foaled by himfelt. And Licutenant General George Harris, the Honourable Colonel 
Welleiley, the Honourable Henry Wrelleficy, Lieutenant Colonel William Kirk- 
and Licutenant Colonel Barry Clofe, and Meer m Behader, feverally and 
the Right honourable 
from the date hercof, 
within twenty-five days 


pairic 
mutuaily engage that the faid Treaty Mall be refpectively ratified t 
the Governor General, under his feal and fignature, within eight d: 
and by his Highnefs the Nizam ud Dowlah Afoph Jah Behader, 


from the date hereof. 
(Nizam’s Seal.) 


Ratified at Hyderabad, by his Highnefs the Nizam, on the 13th day of 


July anno Domini 1799. 
(Signed) J. A. RIRKPATRICK, 
Refident. 


Schedule A. 
Firft—The Company’s Share. 
The following Diftri@s from Nuggur or Bidnore. 


Korial, Mangalore, Bekul and Nekferam - = 1,393,662 7% — 
Karkul - + ey 
Barkoo - - - - - - - - 
Khofhaulpoors  - .- - = - ote _ 
Bulkul ec z 
Gairfopah —- - - - - - - Z 
ur (Quore) a - Hoh _ 
Mirjaun - - ose - - - - _ 
Anodlah, Peach Mahl and Shedafooghur (orSoonda) - F 
Payer Gavt - - - - - - - - - - - 2,92,045 25 — 
Bighy - = = 5 2 2 = ee = = | 28929 48 — 
COIMBATOOR, Viz. 
- = = ee = = 80,000 — — 
S) ZF Sha Feo SY ais 95000 
- = - - - - - 27,000 — — 
Chinjerry .- - ce - - - - - 27,000 — — 
Darapocr, Chuckergherry — - - - - - 64,000 — — 
Settemungalam =~ 0-0 ee - = 30,000 — 
Undoor a 8,600 — — 
Perondoora - = = see 4,000 — — 
Vizimungul (Adavarcourchy) - - - - 20,000 — — 
Errode - - - - - - - - 20,000 —~ — 
Corocr - - - ee - - = 41,000 ~— — 
Coodgully  - - = = = a sr - 18, es 
Caveryporam SR a ee sie Ber oe 4) as 
385,000 —= = 
Wynaad fiom Amudnugur Checktoor, 
From Talooks belonging to Seringapatam. 
Panganoor - = = ee - = 15,000 —~ — 
Suttikal, Alambady, and Kodabully - - + 15,200 — — 
Ouffore - eee 18,096 — — 
‘ota and Ruttungeery - = = = 14,000 — — 
rahcotah - - - - - - 6,000 — — 
ryand Solageery - - 2 © = 4,000 — — 
Baugloor ~~ ey 3,000 — — 


‘Tahnulla and Talwoddy, half Talooks of Hurdunhully 5,000 — — 


Deduét Provifion for the maintenance of the Families of Hyder Ali? 
Khan, and of Tippoo Sultaun, Star Pagodas two Jacks, in Can- 2,40,000 — — 
terai Pagodas - - ee - ~ 2 es 25 


Remains to the Company - -~ + + Cant. Pag’ |» 5,37,170 64 — 
—————— 


>the Aftairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 251 


Schedule B. 
The Nizam’s Share. 


GOOTY. 

Fyse Huffer Kubul “ 
Kona Koomlah  - 

Pamri = = = 
Wurjor Kunoor - 
Yurluity Murajcherroo 
Bheem'Rapah- 
Muttoor — - 
Pravalli Muanimong 
Chunumpilly - 
Maulkaira Kooboo 
Koortunni = - 
Yarky - 


pees 


ere rnreerene 
bree er tenes 
° 
phere et reeces 
eurer ee aeens 
Crete bent tae 


terranes 


1,28,571 1 ~~ 


Pennacoondah + - 60,600 — — 


Murrug Seera - - - - bo * 8,000 — = 
1 tundytenantpoor ne 16,000 — — - 
Koorgoor (remainder of) - - - - - 11,629 — — 


Hanchongoondy (remainder of) - 
Of Gurrumcondah all the Diftriéts not ceded in 1792 


10,000.—~ —~ 
1,55,8:0 — —~ 


Pattungheery. {from Seringapatain) - - - pone eickas 
Rydroog (6 Talooks) — - - ose 02,856 
Kurnool Peifheuth ee ee ee a “ge S86 
From CHITTELDROOG. . 
Terrymulla(: Talooky - = + = = - + 7,800 + —~ 
—— 
, ; sehen 6,07,332 18 — 
Deda&, perfonal Jaghire to Kummec ud Dien Khan and Relations 70,000 — — 
Remains to the Nizam 5 eee | 51371332 1 — 
— 


Schedule C. 
Diftridts ceded to Maharajah Myfoor Kithnarajah Godiaver Behaden, 


Talooks belonging to Seringapatam. 


Putton Attorkran ~~ 

Mytore Attorkran, or Reknzat Naseer 
Nuzzer Bar - = 
Hurdunbully —- 
Periapatam - —- 


Muddoor = -  - 
Hotghur Dewancotah 
Betudapoor - — - 
Tyor =  - + 
Yelandoor  - 
Malwelly (Gulinshabad) 
Talkar Sofdah —~ 


Ce 


Nucipoor -  - = - co = = 10200 —- +] | 
Yeftoorah - - - - = 5 © Fe 7,200° — = 
Bailoor ~ 2 « Z = es = - 15,700 — 
Arkeelgoor - - - - os - - 4,300 — — 
Chimpatan = et 18,100 
Bullum (M ungirabad) - - - oe - - 10,000 — — 
Hufien - - - - - oe - - 7,900 — — 
Honawelly - = © © 2 2 2 = 9,400 — -— 
Nagmungul- - = - soe ee 4,700 — — 
Pelfoor re 3,100 — — 
Maharage Droog - ee ee 10,000 — 
Gram - er) 3,500 — — 
Ramghury - - - - - - - - 7,400 — — 
Tuckarumb ~ = - = =e - - 7:400 — — 
Abmudnugger Ghicklon - - - - = 10,000 — — 
Kup - - - - + 12,000 — — 
Tony Khia ee fe ef eee 9,000 ps 

- ee ee ee ee 008 g —~ 
— she 358 ON ae Horleoordroog 


2532 APPENDIX éo the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee ox 


Horleoordroog 4,000 — — 


Kirkairy - - - - - - - - 4,06: 

Chennyputtan - - + - - - - 9,138 — — 
Nooggacrty - = -  - - - - - 3,000 — — 
Mairlatith and Kifhnagepoor - - - - 6,100 — — 
Sucknyputtan — - - oe os 6,200 — — 
Banorawar, Goradongilly, Hanunbelly ~ = = 10,000 — — 
Rardihall = - - - - - 7,000 — — 
Nidghal - - 3 - - - + 6,000 — — 
Pafghur - - oe - - - - 10,000 — — 
Hagulwary - - - - - - - - 12,000 — — 
Goomaaipolum - - = = = = = 10,000 — — 
Bangalore = - - - - - - - ¢ 55,000 — — 
Magry - oe - oe le - -  - 8,400 — — 
Mudgerry - - fs - - - 36,000 — — 
Loorjghary - - - - 7 - - 4,000 — — 


460811 9 — 


Cankanhelly So. were tet ee RF 8,900 
Nulwungle and Doortiliah - oe - - = 16,000 
Anicul - - - - mse - 10,300 
Byroodroog - - - e - - - - 4,000 — — 
Hyboor - + a 7,090 — — 
Dowanhelly -  - = = ee 20,045 — 
ficeadroog coe - -  - - - - 5,000 — — 
roydroo, - - eee - - 8,000 — — 
nkoor and Decroy - = - = = = = 18,000 — — 
5 igegul and Maklydroog = - - - 2 - 16,000 — —— 
Kundyt cere and Challnaighul Hy = - - - 16,000 — — 
Chota Balapoor - -  - = - = = 80,000 — — 
Colas - - - - - se - - 80,000 — — 
Junguncoth - + = = = - = 13,000 —— 
Chuckmoogalum - - - - - - - 8.154 4 — 
Kudoor eee eee - 7129 7% —| 
: 3517,509 1% — 
SERRA (remainder of). 
Serra and Annapoor = - - - - - - 
Hoofuttah - 9 - = - = = = | 
Burra Balapoor - = = = - - = : 
1,49:754 — -- 
NUGGUR above GHAUT. 
Kofbah - oe - - oe - = = 29,145 45 2 
Loolydroog - - - - = = = = £8,818 of 2 
Koompfee - oe - = - - soe 8,094 22 2 
Kope - - - - - = = = = 22,864 53 2 
Wafthaa - - - - =~ 2 - = 6,818 9 2 
Eckairy and Sagur - ee - - = 39,411 £2 
Ghorty (Hoably) - - - - - - 11,006 83 — 
Surbtowanundy — - soe coe - - 10,458 $2 
Jerryanwitty - - - oe - - = 17,484 —- — 
Shikarpoor -  - = = = = = = 13,774 $— 
Annuntapoor - - - se - = 10,191 9F — 
Lakouly Danwafs - eee 11,629 BE 1 
Oodgunny - - - - - - - . 13,614 1g 
Simoga - te 16,883 5 — 
Hoolyponore - - - - - - - 6,583 54 2 
Biddery - - - ewe 10,835 5 2 
Chingeery Befwapatam - ~ = = = = = 22,091 12 3 
Azimpor =~ - fe - - 10,696 24 3 
———]  3,02,4176 6 
CINITTELDROOG (remainder of) 12 Talocks. 
Kulbth - - - - - 20,874 721 
Bum Sumendar - ye ee - - 12,148 4 2 
Dodiary - - - - - - 12,984 93 — 
Huldroog -- - - = = - = = 11,036 24 3 
Muttor - - - - = = = = 10,392 32 2 
MufkalMunoo - - - - ~- - = 18,602 gf 3 
Tallick a © 1-7 Oe eens 
Burm Sagur - - - - ee - 10,163 6} — 
Kunkopah - - - es os - = 12,542 Be 


1,15,550 4% 13, 


Carried forwatd - | 13,46,0531 7 


the Mfairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 253 
13,46,053 1 7 


Belchoor - + a 7 Sie se: 
Hinoor BL Oe Gertie eS Oe OS 
Goodycotah- = - ~ = + = = 11,330 583 
5 $3,023 6. 10 
« 13,79,076 8 4 
Deduct 2 Pergunnabs of Hurdunhily, viz. Talal and Taknawaldly} G00 esis 
included iv the Company's thare = = = = ae 
13,740765 8 
——————— 
Schedule D. 
The Peifhiwa’s' Share. 
Harponelly (6Talooks)- = = eee 4,10,030 83 — 
Soouda (above the Ghauts) -  - - + = = ee 59,377 — — 
Annagoondy - - - - = - Cid - a 60,101 — — 
Fron CHITTELDROOG, 2 Talooks; Viz 
Holubkaira - = es ee 
Mycoonda - - - - “oe - - 
: 23,652 3 
From BIDNORE, 2 Talook; Viz. 
Horryhur = - = 5 ee eee 10,796 — — 
Total, Canterai Pagedas 2,63,957 3% -- 
—_————— 
Ratified at Hyderabad by his Highnefs the Nizam, on the 13th day of July anno 
Domini 1799. ‘ 
(Signed) J. A. KIRKPATRICK, 
Refident. 


‘Separate Articles appertaining to the Treaty of Myfore, concluded on the 22d of June 
1799, correfponding to the 17th of Mohurrun, anno Hejira 1214, between the Honour- 
able eogiils Eaft India Company Behader, aud the Nabob Nizam ud Dowlah Afoph 

ah Behader. 


Article 1ft.—With a view to the prevention of future altercations, it is agreed between 
his Highnefs the Nizam the Nabob Nizam ind Dowleh Afoph Jah Behader, and the 
Honourable Englith Eaft India Company Behader, that to whatever amount the ftipends 
appropriated to the maintenance of the fons, relations, and dependants of the late Hyder Ali 
Khan and Tippoo Sultaun, or the perfonal Jaghire of Meer Kummer ad Dien Khan, fhall 
hereafter be diminifhed, in confequence of any one of the ftipulations of the Treaty of My- 
fore ; the contracting parties fhall not be accountable to each other on this head. 

Article 2d.—And it is further agreed between the contraciing parties, that in the event 
provided for by the cighth Article of the Treaty of Myfore, tw Is of ‘the fhare referved 
for Row Pundit Purdhaom Behader thall. fall to his Highnefs the Nabcb D 
Jah Afoph Jab Behader, and the remaining third to the Honourable Englif 
Company Behader. 


un ud Dow- 
h Eatt India 


(Nizam’s Seal.) 
Ratiied at Hyderabad, by his Highnefs the Nizam, on the 13th day of July anno 


Domini 799. 
{Signed) J. A. KIREKPATRICK, 
Refideat. 
(A true Copy.) . . i 
(igued) G. Buchan, 
Chie! Secretary. 


_ Tr ''-- Ooo 
Appendix, No, 36. 


TREATY with the Rajah of Myfore, dated 6th July 1799. 


A Treaty of perpetual Friendthip and Alliance, concluded on the one part by his Exeel- 
lency Lieutenant General George Harris, Commander in Chief of the Forces of bis 
Britannic Majefty, and of the Englifh Eaft India Company Paliader, in tne Carnatic and 
on the Coafi of Malabar; the Honourable Colonel Arthur Welleflcy, the Honourable 
Henry Wellefley, Lieutenant Colonel William Kirkpatrick, and Lieutenant Coen 

are 


254 APPENDIX 0 fhe Seoond REPORT from the Sete& Committee on 


Barry Clofe, on behalf aad in the name of the Right honourable Richard Lar! of 
Mornington, K. P. Governor General for all Affaixs, Civil and Military, of the Britifh 
Nation in India, by virtue of full powers vetted in them for this purpofe by the faid 
Richard Earl of Mornington, Governor Getteral; and on the other part by Maha 
Rajati Myfoor Kiftna Rajah Oodiaver Behader, Rajah of Mytore. . 


WHEREAS it is ftipulated in the Treaty concladed on the 22d of June 1799, between the 
Honourable Eatt India Company Bahader aud the Nabob Nizam ud Dowlatt Afoph Jah 
Behader, for fivengthening the alliance and friendthip fubfifting between the faid Englith 
Eat India Company Behader, his Highnefs Nizam ud Dowliuh. Afaph Jah Behader, 
and the Pefhwa Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader, and for effecting a fettlement of the 
Territories of the late Tippoo Sultaun, that a feparate Government fhall be cftablifhed in 
Myfore, and that his Highuefs Maha Rajah Myfoor Kiftna Rajah Oodiaver Eehzder fhall 
polfefs certain Territories {pecified in Schedule C, annexed to the faid Treaty ; and that for- 
the effectual eftablifhment of the Goverament of Mytore, his Highnefs fhali be attifted with 
2 fuitable tubfidiary force, to be furnifhed by the Englith Eaft India Company Behader. 

Wherefore, in order to carry the taid ftipulations inte effec, and to increafe and ftrengthen 
the friendthip fublifting between the faid Engldh Eaft India Company and the faid Maba 
Rajah Myloor Kiftna Rajah Oodiaver Beliader, this Treaty is concluded by Lieutenant 
General George Harris, Commander in Chief of the Forees of his Britannic Majefty,and of the 
faid Englith Eaft India Company Behader, in the Carnatic and oti the Coatt of Malabar; 
the Honowable Colonel Arthur Wellefley, the Honourable Henry Wellefley, Lieutenant 
Colonel William Kirkpatrick, aud Licutegant Colonel Barry Clofe, on the part and in_ the 
name of the Right honourable Richard Earl of Mornington, Governor General aforefaid ; 
and by his Highnefs Maha Rajah Myfoor Kifina Rajah Oodiaver Behader; which fhail 
be binding upon the contracting parties as long as the iun and moon fhall endure. 

Article 1—The friends aud encmies of either of the contracting parties fhall be con- 
fidered as the friends and enemies of both. 

Article 2—Tbe Honourable Eaft India Company Behader agrees to maintain, and 
his Highnefs Maha Rajah Myfoor Kitina Rajah Oodiaver Behader agrees to receive a 
amilitary force for the defence and fecurity of Ins Highnefs's dominions; in confideration of 
which protegtion, his Highnels engages to pay the annual fum of feven lacks of Star Pagodas 
to the faid Fait India Company, the faid {um to be paid in twelve equal monthly inftalments, 
commencing from the 1ft ef July A. D. 1709; and his Highnefs further agrees, that the dif- 
potal of the faid fum, together with the arrangement and cmploymicnt of the troops to be 
maintained by it, fhall be entirely left to the Company. 

Article 3.—If it fall be ncceilary for the protection and defence of the territories of the 
contracting parties, or of cither of them, that hoftilities fhall_be undertaken, or Preparations 
amacte for commencing boftilities againft any State of Power, his faid Highnefs Maha Rajah 
Myfoor Kiftna Rajalr Oodiaver Behader agrees to contribute towards the difcharge of the 
inereafed expenfe incurred by the augmentation of the military force and the unavoidable 
charges of war, tuch a fum as fhall appear to the Governor General in Council of Fort 
William, on an attentive confideration of the means of his faid Highnefs, to bear a juft and 
reafonable proportion to the aétual net Revenue of his faid Highnets. ; 

Article 4—And whereas it is indifpentably neceflary that effectual and lafting fecurity 
Should be provided againft any failure in the funds deftined to defray either the expenfes of 
the permanent military force in time of peace, or the extraordinary expentes deferibed in thé 
3d Article of the prefent Treaty ; it is hereby ftipulated and agreed between the contracting 

arties, that whenever the Governor Geacral in Council of Fort William in Bengal -fhall 
have reafon to apprehend fuch failure in the funds fo deftined, the faid Governor General 
in Council thall be at liberty, and fhall have fall power and right, either to introduce fuch 
regulations and ordinances as he fhall deem expedient for the internal management and col- 
lection of the Revenues, or for the better ordering of any other branch and department of 
the Government of Myfore; or to affume and bring utider the direct management of the 
fervants of the faid Company Behader, fuch part or parts of the territorial potieffions of his 
Highnefs Maha Rajah Myfoor Kifina Rajah Oodiaver Behader as fhall appcar to hin the 
faid Governor General in Council neceffary to render the faid funds efficient and available 
either in time of peace or war. 

Article 5.—And it is hereby further agreed, that whenever the faid Governor Generel’ 
in Council fhall fignify to the faid Maha Rajah Myfoor Kiftna Rajah Oodiaver Bebader, 
that it is become neceffary to carry into effect the provifions of the 4th Article, his faid 
Highnefs Maha Rajah Myfoor Kiftnah Rajah Oodiaver Bebadcr fhall immediately iffue 
orders to his Aumils or other Officers, either for carrying into effect the faid Regulations 
and Ordinances, according. to the tenor of the 4th Article, or for placing the territories - 
required under the exclufive authority and control of the Englith Company Behader; and 
in cafe his Highnets fhall not iffue fuch orders within ten days from the time when the 
application fhall have been formally made to him, then the faid Governor General in Council 

all be at liberty to iffue orders by his own authority, either for carrying into effect the faid 
regulations and ordinances, or for affuming the management and coilection of the Revenue 
of the faid territories, as he fhall judge moft expedient for the purpofe of fecuring the 
efficiency of the faid military funds, and of providing for the effectual protection of the 
country and the welfare of the people. Provided always, that whenever and fo long as 
any part or parts of bis faid Highnefs’s territories fhali be placed and fhall remain utider 
the exclufive authority and control of the faid Eaft India Company, the Governor 
General in Coyncil fhall render to his Highuefs a true and faithful account of We Revewves 

au 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. -. a55 


Highuefs’s aGual receipt or annual income arifing out of his territorial Revenue -be lefs 
than the tum of one lack 


er up to the Company's 
ho fhall be found withia the territor 


regular pafip: 
refolution not t 
tories now tubj 

Article 8.— W herea: 


fh Compaay Behader thal 

manner they ma ige proper, ail fuck 

territories as it (hail appear to them 
Articie 9.—And whereas, in cont 


‘trating parties. 
Article 10.—In cafe it thall become neceffary, for enforcing and maintaining the 
authority and goverament of his Highnels in the territories new fubjected to his power, that 
the regular troops of the Englith Lait (India Company Bebader (hwald be employed, it is 
ftipulated and agreed, that upon formal application being. made for the fervice of the faid 
troops, they flali be employed iz fuck manuer as to the faid Company fhall feem fit; but it is 
-exprefsly underftood by the contracting parties that this ftipulation, thail not fubject the 
-troops of the Englifh Eaft india Company Behader to. be employed in the ordinary ttanf- 
actions of Revenue. ‘ 
Article 11.—It being expedicnt, for the reftoration and permanent eftablifament of tran: 
guillity in the territories now fubjected to the autherity of his Highnefs Maha Rajab Myloor 
Kifina Rajah Oodiaver Bchader, that fuitable provifion fhould be made for certain Officers 
-of rank in the fervice of tuelaie Tippoo Sultaun; his faid Highnefs agrees to enter into the 
Jmmediate diicuilion of this point, and to fix the amount of the funds (as foon as the neceflary 
information cau be obtained) tu be granted for this purpofe, in a {eparate Article, to be here- 
after added to this % 


conclude a comincrcial Trosty for this purpofe with as little delay a3 potlible, 

Article 14.—His Highneis Maha Rajah Myfoor Kiftua Rejuh Oodiaver Bebader hereby 
promifes to pay, at all times, the utmeft attention to fach advice as the Company’s Govera~ 
inent_fhall oceafionally judge it necellary to_offer to him, with a view to the economy of 
his finances, the better collection of his Revenues, the adminiitration of juttice, the 
extention of commerce, the encouragement cf trade, agriculture and induflry, or any other 
objects conacéted with the advancement of his Highnefs’s intereit, the happinels of his 
people, and the mutual welfare of both States: 

Article 15.—Whereas it may hereafter appear that fome of the diftricts declared by the 
Treaty of Myfore to belong ‘refpestively to the “Enytith Company Behader and to his 
Highness, are inconveniently fituated, witha view to the proper conucétion of their refpective 

363. 3T Hi lines. 


250 APPENDIX % theSocoad REPORT from 0 Scie Cotamitee on 


Wines of frontier’ it-is thereby ftipalated between te’ contraGing parties, that in’ all. fack. 
«gales they will proceed’ vo fuch an gdjuftinent; by means ef exchanges or otherwife; as thall 
Whe belt fiited tb the ovctfion. ua jis a 
Article 16~This Treaty, confifiing of Guiteer Articles, being this ‘day, the 8th of July 
:aano Domini 1799 (correlponding td thé 3d of Suffer; ano Hejira 1214, end to'the 7th of 
athe morith Affar of the 1721ft year of the Saluvund Alra) fettled and: concluded; at the Fort 
vf Nazzerbuh near Seringapatam, by his Excell Lieutenant General George Harris, 
-iGomimander in Chief of the Forces of ‘his Britannic Majefty, andof the Honourable Eaglith 
“Tat India Company in the Carnatic and on the Coaft of Malabar ; the Honourable Colonel 
-Arthur.Wellefley, the Honourable Henry Wellefley, Lieutenant Colonel ‘William Kirk- 
patrick, and Lieutenant Colonel Barry Clofe; with the: Maha Rajah’ Myfeor Kiftna Rajat 
Dodiarer Behader; the aforefaid gentlemen have delivered to the faid Maha Rajah one 
scopy of the fame in Englifh and Perfian, fealed aad figned by them, ard his Highnels Maha 
Rajah has delivered to the gentlemen -aforefaid another copy, alfo in Perfian and Englith, 
wearing his feal; and fig: by Luchuma, widow of the late Kiftna Raja, and and 
aned by Purnia, Dewan tothe Maha Rajah Kiftna Rajah Oodiaver. 7 
. And ‘the aforefaid gentlemen have-engaged to procure aud to deliver to the faid Maha 
‘Rajah, withont delay, a copy of the fame, ander the feal and fignature of the Right 
shphourable'the Governor General ;.on. the zeceipt. of. which -by the faid. Maha Rajah the 
prefent Treaty thall be deemed complete and binding on the Honourable the Englith Eaft 
ridia Company, and on the Maha Rajah-Myfoor Kiftaa Rajah Oodiaver Bebader, and 
wthe copy of it now delivered tothe ‘fait Maha Hajah thall bereturned. 
Re (Geal of the Maia Rajah) 
Z J 


(Ranies Signature.) 
~ fGeat ant Sigeaties of Pomezh) 
A teue Copy) ae ae wee 
: (Signed). &. Buchan, 
Secretary to Government. 


Appendix, No, 37- : 
"REPORT of Captain Madleod,.on the Myfore Reveriues; dated Sth. July 1709. 
om ek “Porthe Commiffioners for the Affairs of Myfore. 


IN compliance-with the defire of the Right honourable the Governor General, conveyed 

i ig chis letter to you, the 21% June, exttadt of which was forwarded to me by your, 
Wide No..t1.. diredtions, I have tlie honour to'tranfimit to you a Statement of the Revenues of the Térritories 
g ately acquired for the Hongurable Company ; in which you will pleafe to obferve the grounds 
“en which. I-am led te-pelieve that thole acquifitions are capable to yield a grofs Kevenue 


late Tyopo> Suliun sited his Sunimabandg, in the 96, by atig hi Head 
e late Ty Sultaun rai! is Jummabu: in the year 1796, by atgmenting his Ix 
stent, three. maak Fanams on each Pagoda Gen: Fanams) ‘fappo! Gn, the county 


-eapable of bearing. this augmentation. .He alfo charged his Jummabundy. with balfa Fanam 
.03 a tax on ‘Shroff, and S aiaciee of a Fanam asa duty.oh ‘Tobacco. he two laf. articles 
were abfurdly added to the land-rept as well as the firft, the whole: amounting to 34 Fanams 
ry ten Fanams; fo. that, by this‘ increafe, every ten by the preceding Jummabupdg 
 19$ for the new Jummabundy, or 4o was raifed to 55. . oe ot : ; 
ere were, however; fomé inconfiderable articles of thé Revenué ¢xéluded from contribut- 
‘ing towards this augmentation ; fuck as the-rents of lands farmed for portions of the pro- 
. dace, and alfo the road duties :, but as:I could not procure an exact account of the amount 
-of items left out in forming the increafe, I have foppofed, for the convenience of calculation, 
that the increate. of 1796 exteniled.to the whole grofs Revenue; and, by following this mode, 
Uhave eftimated the increafe in Column 2 of the Statement greater than it really was; confe-. 
squently Column g or 4 is'eftimated lower than it otherwite fhould be, if the detuil of the whole 
Shereals had been acourately atcertained. ~ . . 
- _.. Phe fams in Canterai Pagoilas in the third Column, or in Star Pagodlas in the fourth, may,. 
in my opinion, be, confidered as, nearly the fair Jummabuudy which’ anay hereafter be ex- 
ted; though { cannot take pou myfelf to affert that the feveral diftridts’ ought to yield 
enue. equal to this valuation of them. |, oan 
“If fome of the diftriéts fhould be over-rated in'this Eitimate it is probable that others are 
vunder-valued, I think it is not unreaforable to expect, that, in the’ aggregate, the whole 
may, in the courfe of three or four years, produce a Revenue equal to the amount of Columa 
4; and if from this fum one-fifth be deducted fur the feveral heads of Imauims to Pagodas, 
_&e.. and fox defraying all. charges of collection, there would remain to the Company a clear 
Revenue of near welve lacks of Star Pagodas annually. ; : 
., Should this eftimate.of. the new acquifitioas be hereafter found, throogh better. infor- 
sation) te be materially erroneous, E hope it will be remenibered ‘that I followed the trueft 
“Wale which can. at prefent be procured.’ Much will always depend on.the tkill and talents of 


serfons employed in the managemteat of Reveane. “Dhave 


* 208. 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


4 have an account of the amount of-therent of each Aumildarrie compofing the Jumma in 
the firft Column, and I have materials and.information fufficient to prove, that the Schedule 
of the Myfore Revenue, given to the Confederates in 1792, was a falfe ftatement of -the 
Jummabundy. 

Seringapatam, 

8th July 1799. 


357 


-Lhave-the honour-to be, &e. &c. Xe. 
(Signed) WILLIAM MACLEOD. 


No. 11.—Statement of Revenue, &c.-&e. enclofed in Captain Macleod’s Letter. 


SOURCES of the DISTRICTS 


STATEMENT, fhewing that Column 3 or 4 contains an Eftimate of the It 


lately acquired for the Honourable Company. 


A. 2. 3. 
DISTRICTS 
% to former | Trepoo's | The Inereafe || Remaining apeanieatent | 
& fawacs, Jummabundy of Fummabundy inStar Paguaas 
é and tothe Jor the veur 796] 3+ on every 154 | alter deduiting by tchedle 
Areangement of them}, incading be) °*"Pattms, — | the Tncreate 6 Cat? 
E inthe [det Lnereafe ot) inctadedt inthe | of 
Schedule of 1798. | “cach Pagoda, | firft Cotmn, 1796. 
Gr. nal GPL RAL CP. RA Star Pag’, 
s{\Salligal~ - - -2 iy bb \ iepee ai 
PUGH” 1 2]] 8109 ——} 17778 Fae) araso 2 4 39,508 8 |. 12,666 11 ~ 
42 ae § Tee prepartiod inctudedt 
S)\rutmotzh - - -| 14809——| 4,063.30] 10,895 6 6 9029 41 | 41,666 108) ia Mureentiutiy by the 
2 it ScheduJe of #792, 
s i ae Diftriét bas been 
5] |Chubloor - - - F ‘ jeferted tince the year 
Weluad,orBeinar ¢] 19000——| 2797 919] Trt 7 4 6060 93} 4166 104) to 99. Hall this Dilinct 
3 remains in Rajah’s thare. 
S i This Diftrict has beew 
2). {Runganoor - - -| 62555 ——]| 17,000 4 8) 45834 5 8 64 $7,778 121} 12,800 — {) totally ruiaed -by dit 
31S tarbuiges, 
£12} Ivankerygherrycotta | 18,243 ——| 4975 Sc} 13,267 6 6} 2%} 11,056 6} 5,000 — 
3/3) |Bactr - - - -{| 13625 —— S715 8 9,909 2 — 2 8957 11 2,500 — 
S/% J |Soolzgeery - - -| 24,907 ——| 4065 5 8] 10911 4 8] 2{ 9034 9) 5233 SRP 
é This Diftria has not re- 
s _ |heovered.from the effette 
[Denkenicottah - -] $9,929 ——] 10,889 7 4] 99059 2 a2] 6 | 24,199 64] 11.666103)7 of being in the hands of 
5 the Mebrattas iin 1791 
z j . aud 173%, 
'Ofore - - - -} -o7u51——] 7,899 3 10f 19,731 6 6] 4] «16,443 —~$] 15,080 — 
Total - | 2,66,258 — —| 72615 6 10] 1,93,642 3 6] 35 | 161,368 10 | 71,080" — 
Coimbatoor - = - | 237,708 314] 64029 9 14] sree 5 —| 28 | 141,003 63] 66,606 1g 
:Daninncottuh - - | 85,016 7 7) #2610 9 7| Go75 B—| 12} 50,313 2% 
\Checor - - - -| 1,28,562 311] 35,062 4 9] 93499 9 | 18] 77,916 9) 
| Stingeree = - =| 78.054 Bae] 21,583 ——| Grad S az] 10 | 47.051 pa 
‘Z| {Daraifoor and 2 f 
© | |Chuckergeery - = § 173,835 — —~] 47,409 5 8] 1.26495 4 8] 23 | 105,354 84] 
© }lSattimangle = =~ 911] 5 8] 14] 35468 124 
34 JAndoor = - = = 1] 9—| 5] et195 12 
=) |Perindorah = = + 7 4] 21a} 6] 24186 1 
3] iHerrond ~~ - - 4 3 5 8] 7 | 33932 2 
3.) [Viaiemungte - = 114] a 2} 6] 24,118 23 
"]{Canjam = = = = 310 6 6| 8] * 30.569 41 
iCarroor = = -= - 438i 5 8} 12] 50578 12f 
Uningocly = -= 8748 — — aa) 4] (19440. — 
‘A \Cavariffoor = + = 2745 8 3 413{ 2 | 6101 13, 
Total 310,991 9 —| 829,310 423] 155 | 691002 1 
igen = = = 5 8 48 ‘The'Revenne of thote 
|Corial (Aungalove) - 4 8 58 9 Difiriéts thown in the Grit 
g |[Omiul == "= 5 8 4 8| 3] 24597 9 .| three Coinnunsis expres: 
Barkoor = = + = a B—| 11} 107,740 BF ed.in Bahaderee Pazo- 
Sl [Khowtealpoor = - eat 11g) | 66016 6 das, and the Equivalett 
3 {Bata Sree ey 74 212 4 19.837 34 in Conterai Pagodas is 
sg |S | {Gera = = = 219 7 4] 4] e107 ¢ noted belew she. tithe 
“2/7 |i unawar (Onure) - $ 16, 6 6} 6] Sua 15 Total. 
|Mijun - - - =| 24,908 — =] au 5 a] 4 | 16,001 18 
Bab. Pag’ | 749,983 6 —! 94 3142 6 8) 
cys Camera Tass | 97H978. 6 13] 2,063,903 2 14; 709,075 313) — | — = - + 
nkola and Sid= 7 * 2, 50H S 
fi raermite SYLY] sst3——| az903 5 8) 4409 4 3] | 8] 95.981 23,610 3 
Total - {10,833,291 6 -43| 2,81,806 @ 6] 7,31,t82 8 7) 100 | G.97,.497 At| 259,877 4} 
Grand Total .- |94,39,852 — 12) 6,653,414 1 —|17,74,437 6 12{ 290 | 11,78,698 —| 6,70,623 154, 


— 


Trrroo's Jummabundy had not fuffered any other change fice the sear 178%, excepting tlie increafe thewn i 
Sthedale he gave the Allies in 1792 mult'have been lets than 


tan thofe: of. Colamn 4. 


oe 


Seringapatam, 8th July 1799. 


A.B. From the Total there thoald probably be deduéted two-thirds of Punganoor, for an eqaivale 


eee 


(Signed) 


y Colarm 25 contequen:iy the 
Jasuuubuudy in weusly ibe fame propsrtion that the fms in Column 5 ure tefs 


Filliam Macleod. 


takon fiom the Real's Mia tor the Nizam. 


258 APPENDIX # the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


Appendix, No. 38. 


Lctter from the Governor General in Council, to the Nizam; dated 7th July 1789. 


To the Nizam. 
[Writtea 7th July 1789.] 


YOUR Highngfs’s Letter, containing ftrong expreffions of friendfhip, was prefented to me 
-by Meer Abul Coflim, and has afforded me the moft inexpreilible fhtisfaction. I bave’ 
rfecily underfiood all the matters catrufted to the verbal communication of Meer Abul 
-Coflim, and the fincere and tricndly Sentiments which I have difvovered your Highnots to be 
preiled with towards me, have induced me to fhew the confidence [ place in your Highnefs's 

ation, by candid and-explicit converfations with Meer Abul Coflim, on fubjects of the 
eft importance; and as they all of them have tendency to ftrengthen and inorcafe our 
Mtip, { fhati communicate without referve to your Highnels what has occurred to me 
xelative to them. 


“fubjeét, until [was convinced that your Highnefs, uninterrupted by war, had full leifere to 
«contider the propriety of the performance of this Article of the Treaty ; and until you might 
have had futticieat oppor:unity to put implicit confidence in my aTurances for the punctual 
-difeharge of the Peithcufh for the Northern Cirears; 1 then Geputed Captain Kennaway 
to your Highnets’s Court, with inftrutiors to make the demand of the Guntcor Circar, by 
virtue of the Treaty of 1768; to affure ycar Highnefs of wy firia intention to difcharge the 
balances, upon fair ftatement, due to your Highnefs on account of the Peifhcuth, and te 
ianprefs you with the fincerity of my intentions for its regular payment hereafter, 
have already expreifed my datisfaétion at your Highnets’s immediate comptiance to de- 
liver up the Guntoor Circar to the Company, and have affured your Highaels of my firm 
intention to perfevere in a ftriét fy2cem of faith to engagements; and now, with fuch a proaf 
of the fincerity of your Highnels’s friendfhip and good ith, I have, from a defire to teftify to 
your Flighneis that 1 am impreifed with fimilar fentiments, entered into a full difenilion of 
every Articie with Meer Abul Coflim, in order that fuch parts of it as are undefined, and bear 
.an obfcure and doubtlul meaning, may be fo explained as fhall preclude every neceflity of 
Suture difeulfion, remove all grouads of mifunderftanding, and give ttubility and permancacy 
to that friendfhip which now fubfitts betweeMus.. In adopting this rule of conduci, | do 
-no mote than fulfil the intention of the King of England and the Britith Natiou, who, by 
ahe fyftem lately efteblithed for the government of this country, had in view the im- 
portant end of giving efficacy to the exiting Treaties between the Englith aud the Powers of 
Hindoftan, and of fecuring a due performance thercof in future. This communication, | am 
perfuaded, will fuily fatisfy your Highnefs of the propriety of iny declining the propotal of 
‘Meer Abui Coflim ‘for entering into a new fecurity for the difcharge of the Feiheufh, by 
mortgaging « poriion of the Cirears ; contidering, as ido, the faith of tue Enyglith Nat oa 
pledged for the due payment of it. ln proof of the fincerity of my intentions tuat tie Treaty 
lhouid be ex: to full effect, Lagree that in the 6th Articic of the ‘Treaty, the words 
“ Whenever the fituation of affairs will allow of fuch a body of troops to march into the 
“ Deccan,” fhould be underftood to mean, that the force engaged for by this Article, viz. 
two battations of Sepoys, and 6 pieces of cannon manned by Europeaus, fhafl be granted 
whenever your Highoeis hall apply for it; making only oac exception: that it is not to be 
-employed againft any Power in alliance with tie Company, viz. Pundit Purdhaun Peillwa, 
Ragojee Bhootia, Madajee Scindia, aad the other Mabratta Chicts, the Nawaub of Arcot, 
and Nawanb Vizier, Rajah of Tanjore aad ‘lravancore, That the battalions at prefent not 
defiued in number fhai! not confitt of lels than 800 men each; that the fix ficld-pieces fhall be 
manned with the number of Europeans which is ufual in time of war. ‘That the expenie to 
be charged to your Highnefs fhali be no more than the exact fia which it cofts the Company 
to maintaia a body of that force when employed on fervice ia the field, and that this ex~ 
penfe be as per feparate Account. That tnis detachment fhali march within two months, ar 
jooner if poitible, aiter it is demanded, and your Highnefs hall be charged with the expenie 
of it from the day it enters your Highnels’s territories, until it quits them .on its return te 
the Compzny’s, with the addition of one month, at the average calculation of the whole 
Amount, in erder to defray the charges the Company mufé neceflarily jacur, to put fuch a 
force in a fiate fit for fervice. 

LT have fo fuily difcufled the Articles of the Treaty that relate to the Nawaub of Arcot 
and the Carnatic, on the reprefentation of Meer Abul Coilim, that a mere reference to the 
Articles themielves will inform your Highnefs of the fall force of my arguments; and 
although the long exifting friendthip between the Nawaub and the Company, might be 
urged as farther ground for declining the propofi! of Meer Abul Coftim, his right to the 
polleltion of the Carnatie Payenghaut is fully eftablithed and admitted by the ares Sth 

Asticles, 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMBANY. | - 23y 


Articles, and papers appertaining to them ; there can therefore be no neceility for troubling 
your Highnefs with other reafons. . 

In regard to the Articles relative to the Dewanny of the Carnatic Ballagaut, 
nefs muft be well convinced that circumftances have totally prevented the e: 
Articles, and the Company are in the full enjoyment of peace with all the world 
it hereafter happen, that the Company thoullebtain pofleltion of the country mentioned in thefe 
Articles, with your Highnets’s alliftance, they will firiélly perform the fipulations in favour 
of your Highnefs and the Mahrattas. Your Highneis muft be well affured, chat while 
ics of Peace and Friendthip exift with any Chief, negociations that tend to deprive 
ief of any part of his poflellions, unprovoked on his part, mutt naturally create 
ions in his mind, unfavourable to the reputation of your Highnels and to the character 
of the Company; fince the only grounds on which fuch uegociations could be carried on, 
reft on a Treaty exifting upwards of 20 years, the execution of which is yet unclaimed ; and 
fince no provocation has hitherto been made to juftify a breach in the prefent peaceable and 
amicable underitanding between cach other. 

As Tam at all times defirovs that fuch cireumfianccs as carry with them impediment and 
hindrance to good order and government, without bearing the finalleft advantage to either 
fide, fhould be fo changed as to produce the good effects expected from Treaties; and as 
the affairs of both parties might fuffer great injury from being excluded from correfponding 
with the other Powers of the Deccan, I agree that in future either party, without a breach of 
Treaty, fhall be at liberty to receive or fend Vakeels to correfpond with any Powers in the 
Deccan, in fuch manner as may be expedient for the benefit of their own aifnirs, under the 
condition that the object of fuch intercourfe or corretpondence be not hoftile to either of 
the Governments. I have in many inftances, as well through Captain Kenneway as to 
Meer Abul Coftim, and in the firft part of this letter, declared my firm intcntion to execute 
the Treaty of 1768, and to live in perpetual amnity and friendfhip with your Highnefs; and 
your Highnefs will be convinced, from the explanations | have given to thofe Articles in 
the Treaty of ambiguous and obfcure meaning, that [ am earnefily defirous of the adjuftment. 
of every matter on grounds fair and liberal. But it is neceflary, in confideration of the 
fubjeéts of converfation with Meer Abul Coffim, that I fhould point out to your Highnefs, 
that unlefs juft caufe fhould be given for entering into new Treaties, the laws of my country, 
the injunctions of the King and Company of England, as well as the faith and honour. of 
the Englifh, prohibit me from entering into any negociation to make new Treaties; and 
Ihave confined my conferences with Meer Abul Coffim to the explanation of that made in’ 
1768, with a view to a more perfeét exccution of it, On this account I have not judged 
proper to comply with fuch requefis as have been made by Meer Abul Coflim, that m any 
shape tend to alter the fpirit of that:‘Trcaty. A farther argument to imprefs your Highneis 
with the propricty of this determination is the fanction and fupport of his Majefty and the 
Company of England to thofe meafures, that coincide with their inftruétions; I have 
mentioned this circumftance merely to aifure your Highnefs of the firength of my affertions 
and the value of my engagements, in regard to the Guntoor Cirear, and the other Articles of 
the Treaty; and I trafi that this clear explanation of the ambiguous Articles of the Treat 
will render it effectual, and wili afford your Highnefs a convincing proof of the Company's 
determination to adhere to the faith of it, 

Although T have not agreed to enter into a new Treaty with your Highnefs, through 
Meer Abul Coilim, for the reafons above afligned, yet your Higimeds, iu confideration of 
the authority velted in me by the King and Parliament of England, will confider my letter, 

gh merely purporting a clear explanation of the feveral Articles in the Treaty of 1768, 
roag aad cfheient upon the Englif Governments in India, equally fo as a ‘Treaty in due 
Id be, ince the Members of the Council have given their cheerful ecquiefcence to its 


ar High- 
of the 
but fhiouid - 


rther particulars of my fentimenis I beg leave to refer your Highnefs to Meer Abul 
Coflim, whom TU have confidered during this negociation as faiblully attached to your 
Highnefs, fully acquainted with your Highnefs’s interefts, and your moft confidential fervanty 
empowered to fettle any Agreement for the mutual benefit of the two Governments. 1 have 
accordingly communicated to him, without referve, all that has occurred to me on the 
ject of the clucidation of the Treaty of 1768, in the fame manner as if your Highuets 
vefent. Neverthelefs, as your Highnefs’s concurrence and approbation ‘are neceflary 
a final fanétion wo the Articles difcuiled, I have thought proper to mention them in. 
isletter; for the reft, your Highnefs may have the moft ailured a chaencs that I will mof 
faithfully abide by all the cngagements I have entered into on the part of the Company. 


Extra@ from the Journals of the Houfe of Commons, 15th March 1792. 


“ Refoized, that it appears that Earl Cornwal/is’s Letter, dated the 7th July 1789, 
“to the Nizam, was meant to have, aad has had the fulltorce of a Treaty exe- 
* cuted in duc fona.” 


260 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on. 


Appendix, No. 39. 
‘TREATY with the Nizam, dated 1f September 1798. 


An enlarged perpetual Subfidiary Treaty between the Honourable United Englifh Eaft 
India Company and his Hlighnefs the Nawaub Nizam ul Mulk Afoph Jah Behader, 
Soubahdar of the Deccan, his Children, Heirs and Succeffors, fettled by Captain James 
Achilles Kirkpatrick, by virtue of the powers delegated to iim by the Right honour- 
able Richard Earl of Mornington, Knightof the moft honourable Order of St. Patrick, 
one of His Britannic Majetty’s moft Honourable Privy Council, Governor General in 
Council, appointed by the Honourable Court of Direstors of the faid Honourable Eaft 
India Company to direét and control all their affairs in the Hatt Indies. 


WHEREAS his Highnefs the Nizam ul Mulk Afoph Jah Behader has, from the greatnefs 

“of exifting friendihip, expreffed a defire for an increafe of the detachment of the Honour- 
able Company's troops at prefent ferving his Highnefs, the Right honourable Earl of 
Mornington, Governor General, has taken the propofals to that effectinto his moft ferious- 
confideration ; and the prefent juncture of affairs, and the recent hoftile conduct and evil 
-defigns of Tippoo Sultaun, as fully evinced: by his fending Ambafladors to the Ile of 
France, by his propofing to enter into a Treaty offenfive and defenfive with the Vrench 
Republic againtt tthe Englith Nation, and by attually receiving a body of French troops 
into his dominions and immediate pay, rendering it indifpentably neceffary that effeCiual 
meafures for the mutual defence of their refpective poffeilions, fhould be immediately taken 
by the three allied Powers united in a defenfive league againft the aforefaid 'Tippoo Sultaun ; 
the aforetaid Governor General in confequence empowered Captain J. A. Kirkpatrick, 
A@ing Refident at the Court of his ‘Highnefs the Nizam, to enter, on behalf of the 
Honoarable United Englith Eaft India Company, into certain engagements with his High- 
nels the Nizam ul Mulk Afoph Jah Behader, for a permanent increafe of the Honourable 
‘Company’s troops in his Highnefs’s pay, in the proportion and on the condition fpecified in 
the following Articles, which muft be underftood to be of fuli validity when this Treaty 
fhall be returned, figned and fealed by the Governor General. 
. _ Article 1ft—Such parts of the letter from Earl Cornwallis to his Highnefs the Nizam, 
dated 7th July 1789, and which has always: been confidered in the light of. a Treaty, as 
relates to the ftationing of troops with his Highnefs, are to be confidered as in full force ; 
thatis, the fervices of the new permanent fubfidiary force are to be regulated precifely by 
the fame reftrittive claufes that operate on the prefent detachment, unlefs the Peifhwa 
fhall hereafter confent to any alteration in thofe conditions, and his Highnets likewife ap- 
prove of the fame. 

- Article 2d,—Agreeably to the practice in the Company’s fervice, the new fubfidiary force 
thali be fubjeé to relief, either partial or entire, as oftea and in fuch manner as the Company's 
Government may require ; provided withal, that no diminution takes place by fuch means in 
the ftipulated number to be ftationed with his Highnefs. 

Article gd.—The propofed reinforcement of fubfidiary troops fhall be in the pay of this 
State from the day of their crofling the boundaries ; fatisfactory and effectual provifion fhalk 
be made for the regular payment of this force, which, including the prefent detachment, 
is to amount to 6,000 Sepoys with firelocks, with a due proportion of tield-pieces manned 
by Europeans, and at the monthly rate of 2,01,425 Rupees. The yearly amount of 
fubfidy for the aforefaid force of 6,000 men, with guns, artillery men, and other neceffary 
‘appurtenances, is Rupees 24,17,100. The faid fum fhall be completely difcharged in the 
ccourfe of the year, by four equal inflalments; that is, at the expiration of every. three 
Englith months, the ium of 6,04,275 Rupees in filver of full currency fhall be iffued with- 
out hefitation from his Highnets’s Treafury ; and fhould the aforefaid inftalments happen to 
fall at any time the leat in atrear, fuch arrears thall be deducted, notwithfanding objections 
thereto from the Current Kitt of Peifheufh, payable to his Highnetfs on account of the 
Northern Circars: fhouldit any time fo happen, moreover, that delay were to occur in 
the iffue of the inftalments aforefaid in the ftated periods, in fuch cafe alfignments fhall be 
granted on the collections of certain diftriéts in this State, the real and actual Revenue 
of which hall be adequate to the difcharge of the yearly fubfidy of the aforelaid force. 

Article 4th—The dutics on grain and all articles of confumption, as well as on alt 
neceiinries whatever for the ufe of the new fubfidiary force, fhall be commuted agreeably to 
the praétice that obtained with the former detachment. A place likewile thall be fixed 
the head-quarters of the faid force, where it fhall always remain, except when fer- 
vices of importance are required to be performed, and whenever cither or part of the 
faid force is to be employed in the butinefs of the State, a perfon of refpectability, and 
who is afervant of this Sirkar, fhallbe appointed to attend it; the Commanding Officer 
and Officcrs of the faid fubfidiary force thall be treated in all refpects ‘in a manner fuitable 
to the greatnefs and dignity of both States. 
ile sth—The faid fubfidiary force will at all times be ready to execute fervices of 
importance, fach as the protection of the perfon of his Highnefs, bis heirs and fucceffors, 
from race to race, and overawing and chaftifing all rebels or exciters of difturbance in the 
dominion of this State; but itis not to be employed on trifling oceafions, nor like Sebundy 
to be fiationed in the country to colleét the Revenues thereof. : 

Article 6th.—Immediately upon the arrival of the fubfidiary force at Hydrabad, the 
ovhole of the Officers and fervants of the French party are to be difmiffed, and the troops 

comprizing 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, 261 


comprizing it difperfed and diforganized, that no. trace of the former eftablifhment fhall 
-yemain; and his Highnefs hereby engages for himfelf, his heirs and fuccellors, that no 
chinan whatever fhall ever hereafter be entertained in his own ferviee, or in that of any 
ot his Chiefs or dependants, nor be fuffered to remain in any part of his Highnets’s do- 
minions ; nor fhall any Europeans whatever be admitted into the fervice of this State, nor 
be permitted to remain within its territories, without the knowledge and confent of the. 
Company’s Government. 

Article 7th—The whole of the French and Sepoy deferters from the Company’s fervice, 
that may be in the French or ‘any other party of trooyis belonging to this State, are to he 
feized and delivered up to the Britifh Refident; and no perfons of the above deteripzion 
are to be allowed refuge in future in his Highnefs’s territories, but are on the contrary tu be 
feized without delay and delivered up tothe Britith Refident; neither fhell any refuge be 
allowed in the Company's territories: Sepoy deferters from the fervice of his Highneés thall 
in like manner be feized, and delivered up without delay. 

Article 8th—Whereas his Highncfs the Nizam, from confiderations of prudence and fore- 
fight, and with a view of avoiding manifold evils, has determined on difmiffing the French 
from his' fervice, and on difperfing and diforganizing the troops commanded by them, ag 
{pecified in the 6th Article, and on entertaining a perpetual ftanding force of the Honourable 
Compan ’s in their room, fubjeét to the limitations and reftri¢tions preferibed by Earl 
Cornwallis’s letter to his Highnefs the Nizam, mentioned in the 1ft Article ; it is there- 
fore agreed, with a view to the mutual benefit of his Highnefs and the Peifhwa, and the 
happinefs of their refpective fubjeéts, that the Company’s Government will ufe their beft 
ealcaroirs to have inferted, with the confent and approbation of both, in the new Treaty 
in contemplation between the three allied Powers, fuch a claufe as fhall fet eaclr at eate 
with regard to the other: fhould the Peithwa, however, not accede to a propofat fo highly 
advantageous and profitable to both Governments, and differences hereafter arife between 
the two States, namely, that of the Nawaub Afoph Jah Behader, and of the Row Pundit 
Purdhaun, in fuch cafe the Englith Government hereby engage, that interpofing their me- 
diation in a way fuitable to rectitude, friendfhip and union, ‘hey will apply themfelves te 
the adjuftment thereof, conformable to propriety, truth and juftice. The Nabob Afoph Jah 
Behader accordingly hereby engages never to commit on his part any excefs or aggreffion 

ainft the Sirkar of Row Pundit Purdhaun; and in the event of fuch differences arifing, 
whatever adjuftment of them the Englifh Government, weighing things in the feale of truth 
and juftice, may determine upon, fhall without hefitation or objection meet with full appro- 
bation and acquiefcence, : 

Article gth.—All former Treaties between the Englith and the Government ‘of the 
Nawaub Afoph Jah and the Peifhwa remain in full force. Should, hereafter, the Row 
Pundit Purdhaun exprefs a defire to enter into fubfidiary engagements fimilar to the prefent 
with the Company, the Nawaub Atoph Jah will moft readily give his concurrence. 

Article 10th.—This enlarged fubfidiary Treaty, confitting of 10 Articles, being this day. 
fettled by Captain Kirkpatrick, with the Nawaub Afoph Jab Behader, Captain Kirkpatrick has 
delivered one copy hereof in Englith and Perfian, figned’ and fealed by himfelf, to. the 
Nawaub, who on’ his part has alfo delivered to Captain Kirkpatrick one copy of the fame, 
duly executed by him{elf; and Captain Kirkpatrick Rereby engages to procure and deliver to 
his Highnefs, in the {pace of 50 days, a ratified copy from the Governor Gencral, itt every 
xefpect the counterpart of the one executed by hinifelf; and on the delivery of {uch copy, 
which will then have become a full and complete inftrament, the Treaty executed by 
Captain Kirkpatrick fhall be returned. In the mean while no time fhall be loft in writing 
for the advance of the propofed reiuforcement. 7 

Signed, fealed and executed, at Hydrabad, 1 Sept’. A.D. 1798, 

or ig Rubby ul Orwal, anno Hejira 1213. 


(Signed) _J. A, KIRKPATRICK, | 
Asting Refident. 


Separate Articles appertaining to the ‘Bereta Subfidiary Treaty concluded between 
the Honourable Eaglifh Eaft India Company and his Highnefs the Nawaub Afoph 
Jah Behader, on.the 14 September, anno Domini 1798, or 19th Rubby ul Orwal, anno 
Hejira 1213. 2 
WHEREAS, in conformity to a with expreffed by his Highnefs the Nizam, the ftipulation 
in the 6th Article of the Subfidiary Treaty, refpedting the delivering up of the French, is 
agreed to be made a feparate one ; his Highnefs hereby engages, that after the arrival of 
the Company’s troops at Hydrabad, the whole of the French Officers and foldiers in his 
fervice fhall be apprehended in fuch way as Captain Kirkpatrick may point out, and be 
delivered up to him, or for atime be kept in confinement in a habitation belonging to this 
Cirkar, but in the cuftody of the Company's troops; and upon the reorganization of the 
party lately under the command of the aforefaid French Officers and foldiers, fhall, within 
the {pace of two months, be delivered up to the Britith Refident ; {tri@ orders {hall moreover 
be given to all Talookdars on the frontiers, and to thofe in charge of all fords and paffes, to 
feize any Europeans whatever attempting to pafs their epee ftations, and fend them 
immediately, with all due precautions, en loners to Hydrabad, where they fhall inftantly be 
delivered up.to the Britifh Refident. On the above condition it is hereby agreed, that the 
Frenchmen thus delivered up thall not be confidered as common prifoners of war, nor be in 
any 


262 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT jfrom the Sele&t Committee on 


any refpe& mal-treated ; ther fhall be conveyed at the Company’s expenfe, and with as 
little refiraint as poflible, to England, and from thence be fent by the firft favourable oppor- 
tunity to France, without being detained for a cartel or exchange of prifoners. 


Signed, fealed and exchanged, at Hydrabad, 1 Sept’ A. D. 1798, 
or 19 Rubby ul Orwal, anno Hejira 1213. 
(Signed) J. A. KIRKPATRICK, 
Adting Refident. 


Separate Article appertaining to the perpetual Subfidiary Treaty concluded between 
the Honourable Englifh Eaft India Company and his Highnefs the Nawaub Afoph 
Jah Behader, on the 1ft September, anno Domini 1798, or 1g Rubby ul Orwal, anne 
Hejira 1213. 


NO correfpondence on, affairs of importance fhall in future on any account be carried on 
with the Cirkar of Row Pundit Purdhaun or with any of his dependants, either by the 
Nawaub Atof Jah Bebader or by the Honourable Company’s Government, without the 
anutual privity and confent of both contracting parties; and whatever tranfactions, whether 
of great or finall import, may in future take place with the aforefaid Row Pundit Purdhaun 
or his dependants, a reciprocal communication of the fame fhall be made to the other con- 
trating party without delay and without referve. ¢ 


Signed, fealed and exchanged at Hydrabad, 14 Sept 
: anno Domini 1798, or 19 Rubby ul Orwal, 
anno Hejira 1213. 


Appendix, No. 40. 


TREATY with the Nizam, dated 12th Oéober 1800. 


Treaty of perpetual and general defenfive Alliance between the Honourable the Englifl 
Eaft India Company and his Highnefs the Nabob Nizam ul Mulk Afoph Jah 
Behader, Soubahdar of the Deccan, his Children, Heirs and Succeffors, fettled by 
Captain James Achilles Kirkpatrick, Kefident at the Court of his Highnefs, by 
virtue of the powers delegated to him by the moft noble Richard Marquis 
Wellefley, &c. &c. Ke. 


WHEREAS, by the bleffing of God, an intimate friendfhip and union have firmly fub- 
fifted for a length of time between the Honourable Company and his Highnefs the Nabob 
Nizam ul Mulk Afoph Jah Behader, and have been cemented and pengocte! by feveral 
‘Treaties of Alliance, to the mutual and manifeft advantages of both Powers, who with 
uninterrupted harmony and concord, having equally fhared the fatigues and dangers of war 
and the Hetiings of peace, are in faét become one and the fame in iutereft, policy, friendship 
and honor. Thete Powers, adverting to the complexion of the times, have determined, on 
principles of precaution and forefight, and with a view to the effectual prefervation of con- 
ttant peace and tranquillity, to enter into a general defenfive alliance, for the complete and 
xeciprocal protection of their refpective territories, together with thofe of their feveral Allics 
and dependants, againft the unprovoked aggreffions or unjult encroachinents of all, or of any 
enemies whatever. 

Article 1ft—The peace, union and friendthip, fo long fubfifting between the two States, 
thall be perpetual ; the friends and enemics of either fhatl be the friends and enemies of 
both; and the contracting parties agree, that all the former Treaties and Agreements between 

> the i States now in force, and not contrary to the tenor of this Agreement, fhall be con- 
firmed by it. 

‘Article 2d.—If any Power or State whatever fhall commit any act of unprovoked hoftility 
or aggreflion againtt either of the contracting parties, or againft their refpective dependants 
or ‘Allies, and, after due reprefentation, fhall refufe to enter into amicable explanation, or 
fhall deny the juft fatisfaGtion or indemnity which the contracting parties fhall have required, 
then the contracting parties will proceed 'to concert and profecute {uch further meafures as 
the cafe hall appear to demand. 

3d. For the more diftin& explanation of the true intent and effect of this Agreement, the 
Governor General in Council, on behalf of the Honourable Company, hereby declares, that 
the Britith Government will never permit any Power or State whatever to commit with 
impunity any act of unprovoked hoitility or aggreftion againit the rights or territories of 
his Highnets the Nizam, but will at all times maintain the fame in the fame manner as the 
rights and territories of the Honourable Company are now maintained, 

Article 3d—With a view to fulfil this Treaty of general defence and protettion, his 
Highnets the Nabob Afoph Jah agrees, that two battalions of Sepoys, and one regiment of 
cavalry, with a due proportion of guns and artillery men, fhall be added in perpetuity to the 
prefent permanent fubfidiary force of fix battalions of Sepoys of 1,000 firelocks each, and 
one regiment of cavalry 500 firong (with their proportion of guns ‘and artillery men) ; fo that 
the whole fubfidiary force furnithed by the Honourable Eaft India Company to his Highnels, 
fhall henceforward confift of 8 battalions of Sepoys (or 8,000 firelocks) aud.2 regiments of 
cavalry (or 1,000 horfe) with their requifite complement of guns, European lery met, 

cars’ 


the Affairs’ of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. - 263 


Lafcars and pioneers, fully equip d with warlike ftores and ammunition ;' which force is to 
be ftationed in perpetuity in his Highnefs’s territories. y 

Article 4th—The pay of the above-mentioned additional force thall be calculated at the 
rate of the pay of the exifting fubfidiary force, and fhall commence from the day of the 
entrance of the faid additional torce into bis Highne(s’s territories. 

Article 5th—For the regular payment of the whole expenfe of the faid augmented fub- 
fidiary force (confifting of 8,000 infantry, 1,000 cavalry, and their ufual proportion of 
artillery) his Highnefs the Nabob Afoph Jah hereby affigns and cedes to the Honourable 
Eaft India Company, in perpetuity, all the territories acquired by his Highnefs under the 
Freely of Seringapatam, on the 18th March 1792; and alfo all the territories acquired by 
his Highnefs under the Treaty of. Myfore, on the 22d June.1799, according to the Schedule 
annexed to this Treaty. i 

Article 6th.—Certain of the territories ceded by the foregoing Article to the’ Honourable 
Company being inconvenient from their fituation to the northward of the river Toom-- 
buddrah, his Highnefs the Nabob Afoph Jah, for the purpofe of rendering the boundary line 
of the Honourable Company’s poffeffions a good and well defined one, agrees to retain the 
diftri&s in queftion, namely, Copul Gujinderghur and others (as marked in the. annexed 
Schedule) in his own pofleftion ; and in lieu thereof afligns and cedes, ip fatl and in perpetuity 
t0 the Honourable Company, the. diftri@ of Adoui, together with whatever other territory 
his Highnefs may be polio’ of, or is dependant on: his Highnefs's Government, to the 
fouth of the Toombuddrah, or to the fouth of the Kiftnah below the junction of thofe two 
rivers. é 

Article 7th.—The territories to be affigned and eeded té the Honourable Company by 
the sth Article, or in conifequence of the change ftipulated in the 6th Articlé, ‘thail be 
fabjoet to the exclufive management and authority of the faid Company and of their 

Article 8th.—Whereas the a@ual produce of a confiderable portion of the diftridts, ceded 
to the Honourable Company by Article 6th, is afcertained and acknowledged to be greatly in-. 
ferior to their nominal value, as {pecified in the Scheduld annexed.to this Treaty, and the 
faid diftri@s cannot be expected, for along courfe of years, tu:reach their faid nominal 
value; and whereas differences might hereafter arife between the contracting parties with 
refpedt to the real value of the fame, and the friendfhip and harmony happily fub6fting be- 
tween the contracting parties be difturbed by difcuflions relating to the. adjuftinent of ac- 
counts of the produce and value of the faid difiri@s; in order to preclude alt caufes of any 
fuch future difference or difcuflion between the two States, the izid Eaft India Company 
agrees to ceo the faid diftriéts (with the refervation flated in the 6th Article) 4s a full 
and _coinplete fatisfaction for all demands on account of the pay. and charges of the faid 
Subfidiary force ; and therefore to whatever extent, or for whatever length of,time, the a@ual 

roduce of the faid diftriéts thall prove inadequate to the amount of the fublidy payable 
by his Highnefs on account of the faid fubfidiaty force, no demands hall ever be made 
by the Honourable Company upon the Treafury of his Highnefs, on account of any fach, 
deficiency, or on account of any failure in the Revenues of the faid diftridts, arifing from 
unfavourable feafons, from the calamity of war, or any other caufe. His Highnefa the 
Nizam on his part, with the fame friendly views, hereby renounces all claim to any arrears 
or balances which may be due to him from the faid diffricts at the period of their 
ceffion to the Honourable Company, and alfo to any eventual excefs in the produce of 
the faid diftri&s beyond the amount of the fubfidy payable by his Highnefs on account 
of the faid fubGidiary force; the true intent and meaning of this Article being, that the 
ceffion of the faid diftri@s, and the exchanges ftipulated in the 6th Article, fhall be con- 
fidered as a final clofe and termination of accounts between the contratting parties. with 
refped& to the charges of the faid fubfidiary force. 5 
rticle oth.—After the conclufion of this Treaty, and as foon as the Britifh Refident 
fhall fignify to his Highnefs Afoph Jah that the Honourable Company's Officers are 
prepared to take charge of the diftrifts'ceded by the 5th Article, his Highnets will imme- 
diately iffue the necellary Perwannahs or orders to his Officers, to deliver over charge of the 
fame to the Officers of the Company ; and it is hereby ftipulated and agreed that all eol- 
lections made by his Highnefs’s Ofheers fubfequent to the date of the fatd Perwannahs or 
orders, and before the Officers of the Company fhall have taken charge of the faid diftritts, 
thal be carried to the account of the Honourable Company. " 

Article 10th.—All forts fituated within the diftridis to be ceded as aforefaid thall be 
delivered to the Officers of the Honourable Company with the faid diftriéts; and his High- 
nefs the Nabob Afoph Jah engages that the {aid torts fhall he delivered to the Honout- 
able Company, as nearly as pollible, in the fame ftate as that in which his Highnefs 
receive 


Article 11th.—His Highnels the Nabob Afoph Jah will continue to pay the fubfidy 
of the former fubfidiary force, and alfo that of the additional troops, from his Treafury, in 
the fame manner as hitherto obferved, uatil the Honourable Eaft India Company's Offi 
fhall have obtained complete poffeffion, from his Highnefs’s Officers, of the country ced 
to the faid Company by the 5th Article: the Company will not claim any payments of 
fubfidies from his Highnefs’s Treafury after:their Officers fhall have obtained poffellion of - 
the faid diftriéts from the Officers of his Hi; " 

_ ‘Article 12th.—The contracting parties will employ all praaicable means of conciliation, to 
prévent the calamity of war; and for that purpofe will, at all times, be ready to enter into 
< + 353e: ° 33 amicable 


264 APPENDIX fo the Sccond REPORT from the Scle& Committee on 


-amicable explanatioys with other States, and to cultivate and improve the general relations 
of peace and amity with all the Powers of India, according to the true fpirit and tenor 
of this defentive ‘lreaty ; but if a war fhould unfortunately break out betwecn the contract- 
ing parties and any other Powcr whatever, then his Highnefs the Nabob Afoph Jah engages, 
that, with the referve of two battalions of Sepoys which ‘are to remain near his Highnets’s 
perfon, the refidue of the Britith fablidiary force (confifting of fix battalions of Sepoys 
and two regiments of cavalry, with artillery) joined by Gx thoufand infantry and nine thou- 
fand horie of his Highnefs’s own troops, and making tugether an army of 22,000 infantr 
aud 10,000 cavalry, with their requifite train of artillery and warlike ftores of every king, 
fhall be immediately put in motion, for the purpofe of oppofing the enemy; and his 
Highnefs further engages to employ every further effort in his power for the purpofe of 
bringing into the field, as fpeedily as poflible, the whole force which he may be able to 
fupply trom his dominions, with a view to the effectual. profecution and {peedy termination 
of the faid war. The Honourable Company in the fame manner enga; ng on their part, 
in this cafe, to employ in aétive operations ‘againtt the enemy the levgell ree which they 
-may be able to furnith, over and above the faid fubfidiary force. : 7 
rticle 13th Whenever war fhall appear probable, his Highnefs the Nabob Afoph Jah 
engages to collect as many: Renjarries as poflible, and to ftore as much grain as may be 

\ticable in his frontier garrifons. 

Article 14th.—Grain and all other articles of confumption, and provifions, and all forts of 
materials for wearing apparel, together with the neceffary quantity of cattle, horfes and 
camels, required for the ufe of the fubfidiary forée, fhall, in proportion to its prefent aug-. 
mentation, be, as heretofore, entirely exempted from duties. 

Article 15th.—As by the prefent Treaty the union and friendthip of the two States are fo. 
firmly cemented as that they may be confidered as one and the fame, his Highnefs the 
Nizam engagcs neither to commence, nor to purfue in future any negotiations with any- 
other Power whatever, without giving previous notice, and entering into mutual confultation 
with the Honourable Laft India Company’s Government; and the Honourable Company's 
Government on their part hereby ‘declare that they have no manner of concern with any 
of his Highnefs's chikdren, relations, fubjes or fervants; with refpect to whom his High- 
nefs is abfolute. : 

Article 16th.—As by the prefent Treaty of general defenfive alliance, mutual defence. 
.and offence -againft ‘all enemies are eftablifhed, his Highnefs the Nabob Afoph Jah.con- ~ 
fequently engages never to commit any act of hottility or aggrcilion againtt any Power 
whatever; and in’ the event of differences arifing, whatever adjuttment of them the Com- 
pany’s Government, weighing mattcrs in the fcale of truth and juftice, may determine, {hall 
meet, with full approbation and acquiefcence. Paces : Me ag Gre 

Article 17th.—-By the prefent ‘Treaty of general defenfive alliance, the ties of union, . by 
the blefling of God, are drawn fo clofe that the friends of one party will be henceforward 
eonfidered as thé friends of the other, and the enemies of the one party as-the epémies of the « 
other } itis therefore hereby agreed, that if in future the Shorapoor or Gudwall Zemindars,, 
or any other fubjects or dey ndants of his Highnefs’s Govermnent, fhould withbold the pay-. 
ment of the Circar’s juft claims upon them, or excite rebellion or difturbances ; the fubfidiary 
force, or fuch portion thereof as may be requifite after the reality of the fact fhall be. dul 
afcertained, fhall be ready, in concert with his Highnefs’s own troops, to reduce all fuch, 

* offenilers to obedience ; and the particular interefts of the two States being now in every. 
refpeét identified, it’ is further mutually a; that if difturbances fhall at any time break 
out in the diftriés ceded to the Honourable Company by this Treaty, his Highnefs the 
Nabob. Afoph Jah’ thall permit fuch a portion of the fublidiary force as may be requilite, 
to be emptoyed in quelling the fame within the faid diftri@s. ‘If diftarbances fhall at aay 
time break out in any. part of his Highnefs’s dominions contiguous to the Company's frontier, 
to which it might-be inconvenient to detach any portion of the {ubfidiary troops, the Bri- 
tith Government, in like manner, if required by his Highnefs the Nabob Atoph' Jah, fhall 
direé&t fach proportion of the troops of the Company as may be moft conveniently fia- 
tioned for the purpole, to ailift in quelling the faid difturbances within his Highnefs’s do- 
ininions. = 

Article 18th,—Whereas by the favour of Providence, a perfect union, harmony and con-. 
cord, have long and firmly fubfifted between the Honourable Eatt India Company, his. 
Highnels the Nabob Afoph Jah, his Highnels the Peithwa Rao Pundit Purdhaun, and 
Rajah Ragojee Buooflah; therefore fhould his Highnefs Rao Pundit Purdhaua and 
Rajah Ragojec’ Bhooflah, or either of them, exprefs a.defire to participate in the benefits 
of ‘the preient defenfive alliance, which is calculated to ftrengthen and perpetuate the foun- 
dations of general tranquillity, the contracting parties will readily admit both or either of 
the faid Powers to be a member of the prefent alliance, on fuch” terms and conditions -as. 
fhall appear juft and expedient to the contracting parties. 

Article 19th.—The contracting parties, being actuated by a fincere defire to promote and 
maintain general tranquillity, ‘will permit Dowlut Rao Scindiab to be a party to the prefent 
Treaty, whenever he thali fatisfy the contracting parties of his difpofitioa to enltiyate the 
relations of peace and amity with both States, and. fhall give fuch fecurities fer the maintes 
nance of tranquillity, as fhall appear to the.contracting parties to be fafficient. : 

Article 2oth—This Treaty, confifiing of twenty Articles, being this day fettled by Gapiaian 
James Achilles ‘Kirkpateiok with the Nabob ‘Aloph dah Behader, Captain Kirkpatrick has 
‘delivered one copy thereof in Englith and Perfian, figned and fealed by bimfelf, to pol 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 265 


Nabob, who, on his part, has alfo delivered one copy of the fame, duly executed by him~ 
felf; and Captain Kirkpatrick, by virtue of efpecial authority given to him on that behalf by 
the moft noble the Governor General in Council, hereby declarcs the faid Treaty to be in full 
force.from the date hereof; and engages to procure and. deliver to his Highnefs, in the fpace 
‘of thirty days, a copy of the fame from the Governor Gencral in Council, in every refpect ~ 
the counterpart‘of that executed by himifclf; and on the delivery of fuch copy the Treaty 
executed by Captain Kirkpatrick fhall be returned ; but the additional fubfidiary force, fpe~ 
cified in the gd Article, fhall be immediately required by-his Highnefs the Nizam, and fur- 
aithed by the Honourable Company ; ‘and all the other Articles fhall be in full force from 
this time. 


Signed, fealed and exchanged, at Hydrabad, on the 12th OMober, A. D. 1800, or 22d 
Jumady ool Orwal, A. H. 1215. 


‘Signed J. A. KIRKPATRICK, 
aa ; Refident. 


{A true Copy.) (Sigtedy Thomas Sydenham, 
. Secretary to xs Prefidency. 


Separate and’ Secret Articles appertaining to the Treaty of perpetual and general 

lefenfive Alliance concluded between the Honourable Englifi Eatt India Company, 

and his Highuets the Nawaub Afoph Jah Behader, on the 12th October A.D. 1800, 
or 22d Jumady ool Orwal A. H. 1215. ‘ 


Article 1f—The Peifhwa Rao Pundit Purdhaun fhall be admitted to the benefits of this 
general dcfenfive alliance, on the following conditions : : 

Firft.—Rao Pundit Purdhaun thall accept the mediation of the Honourable Company's 
Government, for the amicable adjuftment, on the bafis of the Treaty of Mah, of all claims 
or demands of Choute, and of all other claims or demands whatever on the territories or Go- 
verament of his Highnefs the Nabob Afoph Jah. k . 
~ The Britith Government will alfo take into confideration the claims of bis Highnefs the 
Nabob Afoph Jah to a total exemption from Choute, and will arbitrate on the principles 
of juftice and equity, any queftion now exifting, or which thall hereafter arife relative to 
the fame, between Kao Pundit Purdhaun and the Nabob Afoph Jah, provided Rao Pundit 
Purdhaun shall agree to accept the faid arbitration ; and Rao Pundit Purdhaun thall not be 
admitted to the benefit of this general defenfive. alliance until he fhall have agreed to ac- 
cept the arbitration of the Britith Government with refpe& to the faid claim of the Nabob 
Afoph Jah to a total exemption from Choute. . 

Secondly.—Rao Pundit Purdhaun fhall give full fatisfaGtion to the Honourable Eaft India 
Fempany ‘on the various points depending between him and the Britith Government in 

udia, e 

Thirdly —If Rao Pundit Purdhaun fhall e to the foregoing conditions, the Honour- 
able Eafé India Company and his Highnefs the Nabob Afoph Jah will aflift him in the 
zeftoration of his aft autharity in the Mahratta Empire. 

Fourthly. —For this urpote Rao Pundit Purdhaun fhall agree to fubfidize, in perpetuity, 
fuch a body of the fain mpany’s troops as fhall hereafter be judged neceflary for the 
teftoration and maintenance of his authority. . 

Article 2d.—Rajah Ragojee Bhooflah fhall be admitted to the benefit of this 
alliance on the following conditions: Fir, Rajah Ragojee Bhooflah fhall accept the 
Honourable Company’s arbitration ‘of all jjufted points between his Highnefs the 
Nabob Afoph Jah and the faid Rajah, according to the tenor of fubfitting Treaties. Sé- 
condly, Rajah Ragojee Bhooflah ‘thall agree to fuch equitable interchanges of territory 
with the Honourable Eaft India-Company, as fhall be judged neceffary to complete or im- 
prove their refpective frontiers, or to fuch ceffions of territory (in confideration of a juft 
pecuniary equivalent) as fhall be judged neceffary to the fame purpofe. 7 

Article gd.—If, contrary to the {pirit and object of this defenfive Treaty, war thould here- 
after appear unavoidable (which God avert!) the contraéting parties will proceed to adjuft”, 
the rule of partition of all fuch advantages and acquifitions as may eventually refult from .. 
ithe fuccefs of their united arms. a, 

‘The contracting parties entertain no views of conqueft or extenfion of their refpective do- ” 
minions, nor any intention of proceeding to hoftilities, unlets in the cafe of unjuftified or 
anprovoked aggreffion, and after the failure of their joint endeavours to obtain reafonable 
fatisfaction through the channel of pacific negotiation, according to the teuor of the pre- 
ceding Treaty. {tis however declared, that in thé event of war, and of a confequent 
tition of éonquefts between the contracting parties, his Highnefs the Nabob Afoph Jah thall 
be entitled to participate equally with the other contracting parties in the divifion of every 
territary which may be acquired by the fuccefsful. exertion of their united arms, provided 

his Highnefs the Nabob Afoph Jali fhall have faithfully fulfilled all the ftipulations of the 
preceding Treaty, efpecially thofe contained in the 12th and 1th Articles thereof. E 


ned, fealed and exchanged, at Hydrabad, on the 12th Odtober A. D. 1800, oraad - 


Sig 

" yi al A. H. 1215. ; 

Jamady ool Qrwa 5 (Signed) J. A: KIRKPATRICK, 
Refident. 


266 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sele&t Committee on 


SCHEDULE of his Highnefs‘ the Nizam’s Territorial Acquifitions by the Treaty of 
Seringapatam, dated the 18th May 1792, and by the Treaty of Myfore, dated’ 
22d June 1799; and which, in conformity to the 5th and 6th Articles of the 
annexed Treaty, are now, together with the Talook of Adoui and all other Talooks 
fituated to the fouth of the Rivers Toombuddrah and Kiftnah, ceded in full and in 
perpetuity to the Honourable Eaft India Company. 


Lift of Talooks acquired by the Treaty of Seringapatam. ia ee 
Sidhout - - - =~ preeie (6 Talooks) - i 81885 of 1 
Chimoor- - - - + - - - - 6 65,427 44-4 
Kumlapoor - - - - - - + = 4 DB») 50,729 3% 3 
Voor - ------+--+€ DY 70,084 9 25 
Budwail - - - - - + - - @ DY 54,883 — 4 


90,643 7 
1,30,148 22 


Jumonul Murrow - - - - = - G Dy 4 
1 
30,952 4$ 1 


Kummum - - - - - ---( D9) 
Kunnuckgherry - = - - - - (3 De) 


ee ry 
Salis ECO a ep 
tao 
Ea a a ary 
oan 

Aaa ee Ot ee 


SSB Boa a in ae fad ag 


~Chitkoontah “- - - - -.- - G D»} 11,208 of 
Gudtorr = - - - - - - -(@ D) 17,845 ea 
Coelkonetah -~ - - - + = = (2 DY) 10,224 9 3f 
Opulpaho - - - - - - - - G@ Ds 10,008 1 14 
Nurlapoor - - -.- - - - - GQ DY 1307 52 3 
Bifspul - - - - - - + = -G@ DY 11,074 14— 
Donypahr Wurdwarum - - - - (1 D) 12,402 3$ 1 
‘ Poodtoor - + = - === - @ D)-~ - - = =| og oP 
Chutwail or Muttlwaur - - - - (8 °D) -  - + 1.) - gece 4 
Mongarel Paht - - - - - ~ a D)- - - - of 6,000 falas fase 
Nofum  - - - - - - = -(@ D) ~*~ = = =] a7 802 of — 
Bungumpully and Chunchunmattah (2 D*) -  - - 7 “| 41,804 of — 
Oak scene See sc 2 -G@ Dy - - = =] 20,000 = — 
InGooty - - -----+- @ D)- - = = =] 51,782 84— 
Bulhary and Kurkoor - - - - (2 DY - - = > +1 23,000 — — 
Weonlahwempelly - - - - - (4 D)- - -° -  - 12,565 — — 
Kopal ~~ - 2 > fee 7 OB DP - e+ = 106137 — — 
Gajjinderghun eee ee - 8 D- - - - =| 1,01,077 2 
Kunnuckgherry - - - - - -( D)- = = + =] ‘Zoi60— 
Singaputtum Oopal Warrah - > (2 De) - - = - =] a0:000 
Hunmunteond - - - - - - G DY) - =) = = =] 153000 — — 
-Buflwahpoor - - - -"- - -(@ Dy - - = - = 5,000 — — 
Mokah - - eee - ~ 7 ms} 12,162 GR 2 
In the Talookof Koorkoor - - = = - = = = 370 23 1.9 
Total - 113,16,666 6 2. 
—— 


Lift of Talooks acquired by the Treaty of Myfore. 
Gooty (remainder of) 

‘Tyze Niffar (the fort and dependencics) 
ankund Cah ee ee 
Paumry - - 
Wurkur Kunoor - 
Yarutty Murracherrvo 
Beem Rajah - 
Nuttoor - 


ve 


Hoodanty = 
Penevondah - 
Tims erraly - 
fun Inuntpoor 
Koorkoor (remainder of) 
unchungoon 
Garromcondah- 
uttunghe - 
Reydrene (€ Talooks) 
Kinnool Peifheuth 
Jungmullah (1 Talook) 
Umrahpoor Noomautty 
Annagoondy - oe 
Kurpunkully (6 Talooks) 
W atmabpocr and fundry other Villages in the 


peer ane 


erent 
peer er ree here ereeraeranannee 


Pee eeeeerretreeeraeneae 
Weve eee tree ener reeranane 


3,10,030 &f— 
5,840 18 — 


in the Chittledroog Diftriat 
Total .- | 7,93,300 103 — 

Grand Total - '21,09,968 5 3 
ere 


the Mivits of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 263 


DISTRICTS, fituated North of the Toombuddrah, which conformably to the 6th Article : 
it the paint Treaty remain with his HighnelS the Nizam, to be deduéted from the 
above, as follows: 


Koopul - - - (8 Talooks)- - - - - : - - 
Gajjerdughor - (8 D) - = = - = 2 = = 
Kunnauckgherry (2 D* a 
Villages of the Anagoondy Diftrict, fituated to the North of the Foom:} 
buddrah  - - - - - - a ae = = 
Villages of the Takkulcotah Diftri@s, fituated likewife North of the 
Toombuddrah - - es OE eT Fee eS ee: i 


1,06,137 3h = 
1,901,977 9 — 
79,100 — — 


8710 — — 


855 —- — 
Retained by his Highnefs the Nizam- - - -] 2,96,780 —} — 
Remains to the Honourable Company - 8s 18,13,1 88 4F g 


Add the Adoui Country, which, together with all his Highnefs’s remaining’ poffeffions 
South of the Toombuddrah, is by the 6th Article of the annexed Treaty ceded, in ex- 
change for the above Diftricts, to the Honourable Company - - ~ R* 8,394,718. 12. 


(A true Copy.) 
Gigned) J. A. KIRKPATRICK, 
+ Refident. 


Appendix, No. 41. 
TREATY with the Rajah of Travancore, dated 17th November 1795. 


‘Temporary Engagement between the Honourable Eaft India Company and Raja Ram 
Raje Behadcr, the reigning Rajah of Travancore, fettled by the. Honourable Jonathan 
Denean, Etg. Governor of Bombay, on the part of the Honourable Company, in con- 
fequence of infiructions from thé Honourable Sir John Shore, Bart. Governor General 
in Council of Fort Williem in Bengal, in virtue of the powers vefted in him by the 
King and Parliament of Great Britain, and by the Eaft India Company, to direét and 
control the political Affairs of all the Company's Settiemcnts in India, on the one part; 
and by the faid reigning Rajuh on the other. 


Article 1ft—Until the receipt, within two years, of the approbaticn and ratification from 
Gyeat Britain, of the propofed terms of the Treaty of future perpetual ending, aleance and 
fubfidy, as written this day, the uth of November 1795, or 5th of Cartikeeo71, Malabar ftyle, 
and to be then in full force, and obferved-on both fides; the following Articles fhali conftitute 
the rule of guidance. 

Article 2d.—The Rajah of Travancore thall, from the 17th of November 1795, or 5th of 
Cartikee Malabar ftylc, pay to the Compaty, in the manuer noticed in the gd Article, the 

pofed terms of a perpetual Treaty, a fum equivalent to the expenfe of one battalion of 
the Honourable Company’s Sepoys; which battaliou fhall be kept ready for his fervice 
whenever he ftands in need therof, and fhall call for the fame, to detend his country againft 
external force; for which defence the Company engage, in the manner and under the con- 
ditions inferted under the 4th and 5th Articies of the propofed terms of a perpetual Treaty ; 
under this further claufe, that if during this interval the faid Rajah-fhall find occafion to call 
for more than one battalion to his afliftance, he is in fuch caie to pay to the Honourable 
Company a fum equal to the expenfe of two battalions, but no more than for two, for any 
further force for his defence that may prove neceflary. 

Article 34.—During the faid interval, or_ until the arrival from Great Britain of the 
approval of the propoied terms of a perpetual Treaty, the Kajah of Travancore is to be liable, 
to furnith and maintain, at bis own expenfe, on the requifition of the Company’s Governor at 
Bombay or Madras, one complete battalion of his troops, to ferve under the command of the 
Lritith Officer, in conjunétion with the Englith forces, on either fide between Madura and 
Calicut, in garrifon or in the field, for fuch period or periods within the faid interval as the 
afliftance of the faid battalion may be required; and any troops required beyond this 
battalion, the Kajal is, to the utmoft of his abiiity, to furnifi on the terms and to the extent 
of the 7th Article of the propoted terms of the perpetual Treaty, 

This Agrecment, coniiiting of three Articles, is fettledin the neighbourhood of Anjen; 
on the 17th November 1795, correfponding with the 5th of Cartikee 971, Malabar fiyle, by 
the faid reigning Rajah of Travancore and Mr. Duncan, by whom a copy thereof fhall be 
fent to the Honourable Sir John Shore, Bart. Governor Gcneral in Council; who, on approving 
thereof, is within two months of this date to fignify his ratification of the fame, by a letter 
from the Governor General to the Rajah Ram Kaje Behader; from the receipt of which 
ketter this Engagement is to become finally binding on the contracting parties, and 
to bein the mean time, ox trom this date till the expiration of the two months allowed 
for the receipt of the anfwer from Bengal, literally obferved on both fides. The amount of 
the fubfidy, under this temporary engagement, (hall, without fail, be annually paid in cath, ia 
three equal Kifts or inflalments, at the expiration of every four months, at Anjengo. 

{Sigaed) J. DUNCAN. 

363. : 3Y 


263 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Scleé&t Committee on 


* Appendix, No. 42. 


TREATY with the Rajah of Travancore, dated 12th January 1805. 


Friendfhip and Alliance between the Honourable Englith Eafe In 
der, and the | Maha Kajah Ram Rajah Behader, Rajah of ‘It 


- WHEREAS the Treaty concluded in the year 17: fo npeny 
t of 
y 


was intended to ‘deferid aud protect the ‘Travancore countr aft for 
ad to tirengthen and fix the terms of the aucient friendthip and fabli 


r 


crcas it is evident that tue intentious of the contracting panties have not been duly 

- creas the faid Company and his Highnefs the Rajah of Travancore have 

judged it expedieat that additional provifions fhould at this time be made, for the purpofe 

of fupply the defedis in the faid ‘Tveaty, and of eftablifhing the connection between the 
faid contacting parties on a permanent bafis of fecurity in all time to come ; 

Therefore, in order to carry into cffect the faid intentions, the prefent Treaty is concluded 

by Lieut. Colonel Colin Macaulay, Refident at Travancore, on the part and in the name of 
his I cy the moft noble Marquis Wellefley, K.P. and K.C. Governor Geueral in 
Council of ali the Britith Poffetfions in the Eaft Indies, and by his Highuels the Rajah of 
‘Travancore, fur himielf, agreeably to the following Articles; which fhall be binding on the 
g parties as long as the fun and moon fhail endure. 
le 11.—The friends and enemies of either of the contracting parties fall be coi 
fidered xs the friends and enemies of both; the Honourable the Eaft India Company Pehad 
(pecially engaging to defend and protect the territories of the Maha Rajah Ram 
ier of ‘Travancore againft all enemies whatever. 7 
Articie 2d.—W hereas by the feventh Article of the Treaty concluded in the year 1795, be- 
tween the Maha Rajah Ram Rajah Behader and the Englith Eaft india Company Leader, 
it was Ripulated, that when the Company fhali require any aid of his troops, to afift them in 
war, it {hell be incumbent on the faid reigning Rajah for the time being to furnith fuch 
aid, to fuch extent and in fuch numbers as may be in his power, from his regular i 
and cavalry, exclufive of the native Nairs of his comtry; and the Company being now 
willing entirely to releafe the Rajal: from the obligations incurred under the {aid ftipulations, 
it is hereby concluded and agreed, that the Ram Rajah Behader is for ever difcharged trom 
the aforefaid burthenfome obligation, 
- Article gd.—In confideration of the ftipulations and _releafe contained in the firft and 
fecond Articles, whereby the Company become liable to heavy and conftant expenfe, while 
great relict is afforded to the Revenues of the Rajah, his Highnefs engages to pay annually 
to the faid Company a dum equivalent to the expente of one regiment of the Honourabie 
Company’s native infangty, in addition to the fum now payable by the faid Rajah, for the 
force fubiidized by his Hlighnefs, by the:third Article of: the Subfidiary Treaty of 1795. 
The faid amount to bépaid in fix equal ‘inftalments, commencing from the ‘tirft day of 
January one thoufand &ight hunded and five: and his faid Highne!s further agrees, that 
the difpotal of uie faid fu, together with the amongemet and employment of the troops 
to be maintained by it; whether ftationed within the Travancore country or within the 
Company's difiricts, iliall be left entirely to the Company. 

Article 4th.—Shoualdl. it become neceifery for the Company to employ a larger force (than 
that which is ftipuigted for in the preceding Article) to protect the territories of the faid 
Maha Rajab again attack or invation, his Highnefs agrees to contribute jointly with the 
Company, towards the difcharge of the incrested expente thereby occufioned, fuch a fun 
23 fhall appear, on an aittentive confideration of the means of bis faid Highnefs, to bear 
a juft and reafonable proportion to the aétual net Revenues of his faid Highnels. : 

‘Article 5th Whereas itis indifpenfably neceffary that effectual and lafting fecurity 
~fhouid be provided againft any failure in the funds destined to defrzy cither the expenfes 
of the permanent military force in time of peace, or the extraordinary expenfes deferibed 
in the preceding Article of the prefent ‘Treaty ; it is hereby ttipulated and agreed betwecn 
the contracting parties, that whénever the Governor General in Council of Fort Wiliiam in 
Ecugalthali have reafon to apprehend fuch failure in the funds fo deftincd, the faid Governor 
Genazal in Council fhall be at liberty, and fhall have full power and right, either to introduce 
fach regulations and ordinances as he fhall deem expedient for the internal management 
and collcétion of the Revenues, or for the better*ordéring of any other branch and 
department of the Government of Travancore ; orto affume and bring under the dircé 
management of the fervants of the faid Company Behader, fach part or parts of the 
territorial poffeilioas of his Highnefs the Mana Rajah Ram Rajah Behader, as fhall 
appear to him the faid Governor Gencral in Council neceflary to render the faid funds 
eflicient and available either in time of peace or war. 

Article 6ii.—And it is hereby turther agreed, that whenever the faid Governor General 
in Council thail fignify to the faid Maha Rajah Ram Behader ‘that it is become necetiary 
to carry into effect the provifions of the 5th Article, his faid Highnefs Maha Kajah Ram 
Rajah Behader thall immediately iffue orders to his Aumils or other Cfficers, either for 
carrying into effect the daid regulations and ordinances according to the tenor of ne 5th 

rticle, 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 269 


Article, or for placing the territories required under the exclufive authority and control 
of the Englith Company Bebader: and in cae his Highnefs thall not iflue orders within 
ten days from the time when the application fhall have been formally made to him, then 
the faid Governor General in Council thall be at liberty to iffue orders by his own authority, 
either for carrying into effect the faid regulations and ordinances, or for affuming the 
management and- colleétion of the Revenues of the faid territories, as he fhall judge 
expedient for the purpofe of fecuring the efficiency of the faid military funds, and of 
providing for the effectual protcétion of the country and welfare of the people. Provided 
always, that whenever and fo long as any part or parts of his faid Highnefs’s territories fhall be 
placed and hall remain under the exclufive authority and control of the {aid Eat India Com- 
pany, the Governor-General in Council fhall render to his Excellency a true and faithful 
account of the Revenues and produce of the territories fo affumed. Provided always, that 
whenever and fo long as any part or parts of his faid Highnefs’s territorics {hall be placed: 
and hall remain under the exclufive authority and contro! of the faid Ea(t India Company, 
the Governor General in Council fhall renderto his Highnefs a true and faithful account 
of the Revenues and produce of the territories fo affumed. Provided alfo, that in cafe 
whenever his Highnefs’s actual receipt or annual income, arifing out of his territorial Revenucs, 
be lefs than the ium of two lacks of Rupces, together with one-fifth of the net Revenues of 
the whole of his territories, which fam of two lacks of Rupecs, together with the amount of 
one-tifth of the faid Revenues, the Eaft India Company engages, at all times and in every 
peilible cafe, to fecure and caufe to be paid for his Highnefs’s ute. 

Article 7th.—His Highne!s the Maha Rajah Ram Rajah Behader engages that he will 
be guided by afincere and cordial attention to the relations of peace and amity eftablithed 
between the Englifh Company and their Allies, and that he will carefully abftain from any 
interference in the affairs of any State in alliance with the faid Englifh Company Behader, 
or of any State whatever; and for fecuring the object of this ftipulation, it is further ftipu- 
Jated and agreed, that no communication or correfpondence with any foreign State whatever 
Shall be helden by his faid Highnefs, without the previous knowledge and fanction of the 
faid Englifh Company Behader. 

Article 8th—His Highnefs ftipulates and agrees, that he will not admit any European 
foreigners into his fervice without the concurrence of the ,Englifh Company Behader, and 
that he will apprehend and deliver to the Company’s Government all Europeans, of whatever 
éefcription, who fhall be found within the territories of his faid Highnets without regular 
paffports from the Lritifh Government; it being his Highnefs’s determined refolution 
not to fuffer, even for a day, any European to remain within his territories, unlefs by confent 
of the faid Company. ; 

Article gth—Such parts of the Treaty, (A. D. 1795) one thoufand feven hundred and 
ninety-five, between the Englifh Eaft India Company and the late Rajah of Travancore, as 
are calculated to ftrengthen the alliance, to cement the friendfhip, and to identify the 
interefts of the contracting parties, are hereby renewed and confirmed; and accordingly his 
Highnefs hereby promifes to pay at all times the utmoft attention to fuch advice as the 
Englith Government ‘ fhall occafionally judge it neceflary to offer him, with a view to the 
economy of his finances, the better collection of his Revenues, the adminifiration of juftice, 
the extenfion of commerce, the encouragement of trade, agriculture and induftry, or any’ 
other objects connected with the advancement of his Highnefs’s interefts, the happinefs of 
his people, and the mutual welfare of both States. 

: Article 10th——This Treaty, confifting of ten Articles, being this day, the 12th day of 
January one thoufand eight hundred and five, fettled and concluded ‘at the fortrefs of 
Jecroovanamaporam in Travancore, by Lieutenant Colonel Colin Macaulay, on behalf and 
in the name of his Excellency the moft noble Marquis Wellefley, Governor General in 
Council, with the Maha Rajah Ram Rajah Behdder; he has delivered to the faid Maha 
Rajah one copy of the fame in Englifii and Perfian, figned and fealed by him; and his 
Highnefs the Maha Rajah has delivered to the Licutenant Colonel aforefaid another copy, 
allo in Perfian and Englith, bearing his feal and fignature, and figned and fealed by Vayloo 
Tomley, Dewan to the Maha Rajah aforelaid: and the Lieutenant Colonel aforefaid has 
€ngaged to procure and-deliver to the faid Maha Rajah, without delay, a copy of the fame 
sider the feal and fignature of his Excellency the moft noble Marquis Wellefley, 
Governor General in Council; on the receipt of which by the faid Maha Rajah the prefent 
“Treaty fhall be deemed complete and binding on the Honourable Company, and on the 
Maha Rajah Ram Rajah Behader, and the copy of it now delivered to the faid Maha 
Rajah fhail be returned. 5 


(A true Copy.) 
(Signed) C. Macaulay, 
y * Refident, Travancore. 


Appendix, No. 43. 
Extra& Letter from the Governor in Council at Fort St. George, (Secret Department) ; 
dated 15th May 1809. _ 
Honourable Sirs, 
Para. 1. Our laft iipetc from this Department was dated on the 28th February laft, and 
oT Secretary addrefied a ietter to the Secretary to the Honourable Court on the oth March 


2. Ia 


Conf. 3 Mar. 


Conf. 3 Mar. 


Conf.14 Mar. 


270 APPENDIN ¢o the Second REPORT from the Scle& Committee on 


2. In the fory 


r of thefe difpatches were detailed the fucce!sful operations of the detach- 
ment of tro under the comand-of Lieutenant Colonei St. Leger. The ftorm of the lines 
at Aramboo! the outhern frontier of Travancore, and tie confequent fail, without refitt- 
ance, of the important fortreties of Woodagerry and Falpanauveram; thefe events occurred 

“betiveen the roth enii ‘loth vebruary, and ‘Lieutenant Cotonet St. Leger, by the orders of the 
Refident, iubtequently took up a pofition in the vicinity of Trevandrum, the capital of 
‘Travancore. 

3. On the zoth February a detachment from the divifion on the weftern frontier encamped 
uilon, proceeded in tho columns uuder the refpective command of Lieutenant Colonel 
M teth Reaineat, and Licutcaant Colonel the Honourable Stuart, 

ne ulted and gallantiy carried fome batteries and works erected 

‘aptured feven guns, and repulled a body of the enemy confift- 


nemy at 
ing of about 
vapiain 


ad 

oc is Majefty’s Ship La Piedmontaife, volunteered his fervices at the 
nen and marines, and jomed the troops at the ftorm of the batteries, in a 
ly creditable to his public zeal aod perioual valour. 
ined it. proper, in confequence, to publith in General Orders our approbation of 
the meritorious exertions of the Officers and troops employed on this occafion, and to direct 
our public thanks to be communicated to Captain Foote. 7 

6. The fucceis of our troops upon this occafion, which appears to have been the laft 
ftruggle of tine eaemy in Travancore, facilitated the movement of the foree on the weftern 
line of approach, under the command of Licutcnant Colonel Chaliners, which had been 
employed in placing the difmantied fortrefs of Quilon in a ftate of defence adequate to the 
protection of the grain, provifions and ftores, lodged there Lieutenant Colonel Chalmers 
having with confiderabic exertions effected this pomt, and having formed into brigades the 
whole of the troops ferving in Travancore, advanced on the 26ta kebraary towards Padda~ 
vellum, to eiteét a junction with Licatenaut Colonel St. Leger, and encamped about tweive 
miles north of the Rajah’s Capital. 

7. The divifion under Lieutenant Coloncl Cuppage, dettined to profecute operations on the 
northern frontier of the country, entered tue lines on the.1f March, without oppofition; and, 


* according to inftructions from the Kefident, occupied the ftrong poft of Paroor. 


Conf. 5 Mar. 


D° Conf. 
7 Mar. 


Conf.to Mar, 
D° 14 D*. 


Conf. 14 Mar. 


Conf.28 Mar. 
D*7 April. 


8. On the 4th March the troops from the fouthern divifion of the Army, under the com- 
mand of Colonel Wilkinfon, took poffcition of the defile of Amagawaul, and proceeded to 
occupy the paffes of Sheucottah and Achingole. 

9. On the approach of our troops towards Trivandrum, we received intelligence from the 

Rclident, that the Dewan, Vayloo Tomby, had tuddenly fled ia the direction of the mountains 
on the northern fronticr, and was clofely purfued by partics detatched by the Kajah to 
apprehend hin. 

lo. We are informed by the Refident, immediately after the fight of the Dewan, that he 
had, at the invitation of the Rajah, proceeded on the Piedmoutaife frigate to Ponterah, a port 
in the vicinity of the ajah’s Capital, for the purpofe of concerting with him the necetiary 
arrangements for the rettoration of tranquillity. . 

i, The Rajah had appointed a perfon named Comara Pillay as aéting Minifter, in the 
room of Vayloo Tomby; and the Refident, though unacquainted with this perfon’s character, 
dcemed it to be advifable not td offer any immediate objection to the appointment. 

12. In the courle of the fubfequent confereaces with Comara Piliay, the Refident obferved an 
tunfatisfactory remiffnefs on his part in making the neceflary arrangements for the adjuftment 
of the affairs of the country, and a culpable want of energy on the adoption of the meafures 
requifite for the feizure of the perfon of the late Dewan, 4 alfo appeared that feveral perfons 
in the intereft of the late Dewan were ftill permitted to remain in power, and that the perfons 
who had been detached to apprehend the Dewan had themfelves abfconded ; the Kefident, in 
confequence, with the approbation of the Kajab, appointed Wamana Tomby to be acting 
Minifter, in lieu of Comara Pillay, and be procured the arveft and confinement of thofe by 
whofe collufion and treachery tie flight of the Dewan and his party had been favoured, as 
well as others who continued to fupport bis caufe. Fs 

13. Woinana Tomby, the new Munifter, is a natural fon of the late Rajah; he is defcribed 
by the Refident to be'of'a firm and refpectable character, faithful to ‘the interefts of his 
mafier ; he-is known to have been a decided opponent of the late Dewan, by whom he hed 
been until lately confined, and who had attempted to affafinate him. 

14. We approved the arrangements adopted by the Refident, and adverting to the pro- 
grefs which had been made towards the fettlement of the affairs of the Rajah’s Government, 
and to the further fecurity for the tranquillity of the country, derived from ‘our being in com- 
picte poffeilion of all the defences, fortrefies, arfenals and magazines, of Travancore; we con- 
fidercd it proper to dircét the adoption of immediate meatures for reducing the heavy military 
expenfes incurred on account of that country. 

15. We accordingly direéted that fuch of the corps then in Travancore, or in its vicinity, 
whoie fervices were not required, fhould be ordered to return to their fiations ; and we in- 
firuéted the Refident to ipecify, as foon as practicable, the force which he might confider 
indifpenfably pevellany to be retained in ‘fravancore, and the places at which he would recom- 
mend the troops to be ftationed: for the detail of our fuggeftions on this fubject, we beg 
leave to refer to our Proceedings. : 

16. Having determined that the charges incident to the meafures adopted for fupprefiin; 
the difturbances excited in ‘Travancore and Cochin, fhould be defrayed by the Hajabs 7 

fe 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. a7 


thofe countries; we iffued orders to the proper Officers to prepare the accounts of thofe ex- 
penfes, and, agreeably to the recommendation of the Refident, we determined for the prefent 
that the Rajah of Cochin fhoutd be charged in the proportion of one-third of the whole ex- 

afe, leaving the remaining two-thirds of the amount to be defrayed by the Rajah of 
+ Travancore. : 

17. We have required the Refident to tranfinit a general return of the ordnance, arms and 
military ftores which have faien into ourpofletion in the courte of the late operations ; the 
quantity is eftimated by the Refident to be equal to the quantity captured in the dominions 
of Tippoo Sultaun. 

18. Your Honourable Court will obferve, from the Refident’s letter recorded on our Pro- Conf.14 Mar, 
ceedings, that all the Rajah’s regular infantry, and alio itis Nair battalions, have been dif D* 17 b° 
armed and ditbanded, excepting a part, of about 500 armed men, whom we permitted to be 
tetained near the Rajah tor the purpoies of ftate or for the protedtion of his Highnets’s 

erfon. 
: 1g. A fmall body of cavalry, which had been maintained by the Dewan, hasalfo been re- 
duced; the ferviceable horfes were transferred to the Company's Regiments; the Rajah has 
received credit for tic price of them as well as for the price of the unferviceable horles. 

20. Our Prefideat has received a letter from his Highunefs, in which he imputes the late Conf.28 Mar, 
hottilitics to the treacherous conduct of his late Minifter, and expreifes the ttrongeft allurance 
that his future conduct will be regulated in firiét conformity to the exifting Treaty. 

21, We are happy to be able to inform your Icnourable Committee, that nearly eleven Conf.7 April. 
lacks of Rupees were paid by the Rajah of ‘Travancore, on the 24th March laft, towards the 


Jiquidation of the arrears of Subfidy, and that we have been fince informed that the remainder 
of the arre as been dilcharged. 


22. We have infiracted the Refidents to require the Rajuhs of Travancore and Cochin to Conf.21 Mor. 
make early arrangements for the difcharge of the extra military expenfes which have been 
ineurred by the Government on the fuppretlion of the late difturbances. 

23. By the letters of the Refident, dated 29th March, your Honourable Committee will Conf.7 April. 
oblerve that the place of the late Dewan’s retreat was at length difcovered, and that in order D* 14 D% 
to avoid falling into the hands of perfons employed to apprehend him, he put an end to his 
exiftence ; the perfon of his brother was at the fame time fecured, and by the Rajah’s orders 
he was fent to Quilon, to be executed in tlic view of his Majefty’s Regiment, in the atrocious 
wurder of the patty belonging to which corps, at Aleppi, he bad borne an active part. 

24. The event which we have detailed offered a confident ground of expectation that the 
tranquillity of the country will not be again difturbed, and that the arrangements in progress 
for placing on a fatistactory footing the interefts of the Britifh Goverament in Travancore 
and Cochin, will experience no further interruption. ; 

25. We determined, in communication with the Officer commanding the Army in chief, Conl.7 Aprit. 
that the proportion of native troops neceffary to be retained in Travancore during the rains, 
thould confilt of feyen battalions, being three battalions in addition to the fubfidiary force ; 
viz. three battalions at Quilon, two at Aleppi, one at Woodagerry, and one divided between 
Paroor and Cochin, together with his Majefty’s 12th and 1oth Regiments, the former at 
Quilon, the latter at Woodagerry. We at the fame time dircéied ail Commands and Sta? 
‘appointments, not abfolutely neceffary in the exilting ttatc of affaifs, fhould ceafe, and that 
the Officers who eid them fheuld join their refpettive corps without delay ; that the troops 
remaining fhould be placed under the command of their refpective fenior Officers at the feveral 
ftations ; and that Lieutenant Colonel Chalmers fhould continue to exercife the general com- x 
mand over the whole. Conf. 5 May. 

26. We have fince directed that ali field allowances fhail ceafe on the 31ft of the prefent 
month; and confidering the longer continuance of two of his Majefty’s Regiments in Travan- 
core to be unneceflary, we have ordered his Majefty’s 12th Regiment to proceed to Seringa- 
patam, and his Majefty’s 19th Regiment to be moved from Woodagerry to Quilon. 

27. Deeming it of importance that the introduétion of arms and military ftores into the 
territories of Travancore and Cochin fhould in future be prevented, and underftanding that 
jarge {upplies of thefe articles had heretofore been imported into Travancore from Bombay ; Cont 
we have requefted :the Government of Bombay not to allow any arms or militafy flores to 9, April. 

‘be imported into ‘Travancore or Cochin from that Prefidency. 2 

28. We availed ourfelves of the accounts of the return of his Majefty’s 3d Ceylon Regi- Conf.28 Mar. 
ment to Columbo, to repeat to Lieutenant General Maitland our cordial acknowledgments 
for his Excelleney’s zealous co-operation, and our fati jon at the honourable teftimony 
dome by the Retident at Travancore to the merits of Licutenant Colonel Morris and a! 
the Officers and men eompofing the detachment. 2 

go. Lieutenant Colonel Macaulay informed us that the whole of the annual fupplics of 
Tobzeco from Ceylon to Travancore had been captured at fea by his Majelty’s fhips, ex- 
ccpting a finall quantity captured by the land forces. during the late military operations; 
and that the former bad been difpatched for adjudication to the proper Court at Columbo. 

Colonel Macaulay expreffied his apprehenfions that this tobacco would be condemned as 
legal prize, and fuggeticd the expedie cy of our taking meatures to prevent the illicit intro- 
duction of ncore: to the injury of the Revenue which the Rajah derives from 
the regulations under which that article is fold. We received at the fame time a requeft from Conf. 4 Aprih 
the Honourable Licutcnant Colonel St. Leger, that fome tobacco, elephants, &c. captured 
at Palpanaveram, and delivered in charge to Officers who had been appointed Prize Agents, 
363. 32 might, 


Coaf28April. 


272 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT front the Sele& Cominiitee on 


ith the ordnance, arms, &c. be relinquifhed as prize property to the troops 
t. 


fe received information that about 2,021 Candies of pepper, the property 
but ftored at Quilon in warehoufes belonging to the Rajaa of ‘fravancore, 
n poitetticn of by Odicers appointed Prize Agents, on behalf of the troops 
¢ Colonel Chalmers. : 

cqueace of tiete circumftances, we deemed it proper to apprize the Hefident 
ay ore, tat under the deciarations made in the proclamation publithed the ad- 
eof the oops into ‘Travancore, and the fubiequent conduct of the Rajah, which entitled 
he benefit of thofe declarations, it was our decided opinion that neither the property 
jah nor of any of his ts could, without a breach of public faith, be deemed to 
ful prize; the Britifa Govezninent never having confidered itfelf to be ai war with 


ne 
32. W e accordingly defired the Refident to furnith the Proprietors of the vefte!s, tobacco, 
and other property which had been conveyed for adjudication to the Prize Court at 
Columbo, with authenticated copies of that proclamation, and with fuch other documents- 
and information as might be neceffary to enable them to obtain the reftoration of their 
roperty. 

# ae We were at the fame time fully fenfible that the troops fuflered all the loffes and 
privations, and encountered all the dangers to which they would probably have been ex- 
pofed in an avowed and open war with the Rajah of Travancore, and it appeared to us that 
a diftinétion might reafonably be made between the ordnance, arms and miiitary ftores, which 
the Rajah’s rebellious fubjeéts had feized upon and employed as inftruments and means of 
offence againft the Britith voops, ‘and all other articles or property belonging to the Rajah 
or his fubjects which might have fallen into the pofleflion of the troops, but which were not 
inftruments or means of offence ufed to oppofe the advance of the troops. 

34. We accordingly refolved, as an nad toual mark of the high fenfe which we entertained 
of the gallant conduct of the troops employed in the foppretion of the late difturbaaces ia 
‘Travancore, that a fum of money equal to the valee of fuch ordnance, arms and military 
fiores, fhould be paid to the troops. This value we directed to be adjufted by the Military 
Board, {ubject to the approbation of the Governor in Council. 

35. We determined that this equivalent fhould be granted for the ordnance, arms and 
military ftores, captured or found at the places or on the occafions under-mentioued : 

The lines at Aramboley; the battle at Nagercoil; the forts of Palpanaveram and 
Oudegherry ; the battles and a¢tions fought by the troops at Quilon and Cochin ; the ord- 


him to 
of the 


* nance, arms and military ftores, which may have fallen into the poffeflion of the troops under 


Conf.a1Mar. 
D? 18 April. 


the command of Licutenant Colonel Cuppage before he received notice of the fufpenfion 
of hoftilities, in confequence of the letter of the 24th February laft, addreifed. by the Rajah 
to the Refident. 

36. As the amount of the expenfe which might attend the granting this equivalent will 
be charged to the account of the Rajah, of Travancote, we refvived that a deduction fhould 
‘be made from the amount, equal to the-value of the property of every defcription belonging 
to the Rajah or his fubjeéts, which, in confequence of orders from the Oilficer commanding 
the troops, might have been {old or difpofed of in fuch manner as to preclude its being re- 
ftored to the owners. 

37- We directed that the pepper and all other property belonging to the Honourable 
Company fhould be reftored, or the value of it deducted’ from the fum to be paid to the 
troops. . 

38 We poftponed for future decifion, what corps, detachments or individuals, fhould be 
allowed to participate in the fum of money which may become payable to the troops under 
thefe orders, and under what rules the divilion of it fhall be made. 

39. In the fubfequent paragraphs of our Difpatch to your Honourable Committee, dated 
28th of February laft, we directed the particulars of an Agreement which had been concluded 
by Lieutenant Coionel Macaulay, with the Paleat Achin, as Minifier of the Rajah of Cocain, 
in behalf of his mafter and himtelf. 

40. From the fubfequent letters of the Refident there is a ftrong ground for believing 
that this Minifier did not fulfil the engagements entered into with him on the 8th February 
laft, thereby fubjecting himtelf to a forfeiture of the indemnity and privileges conceded to 
him by that inftrument. _ 

41. The Refident caufed communication to be made of thefe circumftances to the Minifter, 
informing him, however, that he fhould not withhold from him the benefit of the fecurity to 
his perfon, property and family, which he had formerly conditionally granted, but fuggetied 
to him the necetfity of his immediately quitting the texritory of Cochin, 

42. The Paleatacknowledged the truth of the charge, as well as the indulgence with which 
he had been treated, and agreed to repair to Bombay; to which place it.would appear he has 
fince proceeded. 5 

43. At the fuggeftion of the Refident, the Rajah of Cochin has nominated Koonfle 
Kefhen Mcnan to fucceed his late Minifter ; of the character of this perfon the Refident has 
expreiled himtelf in terms which bave induced us to’confirm the felection. 

44. Adverting to the circumftances connetied ‘with the conclufion of the fubfitting Treaty 
with the Rajah of Cochin, as detailed in the Proceedings of the Commiflioners deputed to 
Malabar in the year 1793, and to the late occurrences in the Cochin territory, we confidered 
the Britith Government io be entitled to require the Rajah of Cochin to enter into fuch 

engagements 


the Afirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 273 


engagements as fhould prevent his authority and refources from being again employed in the 
promotion of detigns injurious to the Britith interefts and power in the Peninfula. 

45. We conceived that this objec would be attained by concluding an Engagement with 
the Rajah, correfponding in its general principles with the exifting Treaty with the Rajah of 
Travancore. We accordingly directed the Refident to propofe to the Rajah the conciufion 
of a Treaty founded on tho/e’ principles, with {uch modifications as the political fituation of 
the Rajah, or local cireumftances, night appear to render expedient. 

46. As the entire defence of the country will devolve on the Company, and as the Rajah 
will allo be relieved from the heavy expenfe of the large armed force which he has hitherto 
maintained, we confider it to be equitable that an adequate addition fhould be made to the 
tribate paid by the Rajah, and that this addition fhould not be lefs than the expente of a 
battalion of Scpoys in the field. : 

47. As anecellary confequence of this arrangement, we were of opinion that any fortreffes 
which the Rajah pofetfed fhould be difmantled or occupied by detachments of the Britifh 
troops, and that the Rajah thould alfo be reftrited from entertaining any greater number of 
armed men than might be neceflary for the purpofe of collecting his Revenue; and that all 
ordnance, arms and military ftores, ought to be delivered up, with the exception of the quantity 
fiipulated to be retained by the Agreement made with the Paleat Achin. 

48. The peincipal ColleGtor of Malabar was directed to furnifh the Refident with any 
information which he might require regarding the affairs of Cochin; and with the view of 
facilitating the execution of the arrangements prefcribed by thefe inftructions, we directed 
that until further orders the tribute of the Rajah of Cochin fhould be paid dire@ly to the 
Refident ; and that the charge of the Britifh interefts in the territory under the immediate 
amy of the Rajah, fhould be placed exclufively under the fuperintendance of the 

‘efident. 


Appendix, No. 44. 


CONVENTION with the Guicowar Rajah, dated 15th March 1802. 


ARTICLES of Convention between the Honourable Jonathan Duncan, Efq. Prefident 
and Governor in Council of Bombay, for and in behalf of the Honourable Eaft India. 
Company, of the one part; and Rowjee Appajee, for and on behalf of Anund Row + 
Guicowar Senakafkhel Shumfheir Behader, of the other part; for the fecurity of the 
Dominion and Government of the Guicowar in Guzzerat. 


Article 1ft—The faid Rowjee Appajee having folicited the affittance of the Englifht troops 
againft Muthar Row, with a view of bringing hin to reafon, either by peaceable or hoftile 
means, fo as to prevent his ruining the country of the State of the Guicowar, of which 
Anund Row is the proper and legitimate heir and head; and the Englith troops under the 
command of Major Walker having accordingly arrived in the territories of the Guicowar, 
and the faid Rowjee Appajee being alfo come to Cambay to meet the Honourable Governor; 
it is hereby agreed by and between them, that the expenfe already-incurred, and fuch others 
as may hereatter be occafioned for the pay, allowances and tranfportation of the troops, ex~ 
liture and tranfportation of ftores, ammunition, &c. fhall be accounted for and paid, with 
jntereft at the rate of three quarters per cent. per month of thirty days, by the faid Rowjee 
Appajee on Anund Row Guicowar and the State aforefaid, in two infialments; the firft 
becomes due on or before the 5th October next, and the fecond on or before the 5th January 
1803 ; for the fecurity of which he afligns and mortgages the Guicowar fhare of the Diftriét 
of Attaveefy near Surat; hereby agreeing, that on failure of the firft inftalment; the Englith 
are to take poffeflion of the faid country, and to retain the fame under their own collection 
and management until the whole be. fully cleared and made good to the ‘Honourable: 
Company with intereft. : 7 : ? 

Article 2d.—It is farther hereby ftipulated between the Honourable Eaft India Company 
and the Guicowar State, that the latter fhall permanently tubtidize from the Honourable 
Company a force of about two thoufand Sepoys, one company of European artiilery, and its 
proportion (coalifting of two companies) of Latcars; ‘the eitimated expente of which, includ- 
ing eftablithment of ftores, being about fixty-five thoufand Rupees per month, it is hereby 
agreed that landed Jaidad or fands be affigned fo as fully to cover this expenfe, and what- 
everitmay amount to, from fuch part of the Gyicosrar's territories as may be hereafter fixed, 
in view to the greateft convenience of both parties; but the article is not to ‘be carried into 
effeét until the war againft Kurry be clofed ; when it is allo propofed, through the co-opera- 
tion of the Englith, to effect a reduction in the numbers of the Arab force now‘kept up ; 
and meanwhile this is to be confidered as an eventual, and to remain at prefent an entirely 
fecret Article. : E ee tin eta kine : 

Article g34——The Perunnal of Chouraffey and the Guicowar’s fhare of the Choute of 
Surat having been ceded to the Honouzable Company, in puvfuanc ie Engagement, by 
letiers to that effect from the late Govind Raw to the fonoinable: the !Governor of Bombay, 
the fame is hereby confirmed for ever. eae 


Article 


_ 974 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Seleé Committee on 


Article 4th.—This Agreement to be binding and permanent when ratified by the Supreme 
Goveriment of Bengal, who in all political concerns control the other Prefidencies, but in 
the mean time to be in full force. “In witnefs whereof the parties have interchangeably fet 
hereunto their hands and feals, in Cambay, the 15th day of March 1802. 

(A true Copy.) 4 
(Signed) HH. Shank, 
Ading P. Secretary. 
(Signed) J. DUNCAN. 


Gigned)  ROWJEE APPAJEE. | See 


alk 


(A true Copy.) 
(Signed) J. A. Grant, 
Sub. Sec’ to Govt. 


Appendix, No. 45. 


AGREEMENT with the Guicowar Rajah, dated 6th June 1802. 


Articles of Agreement between the Honourable Jonathan Duncan, Efg. Prefident and 
Governor of Bombay, for and on behalf of the Honourable Eaft India Com- 
pany, and Rowjee Appajee, the Dewan or Minifter of Anund Row Guicowar Senah 

hafkhel Shumthere Behader, ‘for and in behalf of the faid Anund Row Guicowar, in 
virtue of the full powers vefted in the fuid Rowjee Appajee to treat and fettle for the 
Affairs of the Guicowar Princi ity with the faid Governor of Bombay; which powers 
bear date the gd of Zilkad or 8th of March, in the year of our Lord 1802. 

Article 1ft.—Whereas certain Articles were, under date the 15th of March laft, anfwering 
to the 10th Zilkad, entered into under the above-mentioned full powers by the faid con- 
trating parties, in reference to the war then carrying on againft Mulhar Row, and providing 
for the Guicowar Government’s defraying the whole expente thereof, and for its fubfidizing 
@ permanent force from the Honourable Company, and the ceding to them the Pergunnah 
of Chouraffy and the Guicowar’s.thare of the Choute of Surat: All thefe ftipulations are 
bein declared to be in full force, and of equal ftrength and folidity as if repeated in the 

refent Treaty. ‘ 

i Article 2d~-Mulhar Row having commenced hoftilities with the State of Annund Row 
Guicowar Senah Kbafkhel Shumfhere Behader, and taking poffellion of Vellanagur, induced 
‘Anund Row to folicit the affittance of a Britifh force, fur the purpofe of effectually reducing 
Mulhar Row and taking his fort of Kurree; upoa whick the Englith fent a force to 
Cambay, with the view of bringing the faid Chieftain to reafon, either by peaceable or 
hoftile means, and the latter having in confequence been purfued, on account of Mulhar 
Row’s uot abiding by the advice of the Englith, the war has fince terminated _fuccefsfully 
for the State of Anund Row ;_ who has in confequence entered on poffeflion of the fort of 
Kurree and of its Perguanahs, and of Mulhar Row’s other territories, and made a provifion 
for him in the Pergunnah of Merejad, eeding alfo to the Englith Company the Pergunnah of 
Chickly, fituated in the diftri&t of the Surat Attaveefy, in full fovereigaty for ever, as a 
‘pouranenus mark of his gratitude for their affiftance in overcoming ths oppofition to his 
authority. 

“Article 3d.—By the fecond Article of the Convention of the s5th. March laf it is 
ftipulated, that Jaidad or landed funds equal to the income of fixty-five thoatand Rupees 
per-month fhall be afligned to the Honourable Company, to defray the expente of the 

.fubfidized force; but as from the prefent incumbered and mortgaged ftate of the diftricts 
compofing the Guicowar principality, thefe aflignments cannot be effected and the 
Nlonourable Company put into poffeliion during the current year, beginning from the 

*Mifgh of 1859, or June 1802; it is hereby agreed, that the payment of the fubfidy for this 
term thal}, be fecured according to the condition of a feparate bond, execuied for this 
purpofe, under the preient date; and that the alligament of laud to the Honourable Com- 
pany fhail be effectively and fully accomplifhed by the Milgh of 1860, beginning in June 
1803: this fubfidy to be chargeable to the Guicowar State from the period referred to in 
tae Convention of the 15th March. : 4 

articie gth.—The fecoad Article of the Convention of the 15th March laft propofing to 
effeét a reduction in the number of the Arab force under the Guicowar Government, the 

i al obftacle to which confifts in want of ready money funds, ‘for the liquidation 

arrears of fuch part of the faid eftablifhment us it is propofed to dithand, and the 

bie Company meaning to extend. to this effect {ome pecuniary alliftance to the 
fatlcomar State; tais repayment of this amount is to take place and be fecured in manner 
following: : 

The firft payment of intereft by the Mirgh of 1860, or June 1803; the fecond year’s 
intereft and one-third of the principal, by the Mirgh of 1861, or June 18043 and all the 
yemuining principal and_interett by the Mirgh of 1862, or June 1805: but. in the 
event of failing in the above-ftiplated payments, the Rexeaye of the Rewgunaahs of , 

: aroda, 


the Afisis of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. — 275 


Baroda, Caral, Senor, Pittad and Ahmedabad, to the fill amount of the Ruffid, which 
will be about 11,75,000 Rupees per annum, fhail be collc¢led by the Company in proportion 
to the advance that may be made by them ; and when this debt is fully paid, the collection of 
that part of the Revenue from the above named Pergunnaks {half revert again to ‘the « 
adminiftration of the Government of Baroda. 

Article 5th.—There ihall be a true friendfhip and pond underftanding between the 
Honourable Englith Eaft India Company and the State of Anund-Row Guicowar in purfuance 
of which the Company will grant the faid Chief its countenance and protection in all his 
public concerns, according to juftice, and as_may appear ‘to be for the good of the country; 
refpecting which he is alfo to liften to advice: atid the State of tke Guicowar having _ 
reprefented fundry points to the Governor, in which it is interefted, he has affured Raoba 
of the general attention of the Honourable Company to protect the adminiftration of 
Anund Row in all their sights, and to be aiding to its concerns, with his Highnetfs the 
Fetters or ellewhere, on al jutt occafions, where their aflittance may prove requifite and 
ufeful, . 

Article 6th,—For the cultivation and Promoting the permanency of the good under- 
ftanding between the two States, there fhall be a conftant good correfpondence kept ap 
‘between them, and Agents reciprocally appointed to refide with each. 

Article 7th—In future the fubjects of each State, who may take refuge with either, 
fhall be delivered up, if the State from which fuch party or partics fhall have fled appear 
to have any demand of debt, or any juft claim againft him or them; but as a free inter- 
courle between the countries and the two Governments is alfo intended, frivolous claims 
againtt parties reforting from their own to the other jurifdiction, are not to be preferred; 
and in all ferious cafes cordiality will be fhewn. 

Article 8th._—This Agreement to be binding and permanent when ratified by the-Supreme 
Government of Bengal, which in ali political concerns controls ail the other Prefidencies; 
but in the mean time to be in full force. 

In witnefs whereof, the parties to the foregoing Articles of Agreement have interchange~ 
ably put their hands and feals, in Cambay, this 6th day of June, in the year of our Lord 


one thoufand eight hundred and two. 
: (Signed) © JONATHAN DUNCAN, 


Signed, fealed and’ delivered, “ 
in the prefence of (A true Copy.) 
(Signed) 4. Walker, (Signed) HI, Shank, 
Kahmaulddeen. Ads B* Sec’, 
: {A true Copy.) , 
(Signed) J. A. Grant, 
Sub-Sec’ to Govt. 


Tranflation of 2 Sunnud or Grant of Chickly, written in the form of a Letter to the 
Honourable Jonathan Duncan BA. Prefident and Governor of Bombay, by Anund 
ioe Goicowar Senah Khas Kheel Shumfhere Behader. 


Mulhar Row Guicowar Himut Bebader being indebted to us for the arrears of 
our annual accounts, and having exchanged Behaders or fecurities for the future good 
condué on both fides, a fettlement had taken place; in the prefént year Mulhar Row unjuftly 
raifed a quarrel with us, and without peying any regard to the Behaders or fecarities we 
fent to him for, the purpofe of difcniling the fubjeét, the fort of Biflanagur was takea 
from us, and he occationed much difturbance in ‘our country; Babajee Appajee, in his 

roceeding with troops to Katia and Katiavod, was oppofed by him, and there enfued a 

attle. In confequence of this, we difpatched ‘Kehoualeddeen Hooflicn Khan Behader and 
Gopal Row Bapojee to you, and begged the afliftance of the Company Behader, on con- 
dition that we thal defray the charges of their troops; for which a due provifion has been 
feparately made: but in teftimony of our fenfe of the feafonable afliftance. afforded to us 
by the Honourable Company, we now make the Company a prefent of Chickly, within the 
province of Surat Attavifiy, to be taken poffeflion of by the Englifh at the beginning of 
the approaching year, or Suvant 1859, and to enjoy the benefit of it for ever. In thi¢ 
Perguanah, whatever are the gifts or donations, {uch as annuities, Enams of villages and 
grounds, charitable allowances, and the rights of the Zemindars, may be obferved and allowed 
for according to the ufual rules; and the balance of the prefent year, againft that Pergunnah, 

ha: ? 


may be difcharged agreeable to its accounts. 
. (A true Copy.) ' 
Dated 2d Suffer, or } Gigned)  H. Skank, 
4th June 1802. Ags Be See. 
Malfa Kaunt. : 


{In the Rajah’s own hand-writing.} 


J, Anund Row Guicowar, Sena Khafs Kheel Shumfhere Behader, db -hereby confirm. 
and ratify fuch Gompacis and Agreements as my faithtul Dewan, Rowjee Appajee, hath in 
ay aime, and on imy behalf, made and coneluded with the Honourable the Governor of 

jombay, 

363. 4a Firt. 


276 APPENDIX é the Second REPORT from rhe Seleft Committee on 


-Firt-L hereby confirm and ratify fuch grants of lands as my faid Dewan, Rowjce 
:Appajee, has made to the Honourable Company, either in Enam’ or Jaidad; and 1 allo 
declare, that 1 hold myfelf, my heirs and fuccellors, bound to repay in money, or in fuch, 
further landed affignments as may be fufficicnt for the purpofe, all debts and expenfes which 
the Englifh Government have been at or contracted in the courfe of their military 
operationsin Guzzerat, undertaken for the fupport of my Government. 

Secondly—I entirely approve and highly commend the prudence of my Dewan, in having 
obtained a body of Englith troops to remain permanently in this country, as on their 
courage and fidelity L place an uolimited dependance. 

1 have determined that the payment of this fubfidiary force fhall commence from the firft 

- ef -this month, Englith ftyle, or firft of April 1859 or Hindoo wera, 

‘Thirdly. As-1 repofe an entire confidence in the. Englifh, I depend on their friendfhip 

-ko fhieid me from misfortunes. I am fenfible that there are many evil difpofed perfons 
amongft the Arabs, who difregarding my legal authority, have plotted againft my jiberty, 

: andexen my life. 

By the favour of God they have been defeated; bat fhould their wicked machinations at 

. @ny time hereafter fucceed, I thall expect the Englith to releafe me; and defire that all my 
_ aéis and deeds, although executed by me in the ufyal form, while in that ftate of reftraint, 
.gnay'be confidered as of no validity. I defire, ‘therefore, that my fubjects will pay no 
attention to my orders in this fituation, but hear what Major Walker has to fay; ftrictly 
following his direGtions, and affifting him in every meafure that he fhall devife or direct for 
-Feftoring my perfon to freedom. 

Whoeyer, in thort, fhail either bring Canoojee into the management of affairs, or fhut ne 
up in the fort of Baroda, or elfewhere, is a rebel ; and I fully authorize the aforefaid Major 
Alexander Walker, or the perfon entrufted with the chief management of the Compauy's 
affairs in Guzzcrat, to chattize fuch difturbers of government, and bring them to that 
punifhment which is due to thofe who endanger the perfon of their fovereign, in every 
rt of the world. Thus, therefore, I order all the faithful Officers of Government, Silladars, 

jebundy and others, on any of the foregoing events occurring, to obey Major Walker's 

orders. 

Fourthly —W hereas it is fignified in certain Articles of Agreement betweea the Honoura- 
ble Company and my Dewan, Rowjee Appajee, that the Englifh Government is difpofed ta 
aflfift in reducing the Arab force in my fervice; Major Walker, Refident, on the part 
of the Englith Government at Baroda, confents to affilt me with a pecuniary loan, to effect 
this reduction, on the following terms. : 

Fifthly—As it feems impoflible that Ican retrieve myfelf or my country from its pre~ 
feat embarraffments without reforming and reducing the expenfe in every department, P do 
hereby promife and agree to make the neceffary tuctions by degrees. “The objeéts of re- 
duétion are contained in the annexed Account, and if poffible they.fhall be effected at the 

- periods fpecified oppofite to each of: the Articles. : 

Sixthly —Betore aoy money is advanced, Major Walker mutt be fatisfied that g,real and 
effective reduction fhall take place. For this purpofe an exhibition mu be made of the 
accounts, and a mufter taken of the troops, in the prefence of three perfons, viz, one on the 

part of the Company, one. on the part of the Guicawar,.and the third by fuch of the 
lemautdars or Parckhis as may be the Agents of the Sebundy : according to this mufter the 
account fhall be taken and diicharged. : 

Seventhly.—I do hereby further agree and promife, that I thall pofitively reduee the 
_Arab and other force, within fix or eight months after the prefent reduction is accom- 
plithed, to the ftandard of Futteh Sing’s time ; but to enable me to perform this tlipulation, 
it will be neceffary for the Englith Government to aflift me as they have done on the prefent’ 

,occafion, 

Eighthly.—Provifion is already made in the 4th Article of Agreement, executed and in- 
terchanged between the Honourable the Governor of Bambay and my Dewan, Rowjce 
Appajce, bearing date the 6th June, or 5th Suffer laff, for the payment of the prineipal and 
intereft of the money. to be advanced by the Company ; but as it has fince been propoted 
to pay the fame off one year fooner than is thercby provided, by applying the.entire Kefnd 
of the lands appropriated by that Article, to the amount of 11,75,000 Rupees per annum, to 
the ditcharging, i equal proportions, of the principal and intereft of the money to Ue ad- 
vanced by the Company, and by fueh other perfons as may engage therein, Major 
Walker accepts of the modification; by which the Company’s advance may be liquidated: 
one year fooner than it would be by.a ftriét adherence to the letter of Treaty. 16 being, 
however, always underftood that the Provisions in the ath Article.of the faid Treaty of the: 
.6th June, or 5th Suffer, are always in full force, the fame as if this fubfequent engagement had 
not been made; in.the event of the repayment of the Honourable Company's Loan, as well: 
of principal as of intereft, failing to be made good in the more {pcedy mode now propoted, 
the amouut of .the above receipt or Ruffed is to be collected every year from the Comaviff- 
dars of the Purgunnahs allotted for this purpofe, in the Treaty of the 6th Juue, -by fuch 
perfons as the Government.of Bombay may appoint. 

Ninth!y.—Lntereft_on that part of the pecuniary affifiance and aid which the Company 
may give on this occafion, fhall be reckoned and accounted for from the time the faid Com- 
pany may rail a loan: for that purpofe, and it fhall be. reckoned every fix months, at the» - 
tate. of three quartgrs per cent. per mouth of go dayy, inftead of every year or every eeke 

: Month. 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 257 


month. All or any: lofs, by exchange or otherwift, which may arife by bringing the 
spent from Bombay to this place, fhall be on my account, and made good by me and my 
fuceetlors, 

Tenthly—Conformably to Major Walker's fuggeRions and withes, the Articles contained 
in this Declaration were written, and to which Lhave given my affent ; but on the event of 
evil difpofed perfons attempting auy thing unfair or unreafonable againft my perfon, my 
Dewan, Rowjee Appajee, kis fon, his brother, nephew or relations, and Madow Row Fatia 
Muzeundar, or even fhould I myfelf or my fucceifors commit any thing improper or unjutt, 
the Englifh Government fhail interfere, and fee in either cafe that it is fettled according to 
equity and reafon. . ‘ 

T have'alfo required of Major Walker, on the part of the Company, to promife that my 
State and Government fhall ‘be permanent, an:l defend to the fineal inheritors of the 
Mufnud, and that the Dewanthip thall be prefirved to Rowjee Appajee. : 

In the laft place, 1 defire to form the moft intimate conncétion with the Company, and 
that all bufineiS with the Poona Durbar may be jointly managed by the Englith Refidoat 
and my Vakeel. 

Such are my wifhes and fentiments, So kelp me GOD. 


Given at Bembay, 29th July 1802. 
Witnefs, The date of the Mahratta verfion, in the 
Gopaul Row Bapoojee Vakeel, hand-writing of the Dewan, as alfo the fig- 
In behalf of Sena Khats Khel Shumbheir —nature—-Anjind Row Guicowar Sena Khajs 
Behader. Khel Shunjheir Behader. 
Witnefs, The following words arewritten in the Ra- 
Maguel De Lurie e Souza, jah’s own hand; “The above writing is gue.” 


Appendix, No. 46. 


TREATY with the Guicowar Rajah, dated e1ft April 2805; 


Delinitive Treaty of general Defenfive Alliance, between the Honourable Englith Eat 

- India Company on the one part, and the Maha Rajah Anund Row Guicowar Sena 
Khas Kheyl Shumfheir Behader, and his Children, Heirs and Succeffors, on the others 
fettled by Major Alexander Walkcr, Refident at Baroda, having full powers from the 
Government of Bombay ; which js in like manner authorized by his Excellency the 
moft noble Richard Marquis Weliefley, Knight of the moft illuftrious Order of St. Patrick, 
one of His Britannic Majefty’s mott' Honourable Privy Council, Governor General in 
Council, appointed by the Honourable the Court of Directors to direct and control alt 
their Affairs in the Eaft Indics. 

WHEREAS various Agreements have been concluded between the Honourablé Com 
ypany on the one part, and Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas hhcyl Shumfheir Behader 
-an the other, all.tending to improve and inereafe the friendfhip and alliance between the 
scontracting parties, viz. a Convention dated at Cambay the 15th March 1802, fettled by 
:the Governor of Bombay -on. the part of the Honourable Company, arid by Rowjce 
Appaice, Dewan, on the part of Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumfheir 

jehader. 


An Agreement dated at Cambay the 6th June 1802, fettled by the Governor of Bombay 
on the part of the Honeurable Company, and by Rowjee Appajce, Dewan, on the part 
of Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumiheir Behader ; and an Agreement made 
by Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumfheir Behader, with Major Alexander 
Walker, Refident at Baroda, on the part of the Honourable Company, dated at Baroda. 
the oth July 1802; and whercas it is defirable to confolidate the ftipulations of all 
thefe feparate Engagements with one definitive Treaty, and further to improve the ftate of 
alliance of the contraéting partics in like manner as has becn applied tor by the afore- 
faid Rowjec Appajec in his. Ictter of the 10th of Suffer, or 12th June 1803, defiring that 
the prefent Engagement, between the Honourable Company and the Guicowar State, may 
be dawn up in: terms confonant to thofe employed in the Treaty of Baffein, between the 
‘Honourable Company and his Highnefs the Peifhwa; the fad. Company and the Maha ~ 
Rajah Anund Row Guicawar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumfheir Behader do hereby accordingly 
agree to the following Articles, framed for that purpofe. 


Article Firft—All the ftipulations of the Engagements heretofore made between the con 
traéting parties and above recited, viz. gn the 15th of March, 6th June, and goth July 1802, 
are hereby confirmed, and are to bind the contracting partics, their heirs and fuccedfors, for 
ever, - 

Article Second.—The friends and encmies of either party fhall be the friends and enemies 

.of both; and if any Power fhall commit any act of unprovoked ’hottility or aggreflion againit 
cither of the contracting parties, or againft their ,relpective dependants or Allics, and, after 
‘dye. reprefentation, fhall.refute.to enter into aniicable explanation, or thall deny ine jut 

fatiefaction 


°@78 «APPENDIX sto the Socénd REPORT from the Scle& Cominittce on 


fatisfa@tion which: the contratting parties fhall havé required, the contraéting partiés will 
proceed to profecute fuch further meafures as the cafe fhall appear to demand. 

Article Third.— Whereas, in conformity to the Agreements heretofore made between the 
Honourable Company and the Maha Rajah Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Sh 
their Bchader, a fubfidiary force of 2,000 men was fubfidized, and inclufive of the half aug 
mentation of the fubfidiary force firf fixed upon, the Maha Kajah Anund Row Guicowar 
Sena Khas Kheyl Shumfheir Behader agrees to receive, and the Honourable Company to 
furnifh, a permanent: fubfidiary force of not Jefs than three thoufand regular native 
infantry, with one company of European artiliery, and their proportion, viz, two companics 
of gun Laicars, with the neceffary ordnance and warlike ftores and ammunition ; which force 
is to be fiationed in the territories of the faid Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl 
Sbumfheir Behader. : 

Article Fourth —The fubfidiary forec will at all times be ready to execute fervices of im- 
portance, {uch as, the protection of the perfon of Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl 
Shumfheir Behader, his heirs and fuccetfors, the overawing and chaftifement of rebels and 
-exciters of difurbance in his territories, and the due correction of his fubjeéts or dependants 
who may withhold the payment of the Sircar’s juft claims; but it is not to be employed on 
trifling occafions, nor like Sebundy, to be ftationed in the country to colleé the Kevenue: 
one battalion of theie forces, however, or fucb a proportion of them as the performance of the 

vices may require, will proceed to Katty when there may be a real neceflity 
ith Government, whofe care and attention to ail the interefts of the Guica- 

e doubted, muft remain the judge of its neceflity. 

n order to provide the regular payment of the whole expenfe of this fubfi- 
diary force, Anund Row Gnicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumfheir Behader has ceded, by the 
Agreements aforefiid, viz. dated the.1sth March, 6th June, and goth July 1802 and 
2d June 1803, ‘Diftriéts and other Funds, of-which a Schedule (A) is annexed to this Treaty, 
of the yearly net value of 1 10,000 Rupees. This ceflion is confirmed by this Treaty, and 
Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumfheir Behader hereby cedes the Diftriéts of 
which the Schedule is annexed, with all the rights of fovereignty thereof, and all the forts 
which they contain, in perpetuity to the Honourable Company. : 

Article Sixth.—The diftriéts of Chowrafly Chickly, Surat Chouth and Kaira, have been 
ceded to the Honourable Company by Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumtheir 
Behader, as a proof of his friendfhip, and as a teftimony of his fenfe of the benefit which he 
has received from his alliance with the Honourable Corpany’s Government. The ceflion 
of thefe diftriéis is confirmed by this ‘Treaty, and Anund kow Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl 
Shumfheir Behader hereby cedes the ditiriéts above mentioned, with all the rights belonging 
at the fovereigaty thereof, and all the forts which they contain, in perpetuity to the Honoui- 
able ‘Company. . 7 

Article Beveath—Whereas the Honourable Company have ‘at different periods aflifted 
Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumfhcir.Behader, both from their owa funds 
and thofe of Bankers, with advances of Money, a particular account of which, as well as of 
-the Funds affigned for the payment of the fame, is contained in the Schedule annexed, 
marked B; itis hereby agreed that the full amount of the Kuffud of the Diftridts therein 
named, according to the provifions in the 8th Article of the Agreement of the egth July, hall 
-be collested, on account.of the Honourable Company and the perfons therein referred to, 
suntil thefe debts and the intereft due upon them {hall be fully paid ; and for the paft or any” 
fature advances which the Company's Government may make to that of the Guicowar, 
Mahals fhili be afligned as their fecurity. . 

Article Eigith—Grain andi all other articles of confumption, and provifions, all forts of - 
-materials for weqsing apparel, together with the neceflary numbers of cattie, horfes and 
camels, required for the ute of the fubfidiary force, fhall be exempted from duties. in. the 
territories of Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumbheir Behader, and the Com- 
manding Officer and Officers of the fubfidiary force thall be treated in all refpests in. a manner 
fuitable to the importance of the truft placed in them, and the dignity of the Britith Govern- 
ment. dn like manner fhall the Officers of the Guicowar Government meet with fimilar 
confideration and refpec from the Honourable Company. In confideration alfo of the good 
i iendihip which has fo long happily fubfifted between the Honourable Company 
and the Guicowar Government, fuch goods and articles as’ may be, bona fide, requi for 
the private ufe or confumption of that family or of the Minifters, fhall be allowed to be pur- 
chafed at Surat and Bombay, and to be fent from thence free of duties, on being accom- 
panied by @ paffport from the Refident at Baroda. 

As the Degean is the native country of the Mahrattas who inhabit or ferve in Guzzerat, 
fuch of this nation as may be in the Guicowar fervice hall be allowed to pafa and repafs 
frecly with their families terough the Honourable Company’s territories. 

Itis exprefsly underftood that the admifion of this Article is net to fanction, or in any fhape - 
to authorize, the tranfit of merchandize or of prohibited goods. *. 
¢ Maha Kajah Anund Kow Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumfheir Be- 
, that he will not entertain in his ferviee any European or American, oc 
» fubjeét ef the Honourable Company, without the confent of the Britith 
er will the Company’s Government entertain in their fervice any of the 
Guicowar fervants, dependants or flaves, contrary to the inclination of that State. 

Article Tent.—Inatinuch as by the prefent Treaty the contracting parties are bound in 

an allianee for mutual defence and protettien, Anuad Kow Guicowar: Sena Khe Kheyl 
umthgr 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. — 279 


Shumfheir Behader engages never to commit any att of hoftility or aggreffion againtt any 
Power whatever ; and in the event of difference arifing, whatever adjuftment the Honours 
able Company’s Government, weighing matters in the feale ‘of truth and juftice, may, in 
commnunication with the Guicowar Sircar, determine, {hall meet with full approbation and 
acquiefcence. 3 : 

Article Eleventh Whereas there are certain unfinifhed tranfactions between his Highnefs 
the Peifhwa and Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumtheir Behader, and there 
exift certain papers of accounts, which are unadjufied ;-Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas 
Kheyl Shumfheir Behader doth hereby agree that the Honourable Company’s Government 
thal! examine into and finally adjuft the faid tranfa@ions,- papers, and accounts of the de- 
mands refulting therefrom, aad Anund Row Guicowar Scena Khas Kheyl Shumfheir Behadce 

* biads himlelf, his heirs and fuccetlors, to abide by fuch adjuftment as the Britifh Govern- 
ment fhall accordingly determine. Further, in refpect to thefe unfetthed pecuniary affairs, 
exifting with the Governments of his Highact's the Peithwa andthe Guicowar, it behoves the 
Jait:r to repofe a fimilar faith in the Britifh Government as the Peifhwa, who has agreed to 
-abide by the adjufiment of thete concerns. 

This fettlement fhall be effected by the Honourable Company after taking into mature 
confideration the impoverithed ftate of the Guicowar finances, and the latter Government 
entertain a full conviction that no oppreflive demand will be enforced under the Company’s 
mediation. 

Artie Twelfth.—If notwithftanding the defenfive nature of the Agreement between the 
contracting parties, and their delire to cultivate and improve the relations of peace with all 
the Powers of India, war fhould unfortunately break out, it is agreed, that with the referve 
of a battalion of native infantry to remain near the perfon of the Maha Rajah Anund Row 
Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumfheir Behader, or fuch a proportion as may appear 
neceflary for the fecurity of Guzzerat, the refidue of the fubfidiary force, with their ordnance © 
and publi¢ ftores and ammunition, fhall be immediately put in motion for the purpote of 
oppofing the enemy, : 

‘he troops of the Maha Rajah Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumfheir 
Behader fh accompany the Byitith troops to the boundaries of Guzzerat, in order to tertni- 
nate the war; fhould, however, any great exigency arife, the circumttances fhall be mutually 
sender and the beft means in the power of the contracting parties purfued to terminate 
the fame. ‘ 

Article Thirteenth._—As the enemies of both States are the fame, thofe who are in oppo= 
fition to the Guicowar Government, or in rebellion ‘to it, can never; while aGing in this 
‘manner, be admitted to the friendfhip of the Honoprable Ci ny; but ‘thould Can jee 
Guicowar, who comes under this defeription, repent and. fubmnit imfelf, it will be advifable 
to allow him a fuitable penfion ; on which he may {abst and tefide at Bombay, or at any 
‘other place which may be equally fafe and convenient. “ 4 

Neither Canoojee Guicowar nor Malhar Row Guicowar will have any other claim on the 
Guicowar Government, than the penfion which has been alligned to the latter, and that 
which may eventually be aligned to‘the former. e : 

Article Fourteenth.—When_tlie fubfidiary troops will take the field, the Maha Rajah 
Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Khey] Shumfheir Behader will fupply fach quantities of 

rain, and Benjarries to attend the Army, as the refources of his country may afford; the 
ritith Governmeut defraying the expente thereof. 

Article Fifteenth.—If difturbances fhall at any time break out in the Honourable Com- 
spany’s territories or diftricts Lordering on thofe of the Maha Rajah Anund Row Guicowar 
Sena Khas Kheyl Shumfheir Behader, the faid Maha Rajah Anund Row Guicowar fhalt 
-confent to the employment of fuch a proportion of the fubfidiary force as may be requifite te 
quell the fame; and if at any time difturbances fhall break out in any part of the Maha’ 
Rajah Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Khey] Shumheir Bebader’s territories, to which 
it might be inconvenient to detach a proportion of the fubfidiary force, the’ Britith Govern- 
ment will in like manner, at the requifition of the faid Maha itajah Anund Row Guicowar 
Sena Khas Kheyl Shumfheir Behader, detach fuch a proportion of the troops of the Contpany 
as may be moft conveniently fituated, to allift in quelling the {aid difturbances in the Maha 
Rajah Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumbheir Behader's territories. 

rticle Sixteenth-—In future the Subjects ‘of each State who may take refuge with either 

Shall be delivered up, if the State from which fuch parties fhall have fled appear to have 

any demand of debt, or any juft elaim againft him cr then; but as a free mtercourfe be- 
tween the countries under the two Governments: is alfo intendéd, frivolous claims againft 
ies reforting from their own to the other's jurifdiétion are not to be preferred; and in all 

ferious cafes cordiality will be fhewn. . 

Article Seventeenth.—The contracting parties hereby bind themfelves to take into con+ 
fideration, hereafter, the commercial retations between their reipettive territories, and to 
fettle them in due time by a Commercial Treaty. 


Done at Baroda, - 
the 21f April, 1805 A.D, 


963. 4B 


286 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


Schedule A, 


Or STATEMENT of the FUNDS affigned, and DISTRICTS :in perpetual 
fovcreignty, to the Honourable Company, by the Maha Raja Anund Row Guicowar 
Sena Khas Kheyl Shumfheir Behader, in order to provide for the regular payment 
ofthe Subfidiary Troops. 


‘he Pergunnah of Dholka 
be of Neirgaud 
BD of Bejapoor 
ye of Maller. - 
De of Mondeh 
The Tuppa of Kunee - ow 
The Kemkatoda os 2 he 
‘Warrat on Kattywar'* - | = 


Rupees [ 4,50,000 — — 


Peeve ged 


11,70,000 — — 


Rupees | 11,70,000 — — 
me 


“Baroda, 21ft April, A.D. 1805, Signed) A. WALKER, 
* Refident, 


: Schedule B, 
‘On STATEMENT of -the ADVANCES made by the Honounible Gompany and 
various Bankers, to Maha Raja Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumfheir 
. Behader; comprifing an Account of the FUNDS. affigned for their repayinent, accord- 
ing to the provifions made in the 8th Article of the Agreement .of ‘the 29th .of 
-July, A.D..1802. : 


. ADV ANCES. 
On avevunt.of the 1ft Loan for the redu@ion 
of. the ‘Arab.Scbundy, . 
4802, By the Honourable Gompany. 
Dec. 21, | As per“Account fettled’-by ‘the Accountat } 
| eneral at the Prefidency, under.this date 
; Shroff. : 
Hurry Bucktee-  -° = 9 4, 
Anjoonjee Nathjee Terwady } cal 


10,77,447 3 96 


Samuldas Becherdafs - _ (|1248,000 — — 
Mungul Seckeedafs - - =) Manoty. 23:25447 3 96 


On account of the 2d Loan for-the difcharge | 
of the Arab Sebundy. 
1803. . _ By the Honourable Company. 
Daly. 31. | As per Account and Bond of:this date - ~ |%8,89,58g — 16 
By the Shroffs. 


Samuldas Beckerdafs + + + =} 408,143 2 50 
Mungul Seekeedafs -. = = = = 1.4,27;458 — — 
” : 18,135,984 2°66 


"Rupees |41,38,732 9 62 
SE ee 


‘FUNDS affigned for ‘the repaymer 


aft The Pergunnah of Baroda-- - -- 
ado - 5 - Petland- ~ - .-, 
3d Talooka Ahmedabad - = - - 

ath oc Keml «= oe) oe - 

sth The Sayer Kotee of the Fort of Baroila = -- 
6th Pergunnah of Kunee-  - - = 
qth = = Raj Pimpla- =" 


Baroda, 21ft April 1805. 


the Mfairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 281 


Appendix, No. 47. 


TREATY with the Peifhwa, dated 31 December 1802. 
. Treaty of Baffein, 31f December 1802. 


- “Treaty of perrgtual and general Defenfive Alliance, between the Honourable Englith 
Fait India Company, and his Highnefs the Peifiwa Badjce Rao Ragenaut Row 
Pundit’ Purdhaun Behader, his Children, Heirs and Succetfors; fettled: by Lieutenant 
Colonel Barry Clofe, Refident at the Court of his Highnefs, by virtue of the powers 
-delegated to him by his Excellency the moft noble Richard Marquis Wellelley, 
Knight of the moft illuftrious Order of St. Patrick, one of his Britannic Majefty’s 
amoft Honourable Privy Council, Governor General in Council, appointed by the 
Honourable Court of Directors of the faid Honourable Company to direét and control 
ali their Affairs in the Eaft Indies. 7 


"WHEREAS, by the bleffing of ‘God, the .relations ‘of ence and friendfhip have unin- 
terruptedly fubfificd for a length of time between the Honourable Englith Eaft India 
Company and his Highnefs Rao Pundit Perdhaun Behader, and have been confirmed at 
-different periods by ‘Treaties of amity and union; the Powers aforefaid, adverting to the 
complexion -of the times, have determined, with a view to the prefervation of peace 
and tranguillity, to enter into.a general defenfive alliance, for the complete and reciprocal 
proteiot of their refpective territories, together with thofe of their fezeral Allies and 

lependants, agaiuft the unprovoked aggrefliens or unjuft encroachments of all or any 
enemies whatever. ‘ ‘ 

Article 1.—The .peace, union and friendthip, fo long fubfifting between the two States, 
thall be promoted and increafed by this Treaty, and ‘hall be perpetnal ‘The friends and 

-enemies-of either fhall be the friends and enemics of both; and the contra¢ting parties agree 
that all the former Treaties aud Agreements between the two States, now in force, and not 
-contrary to the tenor of this Engagement, fhall be confirmed by it. 

Article 2-—if any Power or State whatever fhall commit any act of unproveked hoftility or 
aggrcflion againft cither of the contracting ‘parties, or againfi their re{pettive dependants 
or ilies, and, after due reprefentation, fhall refute to enter into amicable explanations, or fhall 
deny the juft fatisfaction .or indemnity which the contracting fortes fhall have required, 
then the contracting. parties will proceed to concert and profecute fuch farther meafures asthe. 
cafe fhall appear to demand. . 

For the more diftinct explanation of the true intent and effect-of this Agreement, the 
Governor General in Council, on behalf of the Honourable Company, hercby declares, thatthe 
Britith Government will never permit any Power or State whatever to-commit with impu- 
-nity any act of unprovoked hottility or aggreflion againft the rights and territories of his 
Highnefs Rao Pundit Purdhaun Behader, but will.at all times maintain and defend the 
fame in the fame manner as.the rights and territories of the Henourable Company are now 
-Inaintained and defended. fs 

Article 3—W ith a view to fulfil the Treaty of general defence and protection, his Highnefs 
Rao Pundit Purdhaun Behader agrees ‘to receive, and the Honourable Eaft India 
Company to furnifh, a permanent fubfidiary force of not lefs than fix thoufand regular 
-native infantry, with the -ufual proportion of field-pieces and European artilleryanen 
attached, and with the proper equipment of warlike ftores and ammunition; which force is 
to be accordingly ftationed in perpetuity in his Highnets’s territories. 

Article 4.—For the regular payment of the whole expente of the faid fubfidiary force, 
his Highneis Rao Pundit Purdhaun Behader hereby atligns and ‘cedes in perpetuity to 
the Honourable Eaft India Company all the territories detailed in the Schedule annexed 
to this Treaty. . . 

Article 5.—As it may be found that certain of the territories ceded by. the foregoing 
Article to.the Honourable Company may be inconvenient from their fituation, his High- 
nefs Rao. Pundit Purdhaun Behader, for the purpofe of rendering the boundary line of 
the Honourable Company's poffeffions a good and well defended one, agrees, that tach 
exchanges of Talooks or Jands fhall be made hereafter, on terms of a fair valuation of 
their refpective Revenues, as the completion of the faid purpofe may require. And it is 
agreed.and covenanted, that the territories to be affigned and ceded ty the Ilononrable 
Company by the 4th Article, or in confequence of the exchange ftipulated eventually in 
this Article, fhail be fubject to the exclufive management and authority of the faid 
Company and of their Officers. f . 
., Article 6.—Whiereas there is caufe to apprehend that the a@ual produce of a con- Alteration.—-Not- 

fiderablé proportion of the diftricts ceded to the Honourable Company by Article 4th is withttandi 
inferior to their eftimated valuc, as fpecificd in the Schedule annexed to this Treaty; and a a the 
whereas the fuid diftridts cannot be expected to reach their faid eftimated value til after Oe nce is 
a lapie.of many years; it is accordingly ftipulated, that if, after the tertitories. ceded by chimated at 25 
Article gth thall have been ugder the management of the Honourable Company for the Lacks of Rupers, 
period of three years, it fhall .a that the total amount of the annual Revenue fhall be his faid Highnefs 
deficient of their total eftimated value, as fet forth in the Schedulé annexed to this Treaty, hi agreed to cede, 
in the fum of three lacks of Rupecs;. or in a larger amount, his Highnefs Rao Pandit by Azticie 4th, 
Purdhaun Behader fhall farther cede to the Honourable Eaft India Company a picce of Lands eflimated tn 
: territory 


yield annually 25 
Lacks of Rupees; 
the additional Lack 
being intended to 
meet pofible Defi- 
ciencies in the Re- 
venues of the faid 
Lands, and fave 
the Honourable 
Company from lofs, 


282. APPENDIX to the Setond REPORT from the Sele&t Committec on 


territory conveniently fituated, yielding an annual Revenue equal to half of the amount of 
the deficiency as afore fiated; but, exclufive of fuch faHure in the eftimated value of the 
territories ceded by Article 4th, the Honourable Eaft India Company fhall confider and hold 
the faid diftrits as a fair and complete equivalent for the whole expente of the fubfidiary 
force, under every head whatever. 

Article 7.—After the conclufion of this Treaty, and as foon as the Britifh Refident thall 
fignify to his Highnefs Rao Pundit Purdhaun’ Behader that the Honourable Company's 
Officers are prepared to take charge of the diftridts ceded by Article 4th, his Highnets will 
immediately iflue the neceflary Perwannahs, or orders, to his Officers, to deliver over charge 
of the fame to the Officers of the Honourable Company; and it is hereby agreed and 
tiipulated, that all collections made by his Highnets’s Officers, fablequently to the date of 
the Treaty, and before the Officers of the Honourable Company thal have taken charge 
of the faid diftri@ts, fhail be carried to the credit of the Honourable Company ; and all 
claims to balances from the faid diftriéts, referring to periods antecedert to the conclufion 
of this Treaty, fhall be confidered as null and void. 

Article 8.—All forts fituated within the diftri€s to be ceded as aforefaid, hall be 
delivered te the Officers of the Honourable Company with the faid diftriéts, and his 
Highnefs Rao Pandit Purdhaun Behader engages that the faid forts fhall be delivered to 
the Honourable Company without being injured or damaged, and with their ordinary 
equipment of ordnance, ftores, and provifions. 

Article 9—Grain and all other articles of confumption, and provifions and all forts of 
materials for wearing apparel, together with the neceflary numbers of cattle, horfes and 
scamels, required for the ute of the fubfidiary force, fhall be entirely exempted from duties, 
and the Commanding Officer and Officers of the faid fubfidiary force -fhall be treated in 
all retpeGs in a manner fuitable to the dignity and greatnels of both States. The fubfidiary 
force will at all times be ready to execute fervices of importance, fuch as the protection of 
the pation of bis. Highnefs, his heirs and fucceffors, the overawing and chaftifement of 
aebels or exciters of difturbance in his Highnefs’s dominions, and the due corredtion of 
his fubjedts or dependants who may'withbold the payment of the Sircar’s juft claims; 
but it is not to be employed on.trifing vccafions, nor hike Sebundy, to be ftationed in the 
~country to collect the Revenues; nor againft any of the principal branches of the Mahratta 
Empire; nor in jevying contributions from “Mahratta dependants, in the mahner of: 

oolkguree. : : 

‘Article 10.—Whereas much inconvenience has arifen from certain claims:and demands 
of the Mahratta State, affecting the city of Surat; it is a; that a juit calculation fhalt 
‘be made of the value of the faid claims, by his Highneis Rao Pundit Purdhaun ‘Behader 
and the Government of Bombay ;’and in confequence of the intimate friendfhip now 
-efiablithed between the contraéting ies, his Highnefs Rao Pundit Purdhaun Behader 
agrees for himfelf, his heirs and fucceflors, to relinguifh for ever all: the rights, claims and 
privileges of the Mahratia State affecting the faid city of Surat; and. all collections on 

at account fhail ceafe and determine from the day on which this Treaty. thall be concluded : 
in confideration of which act of friendthip, the Honourable Eaft India Company agrecs, 
that a piece of land, yielding a fum equal to.the eftimated.value: of the faid claims: of the 
Mahratta State, fhall be dedu@ed from the diftriGts ceded by Article 4th ;:and onthe fame 
principle, and from fimilar confiderations,- his Highnefs farther agrees, that the amount of 
the colleétions made for the Poona State, under the title of. Nagabundy, in the Pergunnahs 
of Chouratly and Chickly, hall be afcertained by an average taken from: the receipts of 2 
certain number of years, or by fuch other mode of calculation as may be determined on. 
And his faid Highnefs doth farther agree, for bimfelf, his heirs and fucceflors, to relinquifi: 
for ever the Nagabundy aforefaid, and they fhall accordingly ceafe fromthe conclufion of 
this Treaty: and it is agreed and ftipulated that a piece of land, yielding a fam equal to 
the amount of the faid Nagabundy collections, fhall be deducted from the diftridts ceded by © 
Article 4th, in the fame manner as ftipulated in regard to the Choute of. Surat... At 

Article 11.—Whereas it has been ufual for his Highnefs Rao Pundit Purdhaun Behader * 
to enlift and retain in his fervice Europeans of different countries ; his: faid Highnefs hereby 
agrees and {tipulates, that in the event of war breaking out between the Englifh and any = 
European nation, and of difcovery being made that any European or Europeans in his 
fervice, belonging to fuch nation at'war with the Englith, thall have meditated injury towards. 
the Englifh, or have entered into intrigues hoftile to their intereft, fuch European or. 
Europeans fo offending hall be difcharged by his faid. Highnefs, and not faffered to refide 
in his dominions; all Europeans in his fervice, belonging to fuch nation at-war with the 
Englith, thall be immediately difcharged, and not fuffered to refide in his dominions. j 

rticle 12—Inafmuch as by the prefent Treaty.the contracting parties are’ bound in & 
general defenfive alliance, for mutual defence and protection againft: all enemies; his. 
ighnefs Rae Pundit Purdhaun Behader confequen' ges never to- commit any act 
of perfonal hoftility and aggreftion againft his Highnefs the Nabob Afoph Jah Bebader, 
or any of the Honourable Company’s Allies or dependants, or againft any of ‘the principal - 
branches of the Mabratta Empire, or againt any Power whatever; and inthe evént'of . 
differences anna whatever adjuftment the Company’s- Government, weighing-matters im 
the feale of truth and juftice, may determine, fhall meet with fall approbation .and 


uiefcence. res 
we iticle 13.—And whereas certain differences, referring to tranfattions, arc: knoyn to 
Aubtift between the Sixear of his Highnefs Rao Pundit P n Bebader and the Siseag 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 289 


of his Highnefs the Nabob Afoph Jah Behader; and whereas an amicable adjuftment of 

thofe differences inuft be highly defirable, for the welfare and benefit of both the faid, 

Sirkars, his Highnefs Rao Pundit Purdhaun Behader, with a view to the above end, a 
and accordingly binds himfelf, his heirs and fucceflors, to fulfil and conform to the ftipu- 
lations of the “Treaty of Mahr; -and his Highnefs Rao Pundit Purdhaun Behader farther 
grees, that on the bafis of the fulfilment of the faid Treaty of Mahr, and. of the claims 
of his Highnefs, the Nabob Afoph Jah Behader be totally exempted from the payment of 
Choute, “The Honourable Company's Government fhail be entitled to arbitrate and 
determine all fuch points as may be in doubt or difference between the Sircars of their 
Highneffes above mentioned: and his Highnefs Rao Pundit Purdhaun Behader further 
, that in the event of any differences arifing between his Government and that of 
his Highnefs the Nabob Afoph Jah Behader, at any future period, the particulars of fuch 
differences fhall be communicated to the Honourable Eaft India Company, before any a& 
of hoftility fhall be committed on cither fide; and the faid Honourable Company, interpofing 
their mediations in a way fuitable to rectitude, friendthip and union, and shina fal of juftice 
and eftablithed ufage, ‘thall apply themteives to the adjuftment of all fuch differences, 
conformable to propriety and trath, and fhall bring the parties to_a right underitanding: 
and it is farther ogee: that whatever adjuftment of any fuch differences the Companiy’s 
Government, weighing things in the feale of truth and juftice, fhall determine; that 
determination thal, without hefitation or objection, meet with the full approbation and 
ecquiefcence of both parties. It is however agreed, that this ftipulation fhall not prevent 
any amicable negociations, which the Honourable Company and the Courts of Poonal 
and Hyderabad refpectively may be defirous of opening, provided no fuch negociation 
oat boeamed on, between any of: the three parties, without full commanication thereof to 

other. . 

Article 14.—Whereas a Treaty: of friendfhip and alliance has been concluded between 
the Honourable Company and ajab Anund: Row Guicowar Behader ; and whereas the faid 
Treaty was mediated and executed without any intention that it fhould infringe any of the 
juttrights or claims of his Highnefs Rao Pundit Purdhaun Behader, affecting the Sirkers 
-of the faid Rajah; his faid Highnefs adverting thereto, and -alfo to the intimate alliance 
now eftablithed between the contracting parties, doth hereby formally acknowledge. the 
exiftence of the faid Treaty between the Honourable Company and Rajah Anund Row 
Guicowar Behader; and as, by reafon of. certain unfinifhed. trantactions, the conclufion of 
which has been fufpended from time to time, various demands and papers of accounts are 
found to fubfift between the Government of his Highnefs Rao Pundit Purdhaun Behader 
and the Sircar of the Rajah afore-mentioned; his faid Highuefs, placing full reliance-pn 
the impartiality, truth juftice, of the Britith’ Government, doth hereby agree. that the 
faid Government fhall examine into, and finally adjuft the faid demands and papers of 
eccounts; and his faid Highnefs farther ftipulates, and binds himielf, his heirs and fucceflora, 
to abide by fuch adjuftment as the Britith Government fhall accordingly determine. 

Article'15.—The contrasting parties will employ all practicable means of conciliation to 
prevent the calamity of war, and for that purpofe will at all times be ready to enter into 
amicable explanations with other States, and. to cultivate and aprore the general relations 
of peace and amity with all the Powers of India, according to the true fpisit and tenor of 
this defenfive Treaty; but if @ war fhould unfortunately break out between the contraéting 
parties and any other Power whatever, then his Highnefs Rao Pundit. Purdhaun Behader 
engages, that with the referve of two battalions of Sepoys, which are to remain near his 
Highnets’s perfon, the refidue of the Britith fubfidiary force, -confifting of four battalions - 
of Sepoys with their artillery, joined by fix thoufand infantry and ten thoufand horfe of his 
Highnefs’s own troops, and making together an army of ten thoufand infantry and ten 
thoufand cavalry, with the requifite train of artillery and warlike flores of every kind, fhall 
be immediately put in motion, for the purpofe of oppofing the enemy. And his Highnefs 
likewife engages to employ every farther cffort in his power, for the purpofe of bringin; 
into the ficld, as {peedy as poffible, the whole force which he may be able to fupply from his 
dominions, with a view to the effectual profecution and fpeedy termination of the faid 
war. 

The Honourable Company in the fame manner engages on their part, to employ, in a@tive 
operations sgaintt the enemy, the largeft force they may be able'to turnifh, over and above 
the faid fublidiary force. 

Article 16—Whenever war fhall appear probable, lis Highnefs Rao Pundit Purdhaun 
Behader engages te colleét as many Benjarrics as polfible, and to ftow as much grain.as may 
be practicable in bis fronticr garrifons. z 

ticle 17—A8 by the prefent Treaty tlle union and friendthip of the two States is fo 
firmly connected that they may be confidered as one and the fame, his Highnets Rao 
Pundit Purdhaun Behader engages neither toa commence nor to purfue, in future, ai 
negociations with any other Power whatever, without giving previous notice, and entering, 
into mutual confultation with the Honourable Eaft India Company’s Government; and the 
Honourable Company’s Government, on their part, hereby declare that they have no map- 
aer of concern with any of his Highnely's children, relations, fubjects or fervants ; with 
refpect to whem his Highnefs is abfolute. . 

rticle 18.—Inafmuch as by the present Treaty of general defenfive alliance the ties of 
union are, with the blefling of God, forclofely drawn, that the interéft of the two States are 
i or rao it is farther mutually agreed, ihe if difturbances fhall at any time rs 

: . 4 


284 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


outin the diftridts ceded to the Honourable Company by this Agreement, his Highnefs Rao. 


Pundit Purdhaun Bchader thall permit fuch a proportion of the fubfidiary troops as may 
cling the fame, within the faid diftriéts, “If difturbances 


be requifite to be employed in qui 

fhall at any time break’ out in any part of his Highnefs’s dominions, contiguous to the 
Conipany’s frontier, to which it might be inconvenient to detach any proportion of the 
fublidiary force, the Britifh Government in like manner, if required by his Highnefs Rao 
Pandit Burdhaan Behader, fhall dire& fuch proportion of the troops of the Company as 
may be moft conveniently fituated for the purpofe, to affift in quelling the faid difturbances 
within his Highnefs’s dominions. 

Article 19.—It is finally declared, that this. Treaty, which, according to the foregoing 
Articles, is meant for the fapport and credit of his faid Highnefs’s Government, and to 
preferve it from lofs arid decline, fhall laft aslong as the fun and moon fhall endure. 

(Signed) By CLOSE, 
Refident at Poona. . 


SCHEDULE of the TERRITORIES ceded in perpetuity by his Highnefs Badjee 
Rao Ragonaut Pundit Purdhaun Behader, to the Honourable Englith Eaft India 
Company, agreeable to the 4th Article of the annexed Treaty. 


1f—Yrom: the Province of GUZZERAT and 
Territories South thereof. 


— together w ith Chooia, Koniapoor, and i ipoon ee 
Cambay, Choute, and Nafloor - - = = 60,000 — — 
South of the TAPTIE. 
_Pumair - - - = © 2 © e 
« Bootieer = 5 + 2 = © =| = 
. Banwanny-  - = - = = = f= a 
Baltur a 
~ Parchole wo eek ee mee 
Soopa ¢- 
, Sarbaun - - oe - - - - 
Wallore. - . - a - . a 
Bamdoo Kufbah. ee 
Waunfda Choate - 
123) yo = - - - - - - 
Paab De one: pate he ey cae, 
lS uftoms *-- - yeoos 2 ee 
Between the FAPTIE and NERBUDDAH. 
fareea a 
*OGifier 2 - .- oe 5 = ee 
Nunday.-  - - 5 © = © fe 
Total South of the Taptie, and Renween} 
Taptie and Nerbuddah - - = 
Deduét 20 per cent. on account of de- 
ereafe of Revenue - + = 
nore 8,30,400 — -— 
Nahabundy of Chouraffy and Chickly-  - = ae 
Phoolparra- = = = oe 2 =e 
Coomarria - - - - + -- = = 
Caltergom - - - - - - ee 
25,000 — — 


ad.—From the Territories near the 
TOOMBUDDRAH. 


Savancore, 26 Talooks oe 
From Bankapoor sie ce Ss 


10,22,838 — — 
5158;762 — — 
5 15,79,600 — —- 

36, aan 

in, tegift December, anno Deinini’ 1802, 


The Peifhwa’s Signature, i 


or the 5th Rawzan, A. H. 1217. 


The Seal of 
Pundit Purdhaun. 


Signed, fealed and exchanged, at Baife 


(A true Copy, rae 
Es 8 Clop. 


"the Affairs of Tae RAST INDIA COMPANY. 285, 


Appendix, No. 48. 


SUPPLEMENT to the Treaty of Baffein, dated 16th December 1803. 


A Tredty, confifting of nineteen Articles, was concluded at Baffein between the Honour- 
able Eaft India Company Behader and his Highnefs the Peithwa Badjee Row Rago- 

- naut Pandit Pardhuan Behauder.- The following Articles of Engagement are now 
agreed on and fettled, as fupplemental to the faid remy, by Lieutenant Colonel Barry 
Clofe, on the part of the faid Honourable Company; and Anund Row, Vakeel on the 
part of the faid Row Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder ; under full power and authority granted 
to them refpeCtively for the purpofe. 


ift.—That of the Territory ceded in perpetuity to the Honourable Eaft India Company, by 
the faid Treaty of Baifein, the Country of Savenore, and Talooks of Bancapoor, in the 
Carnatic, yielding an annual Revenue of 16 lacks of Rupees, fall be reftored in perpetuity 
to the Sircar of the faid Row Pundit Purdhaun Bahader. 
* ad.—That of the Territory ceded in perpetuity to the Englifh Eaft India Company, by the 
Treaty of Baffein, the Pergannah of Olpar in Guzzerat, yielding a Revenue anaualty of three 
Jacks and 16 thoufand Rupees, fhall likewife be reliored, in, perpetuity to the Sircar. of the 
faid Row Pundit Purdhaun Bahader, in order that it may be reftored to Nurfing Khandy 
Row, who has ferved the Sircar with fidelity and attachment. 
3d.—That a Regiment of native cavalry, of the fame ftrength and complement as the 
cavalry Regiments belonging to the Hyderabad fubfidiary force, thall be added to the Britith 
Poona fubfidiary force. : 
4th.—In the 15th Article of the Treaty of Baffein it is ftipulated, that 10,000 cavalry and 
6,000 infantry, witha due proportion of ordnance and military ftores, fhall be furnifhed by 
the faid Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader, and in addition thereto, fuch further force as the 
Sircar of the faid Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader fhould be liable to bring into the field ; 
this ftipulation is now anulled ; and in lieu thereof it is agreed and covenanted, that in time 
of war the faid Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader {hall appoint and furnith 5,000 cavalry and 
3,000 infantry, with a due proportion of ordnance and military ftores, and in addition thereto, 
ak further force. as. the faid Row Pundit Pardhaun Behader fhall be able to bring into the 
5th.—That a corps of Mahratta cavalry, amounting to 5,000, fhall be maintained’ by. the 
- Britith Government, during the prefent war, for the fervice of the Poona State, under the 
orders of the Britifh Government ; of which 5,000 horfe, two thoufand fhall ferve with bis 
Highnels the Peifhwa, and the remaining 3,000 with the Britifh Army in the field; and in 
the faid 5,000 Mahratta cavalry are not to be included the Mahratta troops, ferving with the 
Britifh Army, under the Chicttains Bapoojee, Gunneis Parit Goklah, and -Sudojee How 
wen 3 which troops fhall continue to be fubfited at the charge of Row Pandit urdbaun 
‘ehader, : : 
6th.—By Articles 1f and ed of this Agreement, Territory yielding an annual Revenne of 
19,16,000° Rupees, is reftored to the Sircar of Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader ; in lieu 
thereof, and for-the purpofes hereafter mentioned, the faid Row Pundit Purdhaun Bebader 
agrees and ftipulates to cede in perpetuity to the Honourable Englifh Eaft India Company, 
from the Province of Bundelcund, conquered for the Poona State by Ally Behader, 
Territory jietding an eftimated annual Revenue of 36,16,000 Rupees, agreeable to the follow- 
ing detail. : 
irft—In lieu of the Country of Savenore, and Talooks of Buncapoor, in the Caruatic, 
and the Pergunnah of Oolpar in Guzzerat, a traét of Territory yielding an annual Revenue of 
19,16,000 Rupees. : : 
Second.—On account of the ftated high value of Oolpar, a tract of Territory. yiclding .an 
_ annual Revenue of 50,000 Rupees, in excefs for that Pergunnah. : 
Third —To bear the entire expenfe of the Regiment of cavalry mentioned in Article 34, 
a tract of Territory yielding an annual Revenue of 7 lacks and 50,000 Rupees. 
Fourth.—To fervé as an equivalent for the expenfes to be incurred by the Britifh Govera- 
ment, in paying and maintaining, during the prefent war, the 5,000 cavalry mentioned in 
«Article 5th, a trac of Territory yiclding an annual Revenue of 5,00,000 Rupees ;. and lafily, 
-a tract of Territory yielding an annual Revenue of 4,00,000 Rupees, to mect the extraordinary 
expenfe which the Britifh Government muft be fubjeét to in eftablithing its authority iu 
+ Burdlecund ; which is difturbed and ravaged by rebels, who muft be fubdued aud punithed. 
Total Country ceded from Bundeleund, 36,16,000 Rupees. . 
~_ gth.—The whole of the foregoing 'Térritory ceded as above from Bundeleund, to the 
‘Honourable Englith Eatt India Company, fhalt be taken from thofe quarters of the Province. 
mott contiguous to the Britith Pollellions, and in every refpect moft convenient for the 
~ Britifh Government. ©.” _- rot ‘ 
8th.—Inafinuch as the Pergunnah of Oolpor was particularly valuable to the- Honour- 
able Company’s Government, by reafon ofits proximity to the city of Surat, in the prof- 
perity of which the Britify:Goverument. bears un anxious concern; it is decordingly agreed 
and ftipulated, that the fad Pergunnah of Oolpar fhall be fo managed and governed at all 
times by the Mahratta authority, as to conduce to the convenience of the-faid. city, by at- 
tention to the rules of good neighbourhood, and the promotion of an amicyble and com 
_ mercial intercourle between the inhabitants of both States: and inafmachi as the favereignty 


#86 APPENDIX ?o the Second REPORT from the Seic& Committee on 


of the river Taptie doth belong to the Britifh Government, it is accordingly agreed and 
covenanted, that the Maharatta authority in Oolpar fhall have no right or concern whatever 
in the wreck of any veifel that may be caft upon any part of the Goipar territory connect- 
ing with the faid River Taptie ; but be bound, in the event of any fach wreck, to render the 
veltel all practicable aid ; for which the parties aflifting thall be led w receive, from the 
‘owners of the wreeks, a juft and reafonable compenfation. : 


Appendix, No. 49. 
“TREATY with Dowlut Rao Scindia, dated oth December 1803. 


‘Treaty of Peace between the Honourable Englifh Eaft India Company and their Allies, 
on the’ one part, and the Maharajah Ali Jah Dowlet Rao Seindia on the other; 
fettled by Major General Wellefley, on the part of the Honourable Company and their 
Allies; and by Eitel Mahadee, Moonfhee Kavel Nyn, Efwont Rao Goorparah Amecrout 
Omrah, and Naroo Hurry, on the part of Maharajah Dowlut Rao Scindia; who have 
cack communicated to the other their full powers. 


Article 1—There fhall be perpetual peace and friendthip between the Honourable Com- 
pany ened their Allies, on the one part, and the Maharajah Ali Jah Dowlut Rao Seindia on 
the other. . 

Article 2.—The Maharajah ccdes to the Honourable Company and their Allies, in per- 
‘petual fovereignty, all his forts, territories and rights, in the Doab or country fituated be- 
tween the Juinna and Ganges; and all his forts, territorics, rights and interefis, in the 

. Countries which are to the northward of thofe of the Rujahs of Jeypoor and Joudpoor, 
and of the Ranah of Gohud; of which territories, ke. a detailed lift is given in the accomn- 
panying Schedule. Such countries formerly in the poffeffion of the Maharajah, fituated be- 
tween J eypoor and Joudpoor, and to the fouthward of the former, are to belong to the 
- Maharajah. 

‘Article 3—The Maharajah likewife cedes to the Honourable Company and their Allies, 
in perpetual fovereignty, the fort of Broach and territory depending thereon, and the fort of 
“Alinelog rand territory depending thereon ; execpting thofe lands which it is agreed, 
by Article 8 of this Treaty, that the Maharajah is to retain. 

Article 4.—The Maharajah likewife cedes to the Honourable Company and their Aliics, 
all the territories which belonged to him previous to the breaking out of the war, which 
are fituated to the fouthward of the hills called the Adjuntee Hills, including the fort 
and diftri& of Jalnahpore, the town and diftrit of Gandapore, and all other: ditiricts be- 
tween that range of hills and the river Godavery. 

- Article 5.—The Maharajah Ali Jah Dowlut Rao Scindia, for himfelf, his heirs and fuc- 

, ceflors, hereby renounces all claim to the forts, territories, and rights and interefts, ceded by the 
2d, 3d, and 4th Articles; and all clains of every defcription upon the Britith Government 
and: their Allies, the Soubahdar of the Deccan, the Peifhwa, and Anund Rao Guicowar. : 

Article 6.—The fort of Affeerghur, the city of Boorhanpore, the forts of Powanghur and 
Dohud, and the territories in Candeifh and Guzzerat depending on thefe forts, thall be 

. Feftored to the Maharajah Dowlut Rao Scindia. 

Article 7—Whcereas the Maharajah Dowlut Rao Scindia has reprefented that his family 

-have Jong held in Enaun, as a gift from the Kings of Hindoftan, the diftriéts of Dhoot 
Fors Baree, and Rajah Kerrah, which are fituated to the northward of the countries of the 
Rajahs of Jeypoor and Joudpoor,-and of the Ranah of Gohud; and that lands in Hindoftan, 

_eedted by the 2d Article of this Treaty to the Honourable Company and their Allies, are 
held in Jaghire by perfons of the family of the late Mauhajee Scindia, and others by 
principal Sirdars in his fervice, all of whom would fuffer difirefs if deprived of the ad- 
vantages they enjoy in thofe countries; it is agreed, that the Maharajah thall continue to 

. hold and erjoy in Enaum the lands of Dhoolpoor, Barce, and Rajah Kerrah; and that Bala 
Baye Sahib and Montfoor Sahib, Moonthee Kavel Nyn, Bougajee Jamdah, Amrajee Jadheo, 

Wirdah Charieg thall continue to hold their lands in Jaghire, under protection of the 
Honourable Company ; and further, in order that no individual may incur lofs or fuffer 
diftrefs in confequence of this arrangement, it is agreed, that the Honourable Compan 
thall either pay penfions, or gtant lands in Jaghire, pevontling to the option of the Briti 
Government, to certain other Sirdars, and others to be named by the Maharajah ; provided 
tHat the total amount of the fums paid, or Jaghircs granted or held, docs -not exceed 
feventeen lacks of Rupees per annum, including the annus! value of the lands which it 
is agreed by this Article that Bala Baye Sahib, Monfoor Sahib, Moonfhee Kavcl Nyn, 
ajee Jathdah, Amrajee Jadhoo, and Wirdah Charie, are to continue to hold; and pro- 
vi that no froops in the fervice of the Moharajah are to be introduced inte Dhoolptor, 
Baree and Rajah Kerrah, or the other lands held in Jaghire, under the pretence of col- 
lecting the Revenue; or any other pretence whatever, * 

Article 8.—Whereas ‘the Maharajah Dowlut Rao Scindia has reprefented that his famil 
here long held in Enaum certain lands, villages, &e. in the territories of Rae Pundit Puree 

aun, viz. 3 . 

Chormargoondee Pergunnah, . 


Jamgaum, P 
Ranjingaum, ne 
Hat 


‘the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY.:: . af 


Talf of Seo Gaum Pergunnah, 
es in Umber Pergunnah, 
Five Villages in Pytun Pergunnah, 
Five Villages in Niwaz Pergunnah, 
Yive Villages in Kurla Pergunnah, 
Six Villages in Poona Pergunnah, 
Two Villages in Wahy Perguanah, 
Six Villages in Patutood Pergunnah, 
e Villages in Pandipeergaum VPergunnah, 
Five Villages in Pagood Pergdfinah, 
Two Villages in Parnyra Pergannah ; - 
which have lately been taken poffellion of by the Britif, Government and their ANies; 
it is agreed, that.thofe lands and villages thall be reftored to him, provided that no troops 
fhall ever be introduced into thofe lands and villages, under pretence of collecting the Ne- 
venues, or any other pretence whatever. é 
Article 9.—Certain Treatics have been made by the Britifh Government, with Raiahs and 
others, heretofore feudatories of the Maharajah Ali Jah Dowlut Rao Scindia. Thefe Treaties 
are to be confirmed; and the Maharajah hereby renounces all claims upon the perfons 
with whom fuch Treaties have been made, and deciares them to be independent ef his go- 
vernment and authority ; provided that none of the territories belonging to the Bisharajaby 
fituated to the fouthward of thofe of the Rajahs of Jeypoor aud Joudpoor and the Ranab of 
Gohud, of which the Revenues have been eéllected by him or his Aumildars, or have bees 
applicable, as Surinjamee, to the payment of his troops, are granted away by fuch Treaties. 
Lifts of the perfons with whom fuch ‘reaties have been made, will be given to the Mabara- 
jah Downs Rao Scindia; when this Treaty will be ratified by his Excellency the Governor 
Jencral. 
Article 10.—No perfon whatever is hereafter to be moieftcd on account of the part whick. 
he may have taken in the prefent war. i ° 
Article 11—It is agreed, that the rights of his Highnefs the Peifhwa to certain lands 
in Mulwa’‘and elfewhere, fhall be eftablithed as heretofore ; and in cafe any difference fhould 
arife refpecting thofe rights, it is agreed that the Honourable Company fhail mediate, ar- 
bitrate and decide, according to’ the Principles of juitice, between his Highnefs and the. 
Maharajah ; and whatever {hail be thus decided, will be agreed to by both partics, and will. 
be carried into execution. + : 
.. Article 12.—The Maharajah Dowlut Rao Scindia hereby renounces all claims upon his 
Majefty Shah Allum, and engages on his part to interfere no further in the affairs of his 


Majyefty. 

Rrtizle 13.—The Maharajalr Ali Jah. Dowlut Rao Scindia engages never to take or retain 
in his fervice any Frenchman, or the fubje@ of any other European cr American Power, the 
Governnient of which may be at war with the Britifh Government, or any Britith fubject, 
whethes European er nauye of India, Without the oun of the Bait Gorerements x 

rticle 14.—In .order to fecure and improve the relati of amity ‘and peace herel 
eftablifhed between the Governments, it istag that aecreaied Miniiters from each thal 
refide at the Court of the other. “ie ges 

Article 1 pine Honourable Company beitig ‘bound by Treaties of ‘general defenfive alli- 
-ance, with his Highnefs the Soubab tar of the:Deccan and his Highnels Rao Pundit Purd~ 
haun, to which the Maharajah Ali Jah Dowlut Rao Scindia is defirous of acceding, he 
is to be admitted to the benefits thereof; and the Honourable Company, with a view to the 
future fecurity of the Maharajah’s territories, engage, in the event of his agreeing to the 
‘Treaty above mentioned, in two months to furnith him with a force confifting of fix batta~ 
Jions of infantry, with their complement of ordnance and artillery, and cfual equipments of 
military ftores, &c; and the expenfe of this force is to be defrayed out of the Revenues of 
the lands ceded by the 2d, 3d, and 4th Articles. But itis agreed, that in cafe it fhall fuit 
the interefts.of the Maharajah’s Government to decline to enter into the Treaty above~ 
mentioned, fuch refufal fhall not affect any of the other ftipulations of this Treaty of Peace, 
eer are in every other refpe@ to be binding on the contracting parties, their heirs and 
lucceffors. ¢ ; 

Article 16.—This Treaty is to be ratified by the Maharajah Dowlut Rao Scindia in eight 
days from this time, and ‘the ratification is to be delivered to Major General Wellefley. 

Major Gencral Wellefley engages that it thall be ratified by his Excellency the moft noble 
the Governor General in Council, and the ratifications fhall be delivered to the Maharajah 
in three months, orfooner if poffible. 

The orders for the ccflions of the territories thall be delivered to Major General Wellefley- 
at the fame time with the ratification of the Treaty of Peace; but the forts of Affeerghur, 
Powanghur and Dohud, are not to be delivered up till accounts will have been receivedy 
that the territories ceded have been evacuated by the Maharajah’s Officers and troops. | . 

_- Signed) ARTHUR WELLESLEY, 
EITEL MAHADEE. 
KAVEL NYN. *. 

Done in Camp at Serjee Anjengaum, this ESWUNT RAO GOORPARAHS: 

goth of December 1803, anfwering to NAROO HURRY. ° 
the 15th Ramzaun, 1213 Fufly. . 


363. $P 


_ap& APPEMDIX-teshe Spoged REPORT from the Sele Committed on 


: Appendix, No, 50. } 
‘Treaty with Dowlut Rao Scindia, ‘dated 224 November 1805. 
: "Treaty With Seindia, with the Doclaratary Article annexed. * 

Definitive Treaty of Amity and “Alliance between the Hi irable the Englith Eaft Indis 
Company and the Maharajali Ali Jah’ Dowlut Rao Scindia er, and his Children, 
Heirs and Succeffors. Sec : # 

WHEREAS various doubts and mnitandéefindingg ere arifen ‘refpecting thé clear mean+ 

“ing and interpretation of parts of the Treaty of ¥ ‘ coneluded between the Britith Go- 
¥ ent and Dowlpt Row Scindia; at Serjeé Arigehgaum, on the goth December 1803: 
avith ‘a view’ of dotag ‘away all fuch doubts, and of. preventing the recurrence in future df 
any’ imifunderftanding;, this Definitive Treaty-of amity and alliance is concluded betweea 
the two States, by Lientetiant Colonel Jabn Meleolm, acting under the imniediate direion 


- and Srperintendance of the. Right honourable General Gerard’ Lake, Commander ini Chief 


of His | 
siveis and authority'-from the Honourable Sir George Hilaro, Barlow,’ Baronet,. appointed 


che part of the faid Maharajah Dowlut Row Scindia: --° - “ : 
gee “concluded By General Sir Arthur Wcl- 
t may be alt by this engagement, i- 1 


atin 
the Treaty of Serjee Anjengaum, to poffefs ‘the' fort of “ 


' 48 Penfiins forfeited by Bay Séine ue lathes Row, by 

the Britith Govertigient, fe lopped from the date of their Hioftility.  “: 

* ad. Bic of ft tf pei SMa eRe 

ath adtahied By. Slr, Jenkins td pattiev of the Mabirajab’s troops.’ a 

Chittges 6f culletnion, Ketfor the Provinces of Dhoolpodt, Bares; and Rajah Kerra. 
_ Article 5th.-—With id Se f preventing any mifund ing relat to theirs ite. 

~polfeffions on the quarter’ of Hmdottan, it is agretd: that the River Chupibol ‘thall form 

‘the boyhdary between: the t¥q’States, from the city: of Cottah to'the West, ta'the limits of 
‘the territories of Gohud to the’ Eaft ; ‘and within that extent of the courlt of the Chumbul, 
Dowlut Row Scindia fhall have no claim. orright to any “rile, tribute, Revenue or poffeftions, 
‘on its North bank} ahd the Honourable’ Company {hall havd.no claim or fight ‘to any role, 

tribute, Revenues of pofletions, on ‘the Sout bank of ‘thiat river. The Talodks of Bhadek 

‘and Soofeperarah, M#¢hich are oir te batiks of the Jumna, ‘will, however, remain in the poffet 

_ Gon;6f the Hopourable Company, 727 * a ee ‘ 

“Article Bth—By the 5th Article’ of this ‘Treaty, which thakes the tiver’Chumbul the 

Vboundary’of the two States, from the city uf Kottah to the Wet, to the limits‘of ‘the territories 

«ef Gobud to the Eaft, the Maharajah religns all pretenfions and claims to-any tribute from 
‘the Rajah of Boondce, or anyother on the North bank of the.‘Chumbul,. within the afore- 
sncationed limits ; as alfo to the countries of Tank, Ramporah, Bahraungaum, Zemeéidab, &c. 
‘and to the diftriéts of Dhoolpoor, Rajah Kerrah, and Baree ; alt which remain in polfeffion of 
the Honourable Company. °°”, ee ae acres Tee ee : 
"Article 7th. The Honourable Companys ont confiderstion of the Benefits derived: from 
‘the Article which makes the Chuniibul the boundary between’ the two States, and’ from friend- 
Ship to the Maharajab, agree.to grant Him, perfonally and‘€xchifively, the antmal fam of four 
‘lacks of Rupees, to be paid by quarter, in’ Sots th the'Refida the Durbar}, andy ° 

‘the “Honoutable Company ‘alto a! tign, their “tern! in Hindoftan,.a 
Jajrgeet, to be holden on thé ‘fame that énjo' 

Revenue of two lacks of Rupees] 

- and the Jaggeer, amonsting te: 

. the daughter of that: Chieh: so ; oe . & 
__ Article 8th:—The Honouradlg:Gor apiing engeee to, enter into no. Treaty with the Rajahs 
of le and. Joudpoor and: Goftah, or -gther, Chiels;, tributaries. of, Dowlut, Row 
Scindia, fituated in Malwa, Mewer; oe Mawors in. Bpthape whatever to interfere with 

the fettlement which Scindia may make with thofe Chief Sta it a Been ae . 

Article oth.—-The Honotrible Company are now engaged th a war with Jefwunt Row 

!Holkar,.oad ufiag every exeztion for his Gion; but thould they hereafter make a peace, 

3. Be OF 


the Affiirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 28g 


or enterintoany agreement witlrthat Chicf, they engage not to reftore to him, or defire to be 
teftored to him, any of the pofleflions of the family of Holkar in the Province of Malwa, 
lying between ‘the river Taptie and Chumbul, which may hpve been ti by Dowlut Row 
Scindia; nor will the Honourable Company interfere in any mannér whatever in the difpofad 
of thofe Provinces; and they will confider Dowlut Row Scindia at full liberty to make fuch 
arrangement as he chufes with Jefwunt Row Holkar, or with any other branch of the Holkar 
family, refpecting the claims of that family to tribute from the Rajalis or others, or to any 
pofletions fituated to the North: of the river Taptic, and to the South of the River Chumbut: 

uit it is to be clearly undertiood, that as the Company's Government agrees not to concern 
itfelf with the arrangements which Scindia may make with ihe family of Holkar, refpecting 
their claims or hereditary poffefions fituated between the Taptiec and the Chumbul, that 
Government will not take part in any difpute or war which may be the refult or confequence 
of fuch arrangement or fertlement. ri . 

Article 10th.—As Sirjee Row Ghautka has aéted in a manner calcalated to difturb the 
friendthip between the two States, the Maharajah agrees never to admit that Chief to fhare 
in his councils, or to hold any public employment under his Government. 

Article 11th—This Treaty, confifting of cleven Articles, has been this day fettled by 
Licutenant Colonel Malcolm, acting under the dircétions of the Right honourable Lord . 
Lake, on the part of the Honourable Company, and by Moonthce Kavel Nyn, on the part of 
Dowlut Row Scindia. Licutcaant Colonel :John Malcolm has delivered one copy thereof, 
in Perfian and Englith, figncd and fealed by himfelf, to the faid Moonthee Kavel Nyn, to 
be forwarded to the Maharajah Dowlut Row Scindia; and has received from the faid 
Moonfhee Kavel Nyn, a counterpart of the faid Treaty, figned and fealed by the faid 
Moonfhee. Lieutenant Colonel Muicolm engages that a copy of the daid Treaty, ratified by 
the Honourable the Governor General, in every refpe@ a counterpart of the Treaty now 
executed by himfelf, fhall be delivered to Moonfhee Kavel Nyn, to be forwarded to the 
Maharajah, within the period of one month from this date; and on the delivery of fuch copy 
to the Maharajah, the Treaty executed by Lieutenant Colonel Malcolm, under the imme- 
diate direction of the Right honourable Lord Lake, fhall be returned : and Moonthce Kavel 
Nyn in like manner engages, that another copy of the faid Treaty, ratified by the Maharaja 
AL Jah Dowlut Row Scindia, in every refpect a counterpart of the Treaty now executed by 
himfelf, fhall be delivered to Lieutenant Colonel John Malcolm, to. be forwarded to 
the Honourable Governor Gencral, within the period of oné month from this date; and on 
the delivery of fuch copy to the Governor General, the Treaty executed by Mponfhee Kavel, 
Nyn, by virtue of the full powers and authority vefted in him as above-mentidéned, fh: 
alio be returned. 

Done at Mafulipatam, this twenty-fecond day of November, anno Domini one thoufand 

eight hundred and five, or twenty-ninth of Shuban, in the year of the Hejira 1220. 


Declaratory Articles annexed to the Treaty concluded between the Right hénoinrable Lord 
Lake, on the part of the Honourable Company, and Maharajah Dowlut Row Scindia, 
on the 22d cf November 1805. vaca f 
‘Whereas objestions have arifen to the terms of the sth and 6th and 7th Articles of the 
aforefaid Treaty, it is hereby agreed and declared, that in licu of thofe three Articles, the 
two following fhall be fubftituted : : ae 
Article 1ff—With a view of preventing an tnifunderftanding relating to the refpe Gie. 
polleffions of the Honourable Company and Maharajah Dowlut How Scindia, in the quatter 
of Hindoftan, the Maharajah hereby agrees to cede to the Honourable Company all the 
temritory, North of the river Chumbul, which was ceded to the Maharajah by the 7th Article 
of the Treaty of Serjee Angengaum ; that is to fay, the whole of the diftriéts of Dhoolpore, 
Baree, and Rajah Kerrah; and the Honourable Company ihall have no’ claitit or right to 
any rule, tribute, Revenues or poffeffions, on the South havik of that river. The Talooks . 
of Bhadek and Soorfeperarah, which are on the banks of the Jumna, will however remain 
in pofleflion of the Honourable Company. 
Article 2d.—The Honourable Company, from friendfhip to the Maharajah, agree to 
prane to him, perfonaily and exclufively, the amual finn of four lacks of Rupecs, to be paid 
by rtetly intalments, through the Refident at the Durbar. And the Honotirable Com- 
pany alfo agree to ailign, within their territories in Hindoftan, a Jaghire (to be holden on ‘the 
fame footing as that enjoyed by Balla Bye) amounting to a Revenue of twolacks of Rupees 
_ per annum, to Baezah Bhye, the wife of Dowlut Row Scindia ; and a Jaghire, amounting to 
‘one lack of Rupees per annum, to Chummah Bhye, the daughter of that Chief. 
Done at Hlahabad, this third day of December, one thoufand cight hundred and five. 


Appendix, No. 51. 
7 TREATY with the Rajah of Berar, dated 17th December 1803. 
Treaty of Peace between the Honourable Englifh India Company and their Allies, om 


« the one part, and Senah Saheb Soubalr Ragojec Bhoonflah, on the other; fettled by. 
Major General Wellefley on the part of the Honourable Company and their Allies, and 
by Jefwunt Rao Ranchunder on the part of Senah Soubah Ragojec Bhoonflah ; who 


have each communicated to the other their full powers. 


Article 1ft-—There fhall be perpetual peace and friendthi between the Honourable 
Gompany and their Allies on the one part, and Senah Saheb Soubah Ragejee Bhoonflah on 

ie other, " . 2 
Article 


290 APPENDIX 40 the Second REPORT from the Selc6&t Committee on 


‘ Atticle 2d.—Senah Saheb Soubah Ragojee Bhoon‘lahcedes to the Honourable Com. 
any and their Allies, in perpetual fovereignty, the Province of Cuttack, including the port 
tnd difirict of Balafore, 

Article 3.—He likewife cedes to the Honourable Company and their Allies, in perpetual 
fovereignty, all the territories of which he has collected tne Revenues in participation with 
the Soubah of the Deccan, and of thole of which he may have poifeflion, which are to the 
wefiward of the river Wurdah. i 
* Article 4th—It is agreed, ‘that the frontier of Senah Saheb Soubah, towards the territories 
of his Highnefs the Soubah of the Deccan, fhall be formed to the Wett by the river Wur- 
dah, from its iffue from the Injardy hills to its junction with the Godavery. 

‘The hills, on which are the forts of Nernallah and Gaurlghur, are to be in the poffefion 
ef Senah Saheb Soubah, and every thing ‘South of thofe hills, and to the Welt of the river 
Wardah, is to belong to the Britifh Government and their Allies. 

Article 5th.— Ditiriéts amounting to four lacks of Rupecs per annum, contiguous to and 
to the South of the forts of Nernullah and Gaurlghur, are to be given over to Senah Sabeb 
Soubah ; thofe dittricts are to be fixed upon by Major General Weilcfiey, and delivered over 

. to Senah Saheb Soubah at the fame time with the forts. 2 
_ Article 6th.—Senah Saheb Soubah, for himf{elf his heirs and fucceffors, entirely renounces. 
. all claims of every defcription on the territories of the Britiflh Government and their Allies, 
eae by the 2d, gd, and 4th Articles, and on all the territories of his Highnets the Soubal: 
of 1 an. 
_ Article 7th.—The Honourable Company’ engage that they will mediate and arbitrate, 
according to the Principles of juftice, any diiputes or differences that may now exift, or 
inay hereafter arife, between the Honourable Company’s Allies, Secundah Jah Behader, 
his heirs and fucceffors, and Rao Pundit Purdhaun, and his heirs and {ucceffors refpectively, 
and Senah Saheb Soubah. 

-Article 8th—Scnah Saheb Soubah engages never to take or retain in his fervice any 
Frenchman,’ or ‘the fubje& of any other European or American Power, the Government of 
which may be at war with the Britifh Government, or any Britith {ubjeét whatever, Luro- 
pean or Indian, without the confent of the Britith Government. The Honourable Company 
‘engage, on their part, that they will not. give aid or countenance to any difcoutented relations, 
dajahs, Zemindars, or other iubjects of Senah Saheb Soubah, who may fly from or rebel 
againtt his authority. 

* Aiticle gth.—In order to fecure and improve the relations of amity and peace hereby 

eftablithed between the Governments, it is agreed that accredited Minilters from each thall 
efide at the Court of the other. . 

i Article 10th.—Certain Treaties have been made by the Pritifh Government, with feudatories 

. of Senah Saheb Soubah. Thefe'Treaties are to be confirmed. Lifts of the perfons with whom 
duch Treatieg bave been made will be given to Senah Saheb Soubah, when this Treaty will be 
watified by his Excellency the Governor General in Council. 

,* Article 11th.—Senah Saheb Soybah hereby renounces, for himfelf his heirs and fucceffors, 
all adherence to the confederacy-fyrmed by him and Dowiut Rao Scindia, and other Ma- 
Thatta Chiefs, to attack the Honourable Company and their Allies. He engages not to aflift 

ofe Chiefs, if! the war with thein fhould ftill continue. 

Article 12th.—Tiiis Treaty of Peace is to be ratified by Seneh Saheb Soubah. within eight 
gays from this time, and the ratification is to be delivered to Major General Wellefley ; at 
Avhich time the orders for the ceiion of the ceded territories are to be delivered, and the 

oops are‘to withdraw. Major, General Wellefley engages that the Treaty fhall be rati- 
fied by his Excellency the moit nobie the Governor General iri Council, and that the ratifi- 

; cation fhal]. be delivered in two months from this date. 


oh (Signed) -ARTHUR WELLESLEY, 
os : : Major General. 
+ Done in Camp at Deogaum, this .JESWUNT ROW RAMCHUNDER, 
17th December 1803, anfwer- | _ on the part of 
ing to the 2d Ramzan 1213 SENAH SAHEB SOUBAH. 
Yulsly. : 
wy . {A true Copy.) 
» (Signed) ARTHUR WELLESLEY, 
Major General, 
. (A true Copy.) 
Signed) ‘N. B. Edmonftone, 


tary to Government, 


the Affairs of The EAST-INDIA COMPANY.’ 


291 


a oe ie ee 


363. 


MILITARY CHARGES. 
Se 
Appendixes 


No. 52 ° =? - to segs - No. 61. 
oth inclufive 5 


sEine 
GENERAL ABSTRACTS 
Relative to the Company's ARMIES in India, 


an the Years 1794, 3796, 1807 and 1808. 


4B 


202° 


APPENDIX 16 the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


ABSTRACT VIEW of the State of the EFFECTIVE STRENGTH in RANK 


Appendix, 


Joe 


and FILE of tle 


Superaumeraries - + - 


TOTAL COMPANY’s - 


TOTAL EUROPEANS ." 


NATIVES. 
Cavalry 


~ = + + © o] 2 Resiments 
Hakone obi wi ace” ce 


Golandaaze - = 8 oe 


Artillery 
Lafcars- - =| 30Compenies 
Safanny = = = =+0 =| § 6 Brigades or 2 


36 Battalions § 
Body Guard - - - - -| 1 Troop - - 


Him Rangers- « - - -| 2g, 


‘Eleorts and Detachments =| . =. 
Pionees - + ----| - 2 . 
‘hesine Battalion ae eof oe 
Sopcutasdeek Recuits}] 2 * m 
“Ramghur Batalion- - -{ 2 2 - 

ne 

TOTAL NATIVES « = 

=| 


Granp Torat, Europeans & Siva 7 8Th 


5 Regiments 


16 Companies 


x Battalion - 


§ aBrigades, or 7 
& 1% Battalions 


5 


a1 Company - - 


67 Companies - ~ 


{2 Brigades, or 


6,978 Battalions - 3 


315 12 Troops & 2 Comp’, 


x Battalions - - 


s Battalion - - ~~ 


‘ : 1794. , 
a 
EUROPEANS. BENGAL. ¥ BOMBAY. | TOTAL 
: fet - Senne ed 
HIS MAJESTY's: t 
"Beagvogs - wets eS moe rd -e | t Reziment -- aus! 
Artillery- -)4 - 2 +] 0-5. gee eos = = jl 2 Companies - - am 
Infantry + + - bs | 1 Regiment 397° aRegiments -| 965 I}-g Regiments - -| 4.5 
coral MAJESTY’s - « aS, ses an! <> a Regs 
COMPANY’: 
| Artillery, - + + + + a Battslion = - 362 |] 6 Battalions - -} 1,976 
Ditto Horfe) - - - & ae 

> cee Ss EES 
_Anfaney - - - + = + a Banalions - -] 1,206 |] 12 Battalions ~ 6354 


the Mfairs'of The EAST INDIA. COMPANY. 203 
a sae a = SSS, 
"No. 52. 


ARMIES in INDIA, on the 30th April 1794, and@ccording to the Returns as applicable to the year 1808-9. 


EUROPEANS. 


AIS MAJESTY’s: 
Dragoons- = = = + = 
Anilley = = = = © + 


ufontry~- = = = = = 


COMPANY's: - 
Artillery - - - + + °=] 3 Battalions - 
Dito (Hore) - ---f -= - - 30. | 1 Hale Squadron 
afantry - + © + + = Regiment - aRegiment- -/ _ 
Supernumeraties = - - 
TOTAL COMPANY'S 
TOTAL EUROPEANS - - tt | 249374, 
NATIVES. 2 | 
Cavalry - + = - + -| 8 Regiments !- SRegiments =| 3,548} x Troop « ~~ | ° 10s [lr6Regh.and zTroop) 7784 
’ Hore - + -p - -  - 24 {| 1 Half-Squadron AN seats ee ee Ee aks OS 98 
‘Artillery < Golantaze -[ 2-5 ee aN “ee oo a PRG. 6 oe we 828 
Latcars - «| go Companies -| 2,731 |] 42 Companies «| 2,848 | 14. Companies - | 980 |] 96 Companies ~ - | 51559 
. Wee 
fsgoury - = = 2 = =}a7 Regiments -| 46320 || 23 Regimgote - | ap.0s7 ] 9 Reyisents _ - 59. Regiments = - | 100577 
BolyGuard = - -- -| - ~~ oe Sot Siw Bee on ge bo ed 
fi ees ee ee - oe 3 
Hill Raogewp ga? 332 ae ee Be * gh - cit 
Efcorts and Detachments - 28 ee, 643 eo eens he ie se ae eo Par ao “ 648 
* 
Pioneers ~ - - = - =| 3 Companies =| 234 a Battalions -| 3448 ll x Company - == | 103 2 Batee’,d4 Comp’ wires 
Mavine Battalion = ~~] = 2 ef ee POL LL bee Wa pination.« - | 750 xpaceation- ><]. 75° 
Superaumeraries & Recruits] - -, = 813 gs 6664 eee | wes ¢ e * 8,932, 
' * : 
¢ 810 
Rampur Bataion~ - = }x Battaion ~ =| fof 2 Ds fe ef ee Pe 1 ao deck r 
armen, —— a! 
. * . os f29077 
TOTAL NATIVES «| 56,686) - «- = [ gage} - + - 395593 | - 
: "| Sie 
< e 2 = 153,451 
Gran Torat,Evrorcaxs&Natives| 63,744] - - - [63,589 -° -  - |96118 | - tees 
’ Spas | ¢ = 
SS 
. a ae 
(a) Five Regiments, and two Battalions of the 56th Regiment. 


TOTAL HIS MAJESTY’s - 


2 Regiments 


5 Regiments 


1808. 


MADRAS, 


Regiments - - 


2oRegiments - - |; 


‘ NDIX to the Second REPORT from the’ Séle& Committee on 
a eer Se 
Appeadir 
Sete, 
GENERAL ABSTRACT of ihe STRENGTH and MONTHLY EXPENSES 


EUROPEANS, 


NAMES 3 é H 

: H g 

OF WHERE a l= & 

s 2 2 . 

CORPS. STATIONED. 8 A e]si2}4]2 é 

: + vey S;S/E;3 )38)8 g 

< E/el2/21E/ 2/8 3 

é{alaleleie)s é 
capoor of BODY GUARD- - - - . -*5 - -{- -]- = e'he 
Bee g The rt Regiment - - - - + = eda oe ers shy Pie des 
alate Cavalry 2 r9 20 Regiment - - 6 + ++ eda -f. 2 -{- 


ARTILPERY, Firk Batulion, 5 Companies’ - - - 
eee = = Battalion Stal - 
= Second Battalion, $ Companies - + - 
- + + Battalion Staff- = + + 


pen tutya 


- Third Battalion, 2f Company = - - - ee ee ies be 
Ae es in + ad de 3d Companies « r - -{-t-l- 
- - 5 8 + athe gh oe ee - - fue foes fe 
“+ = ° «= ~ Battalion Staff... - - the - P13 Pe pm 
be + + Brigade Staff - -- - - + - rpefeda -]- Ce eee eee 
EUROPEAN INFANTRY - - ~ aft Batralion + -Paupays - fe rladede 
ee eee | "Pepa s aan on ria} e]- 
ide 2. as. WE sds Soh ca ee eels -fapaps -fv a}vfefe 
Be fhe ge ayes tp gts cae afafarls -fe ae er, eee ee 
ew eee ek  Sthe ee -fPrufats ~|[2 a} af... 
we ee Me Eth ee -p apa s ef rivl-]d. 
TATEVE INFANTRY, ift Brigade, gd - -- -- ~ ofed-P al ol- |. -Jale]. 
ee ee thee 2 2 + | Juatpore efed-f tpol-d- i oy ee es 
ee ee ee ees bo ee ee ed OD ei NS 
meee ee gd ee ep Bemares - fe PP et atv of - te aoe bP (ee a 
ce ee athe ee ef Chme sf Pete Pet al gf ld. ae oe oe 
a ce eC i se ee Cd ca aco ce rs 2 a aes [ees 
- = 5 Brigade Staff'¥ece 2 2 2 fe ee ep ed et rf rfl ed id. ode. Paks. 
mo ee = adBrigade, ph- - . -]Ghya- + -]- be pede dad et of. = head techs. 
se oe ee + Bthe . = +] Hazareebaug } -] -]-]-] rf gf} | - oh ehebs 
Bee ee ee othe Seep Divapore- PF -P -P- ] ] ghd. Pe ee ee oe 
ee ew Rb a ef Ramgpore - spodede pat of- fe Pe ers ane 
ron mw se We goth - ~ ~ | Dinapore + ef-}-}-P rf spl ge. Oe een eee ae 
Peo et Bee 2 of Tanbopors: wp ped ed ty ote de ~Rafede 
= + + Brigade Staff + - - + -  ~ | Dinapore- ry ad aj} af ad igs ea ree aes ie 
+ © = 3d Brigade, rf- - ~ - | Cownpore “He t-dedatol-]- ~ftaled: 
a ere Oe ee es Oe Oe Oe dd oo ee 
ee ee ee rth PS “f-f-d-]arfsy- 7. es en 
Pelt tL Le ew 20th = egy sPe-pef at of-t. ‘é ‘ashe 
mee ee re the aw Pepe ff apiape de eho. 
t+ Brigade Staff - 2 2 2 eee thal af al 3}. ~tod. 
we es 8 ath Brigade, roth eee of-d-Talap ed. Pa (ey poe 
Sah wel el me ate Ke ef-pepapsl ed. ehagthctba 
Tp te ee the ee | -f-F-P rp sp lge -T,}-]- 
i. ope fat ots de -fafefe 
Toot tee ee he eee yr 7 rpNp ete be 2 fate fe 
eet) 2 ae =fed ep rbet Ope Fag ee ee 
- = + Brigades - - - - ee rhepatepapod.eae fe P obo y. 
mls 8 en sth Brigades ad 2 es -fef-e} fost. efefpal fd. 
on ee ey See et aa eae oye ep ub epee be deodedwl od. 
nr ee | es “P-Pefrfpeape de -ofeg ad id 
i ded -febobo dep. ed abe de 
a Le Ce -Jd-ehed rt ep. ry-]efad-4de 
a er as -bePovb ole} dlp ld ade 
"sos Brigade Staff © 2 2 ee] Fy rp rp rade pep epee dlp ld. 

* 


the’ Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 295 


eee e seem " 


No. 53. 


of the BENGAL. ARMY, as it fiood on the SOth of April 1794 


53 ATIVES, Ze 
ce ae 
(id) Pocaaar ane WE 123 
gf. es 
5 {2 is MONTHLY 
re |B ae. 
2 Of - g Syl EXPENSES 
s*.)4 i" 35 
of 8-12 me “s ¢ iS 2 Tw 
Sls lg. 1.4/2 & a se SOK ATr 
z| 4 ge Btale 5 a ay SONAUT 
Bl 2 |24] 6 | sz 3 5 Bf2]| Rupees. 
Si is | # [4je 9 a 355 
Fs es fees 16 ang 7 0 
ig a ae 383] 10938 6 6 
= a (ene 369 | tos99 45 6 
13] 504 24 [15007 8 0 
iy hea 84 3199 4 0 
14] 397 34 149332 0 0 
ee 84 24181 4 0 
B] ase 490 7823 13 0 
rm] 336 606} t3:592 14 0 
By} ag 5st 6334 4 0 
Se mad -- 4355 P © 
>) kaa 7 6923 7 8 
-|- - ror || 2,022 12 
co Gas 379 || 2342 8 0 
oe be 379 16,894 14 © 
ba oa 10K 13,769 2 
fe - ror || 12,562 2 0 
-|-- ror] 12403 2 @ 
LA Ned) en to 9} 32 wpe de ofa “4 10,443 0 0 
afe]e cle - ro} 34 -f-[- -Lal so || 1814 8 0 
ap tee ps 10} 35 bole (cae ices a 44 9959 8 o 
ato]. -]- - 9| 38 -f- te -]4 se 3359. 9 © 
co ae: el (laa 9} 38 ms [rd <4 39 10473 8 0 
a}efe cle - ar] 38 -[-]- -f4 “4 176 8 0 
rf -q- -fo Pe oes -4-|- -]- 36 TITAS 9 
2f-]- -|-- ol 35 -tefe ela}ad- 49 || 1188 8 0 
al-|- -]- - ax} 40 he fe -fe]af- 49 | 10,659 8 © 
a}-]- -f+ -][/ x0; 20] 37 “ded -fala}- “4 9268 0 0 
2}-}- -{[- -]] s}a0] 32 = fede ef atary- 19 12,632 0 0 
alof- -f- -H ofa] 3¢ -|-f- -Labal- 4“ gyros § 0 
af-f- -|- -Hso] 94 38 -f-d- -[apal- 49 || 28279 8 © 
r}-]f- ef fee fede - -J-]- -P-ped- 36 8286 0 6 
2{-|- -[- -]] 8] 9] 36 -]- fe -faforte 44 i] 100994 0 0 
‘ale |e -[- -f 8] 9] 36 -f- de -} 4p? 4 yogg2 8 0 
al-{f- -|- -(| sf 84 3 ede ge -Lafrfy > 4 10,552 8 0 
ade]. -]--lol s] a7 pe re ope Se a Ci 44] rm01p 8 0 
tape |- -j- -Hes} 3] 37 =fef- -papale sa f} 1u707 9 © 
‘al -]- -l- -j} 9] 8} 33 e~fef-e -fafadc 44 10,194 8 0 
es (rms ea ae ae sof PS. sede fonfee 36 |] xz210 5 
capeo]- -]- -H ofr} 36 - fede -f4abaqe a4 10,336 8 © 
ap-|- «f+ - Poot of} 32 ~]-]- -f 4; Fp - 49 10,737 0 © 
al cde -[- -ff20] 8] 39 ed-f- -faprpe 49 10,964 8 0 
alef- -l- -ff 8[ of 32 Oe ce ce 2 79 Ing2g 0 0 
ay-|- -|- «t20] 9 | 37 -d-]- -| 4}ord- 49 10,967 0 @ 
af -|- -J- -ffrof amt 36 ~fed- -[ 4] f- 79 12,8c6 8 0 
af -]- -doar ff-[-f- - ede]d- -}-]d-]- 36 32,618 0 6 
af-|- -]- -ff 9] 8] 36 -feo ge <P 4pry- 79 11308 0 0 
al-4- -l- -fl ol 9] 36 - fede -]4a}at- “ 8,882 0 © 
rt -|- -]- -fl s]-o] 3s -|-]--faprf- 44 g4t 0 0 
By obec bee Sl a0 [40° 36 ~fed- -falal- 1 32,650 0 © 
2at-|- -[- =i 9} x0] 37 Coe ice ceed 2 Od fat 4 9-189 14 0 
ap-]e ele + 24 efedgrord 4; tbe is 
be abel eye w fife ete teaegebete ct , 
Hoy pt of babel 


296 


APPENDIX 40 the Secqnd REPORT Jrom the Sele& Comunittee on 


ee 
——$ 
NAMES 4 
H é 
a ) ware |G] {8 & ‘ 
CORPS, ASTATIONED, 8 a g & s 
BEE alii 
. S 2 6 
és 21S] 5 g . 
WATIVE INFANTRY 6th Brigade asth Battalion } stidnapore «,} - | - | - 7 
st ee ee + tgth + + + | Beshampere «] - | - | - ry 
ry.) are ©, mee Mae eae 7 
ee ee eee 28th + + +] Berhampore -] = | > | i 
se ee = agth =~ +] Midnapore -] - | - | - : 
sss = + = = Beh = = =] campifamabed] > | - | - x 
+ = + Brigade Staff = - 12 +] Berhampore | - | ot] 5 
Corps of Hilt Rangers = = = - 2 ete e ee ed epee 
‘Bicort with theRefident at Hyderabad = sw stone le Peel erdic 
‘Blcort with the Refident at the Court ef Scindia~ -{. 2.2. J - fel. 
Andaman Iilsnds  - Bad ee, Ss LZ, walle ee ease [ewe 
Calcutta European Militia - = - ~ efo en. ode f-]- 
Refidency of Fort Marlbro’ =~ 0 - ee tL ee el ede 
Detachment at Prince of WalecIfad ~« ~ -{, 20. ./-]-]. 
Bogheer Corps es ee we ett ee ede te ft 
General Staff + = ee se b.ehe eee eT SE TES 
CANTONMENT-of Barrackpore + - - -{.... -f-4-4- 
= 2 = Berhampore = - = ~ «foe... wfe ded. 
= 5 + Dinspore-- + + - - stole ete ded 
- + «= Miduspre - = - © eloe we ede fe] - 
GARRISON of Monghyr - - - ee Le 
= + sofFort Willism- = ee oe tho oe ep ed ede 
wee = Of Buxae 3 ew - - Ss es oe oe 
-- = + of Chunar + - ” os - - ote ee we - : ~ 
Arfenalin-Fort William + + ee i a ee ae a 
¥Expenfe MAGAZINE in Fort William ~ a <a ee Deen for . 
~ = = =) atBerhampores oe efe f lk LP Te de 
- 8 + + + mMidmpore = ef LP ed ede 
ee =e atDinpore ee, SL UP de 
ew we e Monghyr ee fe ke UP CP et 
- fe: i - = at Chunar - 7 oo es as he ad 
we) an SS Wee Ne BiieS ul oe Na Sie ete afs Beebe: 
wo + + + aCawnpore = ee fe ee ef fed 
eee so Fury - ee} Lp ded 
GMedical:Department ~ 6 es ee ef ef fe de 
MILITARY Auditor Genera’s Ottice = + =| Fort Wiliam | - | - | - 
== + = Paymafter Generals Office - = - -f. 2... eft - |. 
~ = + + -AdjutaneGeneral’s Office - - thee ee af e =) « 
= + + + Gyarter-mitterGeneral’s Office - =f... 2. -f ede]. 
Militsry Board Ofice == = oe ee ele ee fe Pe] 
= + + + SurveyorGenera’sOnice - + =|. ..- -]-]-] 
Judge Advocate General's Office = - eects fee et ef ed 
Supernumeraries in Fort William - - - spe ew ew of - - 
Corps of European aad Native invalids = + fe ee et ee de 
Penfons= = = = = © 2 © fe eee afte fede 
Iavalids, Native, holding Lands in Boglepore and Basar |. 2. - of - -}- 
$85 Children under.the care of the Orphan Sosiety -}. 2 - - ef ef] - |]. 
Boats eco eS ee ad ea Be 
King’s Troops-- - = 6 em ee fe ee PP ed 
Conteadts and other Services performed by Agréements |. 2 2. -f - . 
‘Commiffion on the Revenues - - - Co ef - -]- 
OmReckonings = = = ee fe ef ed ed. 
Military Charges not fixed in their nature andamount +}. 2. 2. 2 - | - =~]. 
Officers Supernumerary, or employed out of the Line, 2 
and whofe Names are not included under the aie | i, Se emia, et 2f- 


Eftabliuhments above mentioned ~ 


10 547 np a6 | 30 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


No, 53—continued, 


397 - 


41,038 9 
UST 1S 
wI40 0 


BITe oO 
8,706 15 
934 6 
24561 3 
DSSS 5 
10,730 4 
39553 6 
682 
34183 
1,649 


end 


mmMeeSnoad ©029066 ° 


z 
{3 NATIVE ee 
3 * 
a ens a el ES * i 
E of fe 4 
E gn |S é 3. 
2 f 22s 
Eg ane z : ‘ He 
zt esse] 2 z 4 F e 28 
ge secle|2| 8 3 2 g é 3 gee 
be $28) zg] 4 a & 3 2 1828 
fee Beei3|2| = ¥ € 3 4 3 le? 
Be 2oa|3|5| 2 4 leleie| 8 jél2 a [832 
- 9 = had 
7 8 - 9 
: 10 z 39 
a $ - 49 
- 9 : 4 
64 
- 9 2 te 
: 36 
1 
z 1" : *” 
: . 
! 2 : 
: 3 - 
: 4 2 
* 3 2 
| : 


699 
6245 
1983 
3813 13 
25 


10 
4364 2 
sts ¢ 

$17 © 

38 0 
° 

° 

° 

° 

° 


° 
9 
1 
3 0 
°. 
4 
3 


B59 
2,300 
46 
1259 
1,086 
36,827 314 
75335 33 
6453. 0 
i892 


39405. 


7,884 
45768 
2/637 


° 
“gyorg 
° 
° 


eo 


959233 4 

134 13 
20,531 10 
6737 § 
24520 © 
21,427 2 
80,878 12 


34)055 1% 


joort 2 
197274 12 


De MR OD Oe Qe 


ooo CO MTHN M0 F7KB70e OOO 


won o WOM OO 


298 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT from the Select Committee on 
SSE SSE 


Appendix, No. 53---continued. 


UPON the within GENERAL ABSTRACT. the Letter V: denotes a Vacancy in the Rank to which the Letter, 
annexed. * : 


The rank of the Officers which will be found: oppofite to the Title of the refpedtive Corps is not uniformly the rak 
eftablithed for thefe-Corps. . Vor example, a-Buttalion of Native Infantry has not a Major upon its Eliablitiment, i; 
feveral Native Battalious are commanded by Majors, svbo receive only the Pay and Allowances of Captains, and atety 
all intents and purpofes Captains intheir own Tarps, although Majors in the Army. 


In fome cafes there will be found Figures in the Money Column only; and in other cafes not fo many Perfons as ver 
aually employed, . For example, in the Avjjutant General’s Office uo Officer will be found in the Columns oppofie & 
this Head, becaufe they are expreiled effe@ive elfewhere, the Adjutant General and his Deputy being entered eticdise 
under the Head “ General Staff.” A coutraty plan would have given a falfe total of the ives, or have occalcael 
additional columns for Non-etfcGive Stuf, which would have rendered the Abftract intricate. 


3 4 
‘THE number of Perfons in the Companys Military Serivce on the Bengal Eftablifhment, on the 30th of April 1795, 


was as-follor 


ificned and Warrant Officers, including all the Names upon the Lift of the 


901 
commiffioned Officers, Rank and File, including Invalids and Super- 
eee - - - - . - - - - - - ASte 
, : , 5,445 Europeans, 
Natives, Commiffioned, Non-commiffioned Officers, Rank and File, including Invalids and 
Supernumeraries - - - - - - - os - - - = 29,690 
——Artillery Lafcars, including Serangs and Tindals - ‘s . . - . 2,111 


-~—— Camp Followers of all defcriptions who receive Pay, including Artificers, Sircars, 


and Black Do@ors < : - 8,579 
———— ] 40,280 Natives, 


& 


Total, Europeans and Natives - § 
——a 


Horfes, Elephants, Camels, and Bullocks * * ¥% = 4,396. 


The'Annual Amount is - - - + * + = * = = = Sonaut Rupees |1,34,59,177 9— 


Dedu€ the Amount ftated in Page 62, under the’ Head Detachment at Fort Marl- 
borough, the Charges of that Detachment having hitherto been defrayed by the 
Relideacy at Fort Marlborough, and not brought to account on the Military Books of 
Bengal, per Month St R* 11,961. 3.4, -  - = = orperAnnum - = « 1,43,554 8 


-Dedudtalfo the Amount of Military Charges annually transferred ‘to the Civil Department, 
on account of Efcoris with the Refidents at Foreign Courts = « z = - 50,741 4 


1,94,975 12 — 


Total probable Expenfe for the Official Year 1794-5 - 2 2 © ©  Sonaut Rupees {1,32,57,901 13 — 
: eG 


King’sTroops = 2 8 = we tee 257,846 — — 
Company's Troops = + «© = = .# # ©  1,80,00,085 13 — 


Total as above -° - ~ Sonaut Rupees |1,32,57,901 13 — 
: cas tcl Mead at Peele 


Or Sicca Rupees one Crore, twenty-fix Lacks, eighty-fix' thoufand four hundred and forty, eight Annas, and Gx Pice 
(Sicca Rupees 1,26,86,440.. 8. 6) s : . eo “F 


: Fort William, i i 
Military Aud". Gen'® Office, (Signed) John dian ait, Gerd, 
“g0tb July 1794. iy 
Stated and Checked by 
James Lockhart, 
Affiftant and Accountant. 
Eaft India Houfe, {A true ») 
‘th Nay 1010. CRY) sittian Wright, 
. ; Auditor of India Actounts. 


the Afviits of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


MADRAS ARMY. 


1794. 


1G 


CORPS, &. 


= 
WHERE | |= 
STATIONED.| [& 


GENERAL ABSTRACT of the STRENGTH and MONTHLY 


EURO 


A ; 
Ppendis, 


PEANS 


ely 
-|a} = 
Af a] = 
-[a] - 
-|a) - 
als 
al 4 
a} a) 8 
ajay 8 
aja} 8 
yay 8 
-[-] 2 
-]-} 3 
Ste] ox 
7A 
-|-] 
Bees 
a} a - 


Pag: 

, ; 

3 {BODY GUARD ~ -f ore {inn o TY) studs ~~ }- 

2 |NATIVE CAVALRY. Firft Regiment - - | Arcot. - - | - 

3]- = - = © Second dito - = | Com ee 
: Bia de. fo) = Tied: ditcols, S| "Tchenwre = | - 
i JS fm oe + + Fourth dito - + - | Arcot- - -|- 

6]- = = = = Fifth ditto -~~ - |fGhimandalumy 

a JARTILLERY - - Firft Batration - - | Mount - - | - 

3 }. == = = Second Batt®.¢ Comp’) Trichinopoly «| - 

- ar EUROPEAN INF, - Firft Battalion - -| Vellore - -| - 
w2]-  - - = Second ditto- - - | ForeSt. George - 

‘ 3} gre =) =) S/TWint dino= - ~ | Pondicherry ~| + 

k t4{- 5 = + = Fourtti dito- - -| Ellore. - -|- 
15 OEE Brigade SRY Fit Battin ~~ |f Mand of 
16 Pcs, Sl Ae Youth dine, oe Ryacotah- ~ | « 

aT} + om =e = Fifth ditto ~~ =| Trichinopoly =| - 

Wl - = + =~ Twenty-fecond ditto | Sunkerrydroog 

w]e - = = = Twemyzthird dito - | Amoor - - |= 

so]- = = - = Thity-firtt ditto | Trichinopoly «| - 

ath-- Fir BrignieSeaff - - - | Trichinopay- | - 

b 33 |Second Brigade ~~ Siath tatalion - - | ambsor = = 
23] 2 oe = = Fourteenth dite - | Tingar = + 

She oe sey we Fiftcenthdicee 

PPP SS le ye w= x Sineenthditto 1. 

26} - - = = = Seventeenth ditto - | Pondicherry « 
AT ee Ne oe oe Twenty 6 | Saem- - 
Pee re A seated Biieade Swf | Pondicherry = 

49 [Third Brigade = = Second Batstion - | Tanjore — - 

30|- > > = Seventh dito - -| Kynar. - - 

31] - > 9+ = Ninthdito - + | Madura = = 

Ble - = = = THrtcenthdito ~ | Dindigut . - 

3 33)- = + = © Twenty-frft ditto - |.Paluncotah - 
Bp - 6 se Trrenty-fourth ditto | Tanjore = 
35]- = = Third Brigate Stat - - -|-pitamcotsh ~ 
36 }Fourth Brigade - = Eight Battalion - | Samulcotah - 
37} - = = =e Bleventhidtto ~~} Etore- 2 - 
Pe = = = = Twelfintino = =! Matutipaiam- 
SMe 2k = es, (1S Bightentin& +] Arka. - - 
Aol = = = Twenty.fixth ditto = | Caffimeotal 
Aye SF = 5) Bwenty-teventh-dites} Chicscole = 
Pile = = Fourth Brigade Staff - - | Chicacole- - 
43/Fifth Brigade -  - Third Betation'- - | Maras = 
Bey e- (R= Nineseonth died, cil piew eiecas 
Pel citerae 2. Twertian Sens <1 mua TI 
5 ee ae > Tembditto- - | Ongole - - 
a7i- - - ~ Thirtieth ditto 2 _ Tunaconlah ~ 
Hf - - = = Thiny-teeond ditto Wallajahbad 
48 |igot Meee Pilih Brigade siaie cig | yeh 5 
50 [Corps of Engineers - - - . _ at different stations - - 
S$! J2orps of Pionesrs = = | Ponsicherry - 
wlaee +S Sets 0 je tiene. 
53 { Nahob's Sepoys * + Ramnaud and Shevelepatore 
53 |Supernumeraries = = For: St. George 
AABN ONSET = a te LR Seg aoe | 


— 


atenant Fire Wa 


a|- 
CP ies 
of 
sf 
6i} =: 
rahe 
30} 10 
3/38 
9] - 
9] - 
10] - 
au} - 
7|- 
7]- 
7] - 
7|- 
71: 
ei 


Cornets and Fafigne, 


| 


-} x 3 
Pa er ea ve) 
-{-f-f-[orf. |e} 
fe ed ie fe (| 
-|-|-]-} a] - ]-ls 
k -[ or] ~ |] 3 
ehelstay =|) 2 ain 
sh<fepe] xt iepee 
2S Ory ee es) 
eh at-\-1 | alae 
-f=}-]4) fo datas 
=12]2) 4}, 3) aes 
«hele fay a Lee 
fate hath ae aeclet a 
oh 15 | Soa tl eg 
=fe} = [aia be bal 
«Vl aeeaet 
2|-)-[Weatis te] s 
Bel eee pac a 23 
apollo np eabel 
a Pe Va nah 
BS ee eg oem Sb) 
sfepsfefoa Petes 
folefed af ede] a 
3S Bee ee le 
=fe[-]-| 2] <4-{%3 
: “| 2}. E13) ig 
=f a] -4-]4 
Shela 34.4 4a 
elol-t-] 3° dele 
lef] a] f-pay | 
f 


Pa 


ANY 


The EAST IND1 


A COMP 


No. 54. 


EXPENSE of the MADRAS ARMY, as the fame ftood on the 30th April 1794. 


: NATIVES. 


4 MONTHLY 
5 
& 2 i EXPENSE 
Lae \ a g|  \é ca 
als id 4 213 cs a STAR. 
t : : 3 2 g A 2 all PAGODAS. 
éjal ela £\2 $ eae 
= east carlisle 30° fairy’ z a 1,608 25 
-|- -} 7] 8) 2g a4 2) 1] 109. geriB 13 gn 
be ire eet 2) ic ea Mg Ca ed 857 3813 
Topo CER oe fa i ae 5/331 29 74 
Se eas i a ed a] t}ae Ses te 
BM a tg de ete 3) &} tose 2,860 12 20 
96.) 36: stata ee oii a} > [235 59967 19 75 
$0) Sy IS ate ten ste EH is fe? 4535 18 3 
|| bsg - f=] =f. - =| >) 3 39535 30 72 
s}x6] sf -]-|- -|- - -[-] 3% ase 832 
32] 17] 68 i -|-|- -|- - -f-] 3 35984 10 9x 
28] Gos} -|-}- -|- - =) * pee 4082 0 16 
OG ha #3 =) ae 853 38 75 
A Ah OI 32 | 3 By gas) 45933 24 35 
fab Wee | 39 a} rl 9 1905 © 75 
{a HHES boa ea Eiht ies 4,887 24 75 
-] ale 32 32 CS el Cee 2 3,812 14 35 
7.4 abs 39 | 40 2 RS 1979 32 55 
CP Seah vy fe) a lies ae 357 26 20 
7h abe seh 5% he Magid 45743 39-75 
Ea eed li ge | 32 Se oe | 1,662 17 35 
i eae) Os 3a | oe Mf. 7 bag 3,930 3675 
af ake 3a | 32 ays 9 | 9665 30 55 
ba Picct iy EON aR Le co Pie Fle | ag 3835 
by et ct 32 ci] bits (ON | 1,860 12 75 
Ba on = pipet) eat 3 ae | spb ar 0 
-]a]- 3 | 32 i.e ae 1850 375 
moe | 32 32 co aed 9 1866 9 15 
eae aa as al tl 9 -')  n9e3 39 75 
oj} 2f- 40 | 40 ol Ps fie : Woz 35 75 
aay bar | gar | 32 2) 7] 9 =] nots 3535 
rol Vee ted gz | 32 as 9 . 1874 3°75 
oayeats AS ee -|-1 4 294 26 20 
-|2]- 32 | 32 al th 9 =!| 1849) 835 
Spa sep 33 | 32 | a irs, ape =| 311909 35 
Su tes te 38 | 37} os ede - 1745 38-75 
ry Sl 38) 37 co! Pigg pes = | 29252 54-95 
ae |e | “i: bee Re =| gor 38:35 
-|.a]- 37 | 37 a)? 9 - 1,382 19 95 
at heete ~ aes ei aaa : 28: 26-20 
- fale 32 |) 32, af 3 - 3,682 28.55 
-|al- 32. | oki a 1,765 10 5$ 
-Jal- 4o | 40 aj? - 2,818 315.55 
ba feel 37 | 40 fag -| 1728 575 
fa} 4o | 39 ‘| a.” =} aon 21-55 
3 enh Barbee] ni9: E 1,760 27 55 
sone ; : 5 a) hs Fs aes oes gage eet | = fats eit 1.97 23.40 
-f-]- Pilase 1s Sil soo) t Shetere eS eee | Aa eR por aede sree Sih 
a Be Gm Le em oa pent Meee Menem Oc) OR | ees ees aa i Ug 333 35 40 
~A fs PO] OP as th a5 Si ed -s cate eee ae sf rh i Sar gh ee 
mols cS (otic al ee es ee ee a Sybase ees Cert 2 
SEN (cess ts Coe Seale Fy Sea |S tae RS Og ara es ie at = | -4)265 22 bo 
i j 
Plioi bea ak i 


. . (continued?) ; 


APPENDIX to the REPORT from the Se 


Pig] 


“EUROPEANS 


WHERE 
STATIONED, 


Capta'ns, 


55 |!nvalids, European 
56 |Penfioners, D? - 

63 | invalids, Native 

63 |Fenfionets, De - + 
64:|Gantonment, Arcot - 

64] + =)Calfimcotah 
soe +/Connatore 


syne = - 
= Secundermally 
-Pilney ~~ 
+ Tachenore | - 


= Wallajalbad - 
~ Warriorg 


= Bellumcondah 
+ = Chicacole — - 
= Chinglepur - 
= Condapillee - 
= Cuddalore - 
r+ + Dindigul, 
je 0 = Ellore. + 
+ +Ganiam- 
. = Innacondab 
~ Fort Si. George 
= Kiftnagherry + 
~ Kungoondy - 
= Madura~ 
= Moglatore 
= Mafulipatam 
= Nameul 
= Nagore 
> Nogapatam 
~ Nellore 


~ Ongole - 
+ Palamcotah 
> Permacoil 
+ Pettacotah 
= Pinagra - 


at different 


<> = Chimundulum Plain 


St, Thomas's Mount 


+ Poltameotah and VerdachiJlam 


= Pondamallee 
- = Pondicherry 
~ Ramnaud 
= Rampour 
+ Rajamundry 
~ Ryscottah 
= Silem - 
= Samuleotah + 
-Suzerow =, 
~ Sunkerrydrooz 
-Thgar = 5 
+ Trichinopuly ~ 
Tanjore -| =! 


jeuitenants, 


ieutenant Fire Workers, 


Cornets and Enfigns. 
ey Ca a2 5 


Ordnance, 
| Affiant Surgeons, 
ploy. E 
Ettabhiiaents- 


| Gitice 


1 Sure 


NATIVES. 


MONTHLY 
EXPENSE — 
' 


a 
STAR 
PAGODAS, 


peters, Drummers 
‘and Fifers. 
Atificers, ke. 
ce Eftabiithmient. 


Havildars, 
Privates. 
Recruits. 


5016 19 16 
- 789 010 
6263 075 
$597 39.9 
177 14 79 
Go 34 3° 
195 730 
120.9 9 
58 39 50 
150 0 0 © 
st 8 3a 
123 8 32 
~ 372.36 6 
852.30 $5 
159 0 @ 


| Conicoplies. 
a | Native Doctors. 


[om 
‘onan oe eo ee ee | Pockatiy aren, 


148 29 16 
+ 96 0 84 
354 6 70 
A) 215 29 74 


139 4 + 


513274" 
689 29 6t 
303 30 53 
571 13.15 
519 450 
4534817 33 
655 30.49 
s2r 13 16 
2896 9 
480 16 Eo 
38 20 
15 38 
a1 0 
18 40 
18 24 
23 2h 
a1 0 
3 3° 
333. 1 50 
646 18 73 
159 4 75 
56 2 32 
106 23 4 
22 34 7% 
43 2 0 
3,260 1 10 
281 


AY Son wa ep 


we Ow ew ee 


APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from she 


| > a | 
- ‘ EUROPEANS | 
é > 
; 21 g ] 
GARRISONS Ean Sele 
+ WHERE 2/& 2 i §| | 
2 | eemidp 
AnD STATIONED. at ele E t' 
e/¢ a 
DEPARTMENTS. Ells 2 (ESI) 
6 |e & Mi 
Zie cS |e} > 
Poe ame OE Sues Bade cl 
Bee es pietuppstive’ =; > etm din tes > Slates] Seep ey eel 
*a6}-° - + Timerycotah Bee lial iat ee tae cs Do neal em) WR We Cn oly pel lok cd oa ad as es 
Gta ceive =) = |e lees fda f bebe md tle bamfel 
Sp f- > Vieismgaram = = => ~~ =~] Jefe} - | = | fd bff ete] -}-f-f-- Sey 
EN gi 2° 68 ae ae ee a) 2 Wl ue a Ka 0 hy a a al ol 
SB]- =~ Veerabudderdroog- = = |= - - = -]-J-}-}- | >} - 4} =f f-f-f-[-1-]-]-t-fe] =] - fel. 
Beye =) Wiesgapatam = oe (ete tee = ate] mf mfr freee ft df pt st cop fod 
ORDNANCE ete 
89 |) f VAartenat = = at | Fore St. George! -| -|- Sy Ht ite] al-f-(f-] Ps p-bs 
MENT. F 
0 a Labormory - = = | Ditto.= - -J=)-fe} - } = fo 2 t= te fa} pel. -f-} po dele 
- = = Expenfe Magazine = -| Mount - -{-}-}-/ = | = [= })- | - ]-]s}-]- foed oom : 
<= = OE) Magazine | =| Vellore =! -4=]-f-} - | - fe fede d- fabs See f= >| eee 
me ee Magazine = = afel-] = foe fade dee t-babata f-f-} [= pep 
= + 5S = Magazine = =| Tanjore = -|-|-]-| -] - [-di= |= f-]efels ps ees 
= = = = = Magazine = -! Matotipatam -]=}-]-} - | = f=] = |= f-]-}-]apatel-l-y-] pede] e 
vee 5 = = Magazine ~ =| Kittnagherry J-|-}-] - 1 sf - f=] -4-f-f-] at are|-]-}-f <7 - df: 
<= = = = Magozine ~~ | Vizagapatam=|={-]=| - | = f= f- F-- -yef-] fet-]-f-f-] 2 date 
= = Conduétors af Stores at different Stations - -]=)-/-| - | - | - | - | - }-{-}-]-frsj-]-{-[-] - | - |-[s 
f 
PNcaniek: DEPARTMENT - at difforen ~ -fepetel = f= tee fe fep-y [fe] fal glad gf - fed. 
95 /MALE ASYLUM= 2 =  - 0 - ) - 1 Madras - -}e}-]-]-|-]-]-].]- He Eee sae a 
Ea MOMFIGES, Miltary Auditor Generat ~ - | Fort St. George|--|-] - | - | =] - f= ]-}-f-t-fefeflfeL | s{-f- 
96 | “Military Paymatter General -| Dito = - -|-{-|-| - | -]-]- | -4-[-J-}-[efe}-fefe} ad ale] - 
96} - 5 = © - AdjutantGenerat-  - =| Dino - - -/-)-J-]- J -]-} ef f-f-fefefeftelL] | af}. 
97} = > ~ Quarter-mafter General - -| Dito = - =}-}-}-)-} - | - | 27 - ]-}-f-fe}of ff ff 2] alep. 
7 |'- = - Mufter-mater General - -| Dito - - =}-|-}-]-]-]-4-] - [-{-}-[-fe}fefef-] |. pf. 
98] - =~ %= Shue Advocate Generat- -| Ditto - -/=}-]-}-] - | - | - fi] = f-fefefedetfete[e] a]. ef. 
pops 65 -\ Military Bord - = -} Dito - - -f-}-J-}-] =] - Foe fef-befhetye] ad ede]. 
gS }- =) - Military Storekeeper ~ -| Dino - -)-J-]-|-] =} -]- |<] = 4-}-ffefe [bey] ad. fede 
99}- - - Garrifon Storekeeper. -  -| Ditto - - -|-|-}-) - | -| - |= | - J-}-}-]-]-}-1-|-]-] 2] - [-]- 
99 }- = © = Agent for Bullocks - -| Dito - - -/-}-|-| - | -|- | - 7 -J-}-]-}-}-}|-1_].] 2]. d. 
a9 |= = = Agents for purchasing Horfes ff Hiberated 1) 1 ft pL | pb pey fe dpe 
oo} - - = Commiffary Gen! of OMmin, &c.| Fort St. George -}-|-| - | - | - | - 1 = [-f-f-]ef-}ef-fi} a} ede}. 
Contragts and Services performed by Agreement| - - - - -|-|-|-| ~ f=] -]-] - fefefe}efi}lc}pp ot. ff. 
Commiffion on the Revenues to Field Officers}- - - - -|-j-|-]~]-]-]-]- J-fefe} ec} }-}pep oy odd. 
Charges under various Heads not fixed in their ? 4 
NatureandAmonnt’) = =e $f > fiapeb = Pee Pe d= [pet fetch -eyePy Spee 
feamttn WME. s, DERE 
KING's TROOPS. o 
Y a eres, Ms 
S355 Yigth Regiment of Lt Dragoons - - -| Seringham -|-| a! a! a | so] - 3] 6]-}-|-)-|-1-|-l-} a} a} - fete 
256 | Laon Regiment of Foot - - = =| Warriore- -}_|-|_ sfa7|- 4} - }-]-[-]-]-]-f-l-fal 2} - |-le 
27 Ysiil Regiment of Foot - - - =| Poonamaltce-|-|.| , 4] 15) - dia] = |- 
38h [freee Regimentof Foot - = = =| seeundermally|-| a} x1 >| a6)- | >| - | 
¥ i : ) 
i “sitane Sor ~ 2 = =| wattajahbad =f 1 al a] 5 | og eh La 
2go | 5737 Regiment of Fuot =. ee Pondicherry -}-|~|-} 5 | 27 Piet fe 
367 | Vp, i Pondich 
Ee } tachment of Royal Artillery 5 - aes erry Y oO el ey ie Ss SR 
305 | $74 Regiment of Foot - = = - | ranjore - -4=| a1 a Aas asf 
371 |GENERAL STAFF - -- ~~. } apeaas - -|-}-] 41 | - ral Be 3 
IGRAND TOTAL of the Strength and Month- at] cot I 
ly Expenfe of the Madras Army sg} ~~ = - ove 23 6} 7] 


ANNUAL AMOUNT - - - - - ~ _  ~ Star Pagodas, Thiny-fix Lacks, Forty-uine Thoufand, Five Hundredand Thittet) 


In the Statement, Pags 102, the Sum ftated as Gratuity to Ficld Officers is the Amount diftribu: i i 
4 : 2 2 ‘ed for the year 1792-3, which was infertel, 
Auditor Geueral’s Office when the Statement was clofed—It has been xeceived on asth inftant, fnce the ‘Totals of aie. Stieaiens wee made YY 
Eaft India Haute, 
ath May 1830. } 


NATIVES. 


| Conicoplies, 


é 
2 
g 
4 
Be) g | 4 lglg Fi 
ez| 2 | 2 i 
ERLE BIE g 
6 = | 2 ile 3 
ged ets, 6 
GR (Seo [hae ual bol eo g 
= bef sy = fa iap go 
> -[- -|- =]-|-1- 1 
jataet Pres Rae pe 
By cae a tes a5 
Se es ee 20 
Fg? MR ha |) | 
24{ 6] 327 |} - | = |- id koe ees Sa pees (es nm 
go| 22] sos}! - | - |- CS eas Wester eee ft | aire 
soles sia Po | ee pe Te [ete ete ie ca 
go} a2} $59 |} - | - | - -o-]}- -|- fe on}etep- Sha 
go}a2| 659 || - | - }- -|- -|- -}- =}- -}-I-]- - + 
golaa} amr i} - | - | - = -}- -]- -]- -f-}-]- - - 
| 
6} 4] 10s} -} = | - =~ -|- -]- -]- -]-]-]- -- 
sola} sss ii - | -!- = -|- -[- -]- =]-]-]- -- 
mee SU) a Re es = Eee -- |_| 
331 | 75373 {1584 [563 | 22029 | 1.664 | 336 |>1,06c] ee 179] 4051 | 86 


a 

3 

F 2 
jg /8 
gle fa 
2/242 
& 

8) 5 1a 
S|] ales 
3/ B18 
z2| <4 |9 
Pack fs 


-|- =] 4s 


- 13] + [20 
- 13] - | 20 
~ | 33} =} 20 
- | 33] - | 20 
2) tag besn lad 


2,705 ae 


yy MONTHLY 
EXPENSE * 
ax 


STAR 


@ |) Pacopas, 
aes ee 
-- 106 15 32 


66 33 5 

Salle 26738. OLLI 

98 41 32 

920 41 39 

3 $2376 
610 233 


iS 371 220 
oe 256 30.40) 3) 
-: 179 23 64 
olf 14410 0 * 
= ey 323.14 70. | | 
tm 95 40 40 
= + % 44000 
Cait 105.37 32 
He: 140 
-- 396 0 o ry 
=) =] 2946 35 38 
208 1364250 
rey 1,764 28 0 - 


-|| 1165 30 © 
567 10 4o 

Y S41 10 49 

s 46218 0 
ti Wom 0 
F 338 22 go 

- 643 39 © 

- 157 4 40 — 

H 24 0 0 


-- 738 38 4o 


E| 752 26 48 
10,427 19 63 
- 25487 35 44 > 
99265 16 17 


331 6378 919 ~ 
- =|] 403012 9 
= =] sseg x39 
- =f] 41460 32 37 


- + |] gong ar at 


3646 17 58 
= 1314 36 43 


=|] 4rt29 27 30 


=f] 5396 716 
J 


HOH 126 5 


inn ft 


a 


“explained in the fame Page, in cor 


\quence of the Account of the Surgs 


“which oceafions a Difference, in comparifon with the eftimared Amount o 


pay 


f 


W, Wright, 


= = 36499513 18 48 


able for the year 1793-4 not having been received in the Military 
the Gratuity, equal to teven. 


(True Copy) 
Auditorof India Accounts. $ 


‘ccemmniansl = 


APPENDIX fo tic Sceond REPORT from rhe Seek Committee on 


EU 


CORPS, &e. WHERE 
STATIONED. 


Capraine. 


rft and ail Companies -] Bombay - - 


5 ih 
BATTALION of ARTILLERY - -( 30 and gth Companies } | Malabar Pro- 


sth Company Divided - - 


3 ¢ 18 Battalion Casnanore - 
EVROPEAN INFANTRY - --- + 2 


2a Battalion 7 | Bombay - - 


ult Battalion Poolianguriy ~ 
2d Battalion Cherry poolcherry 


3 Battalion Calicut 2 - + 


le) 4th Battalion SH z-/) = 
ie Bombay - - + 


6th Battalion Tellicherry -. - 


rigade Staff Divided - - - 


; 3th Battalion Arriacottah - - 
NATIVE INFANTRY - ? 

$:h Battalion - Surat- - =. 
gth Battalion Bombay - ~~ 


26 Brigade roth Battalion ~ Paulgautchersy - 


1ith Battalion - Bombay - - - 
zath Battalion Cannanore -~ - 


Brigade Stat Divided - -- 


Marine Battalion - eS od bee 


Detachment - «= at Poonsh ~ - 


Bombay - - - 


Engineer Corps- - - - 2 Divided - - - 


GenerslSu®- ~ 2 2 2 LL 


Provincial Staff for the ‘Troops in the Malabar Province se eee 


Bombay - - - 
Tellicherry - - 


Tannah - - - 


Paulganteh - 
GARRISON STAFF~ ~~~ 22 2 | gee 


Surat- - - = 


Cannanore 


Mahé = - 


Carrinja - 


MEDICAL-DEPARTHENT . =... . 2. . 2. s Divided 


ofthe EASTINDTA COMPANY, | 


i > 
BOMBAY ARMY, as uenrly as the fame cau be afvertained to have ftoog on the Soth April 179%, 


2 2 iS 3. 

= 3 2 2 Be 

3 & 2 z |e ee 
518 3 B13 5 5 e128ees ae 
i 4 rath) 3 2 |lepezres 
ie i $|: : = (ebegis ele 
Ba 3 a |e a <i bal ind 


MONTHLY — 
EXPENSE 2 


7306 17S 


i 
$598 | 
pug 158 


863 2 18 


s} CER 
Ep Vee fe | 
l 
i s{-}o- qe 
| Pia Rav 
sh mem | 
peaanits- “he 
ahieabs eae 
Shek alee 
4 
saat ps 
plea Mase be 
tl te ous 


364 3 28 4 


3446 328 


879 2 6s 


on 


APPENDIX 


fo the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee 
+ 


mployments, 


WHERE 
STATIONED. 


if CORPS, &. 


Captains. 
Lieutenants. 


| Head Surgeon. 


| Colonels, 


‘Arfenal - 
; Magazine ~ - - - - 


‘DEPARTMENT of ORDNANCE ( Magazine - - - + * 


*s Magazine 


. 
‘ 
‘ 


Magazine 


|) spaitding and repairing Fortifications, Magazines, Barracks, &c, 
& ; 


| aMititary Auditor General's Office - - - © > = + 2 = = 


FP gviliemy Pay Office General - - - + - =~ = 2 == - 


| Deputy Adjutant General’s Office - - - - = = - - 5 = 


| Military Board Office - =~ - -~ 2-2 ee eee 


) mavatie ~~ - + - = -- 2 ee ene 


Mile ------ - eee ee rte 


| Penfioners 4 * 
cs Female and Children - - - + ------ 
pppiiapraty Buropean and Native Officers - - -- === 


Department of Commitfary of Provilions and Cattle = - = = = 


Romer = bee ee - te aia eel 


‘ 
' 


" (Contraéis and other Services performed by Agreement - 


| Charges which cannot be brought under any fixed Eftablifhment - 


h TOTAL of the COMPANY’s TROOPS - - = - - 


“TOTAL of the KING’s TROOPS - - = = - = = 


GRAND TOTAL of the BOMBAY ARMY ~ - - ~ 


‘The Total Number of Perfons in the Company's Military Pay mpon the Bombay Eftablifhment, o8 


Commiffioned Officers, Medical De; dl Civil i init 
‘EUROPEAN: by partment, and Civil Servants in Mili ia A . 
Bi% Hon commnitacised Olivers, Kalk atl #8 iociallog Vevaite choo ee A et cal hs 


Commiffioned, Non-commiffioned, Rank and File, including Invalids, P ie ' 
NATIVES - 9 Arillery Lafcarss Firemen, Pioneers, Serangs, “Tndale, and Much Gflench ecieribee ae tien tee Tavalilage Petes 
; ‘amp Followers of every defcription who receive Pay, including Writers, Doétors, Artificers, Bullock and Elephant Drivers 


ty Maphanty. ('= (spires... Ve a 
Draft and Pack Bullocks- = = = 2 = 300 
Milos j= ep ees |S) Reon gs 
os ‘The Annual Expente is 38,567,105 Rupees, 3 Quarters, 72 Reas; but fince the goth April 1794 Orders have been iffued for raifing two Local 


part of the Regular Troops that has tak i i il 
cia sane Rilgiauirly cbimdeed arenes a ee eee ae as acerr By ie Pcteeteemn Ath Cooley. Cossiry nates 


See 


STAFF OFFICERS and others who appeari i z ; 
of which ftation he is inferted in the line of General Suh ws Meee the Statement, are inferted in one Station only inthe Abftra&; for example 


Bombay, Military Auditor General's Office, 
the 6th January 1795. } 


firs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


‘ T “ 
NA-TEVES. CATTLE 
| £ eg28 ¢ MONTRLY 
é & = eis = EXPENSE 
3 = $ ae S 
as 2/38 # 2 oat ¢ iw 
El 3 Nes 2 236 z 
Slelelaleis| a3 E g ra ah BOMBAY 
2|2Z\e\s\2| 2 4 alele)2] fie z 
e\2\2|2\£| 4 i BIS|E1e|s \é rey RUPEE ioe 
=. = 5 S15 ef 
ol\4lS}e\|a} 2 & aS abs | Sie & : 
— —| ho Pak |-———___ 
el a -|- - -|- | Sfee [os 19,749 
aie Pe hes # oa WP pa | a Ba 190 
-|- oO ha : =|.) 2] - [16 738 
ae ay 8 p safi- bead | ag 3745 
-|> - ‘= - - |=] 2] - [20 4,625, 
uae 0 es 2 Bey dia ie) jeg) Bs ISS 
ate ro) ae = cad | ues] = 4,930 
hey os es ri Ab lcs iO! Bee a 1,602 
-l- aps . ~J-fal- 
Ey et) ee ak = ht a 
- [33 2| 297 + s{ tt 3}- 
TR 3] 199 2 627) 4] 2 
x| 4 == - ii bchy bean Ge 
ee! hee iB iad 8S) atte 
Pea ey) es s tdeipal- 
ef 3 ey ia 5 E dot 5] Gant am 16,488 3 9 
she elas 4 SS ae 34200 3 53 
aaa ia! | 
a] tx 1177 J206 | 628/233 | 8,636 15 29 |720 |raq | 17 281,498 0 13 
Buh ages : Pa ee oe iy 40768 x18 
1d ER aL MS Bd We ed Ba Tea ee | 
} 1] 11 |t77 [206 | 618/233 | 8,636 | 20 35 29 {720 |124 | 17 [197 422,266 1 32 


bg Mad Noe She I Bik tat a a ee vats: SRR ap 
2 De F CEERS le ore = 22 Sr st Se PS argeg ma 
\ ———- 4273 + Total Nomber of Europeans. 
Paonk. 4. Serta rua so) SSRI | | 2" geet 2a erg 
Lites 1 EG 


ae ca, Sweepers, Women and Children on the Penfion Lift, &e. ke. — 2933 
rmen, Watermen, Sweepers, Women and Children o: ion Lift, 5 983 eon toad are 


GRAND TOTAL of EUROPEANS and NATIVES - - - - - ~ = 
: 


Battalions of Native Infantry in the-Malabar Province, which, with the Works carrying on there under the Engineer, and the relief of the principal 


‘Major Little in September and Ogtober laft, the Expenfes of the Military Efteblishments under this Prefidency for the Carrent Year, ending the goth 


. 
ee ns 


$.Captains of the 1ft European Battalion appear in the Statement, and only 7 in the Abfra®, the other being Deputy Adjutant General, in the ranke 


igned 3 Kerr, 
(Signed) =i ag Audt, Gen’, 


‘Eoft India H A true 60; Wn Wrights x 
‘sth May Bee } ‘ a “Avditor of India Accounts. 


SRS 


+ 


“APPENDIX fo the Second 


GENERAL ABSTRACT of the STRENGTH and MONTHLY EXPRYg 


| 


CORPS 


AND 


ESTABLISHMENT. 


BODY GUARD, - .- - - 95 - - 


RY. 


Wane 


NATIVE CAYAL 


aft Battalion. 


2d Battalion. 


ARTILLERY. 


3¢ Battalion, 


EUROPEAN INFANTRY REGIMENT -  - 


NATIVE INFANTRY. 


aft Regiment - - - - = 


SE a ee aa 
ReaD hie Pies Shines 
a ene ee ear 
ip Oa oe, SU. Sot Va as 
apiaa-we Ps rad, gepeeeeenlad 
7th - D® - - - - mo 
Sth - be - - - - - 


Sita 7 > ore Mee ead 
wt Company - = ee 
[rs De! by 2S ge Sa 
ee te Me 
Bh sth ochre np” 2 LL 
(i) ee eens ee Yee 


wt Company - - =o - 
pepe 7). Uae aes 
fas | ai es eT a 
bP De. = + SPR NS 
sth, Gthand zthD® = = - = 
coi 2 Den Wale ie Ie 
‘at and ad Companies == 0 = 


gdandgih- Do - 2 = - 
PP a Se ee ae ae 


6th - + + De - - = 
whe. - D oa 
Stat jo nk a 
Golandaaze - Sf Fy < - 


Experimental Hore = = = 


ion 
Bet aa iit Regiment = -4 
Regimental Staff = = = 2S 
aft Buttalion 


oh a sa Resiment zi -{ 


Regimental Staff oo ~ =~ 


sft Battal 
Too ih sd Regtoae hs -{ 


ad-D° - 

Regimental Staff S- . 

Me Battaion ) a: 

Maree. he Regiment = { 


“Regimental Staff =. sa 


Pat-alion 
7 aa Pan Regiment -” - { 


STATIONS. 
z 


Sbaharanpore = = 
Muttra ~ - 
Murtra and Bundlecund ~ 
Mecratand Bareilly - 
PertaubGhur andBundlecund 
Mutiraand Bundlecund - 
Ghazepore - = - 
- De - - < ~ 


Rewarree - - - 
Fony Ghur -® -  . 
7 Sd Se ia ra 1 
Fort William == = 


Fort Willism- = = 
Agal = 2)-> 3-7 ie 
Fort William =). - 
Cawnpore -  .  - 
Fort William - - 


Cawnpore - - - 
Allahabad - - - 
Fort William-  -  - 
Chunar- 2° 2 
Fort William - .  - 


Cawnpore. = =. 
Nomilah 2-5 
Dinspore = ek 
Jorrah near Mirzapore = 
Keitah near Bundlecund - 


Barrackpore = - . 
Leta ea 
Daceaand Chittagong 
Etaya and Shahabad = - 


FunyGhur - 2. 
meine ee 


Migrapore 


Cuttack - oe 


Regimental Staf = 2. 


aft Battalion 
ad - pe. ¢ Sh Regiment 


Regimental Sif 2 LL 


sf Battalion 
see. RM Regimeot 2 f 
Regimental Staff =. || 
18 Butalion 
ad po. $3 Resiment -{ 
Regimental Saf =, 


Balafore and Jagzernaut - 
Gawnpore - 2. 


Rewarree 2 LL 


= =I 
2 


iftant Surgeons: 


EONS, 


rte j- sf} ste rie 
sf-}=} xfafead =] = f-f-f-]-] - ]-f- 
-[-f-] fap of ef. f-f-f-q-P edd. 
~f-]-} xfap ef 2 fs f-[-f-}-] pb. 
- 2fa} 6f af - {-[-]-]-[-]-}- 
1] ~ fal - | - | - f-fafaf-[. pb. 
-[-}-f-- ]-] 2] 2] + f-[-}-]- -P3 
-}-]-] spa af - | - f-f-f-fe] 2 de]: 
<[-f-foadap x] x] = J-]-[-]-f e Je} - 
=}-f-fix fale] 2] - f-f-]-}-] - fe] - 
at-bat § bd dh a befafedo fe de pe 
ata fa - | - | = [ep ef] - fede 
t}oprp ep) 4l - f= f-fed-]-] - [ef - 
“l-f-} fap @ p= b- b-ted-]-b} de] 
arias 4.1 2f-fel-] goad 
fl fs (eS fod We ee eed a 
Aetede toe ia, - | betel eels 
af ala}. | a =| \/=baelo| eee 
Pyrp tet ate pe f-f-palap- dep 
-}2} ot} as] 6} - f-fabft ofp. 
-|a}- a} gf - | - |-f-fal-} . fe] - 
oy Fs es be Oa a 2 Gg be Ye 
| Eb a Fa Petes Can iri 10 8 aan (| 
Ebet Ke FAc od Pe te 9 FP FS J 
=[4-feaf-] of - Pepa fap pape 


Ce 


Ba pe brad BM need fe | 1 fe : 
-}4 3} 3]-[aof yf - f-f-}sf- - 
C1 oo a ed es eee! oo) Pf fat A a 1 
-13-] af part] af -f-f-t-l-] . fe] - 
- 3}-|20} af - [-f-fal-[ - ]-] - 
1 Bae cd eg Cost WU Wp 
=} 4a) xe] sof af = }-]-faf-} - [-]- 
-}H-) 2]-}ao} 4 - f-f-],J-] - 1-1] - 
ey eis Oss Boman Va 6 29 ne ay (os ( 
=}-} cB pe cc on ea i i Mi el 
Ses Pe Pea cs fs fea fe 


Cawnpore - 2. 


a 


of the BENGAL ARMY, as the fume food on the 30th Day of April 


NATIVE OFFICERS 
anv PRIVATES, 


ARTILLERY 
GOLAN DAAZE! 7 AGCARS, 


Offices, 


Rank and File. 


i 


Taropean Amptants in Aa] 


Drummers & Trum) 


P| 
2 


Rank and File. 
Jemautdars. 
Havildaus. 
Rank and File. 
Serangs. 


c 


als. 


44 

2| = 
$|3| 5 
al 4) 6 
s| | 24 
slar| 34 
€| ar} 24 
slar| 23 
6] | 24 
6 {| as 
6 || a 
61a | 22 


eaaanaaanae 


’ 


a fs 
g 2 
a 169 
Zale 
te 
5° 15s 
SEE 


3) 
3} a2 
sia 
4| 6 
ry} 4 
als 
1] 4 
2138 
3| 2 
7 | 28 
5 | 20 
z 4 
a| 8 
a) a 

1-|- 


Pw 


TOTAL 
PER MONTH," 
SONAUT 
RUPEES. 


Ne ey 


51677 3 
19066 13 © 
19,490 3 8 
11709 0 & 
20,418 15 8 
20,828 5 0 
18397 3 8 
20)594 74 0 
20,106 1 
417390 


saat 
175 35, 
Hri4 9 
8,929 6 
7608 8 


cohen oF 


4924 10 
$426 x5 
4556 2 
20778 33 
6434 0 
4287 14 


owobe & 


9680 12 
75156 0 
477 3 
35396 44 
waI5 3 
4rs0on1a 
6,548 © 
6,606 

16,118) 7 
14807 35 
148409 
1,472, 9 


coom rook wa and 


13,747 6 
130444, 0 
B74, 0 
16,944 14 
16,035 15 
taaz 0 


° 


} ty50x. 4 

15889 14 9 
| x,462, 0 © 
1545t 7 O 
14435 8 0 
100 


15 51g 14 
141933 9 9 


| #07 0 @ 


2.45 
15,786,344 © 


Ptaz 0 © 


cORPSs 
AND. 


ESTABLISUMENT, 


_§ 


NATIVE INFANTRY, 


eee Ie 
Regimental Staff = 


rit Battalion 
2d-D? - 
Regimental Staff = 


aft Battalion 
ad + D° 


aft Battalion 


nemtoe Oe 


Regimental Staff = = 


ft Battalion 
ad - De 


Regimental Staff! - + - 


aft Battalion 
ad- D® - 


Regimental Staff - = = 


aft Battalian 


‘as 15th Regiment ~ 


Regimental Saf = =e 


be tp pea Regiment - 


al + D° 
Regimental Staff = =e 
(& Batali 

5 " ts 38 a7th Regiment - 


Regimental Staff a Be. 


aft Battalion ¥ 
w8th Regiment - 
ad-D°? . 


Regimental Staf see 


aft Battalion 
h ‘ t= 
Megeent | 


Regimental Staff =k 


aft Rattalion 
ad- De . 


Regimental Staff = 


1% Battalion 
ad - D° 


aft Battalion 
ad-D° . 
Regimental Staff = 


Pena Regiment - 


aft Battalion 
ad. De. 
Regimental Staff - 


23d Regiment - 


2% Battalion 


price O° fasth Regiment E 


Regimental Staff 


aft Battalion s 
Alek pesto Recines = 
Regiment StgF = SL 
ait Battalion 


haan Regiment — 


2d-D° - 
Regimental Saf = 


i 33th Regiment - 


} 14th Regiment - 


th Regiment 3 ~ 
} sick tia ae { Barrackpore and Foreign Service 


Cay aa 
fron Regiment - he 


doom Regiment - -{ 
Regimental Staff - =  - 
Lucknow, Byramghaut and Seerora| 


at Regi NES 
2 } 2 ezimen f pee 
Regimental Staff - . 


A ms 


oe 


STATIONS, 


Mattra ~ 
-D - 


Seetapore -- - - 
Baily -- - 
-D . - - - 


Barrackpore = = 
Lucknow =. =. - 


Seerfle= - - 
Sultanpore and Ghazepore 


Bundlecund - 2 
NabobGunge =~ 


Luckanpore and Cuttack - 
Karnal §- = 
Pertaub Ghur =~ 
Sultanpore =. = 
Bundlecund = 2 
Barrackpore -- == = 


Foreign Service 


Moralabad  ~ - - 
hur, Bidgy Ghur & Anophhe 
Shaharanpore = | 
Debi et Sh. 


Allahsbad = 2. 
Dinaporeand Gyah-— 


Bundlecund — 2 _ 
BIO = 2 CNS 


EUROPEAN COMMISSIONED & WARRAND 


ees 
rary 


aT Sei wants wy Mili 
Emplovments. 


Bean Caval 
PGoniductins ot Ord 
re 


i 


eae eee aS 


No, 56—continued. 


—— 


OFFICERS. * 


an Alwanc 
ay Offices. 


ieee | Demers de rumpeters 


Vp eee | Sexjeants 


File. 


| NATIVE OFFICERS 


and PRIVATES. 


) 


z 

E 

2 

& ry 

21 

§ 2 

€ 3 

a |e 
20 | 853 
20 | 66 
20 | 850 
20 | 850 
20 | 864 
20 | 859 
20 | 868 
20 | 866 
20 | 850 
20 | 850 
zo | 850 
20 | 850 
zo | 850 
20 | 850 
20 | 854 
20 | 869 
ao | 850 
ao | $53 
20 | 850 
20 | 850 
20 | 850 
20 | 879 
20 [1059 
20 [1050 
20 S94 
20 | 850 
20 | 851 
20 | $50 
20 | 880 
20 |-855 
20 | 867 
20-| 913 
20 | 862 
20 | 850 
20 | 855 
ao | 255 

| | 


err elnONL | Jemautdars 


ARP otk 


Bota SDA AZEeASCANS: 


~ {ARTILLERY 


3 
z 
= 
& lela] ¢ 
eels 
2 |@je| a 
> and eee 


C 


_——| ——~— 


Native Doétors. 


OM 


CATTLE, 


Horfes. 


- 29422, 


ye ear 


é, 1472 


S W472 


- 4472 


a 1443 


8 1472 


- nage 


z wT 


i 

| ; 
| PER MONT: 
| soxaur 
RUPEES. 


re 
145483 5 9 
| Wag8 xg @ 
- m7 0 
rH989 8 

| pas 


my38o 6 

14,666 14 

41754 8 9 
2 

|) a7e7 15 @ 
3472 

| 0 ape 
15540 14 

15,006 Yo 9 


451507 15 © 
14150 8 


15342 
1g.218 


155478 
14,027 


15.537 
15,821 


15437 
14885 


18,874 
16,728 

3313 
159645 
14625 


13,937 
159337 


141932 
149950 


14,000 
15,248 


- 1857 


Preys 


yg 2 
I} sgi7g2. 15 O59 
na72 0 9 


Corrs 


AND 


STATIONS. 
ESTABLISHMENT. i 


| Quirtermatters onaures 
pean Cavalry. 


13 


w@Bataon ] a, Regiment f Monta ps. 1c |e 
NATIVE )_ vs a7th i -- pe SE Po 

BPt9:t7 INFANTRY, Mt etd Meerat 
armen Siar) +b St} ep lence doar ta 


323 Gateutea Native Mituia 

Efeort tthe Court of the Nizam - + = =| Fyderabad = 9 - 
ththe Refidect atthe Peithwa’s Court - -| Poonth-  - -  - 
Btcort with theRefidentat the Court ofthe RajahofBera}]- - - 9 - 
_[Bfeort with the Refident at the Court of Dowlut Row Scindia - - = - 


Weater Company at -  -  - -)'s '- | =| Bunfers - . |e 


uropean Invalids, Artillery) = = - = -|Chunar- - - 
D? + D® < Infantry + - = = © ~|Chunar, Boxar andAllahabad 
‘se ab SP Cte Soa as pe Se ele BOIGT 


{Native Infantry, Invatids, aft Battation + + +] Allahabad and Buxar = - 
= = | = 2d Battalion - - =] Monghirand Patna - — 
fovea Nae eet Heda J 2.) So 
Detachment of Troaps at Prince of Wates 

= = D® aFortMalbroo - = -fo . 


a 


bar (Ordnance ~ 


Hts 


gets Of the Orphan Socievy | - 


1S MAJESTY's Sth Regiment of Light Dragoons = | Cawnpore 

eh Sot egagivadoe eC pipet Bee |= Seed tobis, f 
= = | apbRegimentof Foot - - —- | Cawnpore 
OB ea atimet meh 2 yd Sinn 
oh, ts seth eae fe} 


Berhampore ~ = fe 
Opt) MD fe = |) Pore Willige = 


Board of Superintendence and the Hon. Company's Stud | - 
lorfes for the King’s and Company's Cavalry - - | - 


Detlué& Charges of a Detachment at Fort Martbto’,’ not brought on ary Books of Bengal, (fee page 133} per Month, Sonaut 
5 ey 4 the Military Books of Sonat 
(fee p: 


AmbafTaors and Refidents at Foreign Courts, tu’be transferred to the Debit of the. Civil Department 
, Dedudt Charges of the Honurtbis Company's Sind and Board of Superintendence ies 


Deda& Regimental Allowances of 


‘Deéda& the Salaries of the Agents for the Manafaure of Gunpowder, and the Agent for the Confira@ion of Gyn Carriages, Rated oa 


* £ : :: 
pee = CA woe Copy)” IP, right, 
, f Aunitor of Intlia AGcounts, 


| No. Sb—euntinued. 


ARTILLERY: 
LASCARS. * 


(ana wes GE 


NATIVE OFFICERS 
ano PRIVATES, 


OFFICERS. GOLAN DAAZE 


€ 
2 
3s 2 4 
= ‘ = 2 
3 EB) e218 bs 
2\4/2) 8 |8, : 
2\% Be E 
oii (eed Dae be 2 
a le\5) a (5 5 
4 aia) (4 
- | 10 | 10 


Native Doétors. 


CATTLE. 


other Camp Followers recei 


of the Cavalry Regime 
Pay. 


-| > 84 33/39 § iN 
=| 0437 snes 305 
4 176 28,075, 33 
S 276 27,867 1 
2 176 293732 
Fe Oe 5 lay “18x08 6 
Spar Eel TH749 13 
a ee 788,497 9 
= [ee “ D17T © 
a) | See See 34223 12 
29 {732 [178 | 023 (659 |764 | 3.259 | 1,004 | 56,229) 19388523 15, © 


21383599887 «5 


Rupees 6,685. 43. 4 orperannum= =. =. -. (= =| -/~|,)=} = 80229 14 0 

ohtheyenttiot, Wall t- | + {beer i look Rion g Ssbesside® $ 

Jt) SUPER ee ct at) BOR ge ro es Eom eke an . 2000 4n 2am 

‘Officers employed in this Department - - - - _%303 9 © Sonaut Rupees = |]4/35:53245. 1% 
5374 FO or 70,488 12 0 ‘on Sicea Rupees. = {}%259370923 74 

‘page 167%, amounting to Sicea Rupees 4314+ 13-.0- per month, or per andum- = = Ra itat ed. Pastn p te 549777 12 © 

Sieca Rupees - - |[2486,148"2 5 
} © Thefe Charges are averaged on the Coft of the Stores, and included in the Amount brought to account under the Ilead of Military Stores. 


303. 


fanaa 
cee. 


(Gigned) 


W. S, Greene, 
M. 


A, Gent. 


- | Refetence to Page of Statement, 


3 
7” 
a 
Pe peinnat's 
< 
ou 
8 
"ee 
Deae ee 
ae es 
yg. % 


ara 


3d Regiment 


NATIVE INFANTRY. 


gth Regiment 


| 21th Regiment ~ 


/paath Regiment 


Fir Brigade- - j 


"ARTILLERY - 


| ad Regiment j 
i 

4th Regiment = 
sth Regiment + 


Gth Regiment - 


ath Regiment - 


roth Regiment ~ 


CORPS. 


GENERAL ABSTRACT of the STRENGTH and 


Teutenant Fire 
15, or Enfigns. 


mafers. 


Captain Lieutenants, 
Worke; 


Lieutenants, 
Comets, 


it Regime - 


sth Regiment = 


Brigade Staff + 


ad Regiment = 
6th Regimes - 


Brigade Staff = 


gdRegiment — 
Thied Brigade ~ bs Reginient 
Brigade Staff. = 
‘4th Regiment = 
Fourth Brgndg =) ih Reximest - 
1 ; {isss Stat = 
f Boly Guard 
Corps of Engineers 


Horfe Artillery - 


Second Battalion 
Staff of the Corpe 


fie Battalion = 


“Madrss European Regiment = = 


Firft Battalion = 
Second Battalion - 
Regimental Staff 


Firtt Battation - 
Second Battalion 
Regimenzal Start 
Fir Battalion = 
Second Battalion 
Regimental Staff 


Firft Battalion = 
Second Battalion 
Regimental Staff 
Fir Battalion - 
Second Battalion © 
Regimental Stas 


Firft Battalion ~ 
Second Battalion 
Regimental Staff 


\(Fitft Battalion = 
Sth Regiment - 


Second Battalion 


Regimental Staff 


Firft Battalion 
Second Battalion 
Regimental Staff 
Firft Battalion — 
Second Battalion 

Regimental Staff 
Firft Battalion - 
Second Battalion 

Regimental Stat 
Firt Bavcation ~ 
Second Eattalion 
Regimental Staif 


Sorgeonm 


EOS, 


“cterinary Sur 
| Snb-A fhitent, 


“the Mbirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


fume ftcod on the 30th of April 1807., 


NATIVES, 


MONTHLY 
EXPENSE 
ae 
STAR. 


PAGODAS. — 


| Subsdars. 
TJomuvedare. 
Havildars, 
Trumpeters, Drummers, 
aud Fifers. 
"| Fir Tindals. 
Second Tindals. 
Native Dresters, 
Keepers and Grais 
‘Aitifcers and Cont 


4a70 38.17 
295 19 64 
4196 22 67 
age 23 63 
292 27 
4/202 53 53 
4332 137 
565. 0 60 


49337 39 37 


39995 1 63 


4195 40 45 
468. 6 57 
2gn 3416 


4199 433 
4440 74.73 
297 3 Of © 
4,046 36 25, 
4376 35.479) 
303 41 33 
4435 35 47 
43226 § 10 
295 32 3% 


4305 2 TS 
4206 4 7 
ag6 1 6h 


Appendis, 


EUROPEANS, 


ary Sureeonas 
Sub-Afliftant Surgeons: 


ts, Lieutenant 
kers or Enfigns. 


We 
| Piymatters. 


Captsin Lieutenants, 


Cortes 


Firft Battalion ~- 
+ ¥ Second Battalion 
Regimental Staff 


— | Affiftant Surgeons, 


Second Battalion 
Regimental Staff 


| Batalion - 


eee a | Hiewtenanes 
ee | Sarpeome, 


{sc Battalion - 


Second Rattation 
Regimental Staff 


jecond Battalion 
Regimental Stat 


-f: Firft Battalion - 


Firft Battalion ~ 
17th Regiment ~ 4 Second Battalion 
Regimental Staff 

‘Fir Battalion = 
48th Regiment - 4 Second Battalion 
4 Regimental Staff 

Firft Battalion ~ 
= 3 Second Battalion 


Regimental Staff 


: Firk Battalion ~ 
oth Regiment - 4 Second Battalion 
7 Regimental Stat 


J ‘ Fir Battalion + 
anft Regiment = 4 Second Battalion 
Regimental Staff 


Firtt Battalion = 
ad Regiment = 4 Second Sattalion 

Regimental Statf 
Fir@ Batrafion ~ 
Second Battalion 


{sn Stat 


agth Regiment - 


Fir Battalion — 
Second Battalion . 
Regimental Staff 
Hevoxrons ao nde | ages 
i Second Battalion -  . 
ExeCompany 
Military Inditution ~ 
Officers on the retired. Lin 
Gorps of Guides . 
Corps of Dooly Bearers 
© | Supernumersries 
‘European Tnvatids 
European Penfioners 
Mile Afylim =. 
Native Invalids < |. 
‘ative Penfioners 


2sth Regiment - 


HIS MAJESTY's TRoops. 
22d Regiment of LightDiagoons - — _ 
sth Regiment of Light Dragoons _ 
ath Regiment of Foot ~ 
Goth Regiment of Foot 
33d Regiment of Foot ~ 


Dromierd aid Filters... 


Havildars. 
Traimpeters, Deommers, 


and Fifers. 


NATIVES. 


Fit Tindals. 
Horfe Keepers and Grafs 


Native Prefiers. 


Second 
| Tafcars. 


14 54 ee Sp Bae ss J[connorats. 


~— 


6 
& 


9| 1 
8] 10 
St 9 
an orm 


B+ BB | Jemautdars. 


= fx | 10 
=) far} aa 
=~ | 1] 20 
= |jso] ar 

10 | 30 
stdin 
“Wore | aa 
anja 
i [fre co 
i 
10 | 16 
“1g | 10) 
12 | 10 
8 } 10 | 20 
~ fro} a 
x0 | 9 
pe 
-| 38 
al cs 
har 
gro = f= 
351 - | - 
iazs |rx6 | 565 
2x6 [x31 
so Ape 
geo] - | - 
568 || - | - 

4359] - f - 

6as|| - | = 


502 34 10 
4839 21 26 


33.046 9 38 
99232,39 33 
56933 16 98 


8507 32 8 
6242 9 59 


(cons 


Bais 
a 
statement. 


3 ; 

& ld 

OPee | g zg Fa 5 # ELS 
aa } at ds Adee AE 
* S & iz BIE 

e bi peat S 2) 2 [22 |<(F4 é lea 
by Sel } 9 4c OP Ss. : S12 cele 4) 2 les 
8 i / 2)5 Bite £18 lee 
; B12 Elgls B/E lle 
ai s\S\e 3 Fi 

o|A =| >= a] st [ala 


nl 


/HIS MAJESTY's TROOPS. 
path Regimentof Foot = = 2 Ot 
g | som Regimentof fot = = = > 5 tt tfe 
=| oth Regiment of Foot = = te 
Both Regiment of Foot = = = = tt 


J} oggth Regiment of Fuot'- = > = = ; 

‘ é ‘Madvas\Armys-) 2) -)) ) =f 
ee SEF gare rioopdiey = | = jv [2 te 

Fy of cenve Di heuti tur) eileen 
an : Southorn Divifion = = - = = | 
i Northern Divifon = = = = =] 

: Msforo i ths el eee ode 
Ceded Diftri’s -. - = = -]- 


See ¢ Malabar and Canara - > = = |= 


3 | Stationsiot the Army. » Infpeftor and exerciéng Officer of Cavalry | - 

_| Hyderabad Subfidiary Force ~~ 
‘Travanenre Subfidiary Force =~ 
Detachment in Wynand = = = 
Netachment in Berar = = = 


 |PANTONMENTS == 9 - = = 5 se 
bo'97 EGARRIONS) thes’) col! 5 eee at ike 
© 109] ORDNANCE pyeiistent = ele the ee 


6] Miltary Public Offices, e. ioe: Meza] oH 
loathing the Army he =p ee ee ee 
‘Sea Pie ayerati =) +) ueuh eS 


TOTAL mses 


e Hie Majehy s Ga Regiment of Foot having only arrived at Fort St. Georgé in January 1807, it hecomes neceffary to dedudt fram the Expenfe 
4 for the Period previous to which,it became 


Pay and Atos of Miety's sh Regie of Fo from 1& May to 31k December 1806 - =- = = = = 2 = 


% ¢ ‘. 
Averge Monthly Exyenfe of Establi@ment - = Ais halite OST Bedok ioe ie ot MAL wl lw) ia ee 
5 Charges incurred inthe year 1806-7, -but not included 


soWar.with the Confederated Mabratta Chiofs 
Expedition againit the Dutch Settlements 
* Dutch Prifoners = - 


evr at 
rttere 
Oe tee 
relive 
i ES 
Pe 
erred 
peruse 
beens 
eee 


; GRAXD ForAL { Lacs Rompe thoufand- aesesiien satcsiginy-fevem Pagod:s, twenty-feven Fanams, and fifiy-two 
ee oui “C,Seventy-fix Lacs twenty-eight thoufand two hundeed.ambfifty-onc Pagoday, thirly-feven Fanams, and fixiy-foar 


eo “ “i 


ry Anditor General's Office, ? 
"Kort St George, 18:h July 807, § 


Fait India Bont) 
~Wisy gtls 3836, 


NATIVES, 


epers and Grafs 


Trompeters, Drummers, 
18. 
‘Artificers and Conicopties, 


and Fil 


Privates, 
Horle Ke 
+ Cutters, 


| Drummers and Fifers. 


s 
8 
ea 

g 


$157 45 0 

meee 
5 S a 

| 1955 17 30 


+ 4636 95 20° 
1ej609 19 4 
14,030 41 68 
14890 19 78. 

1251380 17 4 


1,096 


748 


ofthe Madras Army a Sam equal to the cemputed amount of the Ray and Allowances of that Corps 

ui Expenfe to the Efablithment, via 
ee Shy Shdvbed Sete ti oh abt ck eh Iba sdO Nao 
EqnalperMonthto = = =; - 9 - = - 


fehees 
iy Pin BP) 
ipa ee 
rarer ey Gy 


agnat 33 49 
; pt ee se Pee 635,687 27 52 
7628251 37 64 


=== 


Cath. per Month RL Bek, oop ay age ap a Re 
Cihper Annum = - = = = = = " ~ 
panel Amount of the age red SiS Neaee asin + One 731480599 z 6 

nual Amount of the Extramlinaries + 278661 25 28 

\ : Total Pagodas —- | 7628251 37 64 
ees 


| (Signed) P. pres, a 


2 (A trae Copy) 
_ W. Wright, 
x : “Aciditor of India Acconnes, 


aie. 
& Gomnitice on 


RPS | 
WHERE 3 
pears | & 
Ee ts ih Foe STATIONED. é 
‘DEPARTMENT, a 
3 rate : 
i = 
s 
of Bon Nay Natife Cavahy 4 . 
n of Ar illery;and Lafeartartached =15 
of Earopedn Anfantry =~ rte 
ii © Gflor Grenadier Battalion ~ Ts] | 
If Regiment =} 2tBaalio =. + = Gozzerat - ane, 
a Regimental Staf + | - Divided ~ aie 
BH aft Battalion = = - Poona- ~ ates 
ad Regiment - ) ad Ratalions = = ‘on Service a4 
¥ Regimental Staff is 
af Battalion = 1] ~ 
3d Regiment = if Battalion + Bab. 
t » — CRegimentat seat “hfs 
- ‘ 
© (tt Battalion «= - sf} Bie 
4th Regiment 24 4 Battalion =. ad TOisa 


Regimental Staff 


(3fe Battalion Guzzerst - 
ad Battalion - Goa - - 
Regimental Staff Divided - 


“fe Battalion - 


sth Regiment ~ 


i 
{ 


ad Battalion 2 


6th Regiment ~ 
; Regimental Staff 


~ ft Rattalion & 
“7thRegiment = 221 Battalion . - Gozzcrat- - P : 
; “CRegimental Stair Divided = - : fs ie 
it Bittalion Suratin 2 + P : 
f Battalions = | Fieti Serviee - : sal 


BiRegenent’ 
id Regimental Start 


Et Baration —- 2 5 
goth Regiment: ~ 2 Battalion - 4 - * 

‘ Regimental Sea ivi Mos facut ae. yi 
Marine Bottalion -* . | af-|oy 


Independent Company "= : i 
Pioneer Corps, =e Divided - - ca 


The Honourable the Governor's Péeas Bombay ~ - 
The Engineer Corps es ek Divided - ’ - 
t Lnabithment sheet Verfowah = - + 


Scat oF th the Troops (Northern Dixifion) S ; 55 
Staffof the Sublidiary Force at Pooja - % ‘ oS ie} 


afer 
Sooughur = fa 
Carenja - - 
Staffof the TroopeatGoa = -  . | - 
D* with the Detachment in Kattywyar = 


‘dieal Depattment 


| No.8: 


es 


\ the BOMBAY ARMY, as the fame fiood on the Soth of April 1807, 


' T 
ij 


NAQIVES. CATTLE, 


MONTHEY 
EXPENSE 


wei 
wer, 


Ds 
“be 


te 


other 


avid every 
| tian oF Nati 


BOMBAY 


Pere aS 
Lafears. 


nis and Biles 


RUPEES, 


Serjeants, 
Drummers and Fifers. 
Temautdars. 
Havildate 

Deuromers and. Fifers, 


Wathermon, Puekalticss 
Native\Follo 
+ 
Pack and Draft Bullocks, 


Commandants. 
SweepeessB 


Astificers. 


Horfes. 
Camels. 


ar) 


Taat 4.29) 
36,009 2 10R 
139796 
21,726 


15,545 
14480 


193197 
20/236 

783 
an447 
1,501 
\ 783 
149845 
92482 

733 
44,298 
1yoar 

640 
14930 
15,224 

649 
153589 
14035 

G40. 


135993 
19,622 
783 
anfoa 
14264 
640 
135397 
73 
6340 
Roa 
396 
2,266 
6,068 
24385 
9,884 
6,905 
44197 
731 
310 


seu REPORT from the Scle& Committee on” 


eS 


CORPS 


Ba 


WHERE 
AND 


nt Colonels. 


“ STATIONED. 
‘DEPARTMENT. } 


oe 
Captain Liew. 
Lieutenants, 
| Chaplain. 
| Quarter-mafter. 
ties eer 
carp Wenig 


= 


Axfenal - 

Magazine Tannah 
Magazine Surat ~ 
Magazine Brozch | 
Magaziae | Go - 
Magazine fi Baroda - - 
Magazine Poona. Force 
Magazine Field Service - 


ORDNANCE BEPARTMENT 


Building and repairing Buildings and Fortifications, &c. Divided 
Provifion and Cattle Department ~~ D:- = 
‘The Powder Works = - = - Bombay 
The Military Auditor General's Office, ~ 

The Military Pay Office General 

The Adjutant General's Office = = 

The Quatter-matter General's Office = 

‘The Military Board's Office. - = = 

Rages Ae ge Sys 2 ile 

Mala 21 <7) | Soy. De - 
Female. - | = = p- 


tS 


Native Officers on the Supernumerary Lift 
The Off-reckoning of the Army = = 
Charges not brought under any fixed Eabliament : 


TOTAL for the HONOURABLE COMPANY's TROOPS - 


TOTAL of the HONOURABLE COMPANK’s TROOPS -}- - - - 


TOTAL of HIS MAJESTY'’s TROOPS - - ~~ =| Divided 


re Statement. 


TOTAL of the EUROPEAN RORTUGUESE BATTALION Goa - 


Se; 


GRAND TOTAL of the BOMBAY ARMY - -| - 


‘The Total Number of Perfons in the Honourable Company’s Military Employ on the Bombay Eablithment on the so 


Commiffioned Officers, Medical Department, Chaplains and Civil Servants in’ Military Employmenta 
PUR OPE BN - 0 Won-cotmMonedphadk eat Fam inchadlag Inviliaemse Peafionersy tae ce Sk es 


§ Commifioned, Non-commiioned, Rank and Tile, including Invalids, Penfioners, and the Honourable the Governor's Peons + 
“NATIVES - - 3 Artillery and StoreLafears, Fisemen, and all'thefe defcriptions on the Invalid and PenGon Lift 
Camp Followers, including Artiicers, Doétors, Writers, Packallies, Bullock Drivers, Wafhermen, Sweepers, Haller 


Horfes . 126 
Draft and Pack Bullocks ~  a285 
Buffaloes e { 


=~ + 332 
» The Annual Expenfe is Rupees (94,20,170, x. 12) ninety-four Lacks, twevid 


Bombay, Military Auditor General's Office, 
“aith September-2807. } 


Ba Sofia na OE ea 


the Aftirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, 


No, 58—continued, 


NATIVES, GAY TLE. 


MONTHLY 
EXPENSE 
1 
BOMBAY 
RUREES. 


Sweepers, 


aad every 
tion of Nati 


| Commandants. 
Wathermien, 


| Subadars. 


6,60)373 1 25 
Ayigit2 3 38 


5128 0 20 


242) 1,224 | gog [39,412] 3% [136 | 1, | 7-85,0%8 276 


Women and Children 0 ‘on the Penfion Lift = = m S 


and Abftraét now exhibited, was as follows, viz. 


4 


Total of Europeans and Natives 


igned| Alex, Hay, 
tie TPM Raat G 


® This Total will not add, occafioned by the following omifionsin the Body of the eAbMraG viz. 
Staff of the Ttoops in. Gusgeraty RP 7,050 
- DY ~~. = Sonthern Divifion = - - = = 4213 
he Subsioey Force at Poe, take in Abst at pom 9984 2 
- > 9934 203 
¢ Bombay, raken in auina at ke = 31,649 2 9 
- os = 4IzES}\0 72 


Total omitted - - = 


(Dee Cops) i ae 
m 
78 xo of India Accounts, 


eyious to the Regulations of 1796, according to thofe Regulations, and in the year 1808 thewing the Incresfe ani Decreafe iu the feverul Periods: 


| NATIVE INFANTRY. 


NATIVE CAVALRY. 


European Commiffoned Officers. |Salive Officers and Rask and File ‘Native OfBebrs and Rank and Fite, 
? ee 8 
= St) r 4 g he 
3 s\é 
‘|, | @ 
He Ae aa fe 
a\|£}2 he Bh 
3 ee 
S22 él Pe ; 
Dat 
oma =| 6} x 6 ss]. ap] ar! | vu = 
ost 
Aik cseiat el ed oe ec ec a ed 
Rene) 1 5] 2s} =] sa) so) ane 158 36] apart] i784 
ater =<] -]-]atal al of as a} at 6] ast] are 
ahess- =| 2] a} 4] a6) 8] 72] reo a a8] sce 
be eect | 
Tf sta] = |e] elect at =| 6] 2] cess 


Bengal 


seid 
a 


3 


meg =] =} oa} rf} a] a 


16 Reg. = ~| 4} 16 | x6 | 35 | 26 | ag2} 276 288] 384 96 | ry680| B48 


sp Reg”. ~ 


16 | 149) 207] 156] 246, 60] sce | seq] | - - ~ | 8 20s] 309] 555] 59, 


‘3 APPENDIX fo the Second REBORT: fromthe Sl&6 Committee on 


Appendix, No. 60. 


See 


ESTIMATE, thewing the principal Grounds of the INCREASE in the MILITARY EXPE ES otf 


t INDIA, ou rhe comparifon between the years 1793-4 and 1808-9. 
— 


Tnctafed Expenf by the Arrangement of the Army according 4o the Regulations of 1796—fay, 4 
Se ee fare Fae tat ay ORY ae ae eg 4 ley Sees at ate 


Hs MAJESTY’s = 
| “Phe Increafe in the number of Regiments is three of Dragoons, and eleven of Tofantry. 
a ‘Computed on the-comparifon of the Exprnfe in 1794 and 1807, and adding the arrival of 
five Infoutry Regiments afterwards, the Iucreafe of Expenfe’ may be elti- 


vmatedat- =~ = = = £800,000 
‘COMPANY’s:— 
15 Regiments at Bengal - - - £:900,000 
NATIVE INFANTRY - -4 13 - D* - stMedres - - - 624,000 
3 - D® -atBombay - - - 210,000 
e —_—— 1,734,000 
aie Gavane’. { 6 Regiments at Bengel - - - £.182,500 
3+ D’ -etMadras - - ~- 98,000 
: ——— 280,500 
EUROPEAN ARTILLERY and LASCARS:— , 
ncreafed Expenfe between April 1794.and April 1807 = == == = 74,500 
WORSE ARTILLERY - “= - - - - - - + 2 + © 84500 
3 £2,925,500 
Dedud Decreate of 3 Regiments of Company’s EUROPEAN INFANTRY - 170,500 
i 
noleafe between 1794 and 1807. 
‘General Staff and Staffat Stations (exclufive of what is incladed above in the fum of £350,000) - 
Medical EQablihments - - - - - - - + « = 3 Rts 
Miliary Ofies - - ee 2 ee ee ee 
Anvalids end Supernumeraries = = 0 ee ee ee 
4rregular or Independent Corps Elcorty&& = = = = = = 5 ee 


Gontingnig 9 ee ee ee ee et ee 


350,000 


se opti PE Mowe aor 
the Afairs of TEAST IND EA COMPANY. 5 


-Appendix, No, 61, 
TPereemgarative ABSTRACT ACCOUNT of the EXPENSH of the CIVIL ESTABLISHMENTS at the 
Three PRESIDENCIES in INDIA, in 1794, 1807, and 1808. 
= ae 


1794. 1807. 


EUROPEANS, 
qf Pram 
Bl g.sterting. 
B 
g 
en 
- 2,088) 310,412 468,374 681,089 
- 5,189], $33,407 610,597 603,619 
- 2,206] 506,246 525,842 562,158 
- 8,296] 230,651 |} 320,919 330,186 
= $7,609 49,768 50,954 
TOTAL - - - 1,418,525 2,228,606 
Ceded Provinces = - vee 431,813 
Conquered D~ ~~ ae 
TOTAL - - - 1,418,325 , 50,678} 2,816,188 536 {52,715} 3,216,615 


- =| 298,027 


190,358 [~~ 


saoieif- - - =| 997,978 
103393 1- - - +] 123,258 
50,735 f= ~ oa 51,893 
7070 - + + | 80 
10,500} =~ = 2] 10892 
_———— —, 
TOTAL - - - 178,081 = =f sssarz fe - + +4 720,809 


= =} 582,505 


==} 565,683 =~ 


12,998 


191,035 + =|] 148,860 f}- -} ~~ 


‘As it may be prefumed that the varjations in Expenfe in the three Periads arife in fome 
degree from the variation in the Numbers of Servants employed, it was intended to fiate 
thofe Numbers, both of Europeans andi Natives, but the Accounts receiveu frum Madras do 


«not afford the means of fo doing. 
Ccontina?) 


330 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT front the Selest Conimittee on 


7 


Appendix, No. 61—continued. 


1807. * 1808. 
EUROPEANS. EUROPEANS. | 
| Per Ann. < Per Ann. |} z FH a i Per Ana, 
&. Sterling. = ll g.Srerting, | £ | Ey L. stenting 
BOMBAY. | g Pei g | ge] a | 
z 1 6 p “ | 
i 
Gantlis S-38a~ 3 62,628 64,901 | 34 | 296 | 70949 
i 
Judicial- - - - - 1,375 700 32,104 6 iL 20 31,238 
j | 
Revenue- - - - - 21,000 | 11 950 }- 21,392) 6 6 | gi | 21,255 
q 
| 
Commercial - - - 1,635 7 1 7,8¢0 | 
: 
Marine - - - - - 45,017 3 69,264 
TOTAL - - - 131,655 || 56 200,506 
Ceded and Conquered | 15 29,968 | 14. 
TOTAL - - -{ 81 161,623 


Eaft India Houfe, } (Errors excepted.) 


Sd April 1810. , 
(Signed) IV" Wricht, 
# Auditor of India Accounts. 


Appendix, No. 62, Estraé 


‘the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY.’ 334 


Appendix, No. 62. 


Extra Letter from the Court of Diregtors to the Governor General in Council at 
Bengal (Public Department); dated 13th May 1807. 


Par.2. IN confidering the various eftablifhments under your government, our attention 
has beca drawn to thofe of the Marine Department, which we have recently had under our 
‘examination, in order to afcertain if the prefent expenfe thereof is not capable of reduction, 
or if'a Revenue may not be juftly derived to the Company from the charge now made for 
piloting fhips and veffels into and out of the river Hooghly, or from cther fources conietted 
with the navigation of the river, or with the Marine Department geacrally. 

3. The adoption of meafures by which Government, in return for advantages afforded. to 
the community at the public expenfe, may derive a proportion, of benefit, by the impofition 
of duties or, by fuck other means as are beft applicable to the purpofe, appears to us to be at 
all times juit and reafonuble, and it is more particularly fo in the prefent fiate of our 
affairs, whea every means within reach fhould be reforted to, as well to cilect a reduétion 
of expenfe, as improvement of the Revenue; on thefe grounds we have been induced to 
direét our attention to the Marine Eftablifhment. * 

4. The ordinary expente of the Marine in 1804-5 was S* R° 6,60,000, including the gun 
els, but exclulive of the eftablifhment of the Bombay cruizers or otlier armed velfels. 

5. OF the fam above mentioned, the eflablifhment of twelve pilot vetlels, with the offices 
immediatcly connected therewith, conftitutes about one-half; the expenfe of the veftels 
alone was S* Rt 2,34,000, including wages, fores, provifions and repairs : it is cur-intention to ~ 
enter into fone detail of this branch, as well in regard to the mede of conducting the 
bufinels appertaining thereto, as _to the collections and diftribution of the money received 
for piloting vellels ; for we are of opinion that both are capable of improvement. : 

6. We underftand that the pilotage is calculated according to the number of feet of 
water a fhip or vellel draws; foreigners, except the Americans, paying doubic the rates 
charged to Englifh veffels; the pilotage to an Knglith thip of 800 tons, in and out of the 
river, with the charges for boattwain, feadfmen, tow boats and warping the ship, anounts 
to about S* Ks 1500, cach voyage fhe makes to Calcutta. 

7. The amount of the collections on thefe accounts, we are informed, is upwards of three 
of Rupees per annum; the greateft part of which is diftributed among the pilots, 
matters and mates, belonging to the pilot {chooners ; the charges for tow boats and warping’ 
the fhips are received by the Mafter Attendant, who maintains the eftablifhment.of tox-boats 
ufed for thefe purpofes: one-fourth of the collections for piloting foreign veflels is‘reccived 
by the Company, and forms, with fome other fimall colleétions, the fund for penfions to the 
pilots and others belonging to the [chooners. : 

8. According to the information before us, cach pilot receives annually, in addition to the . 
pay from the Company of 1200 R* per annum, about 12,000 R? trom the pilotage collec- 
tions; and cach matter, in addition to his pay of S* K+ 840 per annum, about S* h’ 4,000 + 
fome calculations have caitied their reccipts even beyond thefe fums; as the collections are 
reecived and diltributed by the Marine Paymafter, you can without difficulty afecrtain the 
exad fam received by cach defeription of perfons in the pilot fervice ; but whatever be the 
amount, itis certain that the Company, whe bear ail the expente, derive no bencfit from the © 
collections for pilotage. : 

9. We apprehend fach large allowances to men of the defeription of thofe forming the 
prefent Pilot Eftablifhment, cannot-bit be productive ‘of bad ctiects. Seamen who defert 
from the Company’s or other fhips, or who find their way by other means into Calcutta, . 


are, we underftand, received into the pilot ferviec, where they rife to boatfwains, mates, 
matters and pilots; wlren in the two latter ftations, they receive allowances fo ample to men 


in their clafs of life, as to encourage diffipation and idlenefs. We have been informed that 
itis not unufual for feveral of the pilot {chooners to lie idle off Calcutta while ihips are in 
the roads, and off the Sandheads, 1m diftrels for want of their affiftance ; aud we find on your 
records numerous inftances of complaints of drunkennefs, inactivity and i acity, wnong 
the pilots, matters, &e. which have frequently been followed by difmifion from the fer 
vice of the parties complained of We fhoald inter, from thefe cireumfiances, that there is a 
great want of difcipline in the pilot fervice, and it is evident that it requires reform, and - 
more efficicut regulations for its management. 

10, As # principal ftep towards improvement in the Pilot Eftablifiment, we fhall ufe our 
endeavours to procure a number of boys from Chrift’s Hofpital, or from fome other feminary 
wherein they may have received the requifite education, to be apprentices for a certain ter 
of years; atter which they may be appoitited mates in the pilot veflels, and rife gradually to 
matters and pilots.” The fervice would thus, in the courfe of a few years, confitt of well 
educated dad] fcientific men, inftead, as at prefent, of the idle, diflipated and ignorant. 

11, Should we meet with difappointment in procaring lads of the foregomg defcription, 
we fhall confider of the propricty of appointing volunteers for the pilot fervice, in like 
manner as for the Bombay Marine. : oe 

12, From what is obferved above, we are of opinion that the number of pilot veffels now. 
on the eftablifhment is greater than veceflary ; we therefore dircét that you take the fame inta 
confideration, and make fuch reduction therein as may be confiftent with a due attention to 
the navigation and commerce of the port ; or report to us yonr fentiments, if they {hall bein: 
oppofition to our own upon this point. : 

(363. 4P ‘ As 


. $32 APPENDIX to the Sccond REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


13. As the following Rules, for conducting the pilot fervice, appear to us effential, we dire 
that they be eftablifhed. ¢ 
Firft. That it be a ftanding regulation that no pilot veflel proceed higher up the river than 


Kelgerce, -unlefs fhe requ: docking, or except it be with onc of His Majefty’s or the 
Companys thips, or an 


nt thip of Soo tons and upwards. Should the pilot deem it 
necellary for the {chooner to proceed with thefe as far up the river as Mud Point or 
Diamond Yarbour, he 


is to be allowed fo to proceeds but on arriving at either of thote 


Places, he is to return again to the Offing. 
Second. t, with the voing exceptions, no pilot {choonc? come in from fea unlefs in 


charge of the fourth fhip or vettel, and having then only the mate on board. 
Th Th cr repleniihing the flock of water and provifions at Kedgerce, where a 
fablifhed, cach fchooner fhail proceed again dor the Roads with fuch pilots as 


fea, frall have on board two months water and 


marine ttores 
8. This would 


tor {hips coming into the x 
afford confiderable ae 


regulations -aad avith due attention to fubordiaation and 
dife ¢ pilot fervi € conceive a confiderable improvement will be effected, 
to the manifelt advantage of the thipping navigating the river. 

And’being of opinion that the prefent mode of diftributing the pilotage collections is 
sabjectionable, we d that in future the charges to the fhipping, for piiotage, &e. .be col- 
Apeted for the Company, and that a fixed monthly falary be paid to the pilots, mates, Ke. at 
athe following rates : 


Each Pilot.- - 


- S*R*700 per Me. 
—— Mattr - - - 270 — 
—— Mate - - ~ 156 
— Boatfwain - - 60 —— 


16. The mode in which the pilotage is now charged appearsto us to require alteration, 
as the rate at prefent is the fame whether the fhip goes to Diamond Harbour or to Calcutta, 
-and whether the pilat is employed three days or three weeks; nor is any difference made 
ieteen the foutn-wett Montoon of feyen months duration, and the.remaining five months of 
-the year, 

2. Toobviate thefe defeéts, we think it will be advifzble to proportion the pilotage col- 
‘Actions to the tonnage of the fhips or vellels, and .the diftance they are conveyed up the 
aiver-urder the direction‘of the pilot; thus a veffel of 100 tons burthen to Saugur fhould 
wpay 50 Rupees, to Kedgeree 55 Rupecs, and fo on swith a fixed addition as they pro- 
ceed higher up the river. Vellels exceeding 100 tons to pay an. inereafe of.ene Anna per 
- ton for the excels, cach of the diftances ftated: thefe rates are to-be in force as to vellels 


19. Having thus detailed our fentiments upon thofe points which attach more particularly 
to the Pilot Kttablithment, we proceed toenumerate fuch other branches, connected with the 
navigation of the river, as have fallen under.our obfervation. 

20. The diftribution ef a fufficient number of mooring chains, at proper ftations, throughout 
the navigable part.of the river Hooghiy, including the anchorage off Calcutta and the Saugur 
Road, appears likely to be productive of great advantage to the Shipping importing into the 


siver, as securing them from the. many dangers to which they are fubjected in the uavigation 
thereof; and we have no doubt the owners would.readily pay a moderate -rate for.the ufe.of 

thefe chains, according to their tonnage. ° 
21. Asa meafure of farther fafety to the fhipping, .we-confider it-expedient.that a number 
of warp boats fhonld be kept in readinefs to accompany them in and out of.the-river, inftead 
of the tow beats now in ufe, which we apprehend are of very little fervice, and fhould be dif- 
continued to the large fhips; the warp Boats to be of adarge fize and-better conttruction al- 
together, and to be provided with a preper anchor and hawler forthe affiftance of fhips ; .thefe 
boats to keep with a fhip at half hawier diftance on the off fide.from any dangerous paflage, 
fo as to enable her to haul off inftantly If fhe touched the ground ; they would likewife keep 
the thipping clear of each other, and might warp them-to the mooring chzins, and thus prove 
of great fervice to the thipping in the river. Yor defraying the expenfe of thefe boats a 
dinall duty -might be levied puthe fhipping; which, from the alliftence and accommodation 
> they 


the’ Affaire of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 333 


they would afford, we have no doubt would .be cheerfully paid. We fubjoin a Statement of 
«he propofed dimentions of fuch boats, and:a fketch.of their diftribution. : 
22. The next point we have to meation,-concerning the fafcty and proteCion of the fhip- 

is the cretion of a light-honfe on Point Palmyras; a meafure which’ would enable 
gators in the S. W. Montoon to bring their fhips, at night, within the reef of the Point 
h fafety, and off.the mouth of the river Kanka or Kanika; within or at the ertrance of 
avhich the pilot vetlels might be ftationed with the beft effects. We ‘believe the erection of a , 
light-houfe on this {pot was, fome years patt, fubmitted to the attention of your Government; 
‘but, poflibly on account ofthe difkeulty attending fuch a plan, from the country not being 
at the fime in our poffeition, was relinquifhed. As this objection is now removed, and we have 
obtained pofleflion of that part of the-coaft, it feems to us, from every information we have 
een able to precure, that the mcafure would in every view be highly advifeable. 

23. Another light-houfe on Saugur [flund would producc advantages nearly fimilar in the 
NE. Montoon, : 5 

24. ‘The expenfe of erecting thee light-houfes, we apprehend, would not be of confiderable 
ameunt; the lanterns and other apparatus muft of courfe be fent from.this country; and as 
i nt of the charges attendant thereon, as wellin the firft coft asin the eftablifi- 
gent required, a moderate daty anay be levied upon the fhipping availing themfcives of the 
sevident benefits that rauft be derived to them, 2 
25. The fupply cf pure and wholefome water to the Sipping importing into the River 

‘ly is obvioufly aa e! ¢ have given particular atten~ 


‘the river a conftant fupply of pure and wholeforie water, is unneceflary ;” does not appear 
to us to be fuch as from the real importance of the fubject we fhould have expected ; for we 
cannot fuppofe that of a Board of twelve profeffional men, cleven members, all of whom muft 
have: been well acquainted with the circumflances on which they reported, would have given 
their opinion that defects exiftcd in the fyftem of procuring water, without a real foundation 
for their aflertions. 

26. The plan that has occurred to us as likely to remove the objections to the -prefent mode 
of obtaining water for the {iipping, is by forming one or more relervoirs, to be fupplied from 
the Loll Dicky or Great Tank ; water to be conveyed from the refervoirs, through iron 
pipes, to boats to be employed in carrying it te the fhips and veffels down the river; the 
expenfe of this meafure to be repaid to the Company by a charge for the water fo fupplied, 

* at a.certain rate per ton. ‘ : <<. 

. 27. We obferve on the Proceedings of the Marine Board, in July 1708, a Statement of © 
the expenfe of fupplying water to the Europe thips fronr November 1797 to 31f¢ May 1798; 
by which it appears the average was at the rate of 10 gallons for a Rupee. Gn that occafion 
‘the Board forwarded an Addrefs to the Governor General and Council, ftating ‘the incon- 
-veniences attending. the mede of fupplying water, with a propofal for building a -refervoir 
.at Kedgeree fer fupplying. water to ips lying at Saugur when the foutherly winds 
orend it difficult for-boats and floops to get down the ziver; you will refer to this when 
-the fabjeee ‘comes before you cunder our. cent orders, aa 

28. We compute that feveral thoufands of country craft, including fnows, brig: and floops, 
make one voyage to Calcutta in the courfe of the year ; which are exempt from pilotage and 
every other. defcription of duty ; it feemsreafonable, however, that according to ‘the eftablifhed 
caftom at the native ports in India, thefewelfels flhould pay a {mall duty, under the denomi; 
nation:of an Anchorage Fee, 5 ‘ 

29. The thips, veffels and fmall craft, fhould take out paffports and regifters, paying an 
eftablifhed. fee for the fame. We believe this was formerly done, and that the fees were 

” -received.by fome of our fervants ; but, in confideratior of the liberal falaries now given, if the 
fees are colle@ed, they are to-be brought to the Company's orcdit; if no fees are taken aw 
thete accounts, they are to be eftablifhed in future. e 

0. The fees now paid on port clearances and manifefts are the emoluments of the 
‘Collector of Cuftoms. We-confider the commiffion en the-Caitoms now drawn by the Collector, 
as. affording. an ample remuneration for-his fervices ; and-therefore dire& that the fecs on 
:port.clearances and manifetts.be in-tuture brought to the Company's credit. . 
gt When hips lofe their anchors in the river.the Master Attcadant-profits by the reco~ 
etics; we propofe, ‘in future, thatthe warp boats fhall be ufed for the purpote of recovering 
anchors, and. that all anchors fo recoseréd thail be retaraed to'the ewners on their paying to 
the Company a fixed advanee prime coft;. a meafnre of this natare, at the fame 
time that it benefits the Company iw a final] degree, is of nm advantage to-the owners, 


and fhews our attention to theix interes, which muf be gratifying te them, od 


a2. The _ 


334 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT. ‘ from the Sele&t Committee on 


32. The fales of marine ftores, as at prefent conducted, appears to require reform ; we 
‘oblerve thefe are made at certain fixed periods, and from the lateft accounts before us we 
are concerned to find a confiderable tots bas accrued upon the invoice price of the ftorcs. 
TL occurs to us that the better mode of difpofing of our marine flores, would be by fixing a 
certain advance upon the invoice price, at which rate they might at any time be ifved to all 
purehafers requiring them; and with a view of further facilitating the difpofal of the mariue 
fiores, fuch of them as were required for the, ufe of the fhips or veilels in the river might be 
fent on the Company’s pilot {chooners. It may probably alfo be adviluble to eftablith Depots 
of thefe ftores at different fiations down the river, whence they night be more readily fur- 
nifhed to tlie fhipping in want of them. 

33. From the adopticn of regulations upon. the foregoing or fimilar principles, we can 
have no donbt that a confiderable Revenue would accrue to the Company, and that tke * 
navigation of the river would at the fame time be much improved, to th ent advantage 
of the community at larg: 

34. ‘Tne Reveaue muit of courfe depend upon.the amount of tonnage of the fhips and 
vellels importing into the river, and the rates and duties to be levied on the fhipping ; with 
regard to the latter, it occurs to us that the following might be eftablifhed, 

33» For.the uf of the mooring chains, according to the fize, and the feafons of the year, 
the accompanying Table will thé the ftations for the chains and rates of hire. 

36. For the warp bouts fer large fhips, 4 Annas per ton, or according to the time they 
are employed. 

37. For the light-houfe duties en large fhips, floops, fuows and brigs, two Annas per ton 
for each light-houfe. 

38. For the fupply of water to larger fhips, fuppofing they require water equal to § of 
their tonnage, at an eftimated average of S* K* 5 per ton; and for inows, floops, and other 
fquare rigged vellels, calculating four tons of water each, at 1 Rupee per.ton. 

39. For anchorage fees on vellels not requiring Pilotage, four Annas per ton. 

40. For fees on annual paflports and regifters for large and fimall vellels, four Annas 


per ton. 5 - 
41. For fees on regifters for fmall craft navigating the river below Calcutta, onc Anna 
per ton. 


42. For port clearances and manifetts, five Sicca Rupees cach per 100 tons. 

43. For anchors recovered, 25 per cent. on the prime coft, to be charged the owners. 

44. For marine ftores fold or fupplied to the thippiug, 25 per cent. on the invoice 

rice. : t 
n 45. "The Revenue derived from thefe fources and from the pilotage collections, after. paying 
the falaries of the pilots, &c. muit, as we have already obferved, be confiderable ;_and,. upon 
the beft calculation we can form of the tonnage of the thips and veflels of all deferiptions 
reforting to the port of Calcutta, we fhould be difpéfed to think it not over-rated.at eight 
lacks of Sicca Rupees; but wifhing, upon the cflablithment of what may be confidered as a 
new fyfieny, to form our gomputation upon the moft moderate feale, we fhall take the pro~ 
bable Revenue at four lacks of Sicca Rupees. Still this fum is an objet worthy of attention 
ia the pre’ of our afftirs ; and it is the more fo, becaufe the meafures from which we, 
calculate its production are at once advantageous to the Company, and beneficial to: the 
iaterefts of thofe who are fubject to their’Government in Bengal ; for, under ali the defects: 
af the prefent fyftem, we have no doubt that the charge now incurred for fhips of the larger 

ize exceed thole propofed to be eftablithed under various and evident improvements. 

__46. We are aware that expenfe muft be incurred, in the outfet of the arrangement, in the 
purchafe of mooring chains, building boats, cresting light-houfes, aud on other accounts 
incidental thereto; but we are of opinion thefe ferviees will not require the difburfement of 
amore tuan one year’s collections; with regard to inooring chains, we obferve by your Marine. 
Storekeeper’s books, there are feveral lying in ftore at Calcutta, which will now be brought 
into ufe; and we fhall tend out fuch further fupply ag may he necellary to complete the, 
anaibe! a belaid down ut the ceerene eaen rs ee : 

47. Refpedting the building of the light-houfes, you will give fuch ordergas may appear: 
nef caleatpeed a the ends ie view) pa ae with 7 due segerd to economy; we ‘hale as) 
already.obferved, fend out the lantern parts for them, ‘with proper directions for putting 
them up, and we conclude perlons may be found on the {pot who will be capable of-under- 
taking that bufinels from the direCtions to be forwarded. 

. 48. You will proceed, without delay, in the adoption of meafures for carrying into effect: 
the general principles laid down in the foregoing paragraphs. With regard to the particular 
points relating tu the impofition of duties therein enumerated, you will confider them rather 
as conveying our ideas in.an outline, than as abfolute dire¢tions; in prepofing the rates of: 
the various dutics to be levied, we have proceeded upo: the beft information we could obtain 
upon the fabject ; this part, however, you will exa:mineinto with particular attention, in 
order to atcertain with precifion the quantum of duty that may. be levied, confiftently with.. 
the objects in view, by our orders now given ; viz. the foundation of a Reyenueto the Com- 
pany, and the advantage of the community in refpeét to thé navigation of the river ;-and in 
doing this you willconfider the propriety of:fixing a heavier duty to be paid by foreigners 
than that impofed on veffels under Englifh colours, according to the practice regarding 
pilotage; due care being at the fame time taken, that in any refpeét the duties are not fo 
sear ‘as to hazard the lofs of the trade to the port of Caleutta, and ‘its refort to foreign 
fettlements. Oe Z oe % : 


49: While 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 335 


49. While the principles of the fore: 


i p | going plan are under your confideration, you will give- 
Your attention to inch other improvements of the port of Calcutta, aad of the Revenue wich 
inay be derived to the Company ia confeguence, as may fuggeft themfelves from the local 
invettigation which will take ptace in conformity with thefe our Orders; and you will direét 
that thele be carried into eflcet at the fame time with the arrangements now pointed out. 
Sheeld any ferious objestions occur to you to the adoption of any particular item of the 
regulations we have determiaed on, you will poftpone carrying tle fame into eliect until a 
referer made for cur ultimate decition. 
probably, of obtaining the moft compicte information upon the various 


ed in fhipp 


em to 
you. wil iy a 


Peary 
of this Committee, 


Appendix, No. 63. 


‘Extrad Leiter from the Governor in Council at Fort St. George (Revenne Department) : 
dated 23d November 1794. 


Para. 1.—HAVING reccived advice of the approaching difps 
from Bengal, we take the opportunity by them of fading your 
of our Prefident’s Minute, at a Mecting on the 24th ultine, tating his dicrdihip’s reafons 
for propofing an immediate abolition of the Chicfihips of Mafulipatam and rapatan 
as well as the Refidency of Gangam, in which we entirely concurred, and hi 1 COR} 
Sequence placed your valuable poffeflions in that quarter im feparate divifions, under the 
charge of nine Collectors. We alto tranfimit, for the information of your Honourable 
Court, a copy of the Proclamation we thought it neceflary to publif on the occafion 
throughout the Circars, anda copy of the Itevenue Board’s Inftructions to the Collegoxs,. 
with other papers relating to the arrangement, 


n of Leven of your fhigs 
cnourable Court aeopy 


Appendix, No. 64. 


Extracts Letters from the Governor General in Council at Bengal (Public Depart- 
ment); dated 26th March 1786, and igth February 1787. 


45. HAVING lately received a Letter from Captain Franeis Light, giving an account of 
the Malays, the conquefts of the Dutch over fome of their Princes, the intrigues ofthe 
French, and the fituation_of the trade to the eaftward; with many Letters from the Princes 
of thefe countries to the Governor General, with which he was charged; alfo a Grant of the 
Hland of Pinang to the Englith Eatt India Company, from the King of Queda; we took 
fhe fame into confideration, with the Orders of your Secret Committce, dated in Oc&o- 

r 1780. : 

46. Captain Light reprefents that the fland of Pinang, lying in the Streights of Mataces, 
in latitude 5° 20’ north, has an excellent port en the eatt fide, where proviions of ail kinds 
are to be procured in abundance ; that it is convenient for fhips bound to China from all 
parts of India, and is fo well fituated that it matt, if not loaded with impotitions and re- 
diriétions, foon become the emporium of ‘the eattern trade. 

47. This ifland is fo peculiarly adapted asa mercantile {tution for veilels from all the 
Malay ports, the Moluccas, the Philippine JMlands, and Borneo, that we did not hefitate to 
accept the King of Queda’s Grant; as by an eftablifiunent properly feeured at this place, 
the Bengal trade with that of China willbe connected. We sre fully convinced, from the 
consluct of the Dutch, that it is become more neceflary tha ever Yor us to heve a pert 
where fhips of our nation may mect the eaftern merchants, as well for the promotion of 
that valuable commerce, as to afford a windward ftation of reirefhment and repair to the 
King’s, the Company's, and the country fhips. 

48. The depth and flow of water in the harbour, the facility of approach end retreat to 
fhips-of all burthens and at all feafons, together with the nature of tie foil aud produdtions, | 
are reprefented by Captain Light to be fuch as have convinced us this fituation is fuperiar 
to all others. It lics right in the track of the China fips from Bombay, Madras and 
Bengal, and the communication with Pinang and the Prefidencics of Bengal and Madras 
is at all times open, and not more than a moath or fix. weeks, in the mest unfavourable 
feafon, is neceflary to fend or receive advices from both. 

49. The poffeltion of this ifland cannot fail of being of the greateft utility to anv 
mutime Power in liviia, and we believe it to be a more eligible fituation in te northerly 
Monfoons than even Bombay; as it aflords a ftation from which his Majefty’s Squadron 
may at any featon proceed to the fupport of the Company’s Sctilements on the Malabar 
Coat, the Coromandel Coatt, or to any port in the Bay of Bengal, with great eate and 
quickneis; which cannot be done citicr from ‘Trincomalee or Bosubay; and faips of all 

363. 4Q ‘purthens 


336 APPENDIX #o the Sccond REPORT from the Sclo& Committee on 


Ravenfworth, and Captain Roddam difcharged his pilot on the 2d infant. 

54. Captain Roddam has been directed, after landing the troops, to proceed to Fort 
Marlbro’, where he will receive on board 150 Caflries ior Prince of Wales land, to be 
delivered to Captain Light for the purpofe of clearing the country; and having performed 

this fervice he is to return back to this place; from whence we purpofe to difpatch him for 
‘England carly in Auguf. This will afford you an early cargo, and fave the expenfe of 
taking up a packet at that fcafon. 

55. We muft confels it was with great relutance we adopted meafures which caufed the 
Company an immediate increafe of expenfe on a profpedct of diftant reimburfement, at a 
time when every fund is appropriated to anfwer a varicty of demands; but the plan has 
gone too far to be haiiily retracted, and the ufurpations of the Dutch in thofe parts, added 
to the great increafe of the Company's trade to China, rendered a Settlement in the 
Streights of Malacca more requifite than ever. 

56. The objects which we expect by this Settlement are both commercial and political ; 
.to coancét the Bengal and China trade, and procure a windward port during the north-eaft 
Monfoon, for the refrethment and repair of the King’s fhips in time of war. How far we 
may be juitified in thefe expe@tations time and experience can alone determine. 

57. We do not look upon the eaftern trade as a fource from whence much fpecie can be 
drawn into this country, but the advantages to be expected from it for the Company are; 
principally, by its becoming more extenfively than at prefent a mart for the barter of 
‘opium and the productions of Bengal,-for tin, pepper and other commodities, to be applied 
as funds in the Uhinefe markets for the purchuie of tea, inflead of the ruinous export of 
fpecie from this country, as well as from Europe. 

58. Captain Light having detailed the. political fituation of the Native Powers around 
him, requefted our orders, in coufequence of repeated epplications for affiftance from the 
King of Queda and other Princes, who dreaded an attack from the Siamefe Forces ; to this 
we peremptorily directed him to refufe compliance with the folicitations of either party, 
but at the fame time inftru&ted him to endeavour to cultivate the good will of all, declaring 

, that the defence of the ifland mutt be his fole object: we, however, informed Captain Light 
that the King of Queda was entitled to fome pecuniary confideration for his grant of the 
ifland, which we authorized him to pay by inftalments. 

59. Not concurring in the propriety of granting pailes to the Malay Prows, which Captain 
Light recommended in order to obtain greater commercial benefits, by affording our pros 
tection againft the exactions of the Dutch, we forbade it; for although we do not admit 
many of the exclufive privileges claimed by that nation in the eaftern feas, yet in cafe 
‘of their being arrogated before we authorized the Englith colours to be hoified, we con- 
fidered it neceffary to guard againft their being infulted; we-have, however, permitted 
Captain Light to grant papers to fuch veffels as belong to perfons actually inhabitants of the 
iflund, who fhall have takea the oaths of allegiance according to the tenets of their 


xeligion. i 
60. We 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 337 


-6o0, We have ordered Mr. Macdonald, an Officer upon this Eftablithment, but on fervice 
at Fort Marlbro’, to proceed to Prince of Wales land and furvey the barbour. From his 
Report we may be better enabled to judge bow far this place will anfiver for the reception 
and repair of thips of war, and whether it will ferve as a place of deience. 

61. We have likewife direed Captain Light to tranimit us particular accounts of the 
exports and imports of goods, with the prices they bear; and fuch further information as 
anay enable us to afcertain how far the Settleanent will anfwer our expeciations in a com- 
mercial point of view. 

62, Having this information before us. we fhall be enabled to come to a final determina- 
tion, whether it will be prudent to continne or withdraw the Settlement altogether. 

63. We have authorized Captain Light to receive fuch Colonifts as he may judge ex- 
pedient; to allot fuci a portion of !and to each family as cireunftances would adinit; and, as 
an encouragement to trade, we have made the port free to all nations, and peremptorily 
forbade his levying any kind of duty or tax on goods exported or imported. 


——— 
Appendix, No. 65. 


Extra& Letter from Court’ of DireGtors, to the Governor General in Council at Bengal, 
(Public Department) ; dated gift Auguft 1801. 


Para. 8. THE nest place where'a material reduction may be effected, is in the Eftablifh- 
mentof Fort Marlbro’. It appears by the accounts of that Kefidency for the years, 1797-8 and 
1798-9, the lateft we have received, that the Company have fuffered an annual lols of above 
£.87,000, after making allowance for the profits derived from the purchafe of pepper 

roduce, 
i g. Weare decidedly of opinion that no reafon exitis to juftify our maintaining this Scttle- 
ment at fo enormous an expenie ; its chief importance to the Company is in a commercial 
view, and in this view it is evident we have been very confiderable loiers, from the fmall 
quantity of pepper fupplied, and the increafing charges of the Eftablifhment in every 
ranch, 

10. It was therefore a matter of fome doubt with us, whether it might not be expedient 
to withdraw our Settlements on the Weft Coaft of Sumatra altogether; againit this determina- 
tion, however, fome arguments of a political nature occurred, which appear to us of too 
much weight to juftily that decifion. 

11. After mature ‘confideration we have come to the refolution of making very con- 
fiderable reductions in the Eftablifhment at Fort Marlbro’, and of withdrawing the fubordi- 
nate Refidencies in general, and the following appears to us to be a larger Eftablifhment than 
can be required for the purpofe of collecting the Pepper for Europe or China; but we have 
allowed a greater number of Affiftants for the prefent than we think neceflary for a perma- 
nent Eftabiithment, in order to make immediate provifion, as far as we can with Propriety, 
for the Servants now at Fort Marlbro’; but as we are decidedly of opinion that a Refident, 
with four Affiftants, will be fufficient, the Eftablithment is to be reduced to that number as 


vacancies occur, viz. 
One.1ft Affiftant, 
One 2d Affiftant, 
Two Junior Affiftants or Writers. 
ESTABLISHMENT for Fort Marlbro’. : 
CIVIL. + Dollars, 


Refident to have a Houfe, but to be reftri€ted from trading in Pepper. Salary 15,000. 
aft Affiftant - - - - - = a 6,000 
2d Atlifiant - - - - - - i a ee 4,000 
gd Alflifiant -  - - - oe eo) Ad) Aes Se Se Oe 3,000 
gADant 2-2. 1s Mae (a, 2 oe Uke ee 3,000 
Four Writers, at 1800 Dollars each - - - : - - ~ - 7,200 


Total Civil - ~ 37,200 
: MILITARY. Pet Annum, 
1 Captain Artillery Pay and Allowance = - 


1 Lieutenant, Infantry = ee ee = 8,198 — — 
aEnfign = = = st 8 et 8954 
1 Subadar - - - - - = - - 984 —-— 
aJemautdar = = ee tt 8 
5 Havildars, - - = = = each S*Rt228 - .1,140 — — 
5Naicks - - - - - - - - 304 - puee —— 
100 Sepoys - 2 - = = = 10 = 10,200:— — 
1 ‘Anne Surgeon. = RS = ssf a, 


1 Serjeant Major 
j Carcied forward 37200 


338 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT from the Scleét Committee on 


Brought. forward 37200 
Artillery. Per Annum. 
720 — — 
648 — — 
1,200 — — 
4947 8 — 
168 — — 
144 — — 
192 — — 
“ 138 — — 
- - soe - - at Sicach 1,620 — — 


crjeants - 
als - 


eae 
vad 


ens 
nag 


Matter Serjeant (non-effective) - 


teen eenes 


“= S*R* 38,350 — — 
Dollar - - Dollars 19,165 


acies, Civil and 1 
ute bounds, fippoled awil 


1 not exceed 


amc! 51273, 


Total Dollars 61,640 


12. The Eftablifament is to be formed with as little delay as poffible, and, as at prefent, is 
sto be fubject to your orders and control in every refpedct. 

13. There mutt, we conceive, be houfes belonging tothe Company, more than fufficient to 
accommodate the foregoing Eftablifhment of Civil Servants and Military Gftic f 
{mall allowance may be made for houfe rent; there are alfo, we egnelude, barracks, 
the troops ; the Pepper Godowns mut of courie be kept up, but the greateft fragality mu 
be obierved in the repairs of houfes or buildings of every denomination, or in tuch allow- 
ances as may be granted for fepairs ; and after the reduction takes place no houfes are to 
be kept at the Company’s cxpenfe, but {uch as are abjolutely required for the refidence of 
the Servants on the new Eftablifhment. 

14. The Refidencies at the Out-Settlements are to be withdrawn in general ; but we leave 
it to you to continue, if you think it neceffary, a finall poft at Pods Peinang near the Straits 
of Sunda, and at Tappanooly, where afew native troops may be ftationed to protect the 

property of native or Englith Merchants; alfo to continue for the prefent a fimall force at 
adang ; thefe are to be taken from the Eftablithment ‘before directed. 

15. As the Pepper Settlement will be withdrawn, every encouragement isto be given to 
the natives to tranfport the pepper produced in their feveral diftriéts, in their own boats, to 
Fort Marlbro’; where it fhould be paid for at a fair market price: if it be found neceflary to 
-employ a veffel or boats belonging to the Company, this muft:be done upon fuch a feale 
-of economy. as may ftill leave a profit on the purchafe of the pepper. 

16. The pay and allowances to the Military include full Batta, which is the ‘higheft rate 
that can be admitted in that refpect. 

17. It will be ncceffary to relieve the detachment at certain’ intervals. 

18. We leave the appointment of the Refident and Affiftants to you, | 
may be taken from the Servants now there, unle{s you fee fome folid obj 
-gard to the Civil Servants who will become fupernumerary by thefe orders, on mature con- 
dideration we have refolved, that as foon as we have legal authority for fo doing, they fhall 
be transferred to the Madras Eftabtifhment ; as from the great addition of territory annexed 
to that Government, there appears to be fufficient room for the employment of an additional 
number of Servants ; but the Fort Marlbro’ fupernumerarics are to be placed, in regard to 
their feversl ranks, with a difference of five years dtanding below the Fort St. George 
Servants; the Writers at ort Marlbro’ who arc under 22 years of age may be fent to Fort 
‘St. George immediately, and rank under the Fort St. George Writers of the prefent featon; 
but this is to extend only to fuch as are of European parents, both father and mother. . 

19. And with regard to the’Servants above the rank of Writers, the transfer is in like 
manner to exténd only to‘fuch as are born of European parents, both father and mother; 
thofe who are not fo, mutt remain at Fort Marlbro’ upon their prefent allowances, gecording 
to their sank, except thofe who you think proper to appoint Alliftants to the Refident ; an 
no Servants can be transferred, who, from the inveftigation now making, may be found un- 
Worthy of future employments in our fervice; thefe muft of courfe wait our final decifion on 
their conduct seks 

eo. Until the transfer.can be made the fupernumerary are to’ be allowed to draw their 
prefent i y, cliet, and hoafe rent, according to their ranks. * 

21. The (ums outitanding on Loans from the Bank muft be called in as foon as pofiible ; 
but in this, as well as the inferior details of arrangement, we leave you to act according to 
your diferetion, * ' ; . 

22. In giving our directions upon this fubject, we have not paffed unnoticed the communi- 
cation, in your Public Letter of the 16th February laft, of the inftractions tent to the Com- 
miffioner, in view to the final arrangement for the management of our aifairs ou the Weft 
Coatt of Sumatra; but, from a firm conviction that a rad reform is abluiutely and imme- 
diately neceflary, we think proper to direét that the reduced Liftablifhment. ordered by us be 
forthwith carried into effect, without waiting for our fextiments on the points referred to 
the Commilliouers inveftigation, as noticed above; ~ 


Appendix, 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 33)-- 
Appendix, No: 66. 


Extract Letter from the Court of Directors to the Governor General in Council at Bengal, 
(Public Department); dated 28th Auguft 1800. 


Par. 6. FROM the importance of Prince of Wales Ifand in a commercial point of view, 
we are induced to direét that a fenior Civil Servant on your Eftablifhment, fully competent to 
the charge, be immediately appointed Superintendant of that [and ; and fhould any gentle- 
man not of this defcription have been previoully appointed to this fiation in the room of the 
Jate Major Macdonald, we further direct that he be removed therefrom, and that one of our 
Civil Servants be appointed in his room, 


. Appendix, No. 67. 


ExtraG@ Letter from the Governor General in Council at Bengal (Pablic Department), dated 
gift July 1801. * 


6. Dire& that a fenior Civil Servant be 6. The Governor General in Cowactl had 
xppointed Superintendant of Prince of Wales \. pointed Sir George Leith, Bart. to. the 
Mland. Further Orders on the fubject, charge of Prince of Wales Ifland, a confider- 
’ able time previous to the receipt of the Order 
-of your Honourable Court, and the affairs of that Government having been conducted with 
‘eat integrity and propriety by Sir G, Leith, the Governor General in Council is apprehen- 
Ere that any fudden change in the Government might produce an injurious effect upon the 
interefts of the Coimpany in’ that valuable Settlement, His Excellency in Couneil is there- 
fore fatisfied that your Honourable Court, under thefe circumftances, will approve his deter- 
mination to fufpend the execution of your Orders on this fubjeét, until he fhall have fub- 
mitted to your Honourable Court a full view of the ftate of affairs at Prince of Wales's 
ifand. 


Appendix, No. 68. 
Letter from the Court of Dire&tors to the Governor in Council at Prince of Wales 
3 Ifand; dated 18th April 1805. 
To Philip Dundas, Efq. Governor of Prince 
: of 
Wales Ifland. 


John Hope Oliphant, Efq. 2d in Council 
Alexander Gray, Efy. - 3d De 
Colonel Norman Macalifter, 4th De 


Para.1. HAVING refolved that’ the fature fyftcm of managing the Company's affairs 
at Prince of Wales Iland fhall be by. a Governor and Council, and -having the higheft 
opinion of your integrity and ability, we have appointed you to the execution of that 
important truft,.and enclofe you a Commiflion of Government accordingly, under the Com- 
pany’s feal. We likewife enclofe you a copy of a feparate Commifiion hich we have 
granted to the Governor, appointing him Commander in Chief of the Fort and Garrifon. 

2, Hitherto the Government seperated for this ifland has been confidered merely as 
of a temporary nature. It has long been our intention, however, to eftablifh a ular 
dyftem of adminiftration for the ifland, but from various caufes that fyftem has not been 
formed till now. Although from the fpirit of Britifh rule, even when imperfectly admini- 
tiered, induftry, enterprize and improvement, have appeared to a confiderable extent on 
the ifland, and its population, produce and commerce, are already very refpectable; yet 
the growth of the Colony has in many ways been impeded by” the ‘want of regular 

overnment and laws; and as the inhabitants have become morc numerous, that waut has 
Been more felt and complained of. 

3. The pofition of this ifland, its climate, its fertility, its harbours, its produce of large 
timber, its contiguity to Pegu, which contains the moft abundant Teak forefts in Atta, 
have long peinted it out-ps an acquifition of very great importance in a commercial and 
political view, being placed in a moft favourable fituation for an emporium of commerce 
in the Eaftern Seas, and for becoming a coimmanding fiation for the rendezvous, refitting, 
and fupply of that portion of His Majefty’s Navy required for the protection of the Cou- 
pany’s poilefions and affairs in the ealtern parts of Atia. 7 

4. From thefe caufes ithas beea in our contemplation, for fome years, to place the ifland 
under the fame form of government as the Company’s other Settlements ia India enjoy, 
and to make it dependant immediately on the Company at home... By this mcaiure we ex- 
pect that the benefits of fixed goverament and laws will be eftablifhed, and induftry, com- 
merce and general refort, be thereby encouraged. 7 

5. Our attention has lately been called to this fubjeét, not only by the gencral_reafons 
already aifigned, but by the necetlity which the renewal of war has evinced of putung this 
important ffation into a fiate of fecurity from the attacks of our caemies. 

303. AR G6. Oa 


340 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REFORT from the Sele& Committee on 

6. On thefe grounds alone we fiiculd have dccmed it indifpenfebly neceffary to new 

‘model the Governmcni of the ifland, and take further meafures for its fecurity; but a Pian 

vhich has lately Been laid before us, of which a Copy (and the Paper accompanying it) is 

‘enciofed, at the defire of the Firft Lord of the Admiralty, for making the ifland a Naval 

Arlenal for the building and repairing His Majefty’s thips, gives a new and high degree 

‘of importance to the dubject, and renders the projeéted reform in tye government ab- 

folutely indifpeafable. We are fully imprefied witi the great national advantages of the 

‘object, propofed ‘by the Firtt Lord of the Admiralty, catertain fanguine hopes of its 

practicability, at leaft to a certain exteat, and have mot willingly agreed to afford the 

‘utiott aid iaotr power in carrying into execution the meafure propoted by His Majetty’s 
Government. 

In the ourfe of our deliberations on this fabject our attention has been drawn to a 

al confideration of the Britifh ‘interefts, political and commercial, in the countries on 

tern fide of Bengal. Befides Prince of Wales Ifland, the Company now poilels in 

raits of Malacea the town and fortrefs of that name; and on the South-weft Coaft 

of Sumatra, Fort Marlbrough and its dependencies. The importance, both in a political 

amd commercial view, of the ifland over which we have appointed you to prefide, has been 

already noticed; although this ifland may be made.a Naval Station, which under the authority 

of the Britith Nation may become paramount in that quarter, yet it will not deprive an 

European enemy ‘of the means of infetting with his fhips the Bay of Bengal, becauie 

‘there. is fill an inviting port open to him in Acheen, on the Weft Coait of Sumatra, 

ovhere the Eyench in the .two latt wars'were enabled to refit and fupply their fhips, and 

tpeedily to refume their depredations in the Bay. This port, properly ftrengtacned, 

might command thé fouthern’fhore of the Straits of Malacca, as as Prince of Wales 

Mand, and, in. the poffciion of the French, might prove the means of great annoyance 

to vur trade, if it did not at any time give them the means of ‘coping with the naval 

force .we fhould happen to have in that part of the world. To have the full command of. 

the Straits-of Malacca, therefore, it appears to be very defirable that the Britith Nation 

thould occupy the Port of Acheen. The importance of this fubject has been recognized 

at different times. In 1781 the Bengal Government was directed to endeavour to acquire 

a fettlement there; which defign was attempted in 1782, and again in 1784, without any 

other fuceefs than the admiffion of a Commercial Refidency, which was.withdrawa in 1785. 

Prince of Wales Iland indeed had not then been acquired; and for a time it feems to 

have been thought, that in obtaining this fettlement we had done all that was requifite 

for the {ccurity of the national interefts in thofe feas; but the gentlemen entrvited from 

time ta time with the care of that ifland, appear to have feen the value of a connection 

with the King of Achcen; for in 1798, Coloncl Macdonald, then Superintendant of the 

Hfland, fubmitted to the Governor General in Council propofitions for a, Treaty with the 

King of Acheen. The object of that Treaty, however, on the part of the King baving been 

* Sic Orig, thought only the exceptionable one of acquiring the * trade of monopolizing the trade of his 

‘Q mete. own dominions, and the inducement held out to the Company being no other than a 

fupply_of pepper (though poflibly a political connection might thence, have been 

cftablifhed) the propofitions were declined. But we have reafon to believe that the King 

‘of Achecn is now difpofed to give the Company a more important footing in his territorics ; 

ane we catertain a‘highly favourable opinion of the expediency of obtaining a footing at 

cheen. 

8. We obferve that in 1798, upon a correfpondence being opened with the Government 
‘of Acheen, the King expretied a defire to be tupplicd with two armed cruizers. The Govera- 
iment Gencral, however, declined giving their confentto the adoption of any meafures which 

ad a tendency to implicate the Mritith Nation in the local policy of any Native Governmeat, 
-which might prebably involve us in diftant petty hoftilities, to the great injury of the com- 
‘merce carried on between Bengal and the Coaft of Sumatra. 

g..{f thelc, or if any other difficultics fhould occur in obtaining an eligible Settlement at 
Achcen; or if, upon further enquiry in India, any folid objection, not known here, thould ap- 
pear againtt the profecution of this fcheme ; there is another place, namely, Merqui, where 
the French are faid to have of late reforted for provifions, and where, with a view of depriving 
them of the relources of that coaft, it might perhaps be expedient for the Company to 
Stablifh an influence of their own. But the decifion upon this fubjec& muft be referred to 
‘the Governor General in Council. . “ 

-10. As a Commercial Eftablithment Bencoolen has become of no importance; the only 
produce of it, pepper, is a lofing concern to the Company, who can be much better supplied 
with that article from the growing plantations of Prince of Wales Ifland,.as well as from the 
Malabar Coaft. It has no value in a political view, -for no other European Nation can tura 
it to mach account, cr bear the expenie which mutt be incurred in maintaining it. 7 

11, Having: alfo taken into our confideration the. great expenfe at prefent Incurred at 
Malacea, wituont deriving any correfpondest benefit either from the Revenues or commerce 
of the place, and the propofed Lftublitament of Prince of Wales Ifland. being calculated to 
duperfede the neceflity of maintaining a Settlement poffelfed of no natural advantazes, either 
in point of produ@, trade or harbour, near to a fiation which is like i howe ad- 
vantages; we liave fignified to the Government of Madras, our determi. draw our 
garrion from Malacca‘and its dependencies, and- whatever other Et ay have 

ven formed there on our account. But, previors to the abandonmeit of the place, we have 
sdirested that the fortifications, arfenels, and public works of all defcriptions; inoutd be cont 

pletely 


- the Afairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 341 


pletely deftroyed and demolifhed, fo as to render it of the leaft poffible vaiue to the Encmy’s 
G at, in cafe the Bataviars fhould hereafter tum their attention to the occupation of 
n. ‘The garrifon and the public fiores and effeéts arc to be tanfported to Prince of 
Wales Ifland, and a particular accornt to be taken of them. 

12. To fuch inhabitants, natives of India or China, as may be apprchenfive of remai 
Malacca, after the Britith garrifon fhall be withdrawn, we have direted that every 
encouragement fhould be atforded them for the fafe and convenient reroval of their perfons 
and ctlects, i ig and ailifting them to eftablith themfelves under the Company's protce- 
tion at. Prince of Wales Hiand; and the evAcuation of the Settlemeat at Malagca is to be fo 
regulated as to give every facility to this object. You will therefore, upon their arrival, re- 
e them with kindaefs and hofpitality, and grant them, uy conditions as fhall here- 
7 a be fpecified, moderate portions of land to clear and cultivate for their own ule and 

cnekt. ' 

13. We have directed the Government of Fort St. George to communic:te with you on 
the fubject of our Orders refpecting the evacuation cf Malacca; it being our intention that’ 
when every thing thalt have been properly arranged under their directions for the com-_ 
picton thereof, that. the means of removing the garrifon ftores, &c. from thence to yout 

eed. fhall be provided by you, as the readieft and leaft expenfive mode of effecting that 
object. 

14. We are aware that, in the firft inftance, the new and more regular forms of govern- 
nent which we have refolved to adopt for Prince of Wales Ifland, mutt inereate the expenfe 
of that Settlement ; not only becaufe the number and quality of Servants there miuft be cn-’ 
hanced, but becaufe, hitherto, the perfons employed for the Company on the Iiland have becn: 
keptia gencral on falaries formed on the confideration of their having been allowed’ the 

rivilege of trade; but as we entcrtain a reafonable cxpetation that the Company will be 
indemnified for the charges they have already been at, and are further to incur, in fupporting * 
an Eftablifhment at Prince of Wales Hand, that indemnification mutt be fupplied in a great 
degree from trade ; which the Company may carry on proatcbly in pepper and other exports 
of the IMand, and imports from Europe. We expett, likewifc, that we thall be in part reim- 
burfed by datics, cuftoms and land rents, and internal taxes; all which will of courfe be 

radually augmented by the improved induftry, population and commerce, which will follow 
from the fuperior protection and management refulting from a more regular fyftem of ad- 
minitivation. 

15. Having communicated to you this gencral outline of the reafons and motives by whicly 
we are induced to form Prince of Wales liland into a regular Government, we have to advife 
you of the following Eftablithment and Appointments, with the Salaries and Allowances 


annexed thereto. 
Per Annum. 
Dollars. 
Philip Dundas, Efg. - Governor and Treafurer - fe ee 82, 
For Houfe Rent, until a Government Houle fhall be 
built undér the orders of the Court of Direttors, and $ 4,000 
for Servants - = = 2 * = 2 © 
John Hope Oliphant - Second in Council, Warchoufe-kecper, and Pay-~ 
‘ : matter, to be allowed a Commiffion upon the Sales of 
Company’s Goods of 3 per cent. and his Income, in- 7 18,000 
cluding that Commiflion, which is to be revifed an- 
nually, js not to be lefs than - - - 
Alexander Gray - ~ - Third in Council, Superinteadant and Paymatfter of: 
Marine, Naval and Military Store-keeper, to be al-f- 
lowed a Commitlion upon the Sales of Stores of > 18,000 
4 per cent. and his Income, including that Commiflion, 
is not to be lefs than = + = - ose 
Colonel Norman Macalifter, Fourth in Council and Commandant, to be allowed } 
® 18,000 


in full for Pay, Batta, and all other Allowaneés what- 


‘ever, Civil or Military - = - - - - - 
Reverend Atwill Lake - Chaplain - eee ee 6400 
Henry Shepherd Pearfon Seerctary 4 oe ee -  - -* = 8,000 
Thomas Raffles - - - Aflifiant Ds - - = - - = + = 6,000 
James Philip Hobfon -. Accountant'and Auditor -  -  - +. - ~ 8,000 
William Robinfow = -- Alliftant D° (-." - +e - = = = 6,000 
Quistin Dick Thompfon Sub Wareboufe-keeper and Deputy Paymafier, to be 
* allowed a Commiffion of 2 per cent. on the Sales én 
of Company’s Goods, and his {ucome, including that ? 
Commiliion, ‘is not to be lefs than - - - antes 
W. E.Phillips - - - Colleéior of Coftoms and Land Revenue + = - ~— 6,000 
John Exfkine - - - - Aflifiant-to the Superintendant‘and Store-keeper. oI 
Marine, and Marine Paymatter; to beallewed aCom-( ¢ 69, 
jon of 2 percent. and his ‘Income is not to be( 9°? 
fe __ legs than ae ee ne ue 
Dr. William Dick 9 - - “Sw 0, including. and all Allowances of a 105720 
Hetty Waring Fir \ Rifiant be oe. e an a == B:200 


wee Dla ne James 


342 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


Per Annum 
. ; Dollars. 

James Hetriott - - - Sccond Affiftant Surgcon - 5 = = =, 8,000 
Ten Writers - - - - = = = each 1,440 


whofe names are as follow: 
Artuur ‘Tegait, William Clubley, 


' Vittiam Bennett, : Joha Lyon Phipps, 
‘doha Curfon Lawrence, Joky McAlifer, 
Robert !bbetfon, Alexander Ballantine Dick, 


John Thomas Le Mefurier Sherwood,| Thomas Cullum - Clerk audSchoolmafter goo 


16. The perfons-filling the before-mentioned offices arc to be reftrifted from trade, agency, 
and from being Planters for exportation. e 

17. We direct that after the expiration of five years fervice, the Writers of Prince of 
Wales Ifland fhall rife to the rank of Factor. 

38. After three years further fervice, to the rank of Junior Merchant; and, 

1g. After.three years further fervice, to the rank of Senior Merchant, in the fame manner 
as tne Writers upon our feveral Eitablifhments of Bengal, Madras and Bombay, rife to 
the fupenor ranks above mentioned. 

so. The perfon who at prefent officiates us Malay Tranflator we have refolved to con- 
tinue te office, and that the amount of his falary fhall be fixed by the Governor and 
Council. < : - 

21, ‘The foregoing allowances are to eommence from the arrival of the parties at Prince of 
Wales Ifland, and are to be in full of all allowances and emoluments of what kind or 
nature foever. 4. 

22. The rate of exchange for the above-mentioned allowances, when drawn for upon 
England, has been fixed at ‘5s. the Dollar; and when drawn for on Bengal, at two Sicca 
Rupees per Dollar; but you are not to draw on cither place for thofe allowances when your 
own Treafury can fupply the requifite funds. 

1 23. In addition to tie Eftablithment above-mentioned, we have refolved upon the fol: 
lowing: : 
Mater Attendant (already on the Ifland) 3,600 Deliars per annum. 

Civil and Naval Engineer. 

24. We have come to the-refolution to allow the fecond in Council, Mr. Oliphant, after 
vemaining three years at Prince of Wales Ifland, the option of returning to his rank at the 
Prefidency from which he was taken, or of refigning fech rank ; which determination is 
to be communicated to the Court of Directors, and he is to, wait their decifion at Prince 
of Wales Ifland. 

25, We have alfo determined to allow the other Servants under Council, who have been 
employed in India, the like option, after the expiration of five years. - 

26, We have likewife refolved that Colonel Norman Macalilter, the fourth in Council, 
he allowed the option, after remaining three years at Prince of Wales ifland under this ap- 
pointment, of returning to his proper rank ‘on the Bengal Eftablithment, or of refigning 
fach rank ; which determination is to be communicated to the Court of Directors, and. he.is 
to wait their decifion at Prince-of Waies Jfand. 

27. In cafe of a'vacancy in the Government, the next in Council is to fucceed pro 
tempore, and fo in fucecfiion, unti} our further pieafare is declared thereupon. 

28. The perfon fucceeding to the office of Superintendant of the Marine is not to-have a 
feat in Council without our previous f{znétion. 

29. Vacancies happening in Council to be provifionally fupplied in the following 
‘order, provided the perfons named fhali Lave conducted themfelves to your fatisfaction in 
the fiations to which we have nominated them. 


Mr. Henry Shepherd Pearfon, Mr, John Erfkine, 
— W. E. Phillips, — Thomas Raffles, 
— James Pi Hobfon, — William eobinion. 


— Quintin Dick Thompton, 


30. The rule to be obferved in filling up vacancies in offices under Council, is, that you 
thail felect from among the  perios bclow Council, fuch as may, from their peculiar quali- 
fications, appear bett iuited to the dilcharge of the duties of fuch particular office as may 
Decome vacant. 

3t. All appointments and promotions to be made in confequence of the foregoing 
directions are to be declared provijional only, febject to our ultimate confirmation. 

32. Aiter earnelily recommending to you tie moft perfect harmony amongtt yourfelves, 
as an object of the higheft concern to the due exccution of the truit repofed in you, we 
procced tv give you the following Infiructions. 

33. We ‘hired that you afemble in Council once in every week at the leaft. At fuch 
Bfeetings the Governor in Council fheli preceed,.in the firft place, to’ the confideration 
of tuch matters in queftion as fliuli be propofed by the Governor; and as often as any- 
mantter ar que‘tica fhall be propounded by any of the Counfeliors, it fhall be competent to 
the Goversor to pattpone or adjourn the difcufion thereof to a future day, provided that - 
no fach adjourniaent thail exceed forty-cight hours; nor fhall the matter or queftion fo pro- 
poicd be adjourned more than twice, without the coufent of the Counfellor who propofed 


the fame. 


34. That 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 343 


34. That in cafe of ficknefs of the Governor, or of his being unavoidably prevented 
from attending at any Meeting of Council, the fenior Member who may be then prefent do 
take the chair. 

35. Upon an equality of votes on any queftion propofed in Council, the Governor or the 
Prefident for the time being fhall have the cafting vote. 

96. The correlpondence with any of the Malay Princes, or other country Powers, is to be 
carried on by the Governor only; but all letters fent by him are to be firft approved in 
Council; and the Governor fhail lay before the Council, at their next Mecting, all lettcrs 
received by him in the courfe of fuch correfpondence, for their information. 

37. Wedirect that ail your Refolutions and Proceedings be entered fair upon each day’s 
Confultations, which are to be figned by the Members preleat. ‘That an annual fet of your 
Confultations, zecompanied by 2 copious Index, be regularly tranfinitted to us, and broken or 
periodical fets by every convenient opportunity. 

38. We direct that you do not on any account, or under any pretence whatfoever, fuller 
any European to hold any poft, or to exercife any office in our fervice, Civil or Military, who 
thall not have been appointed or admitted into the Company’s fervice by the cxprefs 
authority of the Court of Directors. 

39. We refer you to the igoth and following Scétions of the A& of the 33d of His 
fent Majefty, relative to fhips and unlicenfed perfons trading within the Company's a 
and relative to unlicenfed perfons themfelves found within thofe limits. The 132d Clauie 
provides for the manner in which {uch perfons are to be treated, and the 133d Claufe virtually 
invefts the Governor of Prince of Wales Ifland wits the fame authority over fuch perfons 
as is vetted in the Governor General of Fort William, in the Governor of Fort St. George, 
and in the Governor of Bombay. In order to prevent the Ifland from being a receptacie 
for European adventurers, we direct that none be allowed to fettle upon the Hland (except 
fuch as thail have received our previous licenfe to remain in India) without the permiftion of 
your Government, which permiffion fhall be fubject to our confirmation ; and we direct that 
you fend us regular information of the perfons to whom you grant fuch permiflion. We 
enclofe you a copy of the ufual Covenants entered into with the Company by free Mer- 
chants and free Mariners, by which our refpective Governments are empowered to withdraw 
fuch licenfes, if they fhall think proper to do fo, on giving twelve months previous notice 
thereof. At the fame time we direét that you afford every proper encouragement to in- 
duftrious fettlers who are Natives of any part of India or China. 

40. We likewite refer you to the 45th and 46th Sections of the above-mentioned AQ, relative 
to the powers vefted in the Governor General of Fort William, and in the refpective 
Governors of Fort St. George and Bombay, of iffuing warrants for fecuring perfons 
fufpected of carrying on an illicit, correfpondeace, dangerous to the peace ‘and fafety of the 
Company's poffeffions ; and relative to proceedings which are to be had when reafonable 
grounds for the charge fhall appear againtt fuch perfons. We hereby inveft you with fimilar 
powers within the limits of your government for the purpofes mentioned in thofe Sections. 

41. You will regularly and conttantly advife us of the ftate of affairs committed to your 
management, under diftinét heads. You will likewife be regular in the keeping and the 
tranfmiflion of your general books, and other books of accounts, with the accounts of quick 
and dead ftock, and lifts of the arrival and departure of fhipping, their tonnage, imports and 
exports, regifters of births, marriages, burials, &c. You will likewife furnith us every year 
with a ftatement of the Revenues and Charges of the Settlements, under diftinét heads, in 
comparifon of the preceding year; the progreflive ftate of cultivation of the pepper and 
Spice plantations ; with every other information that it may be neceffary to communicate to 
us. Upon fuch matters as may be deemed of a fecret natore, you will correfpond with the 
Secret Committce. 

42. We inclofe, for your information, copies of ihe Acts of the 24th and 33d of His prefent 
Majefty, for the better government of the Company. By the goth and 41ft Clanfes of the 
laft-mentioned Act you will perceive that the Goveracr General and Council at Fort William 
are empowered to fuperintend the other Prefidencies already crested, or to be erected in the 
manner therein def d; aud by the 36th Clauie of the firft AG above-mentioned, you will 
obferve that the fi nate Governments: are required to tranfinit to the faid Governor 
General in C of Fort William exad copies of all orders, refclutions, and aéts in Council 
of their refpective Prefidencies; allo advice and intelligence of all tranfCtions and_matters ’ 

* which fhail come to their knowledge, matérial to be communicated, or which the Governor 
General in Council fhiail from time to time require. 


; POLITICAL, 
43. We have already fuggefed the expediency of our endeavor 
. Acheen, or-of obtaining fuch a footing there as may tend to the exc 
Nations. But before you enter upon any negotiation with the King of Acheen for:that 
purpofe, you will obtain the previous fanction of the Governor General in Council, both as 
_ to the general objects of the negotiation, and the nature of tue conceflion on our part for 
procuring thofe objects. n 
44. We need uct point out to you the neceflity of yo# cultivating and proferving the 
friendthip of the King of Queda; for which purpofe it is highly neceflary that the fum of 
ten thouland dollars per annum, which we are bound by Treaty to pay to him annually, for: 
the ceflions already made to the Company, fhould never be in arrear. You will likewife 
obferve the moft friendly line of conduct, towards all the neighbouring independent Rajahs 
or States, and you wil! avail yourfelves of any opportunities that may offer for negotiating 
- 963. 48 Commerciat 


ing to occupy the port of 
ion of other European 


324 APPENDIX fo the Second REPORT from che Sele& Committee on 


Commercial Treaties with them, upon grounds of reciprocal advantage; ‘but you are on’ ne 
Account to aim at-extenfion of territory, or take any part in their political affairs, unlets 
directed fo to de by the Governor General in Council. 


COMMERCIAL, 

45. Independently of the great political advantages of poffeffing a commanding ftation for 
ahe rendezvous, refitting and fupply, of His Majelty’s Navy. required tor the protection of the 
Comp:ny’s poffellions in the eaticra parts of {udia, with the ultimate view of conttruéting 
‘docks, &e. for building flips of war for the Royal Navy; one of its principal advantages, ina 

mercial point ef view, is the probability of its becoming in a more extenfive degree a 
depot for the commodotics of India and China, particularly thofe of the Britifh 
Aervitories. ft likewife is an emporium fo fituated as to afford an eaiy approaelt from every 
part of India, from the extremity of Chinato the coaft of Africa, and where merchants of 
all nations may conveniently mect and exchange their goods. From a fituation fo highly 
Aavourable for promoting the interefts of commerce in general, the Company naturally look 
40 derive advantages which willindeumnify themfelves fer the expenfe they have already been 
at, and are futher to incur in the fupport of this blifhment. 

46. It has been fuggefted that 250 chefts of opium, aanually fent from Bengal ou the 
‘Company’s account, might-be fold at a fixed advance of 20 per cent. on the medium of the 
fates at Calcutta, the produce te be remitted to Canton ia mozey or in goods. You will take 
this fubject into your confidcration, and, with your opinion as to the quantity of opium that 
may thus be aunually difpofed of at the Iiland, refer the decifion to the Governor General 
in Council. It appears that in 1789, three hundred chelts were difpofed of at the Mand, 
‘and that one hundred more were wanting to fupply the market. In 1792, a fupply of 200 
-chefts was required, in addition to the ufual quantity of 250 chefts. 

47. Another fource of commercial advantage to the Company may arife from the trade 
they may hereafter caizy on in pepper and other exports of the Iiland, and in imports from 
Europe. With refpeét to the former, you will acquaint us what quantity of pepper may be 
procured at the [fland, and at what price. You will likewife report what other articles of 
“export would be likely to yield a profit in Great Britain. Prices Current of the London Market 
will be annually trantimitted to you. With refpect to the imports from Europe, we have 
ordered an inveftment of woollens to be provided, to the extent of £.25,000, and of fuch 
-other goods as may be deemed fit for fale at the Eland. Wee rely upon your excrtions for 
-enluring to thofe goods as quick and advantageous a {ule as poflible. You will likewife tran{- 
anit tous an annual indent of fuch articles of Britifh manufacture as you think may meet 
«with a ready and advantageous fale at Prince of Wales Eland, particularly iron, copper, 
dead, broad cloth, cutlery, and the various manufaGures required by the Malays, Siamefe, 
Birmahs, &e. &e. 

48. It has been ufual, at the other Prefidencies, to difpofe of European imports at public 
fales, but we think it inexpedient to limit you.to that mode; probably, however, you may 
find it convenient to have one annual fale foon after the arrival of the thips from Europe. 
Jt mutt be left to your difcretion to regulate the private fales, at other times, as you fhall find 
mott advantageous to the Company, and for the encouragement of trade. An annual ac- 
-count of the imports and exports, diftinguifhing the different articles, lifts of arrival and de- 
parture of thips, their tonnage, &c. muft be tranfmitted to us. We find that the average 
annual tonnage of thips, for the laft four years, which have entered into and cleared out from 
sthe Iiland, is as follows, r 

Arrivals - ~ see 48,731 
Departures - - - > = arto $ 


4g. It has been fuggefted that an ample and varied fupply of marine ftores, as a monopoly 
in tne hands of the Company, would be produdtive of a lucrative fund of Revenue. It is 
therefore our intention to provide a quantity of marine ftores to be fent to Prince of Wales 
Ifland,.to be difpofed of at an advance of go per cent. on the invoice price, to fuch fhips re- 
forting to the Illand as may have occafion for them, and you will furnifh us regularly with 
-an indent for fuch marine ftorcs as, upon a moderate eftimate, you may be of opinion can be 
aunually difpofed of; aud we rely upon your taking-every precaution to prevent their waft- 
age and embezzlement. 

0. Having expreffed -our reafonable expectations that the commercial advantages of 
Prince of Wales Iiland will reimburfe the expenfes which have already been foftained in 
forming, and are likely to be fuftained in maintaining that Settlement, we thall proceed to 
the confideration of what other fources of emolument are likely to accrue to ‘the Company, 
from the impofition of duties and taxes, in further reimburfement of’ our expentes;-and this 
wwe fhall do under the head.of 


REVENUR. , : 
51. At prefent the principal fources of Revenue arife from the farms of opium, arrack, 
-gaming, tobacco and beetle leaf, and a duty on the exportation of goods and merchandize. 
‘We concur in the opinion-exprefled by Colonel Kyd, that the two articles of Revenue, the 
-farms of-opium and gaming-houfes, appear to give encouragement to the two moft dangerous 
vices in foci But we-underftand it has been thought that the Chinefe and Malays being 
naturally addicted:to both, it would not be practicable effectually to eradicate them; .and that 
under {uch circumttances it only remained to confine the indulgence to thofe propenfitics to 
particular parts of the town, under fuch regulations and seftristions as would furnith a re~ 
fource to Government, But it certainly would be far preterable, in a political as well ot 
an 


the Mfsirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. gas 


tnoral view, if thofe praGices could be fuppreffed, and we delire, therefore, that your atterrfion 
may be direGed to this cad ; towards the attainment of which, it is not to be haftily concluded, 
that a couric of prudeat government, gradually exciting habits of frugality as weil as induftry, 
would not do much, 

52. With refpe@ to the import and export duties, we obferve that in 1801-2, a duty of 
two per cent. ad valorem was taid ou the importation of tin, pepper and beetle nut, and which 
in that year produced 5* Dollars 13,076. Upon the expiration of the year this duty was 
difcontinued, and an export duty eltablithed in its place, extending to other articles. We 
direét that you take it into your confideration what duties on goods, cither of export or im» 
port, can with propriety be impoled, and on what commedities fach duties fhould be laid. It 
4s a ferions queftion with us, whether we fhould encouras eign Europeans to'carry the 
commodities of our 1 Settiement, to rival us in the iercign markets of Europe, and by 
what means that practice, which feems to be a growing one, night be bel checked; and it 
order to aifiit our judgment hercin, we wilh for a particular Re rom you, of the ftate of 
the trade of foreign Europeans with Prince of Wales Lil nid what regulations may ap- 
pear to you proper with refpect to that trade. Every informatian upon this important fubject 
anait be tranfinitted to us, and to the Governor General in Council, whofe opinion thereon 
will be tranfinitted to us by you, though we fhall expect to receive it direét from that 
Government. To whatever articles, eithcr of import or export, it may be ueceffery to extend 
the cuftoms, it is by no means our intention that they thould-be farmied. On the contrary, 
-they muft continue to be managed through a regular Cufem-Houfe by the Company's 
“Offcers. We are aware that different rates of duty may be eftablithed on uifierent articles; 
to this point alfo you wiil of courfe direct your attention. You will likewife attend to thé 
following fuggeftion: that were merchandize, landed and re-exported, to be fubject to a duty, 
it might operate.to difcourage fhips from touching at the Mlatid, and from making ita depos 
for the Eattern trade. We are at the fame time ef opinion that a moderate tax might be 
Jaid on goods landed on the Itland for home confumption. Dutics might likewile be colledied 
on anchorage and port clearances. We have on this matcrial fubject confined ourfelves to 

eneral directions, leaving to you tlie important truft of judging concerning the rates of 

juties which fhould be impofed. We doubt not you will fully aniwer this confidence, and 
awe defire that you will Itate to us at large, -for our final orders, the reafons oa which your 
determination in every cate fhall be founded. 

53. Your attention will next be direéted to the raifing a Revenve from the taxable 
duce of the Iilaad, taking care not to opprefs the inhabitants, or check the rifing cultivation. 
‘We are of opinion, that hereafter a contiderabie Revenue may be obtained from the cultiva- 
tion of pepper and {pices, The following modes of railing a Reveaye were early fuggeited 
dy Captain Light, the firft Superintendant of the Ifland. 

Firlt—That a ground rent be levied on every houfe, after a.certain time from the fstt 
clearing of the ground. 

Second.—That a fhop tax be levied upon all retailers. : : 

Third.—That the privilege of retailing {pirituous liquors be farmed to the higheft bidder. 

‘Fourth That a duty of 2 per centbe levied upon the fale of ail houtes, Jands and 
* tenements; alfo upon the eftates and-effects of deceafed perfons. This was fiated to be ~ 
“ confonant to the cuftoms of the country. 

7 ae That a duty of 4 per cent. be levied upon all India goods imported on foreign 
veffels, : 

Sixth_—© That a duty of 4 per cent. be levied upon all goods imported on Choolias 
“ veffels, not immediately from any of the Company’s Settlements. 

Seventh —“ That a duty of 6 per cent. be levied upon all China goods without diftinion. 

Eighth“ That a duty of 6 per cent. be levied upon all tobacco,’ falt, arrack, fagar, and 
< coasie cloth, the produce or manufacture of Java or any other Dutch polleilion to the 

ward, & 

Ninth.— That a duty of 6 per cent. be levied upon all Europe articles imported by 
“ foreign hips, unlefs the produce or manufixciure of Great Britain. 

Tenth.—* Contains a propofition recited betore, that the Bengal Government fhonld fead 
“ an annual {apply of 250 chefts of opium. é 

Eleventh“ That a port duty on prows of 2 dollars per loyau be a future-confideration, 
“¢ when a greater freedom of navigation is allowed. 

‘Tweltth.—* That to encourage and extend the remittance of Monies to China by Englif& 
“ fhips, it be permitted, for the fake of difpatch, that veilels from any part of India, or be 
* longing to Prince of Wales Iland, who have been trading at the Malay ports, and bring the 
“ iproddee of the Malay countries to Prince of Wales Ifland tor fale, be ullowed to tranfport 
*« the fame on board of Englith veflels, without previoufly landing it; but that this indulgence - 
‘« do not extend to their trafficking with foreigners, who ought to purchafe from the Sctilers, 
‘+ and not from the veffels or prows. 

Thirteenth.—* To levy a general duty on all goods which come to Prince of Wales Hland 
‘« would (it was ftated) defeat the intention of Government, in making remittances to China 
‘ by the barter of the manufactures of India for the produce of thefe countries. The’ then 
* fituation of the furrounding kingdoms, diltraéted by foreign and civil wars, which deprived 
‘¢ their inhabitants of the privilege of bringing the produce of their lands to Prince of 
«Wales Ifland, added to the various impediments thrown into the way. of the Englifh tade 
<« by the Dutch, who prevented the China Junks and the Malay and Bugguefle Prows from, 
* palling Malacca, while by threats they caufed fome of the Malay States, and. ‘ by: fore 

obliged: 


No Notes. 


346. APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sclc& Committee on 


“ obliged others, to defift from trading with the Englifh; were alfo reprefented as obftacles 
“ 00 great to admit of the levying with fuccefs any general dutics.” 

54. ‘The foregoing fuggettions of the late Captain Light and others, contained in his 
feveral letters of the dates mentioned in the margin*, will form a part of your deiiberations'on 
the important fubject of raifiag a Revenue towards reimburfing the Company for their ex- 
penfes in forming and maintaining a Settlement at Prince of Walcs Ifand. it alfo been 
duggetted that a tax on cocoa nut trees would yield from 15 to 20,000 dollars per annum. 


GRANTS OF LAND, STATE OF CULTIVATION, &c. 


45. We have reafon to apprehend, that upon our firft taking poffeflion of the Ifland, very 
little attention was fhewn to the tenures upon which fuch grants ought to have been iffued. 
A vague and indifcriminate order feems at firft to have been given, entitling every perfon to 
duch ground as he might be able to clear. At that period ground was faid to be of fuch 
little value, that to afk was to have, or to appropriate was equivalent to legal right. Hence 
extenfive tracts, from 50 to 100 oorlongs, were potleffed by men who could not cultivate more 
than from 15 to 20. We direct that you endcavour to afcertain the ftate of cultivation of 
the lands under (uch grants, for the purpofe of refaming fuch as may remain uncultivated, 
agreeably to a claufe which we underftand to have been inferted in the grant, that they fhould 
révert to the Company, if not brought into a ftate of cultivation within a fixed period, 

56. There, is reafon to appreliénd that fome Europeans have in a wanton_manner 


*feized upon, or acquired by triiling purchafes, extenfive tracis of the fineft lands. ‘The mott 


effectual check fhould be given to practices of this nature; and you will endeavour to afcer- 
tain the quantity of lands held by Europeans, and under what title, for the purpofe of con- 
fidering of the propriety of refuming {uch as.may have been transferred or acquired by Eu- 
ropeans without the bills of fale having been regiftered or the Company’s duties paid, ac- 


“cording to the cftablifhed regulations of the Ifand. 


57- You will ufe every potitble exertion to difcover and prevent any ufurious tranfactions 
m the Iand. It appears that, in fome inftances, loans to perfons in want of pecuniary 
ailiftance, inftead of being advanced in cafh, have been made in thip goods, at a confider- 


* able rate beyond the coff price in the Bazar, and that thofe advances actually coft the. 


parties to whom they were made 34 per cent. per annum, The intereft of money is not to 
exceed 12 per cent. which may be confidered as the legal interef eftablithed for the Eaft 


“Indies. 


58. We obferve by the inftructions to the late Lieutenant Governor that it was in con- 


-templation to refcind the Regulation of the 1ft Augutt 1704 tefpefting grants of land for 


the period of five years, and it was propofed to render all exifiing and future grants per- 
petual, We very much doubt the propriety of this propofed regulation. At leaft all future 
grants of lands to Europeans muft be made {ubje& to our.approbation; and inftead of bein; 
granted in perpetuity, they fhould be granted on long leafes, renewable on a certain fine, an 
‘on payment of a quit-rent increafing with the increafe of cultivation, and a fine on their 
being transferred; it being our determination that no EuropeanRefident in Europe {1.all hold 
Jands by Agent: and it mutt be a condition in the leafes, that it fhall not be obligatory on the 
Company to-permit the relations, in Europe, of Europeans who may die poffeffed of leafes, to 

0 out in grder to ucceed to them. It mutt likewife be a condition of the grant, that no 
Farge trees applicable to the purpofes of fhip-building thall be cut down, except for thofe 
purpofes ; that the Company thall have the power of refiiming fuch portions thereof as it 
may be déemed neceflary to convert to public purpofes, or fuch as may be found to contain 
anings of,any defcription whatever. No grant of lands to be made to Europeans exceed- 
ing in-quantity 300 oorlongs, unlefs upon very fpccial reafons ftated to us, and approved by 
as. To cacourage the clearing and cultivation of the Ifland, by making {mall grants of 
ands to the indutirious Chinele, would be a moft defirable objeét. i 

59. We direct that you acquaint us with the ftate and extent of the Pepper and fpice 
plantations, diftinguifhing thofe held-by the Company, and by individuals. Vor our opinion 
and dircétions on the fubject of the {pice plantations, we refer you to the enclofed Extraét of 
-our Letter to the Goyernor General in Council, dated 29th February 1804. 

60. itis fiated by'the late Licutenant Governor, that in 1801-2, there were 723 perfons 
‘who potlei¥ed landed property, and that there were at that time upon the Ifland above 1200 
flaves. ‘Ve cannot authorize any encouragement being given to the introduction of flaves 
into the IMand; we could with that the clearing of the ‘jands, and the cultivation of the 
pepper and {pices thould, as we underftand they may, be carricd on by free people. At the 
jane time care muft be taken that flaves belonging to thips ‘occafionally reforting to the 
‘Mand, and who may land for the purpofe of obtaining their freedom, be delivered up, on 
fufficient prcof of their being the property of the claimants. 

COINAGE, 


. We are not fufficiently acquainted with the Coins current upon the Ifland to give any 
upon this fubject. The -Dollar, we underfiand, is the principal current Coin, 
3 to believe that the introduction of a Copper Coinage, of. various dencmi- 
much public advantage. We wifh to reccive your opinion upon this 
ake meafures accordingly; a gradual divifion of Coins, from the 
te the woud be of fingular convenience to the inhabitants. You will acquaint 
us ct you think it edvifabie that we fhould provide copper Coins for the ufe of your 
IMand, aad of what value and defeription, 7 


rations, wou! 
ject, that 


NAVAL 


“the Aifiirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY.” 347 


NAVAL ARSENAL. 

. 62, We have aheady obferved, :that the plan which, has been lately laid before us, at the 
sdefiré of the Firft Lord of the Admiralty, for aking the Ifland a Naval Arfenal, for the build 
fing and repairing of His Majefty’s thips, gives a new and high degree of importance to the 
‘fubject, and-renders the projedted xeform in. the Government abfolutey inlditpentable. We 
care fully impreffed with the greateft national advantages of the object’ propofed by the Firit 


Lord of the Admiralty, and entertain fanguine hopes -of ‘its probability, at leaft to a certain ° 


vextent, aud have moft willingly agreed ‘to afford the utmoft aid in-our power in carrying inte 
sexecution the meafure propoled by His Majefty’s Government. In what proportion between 
Government and the Company, the expenle to be incurred in the Naval ercttiong and forti- 
fications at Prince of Wales Ifland is to be-borne, has not been yet decided, nor is the con- 


fideration of the general fubject fufficiently mature to enable us to furnifh you. with any: | 


precife inftru@ions thercon at this moment.. It appears, however, to be generally acknow- 
edged, that the Ifland Jerajah, one fide of which forms the inner harbour, is the {pot moft 
proper for a dock-yard for King’s thips. The forming of a dock-yard will neceflarily require 
the erection of warehoufes, workfhops, and all the other appendages of fuch an eftablifhment. 
For the confiruction of -thefe a Civil Engineer and other artizans.will be neceflary, and will 
‘be fent out. It will naturally occur to you, that preparatory mcafures may be early taken 
swith a view to the commencement of this important undertaking ; among thefe you will ad- 
vert to the means of providing the various materials that may be wanted. Geod sione and 
brick, we underftand, ‘may be found upon the {fland, as allo various forts of ferviceable. 
timber, but for the fupply of that which is moft effential, namely the Teak, recourfe muft* 
be had to Pegu; and you will coafider of all the meafures that may be requifite for obtaining 
and tranfporting it. ‘We defire to hear from, you as early as poffible upon thefe points, after 
you fhall have procured information relative thercto. 


FORTIFICATIONS. 


63. We ‘find that fomething of the nature of a fort has already been conftructed on the. 


Afland, and whatever may be neceflary to put the [fland ona tolerable ftate of defence we 
with to-be immediately execated ; but itis our wifh thata regular fortification, for the per- 
manent fecuring againft an European force, hould be conftructed ; we therefore dire& that 

‘ou form and trinimit to us a plan and eftimate of fuch'a work, and if there fhould not 


No Stone on 
the ifland,ex~ 
cept ‘for mas 
fonry. 


a fkilful Engineer upon the {fland, you will make application to the Bengal Government | 


r the affiftance of one from thence; but no fortifications of any great extent, involving 
an expente of magnitude, are to be commenced without the plan and eftimate being fub- 
amittéd to our previous approbation, tee ; : 
MILITARY. 


64, We have already advifed you of the appointment ‘of Captain Lieutenant M¢Alifter ° 


‘to be Commandant of the Troops, and fourth ii Council upon:the Ifland. Copy of hi 
commiffion goes a number in the packet. We have deemed it proper -to grant a com 
miflion to this Officer, conferring upon ‘him the rauk of Colonel, by brevet, at Prince 
‘of Wales Ifland, and its dependencies only ; but the rank granted to him by this com- 
miffion is to ceafe upon his return to Bengal; nor is the Company to fuftain any expenfe on 
that account be: ed the falary of S* D'* 18,000 per annum, 4 ready allotted to him. 

wn on prelent force upon the Ifland, as ftated by the late Lieutenant Gevernor, con- 

o! . 


A fmall detachment of European Artillery, 
One Company of Golandaaze, 

One D° © of Gun Lafcars, 

Four Companies of Sepoys. 


FS 
66, The garrifon of Malacca, which, agreeably to*the intimation in a preceding para; 
sgtaph, is to be removed to your Ifland, will afford an addition to this force of about 360 
men; and fhould you deem the whole of this force infufficient for the ion of the 
Mand, you will make application to the Governor General. and Council at Bengal -for 
uch an‘augmentation thereof as fhall be deemed {ufficient for that purpofe. : 


“67. We enclofe, for your information and guidance, copy of the Mutiny A@ eftablifhed 


for the Eat Indies. : 
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE.’ 


68. The adminiftration of juftice being a very important part of the arrangement re- 
uired for.the better government ef Prince.of Wales liland, we ‘have prefented an humble 
etition.to His Majefty, that’ he will be gracioully pleafed to ta charter for the ad- 

aniniftration of juftice in Prince ef -Wales Ifland, by ere@ting the Governor and Council, 
with the affiftance of the Recorder, into a Supreme Court of Judicature. Hs 

69. When. we confider that at ithe itime we took poflefion of Prince of Wales Iflahd it 

was uninhabited, our right to preferibe the fyftem of Jaws which we may deem moft eligible 
‘for the government thercef cannot be-controverted, fince none of its inhabitants who have 
moped to the Ifland can, claim any prefer tive right founded’ on ancient ufage, to the 

lifhment of any particular fy’ of jaws or form of judicial proceedings. ‘The 
eftablifhing, as far as may be pollible, of one regular’ fyftem of laws for the various 
-defcriptions of inhabitants, with a proper attention to their re{pective cuftoms and manners, 
feems to be the moft politic mode that can be npiod under the prefent circumftances of 

4 : 


363. the 


348 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT yrom the Sele& Committee on 


she. Ifland ; -you will:therefore tranfmit.to us, from time to time, fuch regulations and laws as 
‘you may think proper to iffue for the internal government of the Ifland. 

."-7o. We think it necelfary to-refer you to the following Extract trom the Treaty-of Amity, 
‘Commerce, and Navigation, between his Britannic Majetiy and the United States of Amcrica,. 
«dated the 19th November 1794. 

Article 13th.—“ His Majefiy confents that the veffels belonging to the citizens of the 

“ United States of America, fhall be admitted and hofpitably.received in all the {ea-ports and 
* harbours of the Britith territories in the Eaft Indies, and that the citizens of the United 
“ States may freely carry on a trade betacen the faid territories and .the faid United States, 
“in all articles of which the importation or exportation.re{pedtively to or from the faid 
“ territories {hall not be entirely protibited : provided only, that it thall not be lawful for 
*“ them in any time of war between the Britith Government and any other Power or State 
“ whatever, to export from she faid tertitories, without the {pecial permillion of the Brith 

“© Goverument-there, any milite val ftores or tice. ‘The citizens of the United 
- States thall pay for their velicis, when admitted into the faid ports, ne other or higher 
“tonnage duty than fhall be payable on Britith veffels when Sdimitted into-the ports of the 

United States ; and they {hall pay no other or bigher duties or charges ou the importation 
“ or exportation of the.cargoes of the fuid veiYels than fhall be payabie on the fame articles 
“ when.imported.or exported in Britith vefiels: but it is exp: y agreed that the velfcls 
~* of the United States ‘thall not carry any of the articles exported by them from the faid 
“ Britith territories to any port-or place, except to fome port or place in America, where the 
“fame fhall bo unladen, and fach regulations fhall be adopted by both parties as thall 
“ from. time to time be found necellary .to enforce the due and faithful obfervance of 
°* this ftipulation. 2 

“ dt is allo underfteod that the permiffion grauted by this article is net to extend to 

+ allow the veflels of the United States to carry on any part of the coafting trade of. the 
“faid Britihh territories; but veflels going with their criyinal cargees, or part thereof, from 
“ one port of diicharge to another, are not t6 be conic cerrying on the coufting 
““ trade. Neither is.this article tobe conftrued to allow the citizens.of the {aid States to 
“ fottle or refide within the {aid territories, or to go into the interior parts thereof, without _ 

“the permiffion of the’ Britith Government efiaviifhed there; and if any tranfgrettion 
a thould be attempted againit the.regulation of the Bnitith Government in this refpect, the 

“ obfervance-of the fame fhall:and may be enforced againtt.the citi of America in the 
“ fame manner as againtt Britith fubjects, or others trantgreiting the fame rule. And the 
“* citizens of the united States, whenever they arrive in any port .or barbour in the faid, 

* # torritories,.or if they fhould be permitted, in manner aforclaid, to go to any other place” 

* therein, shall always be tubject to the laws, government, and jurifdiétion of whatever nature 
“*eftabliflied in fucn harbour, port or place, according as the fame may be. “The citizens 
“ of the United States nay allo touch for refrefhment.at the Hand of St. Helena, but tubject 
“in all refpeéts to fuch regulations as the Britifh Governmeut may from time’ to time 
“ eftablith there.” 

* ri. We with, ina particular manner, to draw your attention to, and direct your ob- 
-fervance of that part of the article which prohibits the-citizens of Amierica, (in common with 
-other foreigners) from fettling or -refiding within the Company’s termtores without the 
yermiflion of-the Britith Government. “We likewife refer you to the enclofed-copy of a 
Claute of the 37th of the King, for canying the ~beforementioned Treaty into. ‘exe-~ 
cution. - 

72. The Americans being prohibited from carrying on the coatting trade in the Britifh 
-poffeffions in India, and from clearing out from tiem direct for Europe, we require your 
cattention to the, obfervance of ‘that iy 3 and that American fhips be received into 


and cleared put.from your Hand only in forimity thereto. 

73. A Pohlestion. of Mr. Dalrymple’s rts, &e. accompanies thefe. inftructions, and 
-which is to remaingas a depofit among*tly cial secarde f the Iland. i 

74. You weré,advifed, in a -preceding paragraph, of-our having appointed the Rev, 
Atwill Lae to-be-Ghaplain of your Jiland, and Mr. Thomas Cullum, Clerk and School- 
mafter. : As foon,as.may be convenient you will commence.the ercttion of a church upon the _ 
{pot already marked out by the late Licutenaat Governor for that purpoie. {If the building 
now in fe forsthe performance of Divine Service. fhait not be dceme cligible, a more pro- 
<per one muft inthe mean time be fele¢ted. We truft that by.Mr. Lake’s endeavours and 
3your example, the interefts of religion and morality will, be.,prowoted in the Ifland. 


* We are your leving Friends, : Peat ae oe 
(Signed) - CHAS GRANT. 3} «A. ROBERTS. 
. GEO. SMITH. Wa THORNTON. 


ome WM DEVAYN -ROBr THORNTON. 
London, the  JNO-ROBERTS. “EDWD PARRY. 
8th April,1805. PAUL LE MESURIER. |S. TOONE: 

THOS PARRY,‘ -J. HODLESTON. 

E. BARING. 


the Affoivs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. - 349 


‘Appendix; No. 69. 


SLETTER fromthe Court of Directors to the Governor in Council at Prince of Wales 
Tfand-; dated 21ft April 1809. 


Separate Department. 
‘Our Governor.and ‘Council at Prince of Wales Ifland. 


‘Para. ‘Since-the date of our public difpatch of the 2d March 1808, which direSted the 
sremoval of Mr. Pearfon from the office of Governor of Prineé of Wales Hland,to which 
(under an erroneous interpretation of our infiruétions) be bad fueceeded in preference to 
Colonel Macalitter, whofe right of fucceffion to the Government we thought proper then to 
confirm, we have .repeatedly had -under our confideration the adoption of fome definitive 
arrangement for the future Goverament of your Prefidency. 


2. Inthe formation of your Government, as newly conttituted in 1805, aud in regulating 
the eftablifhmentito be’ «fligacd to it, we had a fpecial regard to a meafare then propofed to 
us by His Majeity’s Minit and adopted by us, with,a view both to the fcrvice of the 
public and'to the advanceinent of commerce in India, namely,'to makethe Hland an impor- 
taut Naval Station, where an arfeual and docks fhouit be conitructed to render it-commodious 
for the refort and repair of Britifh thips cf war and other fhips employed in the eaftern feas, 
and alfo.for'building fhips both for the Royal Navy and for the purpoles of commerce. 


3. His Majcftv’s Minifters are defirous of alcertaining corre@lly, by the conftru@ion and 
actual coft.of one or more thips-of war at_your Prefidency, whether the {jfiem may reafoui- 
ably be expecied.to be permanently bereficial for the public fervice. In that ftate of uncer- 
tainty, therefore, as to their intentions, and being ourfelves unwillmg to incur any con- 
-fiderable expeafe in the conftruction of an arfenal or docks, until we-are fatistied that fuch 
works will really be effential to the public intereft, we think it expedient to redace the 
eftablifhment of the Ifland nearly to what:may be requifite for it as an important commercial 
-entrepot and a feparate Prefidency, dependent immediately upon us, under-the management 
-of a Governor and Council; which couftitution, as far as.we «can now judge, is, in our 
decided. opinion, on the whole, fitteft for the prometion -of all the objets connected with it, 


-and that under whiclt it ought toremain, 


4. We have therefore refelved, that infiead:of a Governor and three Counfellors, your 
Government fhall in future confift of a Gavernor and two Counfellors. 


5. We alfo abolith.the place of Superintendant of Merine,a3 unneceffary under prefent cir- 
-eumftances ; but Mr. Erfkine, who fucceeded to it-on-the departuie of Captain Gray, may be 
allowed to hold it with a fulary of Dollars 8,000 per annum, until you can place him in fome 
other office adequate to bis rank. And as foon-as this is effected, whatever charge he may have 
-23 Marine Paymatter or Naval and Military Storekeeper, appointments attached to the office 
of Superintendant of Marine, fhall-be transferred tothe Export Warehoufe-keeper. 


6. Although we have great reafon.to be fatisfied with the conduét.of ‘Colonel Macalifter, 
“yet, as we.think it advifable at prefént that the office-of Governor of our Settlement of Prince 
of Wales Ifland fhould be.filled from the line of our Bengal civil fervice, it will be incom- 
patible with that intention to continue Colonel Macalifter in the Government. Upon this 
principle we accordingly had it in.contemplation to felect Mr, Thomas Parr, from his general 
character and particuiar merits in the Refidency of Fort Marlborough, for the office of 
-Governor. ‘The information, hewever, we have received of the melancholy. fate of that 
-genticman,. who (as you no doubt have becti informed) was. affailinated by a party of 
Malays, under circumitances of peculiar atrocity, fruftrated this idea, and pccaboued a delay 
in our deterinination upon this important affair, . 7 : 


’ 7. Having again deliberated on the meafures proper to be adopted ander thefe eircum- 
7 iS Ag i * '§ prop OP’ : 
ftances, we have, conformably to the intentions already wertioned, and confidering the 
-relation which has hitherto exilted between your Government and the Prefidency of Bengal, 
Amee the firlt fettlement of Prince of Wales Ifland, directéd the Supreme Goverment to feleé 
-a Civil Servant of that eftabliftinent for the fituation of Governor of your Preiidebey. 

“8. On the arrival of the gentleman fo feleSted at Prince of Wales Ifland, Colonel Maca- 
lifter is to refume his feat in Council as fecond Member, and in the event of any vacancy occur- 
ing in.the office of Governor, he is again to exercife.that office until fuch. vacancy thall be 
-regularly filled. ~ - é 


g. As we {ce reafon to be of opinion, that, upon any fcale.of cftablifhment requifite for your 
Prefidency, the office of a ftationary Commandant of ‘Troops will not be enently neceflary, 
wwe defire that on the death, refignation, or coming away of Colonel Macalifter, this office be 
-abolifhed, and the garrilon of Fort Corawallis, together with the command of fuch other 
-troops as may from.time to time form the military force of the Ifland, be placed under the 
authority of the fenior Cfficer doing duty on the Ifland; bat we-defire it.to be underttood, 
«that no allowance is to-be drawn by tuch Officer beyond the ufval hatta, &c. granted under 
ithe Prefideney of Bengal to Officers commanding Regiments. : A 

: 10. As 


350 APPENDIX é0 the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


10. As the plan juft tated will affect the profpects of Mr. Pearfon, who now holds a feat ix 
your Council, fo far as regards his fuccefiion to the Government, we direct that he refume his 
¥ank in the civil eftablifhment of the Government of Bombay, to ‘which he was originally 
appointed by us, and to which, from henceforth he is to confider himfelf attached ; and on 
ine receipt of this difpatch, he is to be required to procced to that Prefidency by the firft 
convenient opportunity, where we fhall direct that he be provided with a fituation tuitable to 
his rank and tervices, 2 

11. According to this arrangement, the following appointments, with the folarics 
and allowances annexed thereto, are to take effeCt upon the arrival at Prince of Wales 
Mand of the gentleman who fhall be appointed to the office of Governor of your Prefi- 
dency, viz. . 


Mr. to be Governor and Treafurer, including houfe-rent - 
Colonel Nounan-Macalifter, te be Second Member of Council and Commandan 
of the forces fo long es he fhall remain at your Prefi- 
dency. In the event, however, of his death, refigna- 
tion or coming away, the Jatter office is to be abolifhed, 
and’a Civil Servant is to be appointed to the vacant 
feat in Council, who is alfo to hold the office of 
Woarehoute-keeper and Paymatter, to be allowed a 
commifiion upon the fales of Company’s goods of 
“3 percent. and his income, including that commiftion,. 
: which is to be revifed anaually, is not to be lefs than_) 
Mr. W. E. Phillips - - to be Thied and laft Member of Council, and to retain 16,00 
og + the office of Colleor of the Government Cuftoms zi oe 


16,000 


12. The pro error madé by Mr. James Philip Hobfon, in his calculation of the profit 19 
‘de derived. by the purchafe of the fpices captured from the’ cnemy by His Majetty’s thips 
Greyhound and Hazrier, would have tended to imprefs our minds ‘with a yery unfavourabie 
opinion of that gentleman’s qualifications for the fituation of Accountant General at Prince 
of Wales Ifland, if we had-not been informed that at the time Mr. Hobfon prepared the 
calculation adverted to, he was labouring under a fevere indifpofition, and that his mind was 
alfo niuch deprefied by the dangerous ilinefs which prevailed in: his family. The belief of 
thefe facts arreft the judgment which we thould otherwife feel it.indifpeniably neccflary to 
fs upon this occafion; a judgment to which the diffatisfaction you appear repeatedly to 
ave exprefled at the backward ftate of the bufinefs of the Accountant's Uffice, would have 
amore impelled us, if the charge thus implied againtt him had not been materially extenuated 
by the delay of other Officers (particularly that of Superintendant of Marine) in tranfinitting 
eir accounts. : . 


13. We have been informed that Mr. John James Extkine, now Superintendant of 
Marine, is in a ftate of health which renders it improbable that he can continue to difcharge 
the duties of that office. If it thould prove otherwife, and that he fhould be reftored to a 
ftate of perfect efficiency, we defire that he may continic to exercife the office of Superin- 
tendant of Marine, agreeably to the conditions ftated in a preceding paragraph, and alfo 
to be a provifional Member of Council, to fucceed in cafe of a vacancy ; but if the illnefs 
ander which he is faid to labour fhould not be removed, we defire that, if Mr. Hobfon 
fell here conducted himfelf to your fatisfaction, he be appointed Provitional Counfeilor in 

8 : 


Doltars 
per annum, 
Reverend Atwell Lake -"- Chaphin - > +  -  - = «= = = ‘ 6,400 
Mr. Thomas S. Rates - Secretary . - Fo sep e bt FS A - 8,000 
William Clubley - - - Aftifant De - - ee - - oe - 3,600 
J.P. Hobfon “- = - - Accountantand- Auditor - + © + = Boo 
Affiftant De - - - oe - - - ~  $,000 
William Robinfon - + - and 

ene Affiftant to the Treafurer = -  -  - = 2,000 

Q. D.Thompfon ~- - ~ Sub Warehoufe-keeper and Deputy Paymafter, to be 
. { allowed a commiflion of 2 per cent. on the fules of S066 

i 


Company's goods, and his income, including that 
commiftion, is not' to be lefs than “- Sie ‘a 

Dr. Charles M‘Kinnon - Surgeon, including pay and all allowances of his rank 10,720 
Firft Afiftant DD ~~ 3,000" 

: Second Affiftant DD - +* = “+ - = 3,006 
Captain D.Baird - - - Mafter Attendant co ee ee 3,600. 


14. By your Lift of Eftablifhments, dated 1ft July 1807 (the laft we have received), we- 
obferve that feveral offices have been inftituted at-your Prefidency which, in our opinion, 
may be difpenfed with without injury'to the public-iervice, while the efiablithments of others 
will adm.t of confiderable reduction, particularly thé following, which have forcibly attracted 
-our atteution, and which we feel no hefitation in directing. you. to revife. 


15. This 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 351 


to the attached, with an allowance for public fervants of Dollars 68 per month, 

Governor. making in the whole 188 Dollars per month, we deem quite unneceflary, 

: and therefore defire, on the receipt of this dilpatch, that you take 
meafures for abolifhing it altogether. 


2 16, We obferve that, in addition to the Secretary, Deputy Seere- 
Secretary's Office. - tary, and five covenanted Writers, this office employs 


Private S: ei: 15. This office, to which a falary of Dollars 120 per month has been 


: Doliars 
per month, 

1 Head Clirkat - - = - - 70 
6 Clerks at60- = = =~ = 360 
1 Jemautdar, or Head Peon. - 10 
8 Peonsat5 - - 40 
aSweeper -  - i 1 

485 


Se 
So large an cftablifhment, we fhould think, cannot poffibly be neceffary; at all events the 
allowances to the Clerks (or monthly Writers) are much too high, as are alfo thofe granted to 
the Jemautdar and Peons; the whole of which we defite you. will reduce to the loweft 
poflible feale. ; : 


* 17. The preceding obfervations alfo apply to the three Clerks and 
Accountant's Office. } four Peons Employ. in this department is 


Treat 18. As the duties of Affiftant, to the Treafurer are performed by the Sub- 
realty: § Accountant, the falary of which office we deem in every refpett fufficient for’ 
both fituations, the allowance drawn for the former office, of 150 Dollars pet-month,.muft be 
diicontinued, agreeably to the directions contained in our reply to your General Letter, dated 
the 17th January 1807. ~ * * 


pi 1g. The allowances to the two Clerks “employed in this De- 
Civil Paymafter’s Office. } partment mutt alfo be reduced. . 7 


‘Tranflator’s Office.—20. This office, we obferve, confifts of a i ie 
iat i Dollars per month. 
MalayTranflator S05 * 4 -" +) + 150 
To whom. is allowed officerent - = - 50 


200 
Dollars. — 

Two Affiftants at 20 each - a ee) 
Two Ditto - at 12 -- +s .- “= = (94 
_One Peon = =) = 2 Hat 
‘One Interpreter to attend on Government = 30 
99° 


we Soneeine that one ee each of. the Aflitanta can only be neceary and i the ‘Tranflator 
is himfeit the Interpreter of Government, we apprehend an: er to be fuperfiuous, - . 
aand therefore we defire the office of Interpreter may be abulifhed. eee ane 
; : 21. We obferve that the Firft Affiftant Surgeon draws, befides- 
Medical Eftablifhment, his regular allowance, of Dollars - 250 paesnow 2 ces 
As Vaccinator and Eftablifhment .-  - 125 
As Medical Storekeeper =~ - - = - 50 


Inthewhole - Dollars: 425 pet month, 


‘Thefe allowances we defire maybe reduced to Dollars 300 per month. 


are sc.) 22 The following fituations: under’ the’ Superintendent _- 
Superintendant of Convids, } appear to be rated ng ‘high; namely, ‘ pe . i 


Dollars per month. 
1 European Regifter.- - - - - 30 
2 Overleers -- = - - - - 40 
40 Native Serangs, atgeach - - > 200 
.40 Convittsas Tindals + - - - 40 
2 Moonthees, or Native Writers ~- + 10 
320 


‘We defire therefore you will take meafarcs for the reduétion of the expentes of this Depart- 
quent. . 
363. 4U “93. The 


332 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT fron the Scte& Committee on 


" +2. 23. The eftablifhment you have inftituted for this Department, 
Police Department. invelyes aa expenie of Dollars 1,224 per month, independent of" the 
\Judicial Department, the expenfe of which is fiated at Dollars 1,143 per mouth. We are at 
sa. lufs to coaceive the necefiity for fu large a difburfement on this aceount, and direct that the 
-expenfe of the Police Departmeat be reduced to Dollars 800 per moath 
‘ . . 24. The falaries granted to the:two Clerks. and eight Peons 
‘Commercial Department, I mployed in this Departinent mut be revited, = 


25. The following fituations in 4his Departmeat appear to he 


Revenue Department. te ed too high; namely, 
* ‘Dollars per month. 


1 European Writer-- -  ~ -~ = 100 
1 Ditto at Soughy Clawn - + = $0 
1 senantoa cos By 3 ae la ag 

ay Peons at Geor, fown = = - 35 
7 Night D° at 6 oe - = = = 48 
6 in tne Country by day and night- = 36 
2D Dy ~ by day only,ataz- 30 

+ i 


2 Native Writers in the Country . - 
eae sat. 2 26+ We have already expreffed our determination with regard 
Marine Department, $ to the office of Superinendant of Marine. The following Ofticers 
anthis Department alfo appear unncceffary, namely, 
Dollars. 


‘Mutter Mafter at - = 400 per month. - 
1 Book-Keeper -° - . + 100 
2 Clerks - - - ~ 140 > 
The firft of :thefe afficeswe direét may ‘be abolifked immediately; ‘the reft as foon after the 
xeceipt of this difpatch as may be potlible. - 
27. We alfo defire, in confequence of the ftate of uncertainty which .exifts with regard to 
Ship-builditig atyour Prefidengy, that you abolith the offices of 
: Dollars per month, 
Deputy Builder - = = 133 33 
Civil Engineer - — - 500 
To whom is allowed 50 
Houte-rent - ~— . 550 


28. The cftablithment ia charge of the Admiralty Hontes confilting of 
8. 


1 European at - ~ + 30 per month. 
: 2Peonss - - + = 10 
. aay alfo, in our opinion, be difcontinned. - 
2g. It was, our ‘intention to have: directed the tevifion of 
this Departiaenty ba uider the prefent ‘tate of the forties: 
i tions at your jency, it'ma: aps be neceflary to have a 
E Military Department. Military’ Engineer to Teneriaseet tale as it may’ be found 
~neceffary toverect ; we hall avoid giving any pofitive directions upon this head of 
. eftablithment, trufting, however, that you will make every reduction in your power, both in. 
this andevery other Department under your fuperintendance. 

30.. While we thus convey to you our fentiments on the practicability of zeducing your 
-eftablithments, we are willing ‘to admit that cireumftances, of which we may not be aware, 
may render it inexpedient to carry thofe reductions to their full extent in fome of the Depart 
anents, In any inftances in which-you hall decidedly entertain that opinion; you will fubmit 
2your objections to us for our final decifion, 


Superintending Engineer 
: in the 


We are your loving friends, 
. Signed) CHARLES GRANT. J. INGLIS. 
: W. ASTELL. G. MILLETT. 
A. ROBARTS. J. A, BANNERMAN, 
>, London, the J. BEBB. J. HUDLESTON. 
#2 April 1809. J. TRAVERS. ROBT WILLIAMS. 
J. JACKSON, CAMPBELL MAJORIBANKS. 


4. TCONE, W. BENSLEY. 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 353 


Appendix, Ne. 70. 
ACCOUNT -of the COMMERCIA L°CHARGES net added to the INVOICES 
at the feveral PRESIDENCIES in INDIA, in each year, from 1792-3 to 


1808-9. 
BENGAL. | MADRAS. TOTAL 
L 

‘Gourt’s Eftimate, February 1793° - 80,000 13,200 |- 104,450. 
23 + 80,185 43,678 135,547 

4798-4 + + 83,736. 54,458 148,521 

17945 98,122 83,765 . 198,417 

1795-6 = = 95,220 91,322 205,879 

uwgeF - + 99,616 | 47,569 155,965 

wo7-8 =e 98,768 $4,570 163,202 

a798-9° 91,691 33,102. |- 159,123 
1799-1800 - = 110,242 208,201 

asooa =e 105,648 168,425 

aso-e o- - 100,496 “160,102 

19023 = ~ 106,288 2” 168,268 

1803-4 +. - 106,071 j 177,083 

18065 | 124,494 3 225,141 

1805-6 -  - 88,214 © 175,792 

wey - = -| 83,569 7 "192,652 

1907-8 - 34,982 | : 210,814 

1808-9 = - + , 86,576. | 135-_ 5 203,819 

(Error excepts) 
Whitehall tach Sone 1810. $ EN NO ee 


355 


THIRD 


R E P OR T 


SELECT COMMITTEE 
ON THE AFFAIRS OF THE 


EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


NN ———— 
Ordered, by The House of Commons, to Le printed, 
21 June 1811. : 


—— ES 


ANS ( 357) 


THIRD ; 


RE: Beocdge rT, 


Tur SELECT COM MITTEE appointed to enquire into the 
present State of the Affairs of Tux Hast Inpra Company, and 
to report the same, as it shall appear to them, to The House, with 
their Observations thereupon ;—and also, their Proceedings from. 
time to time to The House:——Have, pursuant to the Orders of 
The House, further examined the Matters to thém referred ; and 
have agreed upon the following REPORT, 


HE Obje€t to which the attention of Your Committee was moft particularly direét- 
ed, during the laft Session of Parliament, was, the branch of the Financial Syftem 
of the Eaft India Company, comprising the Orpinary Recerpr and Expenpr- 
TURE, or the Revenues and Charges of the Territorial Possessions in India, from the 
year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclusive; and in their Second Report they brought 
under the consideration of the House, the result of a detailed examination of the various 
heads under which these Revenues and Charges are fated in the Accounts laid before 
Parliament from year to year by the Company, in obedience to the Act of 1793. In 
that Report, the amount of the Debts and Assets in India, during the period in queftion, 
was likewise adverted to; but the observations upon this point were necessarily con- 
fined to the mere exhibition of the gross amount in April 1792 and April 1809 respec- 
tively, with the General Result produced by contrafting the two pemotas This, it is 
to be remarked, is the only principle by which the accuracy of the whole operations 
of the Financial Syfem, as fhewn in the Accounts, can be properly determined, and 
the amount of any variation in the Concern correétly ascertained; but the General 
Result then thewn, cannot be considered to be a fair application of this principle, as 
several material adjufiments of the Assets are requisite to be made; and it is more- 
over necessary, for this purpose, to enter upon a minute inveftigation of another 
very important branch of the syfiem, namely, the Receipts and Disbursements which 
may be termed ExtraorpdINAry. sith 
The Result on the review of the Accounts of the Ordinary Revenues and Charges of 
the Territorial Possessions for the seventeen years ending 1808-9, bas been fhewn to be 
an Excess of Charge, amounting to the sum of £. 4,987,676, after defraying the Intereft 
upon the Debts. The ordinary and fixed Chere of the Boards of Trade and. the 
Commercial Eftablifhments, which was not added to the Invoice Price of the Goods, 
amounted to the sum of £. 3,056,251; the entire Ordinary Difbursement of India will 
therefore, in this view, be found to have exceeded the Ordinary Revenues in the sum 
of £. 8,043,927, which sum muft have been provided from extraordinary sources.— 
On the firft view of the subjeét, and on adverting to the largé amount raised from time 
to time in India on loan, the inference seems obvious, that a portion of ‘the Funds 
so raised, was applied to make up this deficiency, which may in part be true; but the 
subjeGt muft be considered on a more enlarged scale. Ditbursements have been 
made from the Indian Treasuries to an extensive amount, in advances for the purchase 
of Inveftments for consignment to Enrope; for Supplies in aid of the Treasury at 
Canton; and also for various other purposes, in some cases to be ultimatelyaccounted 
for in Europe. On_ the other hand, the Indian ‘Treasuries have, fiom time to time, 
obtained Supplies to a very extensive amount, by Monies received for Bilis on the 
Company at home ; by consignments of Bullion from Europe, and of Stores in so far 
as they may have been brougiit to sale; the remainder falling into and forming a part 
of the Assets, The aggregate produce of these Supplies, with whatever suins may 


have been raised upon loan in India, mutt be supposed to have conitituted the An 
Tonk 


4 
Second Report) 
page 64. 


ibid. 


358 Third REPORT from the Select Committee paste 


from which the Deficit in the Ordinary Revenues and the Extraordinary Demands have 
been liquidated. It is therefore from the combination of the whole, that a correct judg- 
ment can be formed of the final result of the Financial transactions of India as to 
the actual {fate of the Concera, on the comparison of the two periods, 1792 and 1 809. 
‘This point bas already been adverted to in the Jaft Report, and the intention of Your 
Committee, in the observations now. made, is a further illuftration of the position then 
laid down, as to the difficulty of separating the Political and Co:nmercial Concerns of 
the Company during the period under examination; and as introductory to the ex- 
planation of the principles on which Your Committee propose to conduct the further 
invedtigation of this complicated and very extensive subject. 


Trom the observations in the laft Report, and those now made, it appears that very 
serious diflicultics are opposed to the separation betweeen the Political and Commer- 
cial transactions, in so fur as they are connected with the receipt and ‘application of 
the Fands, ‘These difiiculties ave found mdre particularly to exist in making this 
diftihetion of the Receipt and Difbarsement termed Extraordinary. ‘The Ordinary 
Revenues and Charges, being more immediately Territorial or Political, have been 
shewn in a manner sufficiently clear, with the exception of the Intereft upon the 
Debts, which, thoagh charged entirely to the Territory, admits of uo proper separation 
ov adjuttment, till it fhall be determined what part of the Principal has been raised for 
Political, and what part tor Commercial purposes. Nowwvithitanding the difficulty 
of such a separation of the two branches of this immense Concern, Your Committee 
would but very insufliciently answer the object of their appointment, if they did not 
direct their attention to a close inveftigation of the Extraordinary Receipt and Ex- 
penditure, in order to produce, for the information of the House, the bett view 
at present practicable, of the application of the Funds which came into the Indian 
‘Treasuries ; from which a reasonable conjecture may be formed of the part which may 
be supposed to have been of a Commercial nature, ; 


Your Committee having therefore called for such Documents as appeared requisite, 
which will be addetl to the Appendix, and referred to as occasion may require, will now 
proceed to {tate the result of this inveftigation, when the examination o1 the situation 
of the Finances, as contined to India, will be brought to a close ; and a view will aiter= 
wards be given of the alteration which has taken place during the seventeen years 
from April 1792 to April 180g faite general causes to which such alteration may 
be supposed to be attributable)" j 

‘The inveftigation of that part of the Finances which immediately relates to India 
being thus completed, the attention of Your Committee will hereatter be directed to 
an examination of the Accounts of the Treasury in England, or, in other words, into 
the conduct of the Concern at home, as a diftinet branch of the Financial syftem of the 
Company. | In rovess, what may not perhaps be improperly termed the opera- 
tions of their Commercial Finance, will come directly under consideration, and a view 
will be taken of the Funds employed in the China trade, which is more particularly 
connected with the Home Coucern, and from which the Political branch is almoft en- 
fire separated. -expense attending the Settiement of the Island of St. Helena 
will likewise be brought under review, and the Balance of the Property there. 

Your Committee mutt here observe, that though the Home Concern is for the moft 
part Commercial, itis, in caflt transaétions as much inyolyed with the Political ftate of 
the Company, as the Concern in India; and the dificilty of making a separation in 
these Accounts also is, in many respeéts, greater, ~ aS 
_ Thevordinity and eftablithed source from which the Home Treasury has derived 
its SupplieS irom year to year, is the Proceeds of the Sales of Goods imported from 
India and China. ‘he returns made to India and China by Exports of Goods, 
Stores and Bullion, and by the payment of Bills of Exchange, together with the 
varions expenses and outgoings incident to the Concern, are to be considered as chiefly 
provided trom this source; although it will be found, that this ‘Lreasory, in like 
Tmanner with those in India, has occasionally received aid from extraordinary sources, 
a increase of Capital Stock, by Loans on ond and Repayments by Goyernment of 
Disbursements made in India, on account of the Public. bie 

Your Committee will not enter into an examination of the extent of the Com- 
pany’s Capital aétually employed, or of the real amount ef Capital which is absolutel 
required for the couduct of the Concern, in a view purely Commercial ; nor is it their 


_ Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY: $59 


Intention at all to discuss, in this. Report, the propriety, prudence, or economy of the | 
Commercial management of the Company’; the present purpose of Your Committee 
being merely to examine and report upon. exiliing facts, as demonfirated inthe 
Accounts which have been laid before the House and Your Committee, r 


From these Accounts is to be deduced, that when a Surplus Revenue exiited in | 
Tndia, it was, in conformity with the principles laid down in the Aéi of 1 793, applied 
to Advances for the purchase of Invefiments for consignment to Europe, or for the 
supply of the Canton Preasury; and when combined with the Funds available in 
India from Supplies from Europe, it was found insufticient for these purposes, the 
difference was furnifhed by Monies raised on loan in India. In whatever amount, 
therefore, the Capital of the Company in England was not snflicient for carrying on 
the trade, and for the conduét of the Concern generally, the deficiency was supplied 
hy Monies raised in India. . ‘The impraéticability of diftinguithing what part of these 
Monies was applied to Commercial, and what part-to Political , having already | 
been frated, the object of these additional remarks is merely intended as a farther | 
<lemontiration of the ftri& connexion of the Political and Commercial affairs at home 
as well as abroad; and as a proof of the. corie€iness of the position, that till it fhall” 
be clearly ascertained that the Supplies from the Home Treasury to India and China, . 
were derived from sources purely Commercial, the queftion of a diftinct view of the — 
proportion of the Indian Debt which is to be termed Political or Commercial, muft 
remain undecided, whatever may haye been the amount of those Supplies. 


‘ The eee Ate relate a the Home Concern Ses and eee the > 
asis-of a futpre Report, are those annually presented to the House ‘ompany, — 
in pursuance of the direétions of the AG of 1793, as well as miles relating baste 
Affairs in India. Although not so numerous and extensive, they are of singular im- , 
portance, by exhibiting the central point to which all the Financial transaétions 
abroad and at home muft ultimately verge, and the result in which the interefts of 
the parties immediately embarked in this extensive’Concern, and not less those of the 
Public, are implicated. In the course of this part of the Inquiry, the amount of the 
Debts and Assets at the end of the period, will be contratted with what it was at 
the commencement, upon the same principle as has been adopted in regard to the 
Affairs of India; and the result will fhew the variation which has taken place 
in the interval. aa aye 


Your Committee propose alse to take a gencral combined view of the whole of 
the Concerns of the Eaft India Company, Both abroad and at. home, as respe&ls 
their exifting property and the amount of their Debts ; in order to lay before the 
House, as accurately as circumftances will adinit, the Final Result of the yarious 
Financial transaStions, both Political and Commercial, from the year 1793 to the - 
year 1810. ‘ a raps eK 

From the concluding part of the laft Report, the House, it is presumed, will be 
fully aware of the difficulties to be expeéted in the further pursuit of au Inquiry into 
the'ftate of the Affairs of the Eaft India Company, upon the principles then adverted 
to; which principles, however, form the basis of the plan proposed to be followed 
upon the present occasion. Every degree of diligence has been employed, and every 
practicable source of information has been resorted to, in order to enable Your Com- 
mittee to bring this complicated subjeét under the view of the House in the moft 
perspicuous and intelligible form; but notwithftanding every exertion on their part, 
and notwithftanding the results to be thewn will be verified by the proper Official 
Documents, they firid it #till necessary to claim indulgence fae consideration 
that this extensive combination of Accounts, being both of a,Poli and | 1 ‘ 
description, is drawn from documents and books originally prepared and: ‘e 
yately in India, China, and England. ‘The various exchanges in which they were firft” 
fiated, and particularly the long course of years to which they velate, will be ad- 
anitted as a further claim, that full allowance fhould be made if these results thall not 
appear entirely satisfactory, or fhall even be found hereafter to be in some particulars, 
jnaccurate. Some difference indeed is naturally to be expetted from the mode of 
ftatement, which has Leen usually in praétice, of conneéting the Home transaGtions of 
one year with the Forcign trausattions of the year preceding, upon the presumpticn, ; 
that in the whole period, the Consignments from India aud China of one year might 


be realizedin England inthe next. 


4ay F HAVEXG 


250. 


Aftairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 363 


honored for a correspondent period, is found to have been £15,489, j Date ‘Appendis 
deduéting the Intereft paid in consequence of the occasional OB Benge some oe pes 
of the Bills whea due, to theamount of £.120,963;'the Debit would be £.15,368,612,. Appendix, N° 
The difference between this sum and the amount credited in India, is £.622,574, and 
is chiefly to be accounted for by the payment having been made on the aétual rate of 
Exchange at which the Bills were drawn; whereas the Indian Credit is calculated at 
- a lower rate, in order to preserve a-general conformity with that used in the State- | 
ments of Revenues and Charges. Of the sum ftated to have been ‘paid in England, : 7 | 
£.7,472090 was expressly in liquidation of Indian Debt. a Nppendi, 4 
Your Committee, without entering into a further examination of the detail of 
various other Receipts for which India has credited England, in the Statement under . 
reference, will content themselves with ftating their amount to have been £.393,372 3) Appendix, Ne 
and the Total of the Supply.as a Cath Fund, for which England has been credited in ~~ ’ 
the Indian books, to have amounted to the sum of £.31,. Combining then, bs 
the Amount received in India on Loan and_ otherwise, viz. tates Appendix, 
ie ae ae 


ad othe in 
amount of the Resources by Supplies from Europe, the 
ordinary Funds which have been received int : 
1792-3 to the year 1808-9, will, on the 
$52,309,424, ; See or a 
Having ftated the Funds themselves, the next objeét- of Your f 
becomes the Application of them. ee Cas MeN 
‘The amount in which the Charges of the 
the Debts ciceeded that of the Territorial 


Bengal preventing an earlier transinission of thesetailed’ Diburscments of that Pre- ~ 
sidency. But accurate Statements: having been since received from -thePr ney of 


Bengal, of the Receipts and Ditbursemeuts of the years beldte dhewn in an incom-" 
plete ftate, Your Committee have thouglif it: ight to°call ty such Accounts as x 


Ie e necessary to be 

made. The Statement so correGted will be found iti the Appendix, “a os  Kppen 

The effet produced by these correCtions upon the Result first shewn, is an addition ALD. 
to the Excess of, Charge in the sum of £90,339. | The gross excess of the Charges 
beyond the amount of the Territorial Reyenues, which muft haye been defrayed from 
the Extraordinary Funds, will then. be found to. have been & 5,078, 015.0% ag 

The amount which India is considered fo have disbursed ony account of the 
merce, and in immediate Supply of or retura.to the Concerti: 
leading feature in the application of the Extraordinary Funds. A 

The Commercial Charges not added to the Invoices have been shewn to have’ _ ; 
amounted, during the period in queftion, to the sum of £-3,056,251) As, upon-the’ Second 
inspe€tion of that Account, it has been found to require correétion‘and adjuftin it PH ae 
another Account is added to the Appendix, by which the amount of these: Charges) “Appendix, N? 
appears to have been f. 2,916,279. ‘These Charges comprize’ the Salaries a 
Allowances of the Board of Trade at each of the, Presidencies, and their subordinate. ; 
Offices of a description ftriétly Commercial, with those of the Aurungs or Factories) 
where the Inveftments are provided ; and also the Charge of the Import Warehouses, i 
or the Departments where the Goods exported from. England to India are deposited 
and sold. he Board-of Trade:at Bengal pace the provision and sale of ee 

5 $ 4 : 
250 ial 


SS “Appendix to Se" 
Goud Report, N°9. 


364 Third REPORT from the Select Committee on the 

two important articles of internal trade which the Government of India preserves 
exclusively for the benefit of the State, viz, Saltand Opium. This Board has likewise 
the control over the greateft part of the Department ofthe Cuitoms ; it has likewise 
the direction of the Marine, which branch may perhaps, irom being principally of a 
commercial description, be considered as. falling within the sphere of its immediate 
duties. The Board of ‘Trade at Madras superintends a small part only of the 
Cuftoms under that Presidency. © With respect to the Board of Trade at Bengal, 
a queftion mizht arise whether, under the circumftance of the extension of Duty that 
took place in the year 1798, whcn the superintendence of the trade in Salt and Opium, 
from which the averaze annual gross Receipt in the three laft years, amounted to 
£. 2,352,000, and of the Cuftoms amounting to nearly £. 300,000, was committed 
to it, the expense’of its eftabliihment should be considered as wholly attaching to 


“the Commerce, or apart fhould full asa charge upon the Territories, with the Revenues 


of which these articles are classed. On this point, Your Committee observe, that 
the Charges of provision, manufacture, transport, or sale, attaching to the Salt and 
Opium, are inserted in the Territorial Charges ; in like manner are the Charges of the 
' Cuftom-Houses. The datics of the Board of ‘Trade are merely superintendence or 
control. . The Salaries of the Members, in the year 1792, previous to the transfer of 
these duties, amounted to £. 24,360, and in te en 1809 to £. 25,520. The number 
of the Members has not been increased; and the new Duties have not in any way 


 affe€ted the subordinate Offices under them of a Commercial description. 


The Advances made for the purchase of Invefiments for Consignment to England, 
are a very important,part of the application of the Extraordinary Funds. ‘The amount 
is tiated to have. bee 038,266. Although it might be inferr(d, in an ab- 
feraét view, that amount of these Advances was principally supplied by 
Funds derived immediately from England; Jommittee are apprehensive that the 
queltion, as to; 


2 particular of the ary Funds from which the Com- 
lied, whether from Money ‘on loan in India, or from aids re- 
Europe, cannot, under the mmftances of the years in which the 
de, and of the nature of the syltem exilting in those years, be sa- 


* ‘tisfaGtorily. ééided, without an cxamiation far more minute than is required by the 
"observations proposed to be matle on the subjeét in this part of the Report. 


» Appendix N™ 15 
andig, 


ty furnithed by the several Presidencies and Settlements in India to the 

Factory at Canton, must, as Your Committee are led to think, be considered asso much 
advanced for the positive and direét purposes of the Trade of the Company, and may 
* be fiated asa Supply ultimately from India to England. The amount applied for this 
as, a ania bat £. 3,313,054, whichis the net Supply. ‘The transaétions be- 
~tiveen India and Pa iéiory of Canton. leading to this result, are shewn in detail in the 
account in the Appendix; irom whieli it will appear, that the gross Supply from India, 
Payments into the Canton Treasury under yatious engagements, by payments of 
Isof Exchange, by Consignments of Cotton, Sandal Wood, &c. amounted to 

he sum of. £4,698; 71. ‘The returas from Canton to India amounted to £. 1,385,317, 
whieh amount £ 1,310,318, -consifted of Bullion. © This remittance was made at 
periods when the Canton Treastiry was greatly replenifhed by the favourable balance 
“of trade between India and China; and when »great consequence attached to the 
Supply of the Indian Governments with Bulliou, by every prattical means. ‘This re- 
mittance’in Bullion is exelasive’ of the Consignment from England, originally de- 
si for the Supply of China, which was detained in India, as has been already 


~ adverted to. 


,, The Commereial line of the Service was found to demand other advances. ‘The 
Commanders of the ships were entitled, under their charter-parties, to be furnifhed 
‘ith a certain amount 6f Cath from time to time, for the immediate supplies of’ the 
necessities arising in the Course of the scrvice; and the amount of such advances was 
ultimately accounted for with the Owners of the thips, on whom Dills were given for 
She It wus, however, an outlay of money from the Indian Treasury. Payments were 
ewise wade. on freight and demorage, to be accounted for on making up the thip’s 
accounts at, home, ‘The amount. in these several inftances is ftated to have been 
£ 949,422; to which fhould be added the freight, &c. of Rice fips taken up ata 
pesiod when the ‘necessities of England required every exertion for the supply of 

oe, and provisious, £182,358 ; making together a total of £.1,128,780. 
‘The Disbursements next to be noticed, may not altosether be considered as 

‘ i ; 

advances for the direét purposes of Commerce, iloagh they may be looked upon as 
- ‘ contributing 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 365 
contribating to the supply of Funds to. the Company's Treasury in England.—Tie 
firft is the advance of money for which Bills were mofily drawn upon His Majetty’s | 
Government. For the service of the Navy, &e. £ 402,069; for the expense of the 
Tsland of Ceylon, &- 318,246 3 for building of ships of war,’ £. 193,463; together 
£.913,778. Other advances on various Accounts were made, for which London was ibidely 
debited, to the amount of £. 286,678. aids 


Appendix, Ned I 
ibid. 5 


In a former Report, Your Committee ‘had occasion to’ offer some remarks relative 
to the Charges of Cevees and the Dutch Seitlements, and the amount of what had 
been repaid to the Company upon: these accounts; they are again led to advert to” 


untof the 
of Ad- ~ 
the: 


rs that the Tot: was 
£. 8,212,572, being Rend ee eee : 
that the whole of the latter sui was incl in, the Interett pai 4 ‘ 
£. 3,675,533 in the Charges of India, leaving £. 1,223,571 to be accounted for as” 
being a part of the disposal of the Extraordinary Funds. Ona more minute in- — 
speétion of this Account, it seems that a larger sum mutt be taken/aS*furnithed from 
the Extraordinary Funds, than that now ftated. The adjufiment'to be made, ‘is as 
follows: the sum not included in the Charges, but admitted as a Gh e 
Public, which has been liquidated in England, has been thewn to be J 
to this fhould be added the amount expended by the Compan 
included in the Charges ; 'viz—the half of the Advantes and Expe 
the Eaftern Islands, whieh, by the decision 6F the Seleét Committee, w 
to be a claim upon Government. ‘The athount of itis £.437,7743 
Total Amount which has been liquidated, in this view, by the: Extra 
may be ftated at £. 1,661,345. eye) f Bs 


¥ 


Your Committee mutt observe, that some diftinGtion will beh 
reference to the various services to which the application of the I straording ¢ 
has been direéted, for the purpose of specifying with acciracy the outlay of Money io 
direét Charge; or in that way in Which the amount, in “Some fhape or other, was: ~ 
ultimately converted into property, and found in the Assets of the Company, either,” 
abroad or at home: but this point will perhaps come mo rly under consider- 
ation in another part of the Report. , Your Committee “sities ore only now remark, 
that with the exception of the increase of Indian Assets, Wiich is the lait point in this 
branch of the examination, the particulars remaining to be considered are of the 
description juft adverted to, viz. a positive issue of Money, or Loss, which may in ~~ 
fa& be classed among the Charges of the Indian Territories: ~ \ : . 


: , ee pay 

The firft issue of this description isa payment of a portion of the Debts of the 

Private Creditors of the Nabob of Arcot, to the amount. of £.3,058;953.. This. pay-" 
ment was made under Orders sent to the Presidency of Madras, dated 20 January 

1796; which Orders originated with the Board of Commissioners for the Affairs of 
India, and were tratismuitted to India, under the exercise of the powers vetted in them 

by the Legislature. Rove be - pe 


A payment was likewise made to the Private Creditors of the Rajah of Tanjore, 
amounting to £.64;044, under orders transmitted to India, dated 18" Sept. 1792, i 
founded on the Treaty with the Rajah, in which provision was made in favour of the Appendix, N° 20.. 
Private Creditors. ‘The sum above fiated was the amount paid in India ; it will Appendix, 8% 
hereafter be hewn, that a further sum was paid from the Treasury in England upon 
the same account. . LA ce 2 


Your 


566 Third REPORT from the Select Committee on the 


Your Committee have, in their laft Report, brought to the view of the House the 
particular result of the Revenues and Charges of each of the Presidencies, from 
swhich it appeared that the excess of the Charges.of Madras and Bombay, uring the 
period under review, amounted to no less a sum then £. 20,579,627. They have 
not examined minutely by what mode the wants of. these Presidencies were supplied, 
either in respect of their excess of Charge, or the Disbursements for the purchase ot 
Tnvefiments, &c. as it is sufficiently clear that the Presidency of Bengal afforded 
assistance to Madras and Bombay toa large amount. ; 


Rpentin, ye 22. ‘The total Supply as debited in the Bengal books, amounted to £. 27,853,171 


‘The amount at which this sum is. creditedin the books of Ma- 
dras and Bombay, is only - - Lon es = = 26,979,768 


“Being lesé than the Debitibyei= Ay SS = LY 873,403 


id syhich matt chiefly be attributed to the effeét of the Exchanges at which the Remit- 


pendix, Nees 


tances or Consignments were made, but partly to the Exchange at which the conver- 
ae ‘of the Colas of each of the Presidencies is effeGted in order to preserve con- 
_formity with ‘the rate used igpie ‘calculation of the Accounts of the Revenues and 
Charges. In either case, for the view now to be given, itis presumed to be correct 
fiate the ; fat as a loss of so much property. \f 
* Your Committee having been informed that various sums have been written off the 
Indian Books of Acco for losses’ incurred at the Presidencies, which losses were 
“notincluded in the A@gounts of the Charges, have called for an Account/of the same; 
. by which it appears, that the amount in the seventeen years under review, was 
’ ~~ rd 
unt ofthe whole of these. tes of Expenditure, is £. 43,794,623 
727 was an expenditure in the course of Commercial Manage- 
ical description, which, from being converted into property, would 
than realized. The fonaane £. 10,889,896 was an expendi- 
greater part of a Political nature; and in 


‘ommercial,“ but for the 
as muft be oem as diminution of property, from 


aur applicati ‘the way of defraying Charge, or so as to 
Pi ge abies ali 
"Of the total amount of Extraordinary Funds; which has been ftated at £. 52,309,424, 

r fill: iains; tobe accounted for, the sum of £.8,514,801. This upona 

minute ex be found, with a comparatively small exception, to have 
been employed :an increase in the Assets in India, To ascertain the fa& 
with every practicable of accuracy, Your Committee have entered upon an 
‘examination rather in detail of the Statement of the Assets annexed to their Second 
Report. The Jaft-year a that Statement is said to have been made up, in regard to 

. Bengal, from we Ga ‘Stock Account of that Presidency of the 31" January only, 
being the lateft wed, As itsis of importance that the periods of the several 
Accounts fhould. accord with each cther‘at the end of the official’ year, namely the 
30" April, and as it has ‘been represented that the Statement now referred to re- 
‘quired correétion on account of an error in calculating the Exchanges ita part of it, 
Your Committee have subftituted another Statement of the Assets, which is added’ to 

~ the Appendix of this Report. According’to this correéted Statement, the. total of 
the Assets on the 30% of April 1792, amounted to the sum of £. 72553,834; and on 


of Funds, either 
ty 


» the go" April 1809, to £.20,127,707 5 being,/on firft view, an Increase of 


$12,573,873. 7 F . 
‘The amount in which thé Assets might be supposed to Have increased by: Le 
__ The amount in wl he Ass sed by the appli 
cation of Funds raised in India, namely £. 8,514,801, leads molt obyiously to, the 
inference, that very considerable adjuftments muft be made of the Increase now ftated. 
- Your Committee have therefore direéted. their, particular attention to this point, be- 


ites in their Judgment it appeared to be of essential importance. 


The adjuftments thought to be necessary, are of various descriptions: firft, the 
absolute.exclusion of bad Debts, or Debts apparently nominal, from both periods of 

» the Account; Revenue Balances, as they were in no-way created’ by the application 
of Indian Funds; Debts from the Nabob of Arcot and Rajah of Tanjore, a very 

r a5 material 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, _ 367 


material part of them having originated in Charges or Advances brousht to account 
antecedent to the year 1792, or were in Debits on Arrears’ of Subsidy, under the 
engagements with those Princes, before the conclusion of the Treaties by which the 
Company now hold the possession of their respective Countries. ‘The part of the in- 
crease occasioned by the Imports from Europe in Goods and Stores cannot, in any 
view, be supposed to have been produced by Indian Funds: it is therefore excluded 
in like manner with the above. ‘Lhe expense attending the Expedition to Exypt is 
erroneously kept on the Bengal Quick Stock Account 2s an Asset, from being con- 
sidered us a claim upon the Public. That claim having been liquidated, ithas | pro- 
perly been excluded from the Accounts made up in Endland: the amount, £.1,733,328, 
is therefore ftruck out upon the present occasion. 


The cffeét produced by these several adjuftments, is ewn by an Account in the 
Appendix, to reduce the amoutit of the increase of Assets to the sum of £. 7,703,611 ; 
to which, however, fhould be added a consignment of Treasure from Bengal to 
Madras, which, though properly exeluded from the Bengal Quick Stock of April 
1809, had not arrived at Madvas in sufficient time 49) Be inserted in the’ Account of 
that Presidency. ‘Fhe amount of the value of this Treasure was £.717,5 ‘The 
total Increase of Assets, procured by the application OF employment of Funds in the 

2 r 


Indian Treasuries, will then be found to amx unt to the sum of £/ E7255 
which, however, fhlould be deduéted for inom view, the Incre the ain 
due from Individuals‘on Advances made to them for the proyisi 

between April 1792 and April 1809, as the Whole of the ces mi 
1808-9, a) already been included in a fo: part of the Rep I 
be deduéted is £. 122,506. The amount employed ia the Increase of | 
then be reduced to the sam - 8,298,686, of which the Commit 
satisfa€tion to observe, £.5;615,494 is in Cath ed pt as the, Tres 
Presidencies of India. rican. SR 2 


‘The Company are besides possessed of property to a considerable 
Presidencies and Settlements in India, which, trom not being conside 
immediately available, is not inserted in what is termed their Bir 
of which a view has now been taken. is pro] sists fof. 
Furniture, Guns on the Ramparts, Arm: ms py fescsiflions 
Buildings might also be mentioned, butythe coft of them is’su; | to-have 
* cluded in the Charges. These several articles, with the doubtful Debts of the Company, 

are cartied into an account termed’ Dead Svock. In many respetissthe articles so 
described are nevertheless to’be considered as .real property'31 : i , 
not been included in the Charges in ike Maiiner with Bu gsand Forti i 
can only have been procured by the advance of Tunds, either nd or India. 
Your Committee having already adyerted to the difficultiés in the way of acccrately 
accounting for the disposal of the Stores consigned from Europe, they haye only 
now to add, that these diflicultics operate upon the pre scasion, and render: it 
almoft impossible to diftinguifh the partof the Guns, Arms, &e. which was received _ 
from England. ‘The net Increase on the whole of the Beat & in India, in ‘so 
far as it consisted of Plate, Houschold Furniture, Guns, Stores, &c. amounts to 
£.929,291, of which stim it is eliniated that £200,000 was produced by the 
application of Indian Funds, oe en sh 


satisfactory as could be esp 
Finances of this great Empi 
Commercial branches of its government~and management. ah ~ 
Your Committee having thus effered to the consideration of the House such re- 
inarks as appeared to them requisiie, in order to explain the several sources from 
which the Extraordinary Funds were derived, and the modes in which they were 
expended, fearing that the manner ih which those remarks have been brought for- 
ward may be thought too diffuse or desultory for a ready consideration of the sub- 

j jet, have causcd'a ftatoment of the figures to be drawn into one point of view 5 
259. Be i which 


Appendix, N°26. 


Appendix, N* 2, 


368 Third REPORT from the Select Committee on the 


which they have added.to the Appendix, with the hope that it will afford greater. 
facility in the comprehension of the whole transactions, by placing them in a foru at 


once simple and clear 


Your Committee, having completed the fir part of the plan which was proposed’ 
to be followed in the course of their Inquiry, in so far as it related to the Receipts 
and Disbursements of the Treasuries of the several Presidencies in India, will now 

roceed to the concluding poiut of this particular branch of it; which, in their 
judgment, is of peculiar importance, from involving the consideration of the cffec 
produced upon the property of the Company, by the complicated transa€tions which 
have been brouzht to the attention of the House, in the Reports of Your Committee 5 
or, in other words, what has been the General Result upon our Affairs in India, im 
a Financial view, by the various operations of a Political and Commercial nature, 
between April 1792 and April 1809. 

The Accounts of the Debtseand of the Affets, which have hefore bcen referred to; 
furnith the data by whieh this great queftion muft be determined. It is, however, ne~ 
eessary to repeat in this place, that the conclusion which might be drawn irom the firt 
view of a comparison mace between the Tetal Amount of either the Debts or Assets 
at the commencement or conclusion of the period, as fhewn in those Accounts, how- 
“eyer apparently plausible, would not be correct, as many adjufiments are found to be: 
necessary; and it mutt likewise be repeated, that the comparison for the purpose now 
in view cannot be made, upon accurate principles, without attending to one very ma- 

the exclusion from the Assets of sach Items as were not producer 
u 


necessity of them is to be attributed. Your Committee will there- 
roceed to draw the attention of the House to the Results produced 


to £.12,2223010, lucting the adjufted amount of Assets at the firft period from 
that atthe latter, 2 that the Assets in India have, upon this principle, in- 
ereased between these is, in the sum of £. 8,421,172, which, with the further 


deductions betore noticed, is reduced to £. 8,298,606. The amount of the Debts 
owing by the Company in India, at the same periods, has likewise undergone adjutt- 
ments, by which the gross amount of Debt on 30 April 1792, which was originally 
fiated at £. 9,142,720, is reduced to the sum of £. 7,992,548; and the gross amount 
ofthe Debt on 30 Ai 1809, firit ftated at £.30,81 2,441, is reduced to £.28,897,742. 
Contrafting these two periods, upon the plan adopted with regard to the Assets, viz. by 
deducting the amount mm 1792’from that in 1809, the Debt will appear, on the whole, 
to have increased in the stn of £. 20,905,194. Dedacting the amount in whieh the 
Assets are {tated to have been increased, from the Iperease in that of the Debts, the 
difference amounts to the sum of £. 12,606,528, which sum forms the General Result, 
which is the object of the present branch of the inquiry, aud thews the amount in which 
the Financial Affairs of the Company in India may be said to have varied between 
April 1792 and April 1809. ” 


The observations already made render it unnecessary for Your Committee to call 
to the recollection of the House, that the General Result now fiated, has been pro- 
duced by the direct Cath transactions of India, both Political and Commercial. ‘The 
Sources fiom which the requisite Funds were derived, and the application of those 
Hoods by which this Result bas been produced, have been respectively examined in 

etail, in the laft and in the present Reports: the Produce of the Territorial Revenue, 
and the Expenditure of it, in the fonner; the Extraordinary Funds, and the Disbirse- 

ment of them, iv the latter. It only, therefore, now remains to ftate, for the 
tion of the House, the immediate causes to which the Result now ex! i ited o be 
attributed; or what circumftances may be presumed to haye occasioned an absorption 
to 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. - 369 


to the amount of this defalcation. This will be seen by a reference to the Statement 4 
which exhibits the Extraordinary Disbursements, and by selecting from it such articles 
as come under the description of pusitive and direct Charge, or of alienation of Pro- 
perty in India; which has been accordingly done, and an Account has been drawn 1p 
upon these principles, and added to the Appendix. As the details of the several Appendix, N*2% 
items contained ia this Account have already been explained, Your Committee need 
only advert at present to the Total of them, which is £. 12,590,303, and which will 
be found as near to accuracy as, upon full consideration of the geueral principles by 
which the inquiry hus been directed, could possibly be expected, when it is considered 
that that inquiry embraces the receipt and application of a sum approaching two 
hundred and forty-five millions fierling. 


: In ftating the apparently unfavourable variation above fhewn, Your Committee feet 
it incumbent on them to observe, that it is by no means to be inferred from thence” 
that the general complexion of the affairs in India is in reality unprosperous, or that 
no adequate counterbalance is to be found for the sacrifives of Funds which have Leen 
made. Although the Political Government of India ulay not regularly come within 
the purview of this branch of inquiry, further than as to the expense attendant upon 
it, and as to the means of detraying that expense; the extension, the internal ia- 
provement, and the additional security of the Indian Empire at the present time, com= 
pared with the year 1792, cannot be loft sight of, any more than the present high fiate 
of public credit, which to these circumftances is juftly attributable. Tt is true that, Appendix, N* 28, 4 
notwithitanding the progressive increase of the Revenues, the increased facility 4 
| 
y 


pendix, N26. 


of realizing them throughout the Territories, the comparison of the Surplus Produce 

of the year 792-3 with the excess of Charge in the year 1808-9, exhibits a Result 

by no means satisfactory; and certainly ftrongly points out the necessity of measures 

being devised to effect a reduction of Expenditure, which, from a variety of causes, 

both in Charge and in Intereft on the Debts, mult now be considered to be excessive. : 
A cursory view of the latter ycars of the Statement annexed to the Second Report, will Appendix to 2 
thew that much has been already done towards this desirable end ; and’ Your Com- Report, N° 6. 
mittee are encouraged to expett, by the tenor of advices lately recei ‘on Bengal, 

that the time is not diftant when the Surplus Produce of the Revenues will be cqual Appendix, N°29, 
to, if not exceed, what it was at the commencement of the period they have reviewed ; 

and that, by the gradual reduétion of the Debt, which may be rational looked for, Appendix, N° 30, 
a saving of Intereft will accrue, which, pre tanto, will be a further addition to the See also Ne 29. 4 
Surplus Revenue. | 


Your Committee muft ftate further, that notwithftanding the defalcation now 
fhewn, would, on another view, be enhanced by the addition of the principal part of 
the Arrears, &c. which have been deduéted from the Debts owing by the Company; | 

et to whatever extent the Revenue Balances deduéted from the Assets hall be i 
hereafter realized, and in whatever sum the value of the Buildings and the Dead Stock “a 
of India may have increased by Indian Expenditure, in. both cases the amount | 
muft be considered as a reduction of the above defaication ; to which may fairly be 
added the net amount of the sum recovered in England, in liquidation of the Dis- 
bursements in India ebargeable to the Public, 


Your Committee having, in another part of this Report, intimated their intention 
of offering some further remarks respecting the Debt, which by progressive operations Me 
has accumulated to the amount at which it ftands, now resume that subject. 


| 
The increase of the Debt bearing Intereft has been fhewn to amount to i 
£- 10,059,897; and the increase of the Intereft payable upon it may be fiated at the Appendix, N° 2. 3 
sum of £. 1,575,009. A fixed annual demand to so large an amount, upon resources 102) 
not directly susceptible of increase by additional assessment, is certainly a mott unfa- 
vourable feature in the Accounts, and very firongly enforces the necessity of every 


effort being made for its reduction. 


Your Committee consider it as due to those entrufted with the Government of 
India to fiate, that the growing amount of the Debt has, from a very early period, 
been the subject of their anxious observation ; and that it has always been an object 
of their earncft solicitrde, to devise practicable plans for its reduction. Various 
measures have been resorted to from time to time for this purpose, which have been | 
in different ways brought under the notice of the House: but Your Coumitice 4 
think it right here to bring to your consideration this part of the subject somewhat 
more in detail. The 


370 Third REPORT from the Select Committee on she A 
'-< "Phe effects of the war which ended in the year 1783, were particularly prejudicial 
to the Financial syftem of India. The Revenues had been absorbed ; the pay ond 
allowances of both the Civil and Military Branches of the Service were greatly in 
arrear; the Credit of the Company was extremely depressed; and, adde«! to all) the 
whole syftcm had fallen into such irregularity and confusion, that the real ftate of 
affairs could not be accurately ascertained till the conclusion of the year 1785-6, 
The increase of the Debts being known in England, the special attention of the 
Board of Commissioners for the Affairs of India, soon after its inftitution, and of the 
Court of Directors, was ftrenuously applied to discover the moft effectual means for 
fits reduction; and, afler verry mature deliberation, ‘a mode was determined upon, 
which appeared well adapted to the exifting cireumftances of the time. ‘This mode 
‘was a transier of the Debt to England, by the subftitution of a Certificate or Lill upon 

* the Court of Directors, at a fixed rate of Exchange, in lieu of the fodian Security, 
Bond, or Note, with an option of poftponement, when due, for a certain period, in 
order to. meet the conyeniene@ of the Home Treesury, The means of payment were 
‘expected to be found in Hhegeartins produce of the Revenues remitted to England, 
torough’ the medium of Inveltuient, combined with the profit of the Trade. This 
plan, from being suited to the convenience and interett of individuals wishing to 
remit their property to England, appeared to promise permanency in its operation ; 
Sie: abut this expectation was disappointed, Although in the year intediately iollowing, 
Ste Account pre- viz. 1786-7, the amount subscribed was £.1,498,712, in the next yeur it was only 
 stitedto the | £210,084. The rateof Exchange at which the remittance was fixed, was considered 
J pane pees unfavourable ; un alteration was therefore made, and orders were conveyed to Iadia 
A erienilt , N° 3a, for an increase of the rate at each of the Presidencies, with the expectation that when 
Appendix, N°33. inore favourable terms. were- oflered,“the holders of the securities would be readily 
See Account disposed to avail themselves of them. ‘This latter arrangement was, for a considler- 
printed 4 Fel.1793. able time; attended with success; and the Act of the 33° of His present Majeiy 
Beste tio & Tecoguized this pian of liquidation, but limited theamount payable within cach year, 
Bais. a a to the suny of x. 500,000, and limited the extent of the operation, so that the Debt 
: thould not, be-reduced below the sum of £. 2,000,000. ‘The Court of Directors, by 
Appendix, Ness, Letter dated 25" June 1793, signified their orderstothe Bengal Government, respect- 
ing the Bills to be drawn conformably to the principles prescribed in the Act which 


‘Appendix, N° 31. 


ee 


ae bis had recently passed. ‘ 

Fea E Your Ci ‘ominittee feel that their olservations: upon this subjeCt have extended to a 
hear period not immediately in the contemplation of their present Report, which has been 
tas : {eneraliy Confined to the transaétions subsequent to April 1792; and they have been 


led to them only by the subjeét now under discussion naturally imposing on them 
& some reference to the measures in aGtive operation at the period when their inquiry 
Originated. A reference to the Statement of Debts aifnexed to the Second Report, 
will thew that.the operations of the plan may be supposed to have been completel ly 
efiicient during the years 1792-3 and 1793-4. In 1794-5, the decrease of the Debts 
was in a much less amount, and the Debt after that period has, in every year till the 
Year 1808-9, progressively increased. But Your Committee here beg leave to 
remark, that the Increase or Decrease of the Debt thewn in this Statement, mutt not 
he taken to be a direét criterion of the operation, or indeed of the continuance of this 
or of any cther plan, as, ih the years where an Increase or Decrease appears, the cul- 
‘culation is made including new Loans raised in the year. © It has oceurred:that, not- 
withftanding the remittance was made in some years to a large amount (the ftate of 
affairs in India requiring Money to be raised on Loan) an Increase of Debt has been 
% exhibited, In order to. give the moft complete information respeéting the operation 
fe of the remittance plan during the period in queftion, Your Committee have drawn 
Ppendix N° 55, ito one view the amount of the sums subscribed from the year 1792-3 to the latcf 
pees as flated annually to Parliament, and added the Account to the Appendix. 
he total of the Account amounts to the sum of £.4,554,471; but on referring to the 
Ken _ etail, it will be seen that in the year 1797-8, the operation of the plan began to relax, 
. and continued, with some exceptions, less from year to year till 1804-5; after which 
: it may be supposed to have entirely ceased. The dircét cause of this efieét is to be 
traced in the political ftate of India, from which the demands for Funds became so 
pressing as to have induced the Government there to have recourse to a syftem of 
‘raising Money by Loan upon new principles. From this circumftance, and from the 
increased facility of making remittances to Europe at more advantageous rates of 
Exchange than those of the traiisier remittance, that plan was entirely superseded. 


fs The 


_ Appendix to 24 
Report, N*7. 


r 


re Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 351 


‘The apprehension that such might be the effeét produced by those circumftances, it 
$s presumed, suggefted to the Government General the necessity of having recourse z 
Yo some other ent by which the increase of the Debt might be checked, or the ‘ ‘ 
redu@tion of it @ffeGted. A plan, under the name of Sinking und, was accordin, ly Appendix, No 36 
inftituted in the year 1798 at Bengal, and in the 1799 at Madras, the principles aud 3%. 
of which are {hewn in the documents added to the Appendix. It appears to have 3 er 
borne no affinity to that which passes under a similar appellation in England, and 
consisted of Sums either raised by Bills on the Court of Directors, or derived from 
the general resources of the Country, and applied to the purchase of Public Secu- 
Tities in India, The operation of this Fund began in the year 1798-9, at the former 
Presidency, and in the year 1799-1800, at the latter; and effeted a reduétion 4 
of the capital of the Debt at Intereft, down to the year 1808-9, to the amount of Appendix to 2€ 4 


£. 4,038,696. Report, N° 7. 
The anxiety with which the increase of the Debt in India has been contemplated by 

the authorities at home, is firongly evinced by a Letter addressed to the Chairman, 

Deputy Chairman, and Court of Direétors, by a late President of the Board of Com- 

missioners for the Affairs of India, when quitting that Department in 1801, which is Printed by Order — 

already upon the Table of the House. The suggeftions contained in it were not of the House, 4 


enetleéled by his successor; and in the next year exertions were made to carry into. 19 Match 1806. 
veffeét a part of what was recommended in that document. The general principle of 5 
the measures (which were apparently confined to the space of two years) was to 
accomplith a more rapid liquidation of the principal of the Indian Debt, than could 
be effected by the exifting arrangements. ‘Lhe proposed plan being brought to matu- 
rity, a consmunication of it was made to the Bengal Government, by a Letter. dated 
1" June 1803, with orders for carrying it into execution. ‘This Document will like- 
wise be found in the Appendix ; and the amount of the Exports of Goods and of Appendix, N38. 
Bullion, in the years 1803-4 end 5, will prove that every cffort was made to cnsure Appendix, N° 5.. 
the success of the measure.. ‘The accumulation of the Indian Debt, however, which 
appears in subsequent years, fhews its entire failure. The cause of this, Your Com- 
mitice attribute to the War with the Mabratta Chieftains, which broke out in the very 
ear in which the plan commenced, and did not finally close til] April 1805. 


Reverting to the Sinking Fund inftituted in the year 1798, and to its operation as 
lately (hewn, it is thought proper to inform the House that this plan for the liquida- 
tion of the Debt has been discontinued, and the Accounts relating to itordered to be Appendix, N° 39. 
¢losed in the General Hooks of the Bengal Presidency. ‘The operation of the Fund Appendix to Se- 
on the Debtof the Madras Presidency, appears by the General Account of the Debts, cond Report: N° 7e 
to have ceased from the year 1806-7; J’rom this circumftance, and from the preced- 
ing observations, itis to be deduced that no regular plan for the liquidation’ of the 
Indian Debt, exifis at the present time ; but that whatever reduétion may be effected 
in its amount, muft arise from the application of the superabundant Funds, which, 
more from adventitious canses than trom an excess of Income, have accumulated in 
the Indian Treasuries; or from Transfers made to Europe, upon the principles 
which will presently be brought to the notice of the House. But these means of re- 
duGion moft obviously appear to be merely temporary; and although it cannot be 
denied that the effeét, as immediately applicable to our situation in India, is salutary 
from lessening the demand for Intereft, the farther liquidation of the Principal of the 
Debt fhould not be loft sight of ; as the subttantive interefts of our Indian Empire 
imperatively prescribe the absolute importance of devising and carrying into effe&t, at 
the earlieft praflicable period, some mode of lessening the Debts, either by pro- 
essive operation or otherwise, in such a way as to avoid the risk of deranging the 
inancial syfiem, by occasioning the necessity of increased Loans in India, or by 
falling with overwhelming effets upon the Treasury at Home. 


Your Committee, having thus given a fhort sketch of the general measures adopted 
from time to time for the reduétion of the Indian Debt, wiil draw this part of their 
Report to a conclusion, by a tew observations respesiing the Debt itself; a farther 
explanation which is the more necessary, from the alteration in the terms of borrowing 
in India being the admitted cause of those embarrassments of the Treasury in Eng- 
land, which have been, upon another occasion, brought to the view of the House. Your 
Committee will not go into detail upon this subje&, but be satisfied with adverting 
generally to what preceded the year 1798. _ Previous to that timie whatever was the 
rate at which Money was raised by loan in India, the transaCtion was almoft entirely 
local, and no power of demand in England, either for Principal or Intereft, was al- 
lowed to the Lender, (except as far as etek to the principal under the ey 

259. 5 : 


it printed 
der of the 


endix, N°45. 


if and 2d Reports. 
é 1 


) this branch of inquiry: 
Dye 


i 


prescribe, this Report mizht be brought to an immediate, close,. if. they bad not to: 
apprehend such a detail might not, as readily as was desirable, direét the judgment: 
to any conch:sion approaching to correéiness, of the diftinCtion which is presumed to: 

obtain between the Political and Commercial parts. of the transaétions. An absolutes, 
diftinGtion upon accurate principles, under the present system, cannot be,drawn 5. but 

Your Committee ave of opinion, that with’ some ‘addition, the documents. in the; 
Appendix to this and ethers of their Reports, will throw very considerable light upon, 


This subjeét twas adverted to.in the concluding part of their Second Report, and a 
Document produced by the Court of Direéiors, entitled, Exposition of the State of ! 
the Company's Affairs both home and abroad, from haying a near connection< 


“ with it, was added to the Appendix; but no direct opinion upon this Document.was 


then offered. Your Committee do not now, as they did not upon that. occasion, . 
think proper to enter upon a detailed examination of the principles, opinions and 
conclusions, which are set forth in the Paper alluded to, whatever be their sentiments + 
in respe€t_to the useful and important information which in wany.respeéts:it mult’ 
be admitted to contain. ‘The only part which, in the opinion of Your Comuittee, 
direGtly calls for remark, is that which relates to the Balance between the Supplies of » 
the Home ‘Treasury, and India and China, for the space of eleven years, which Balance 
is ftated to be in favour of the former, in the sum of £.8,118,861. : 


Tt was observed in the Second Report, that this Result ot drawn in a manner... 
corresponding to the principles upon which Your Commitice have though! 
pedient to conduct their inquiry.” ‘The principle by which they’ have’been gover 
aad the end which is more immediately in their view, 18, to make 'a separation of 
Political from the Commercial part of the Company's affairs; whereas the Accou! 
ti Whence the Balance or Result now adverted to is drawn, blends the. Sup| 
India, of which a partis Political and apart Commercial, with that to China, whi 
is entirely Commercial. ‘They do not dispute the propriety of this mode of statément, 
as referring to the object for which it was professedly intended, namely, to ascertain’ 
simply the Balance of the Debit and Credit between England, and‘ India and ; 
upon a*broad ard general principle; which led the Directors. to-commence their A 
count with the year 1797-8, confining it to a period fhorter than that. of whicl Your 
Committee have taken a review, and also fhorter than that referred toin the Statement 5 
of the Revenues and Charges of India, inserted in another.part of the Appendix to - 
tue Exposition, SRLS Le sary Bia 


a -Affite of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


“The consideration which Your Committee have given to the subject, has eftablithed 
(tq their own conviction at leaii) that. the only principle upon which the line can at 
present be drawn’ between the Political and Commercial branches of the Concern, is 
by the adjuftinent of an Account between the Indian Treasuries solely, and the Trea- 
sury in England; ftating on the one side, the Advances made by India for the immediate 
account of England; and on the oiber side, the Disbursements by England for the 


- immediate account of India, and thus ftriking the Balance. 


373 


Viewing the subject in the light of a mere Cath transaction, the point at issuemight 
be determined by referring to a Statement inserted in the Appendix, in bi tbe 
Supply derived irom Europe, as an available resource, between the year 1792-3 and 
the year 1808-9, is calculated to have amounted to the sum of £. 31,404,230; and 
‘the Advances made in return, including the Commercial. Charges not added to the 
Invoices, with the Supply to China, aré'fhewn to have amounted to £. 34,597,435, 
being, an excess ofipayment by: India, amounting 'to £.3,193.205. But a Result so 
drawn may not, in the judgment of Your Committee, be looked upon as correct, be- 
cause the detail does not comprize either the entire payments by India, which eventually 


felt into’ the Treasury in England, or the whole expenditure of the E 
fairly chargéable to the Indian Political Concern. —Seyeral material 

therefore necessary ito place the matter in a more’ correct point of view. Th - 
included in the Territorial Charges,’ conftituting Claims upon th Public which were © Pe ad 


lth Treasury 
ai 


{ments are 


© amount. 


recovered in Englandy and the Disbursements of a Political nature in England, are 
the principal featares in these adjuftments. * The mode in which Your 


sume this queftion might be determihed upon general principl 


orf 


uimittee pre- 
dverting at the same 


time to all these cireumftances, is by ftating the Supply by India to England, and the 


Return by England to India, upow the following principles : 
SUPPLY by INDIA to ENGLAND. 
Invefiments of. Goods = = or BER 
Salidry-Advances for Bills, &c. repayable in England. -. - 
Com ineoit Charges not added to the Invoices - - 


Net Amount of Supply to Canton Ba PA SS 


Bt 


paid in England by His Majefty’s Government - — - 


Advances and Charges in India admitted as Claims upon the Public, and 


SUPPLY from ENGLAND to INDIA. 


In Goods and Stores —the Total Amount of the Consignments, 
as credited in the Indian Books - 4 = - Sf. 
Jn Bullion dabei? a 


By Bills of Exchange = = =  - = 
Sundry Receipts for which England is credited 


£. 


Total credited to England in the Indian Books 
Add 
Disbursements of His Majefty’s Paymafters General, 
on account of Regiments serving in India, 1793 to 
1807 - - - - - - = £. 2,638,988 
Vidtualling Office Demands - a = = 
Antereft allowed on Repayments by Government = 


5 £.3. 
‘Charges paid in England, supposed to be Territorial 6, 


25,407,009 
25329,236 


= Saag Total Supply by India to England =f. 


. 111,554,218 


7,389,752 
14,746,038 
393x372 


34;054,280 


Total Return by England to India - 4. 


by hich, dedu@ing the Supply by India, ftated above, the 
deslanne.wl appear In fayour of ‘England in the Sum of - 


33,956,268 
8,212,372 


— 


42,178,640 


43,808,341 


£. 1,629,701 5 


‘which is the Amount in which, upon the principles now aéted upon, the Political 
may be fated to be Debtor to the Commercial Concern, during the period in queilion. 


Your 


Appendix, N° 26. 


Appendix, N* 4. 

Appendix, N° 12, 

Appendix, N° 45 
& 16. 


Appendix, N°17 


“Appendix, N°. 


OT 
Appendix to Firft 
Report, Nea. 
} 
Appendix, No. 46. 


Appendix, Ne 46. 


(a) 


Appendix, N°7. 
‘Appendix, N° 47. 


374 Third REPORT from the Select Committee on y 


Your Committee, however, deem it proper to observe, in regard to tlis Result, 
that it is drawn from the Documents referred to in their original fiate, and thr it 
may be subject to some alteration, as well by a minute analysis of the Documents 
themselves, as by other adjuftments which your Committee feel it incumbent on 
them not to omit mentioning ; and upon these it may not be improper to offer a few 
explanatory observations. 

The Consignments of Goods and Stores are credited in the Indian Books, at the full 
amount charged in the Invoices; which amount includes an addition of 10 per 
cent. on the original coft; while the amount of Bills is credited at a rate of Exchange 
producing less considerably than the amount paid in England. 

How far all the sums ftated under the head of Territorial Payments from the 
Company's Treasury in England are accurately described, may admit of quettion ; 
Your Committee, however, think a large proportion are fairly described by 
that title. 

The Commercial Concern has not been debited for the Charge of Prince of Wales 
Island, or Bencoolen, which has been defrayed from the Territorial Revenue. 

The amount of the Losses of Consignments, by capture and fhipwreck, has been 
extensive; Outward £. 335,893; homeward £. 1,027,209; together £. 1,363,102. 
The Commercial Concern is debited by India for the whole'of the Consignments 
homeward, and has not received Credit for the full amount of those outward, 
A doubt may arise how the Joss so incurred is to he charged, whether to the Teii- 
toriés or to the Commerce. . 

‘The Advances in India.chargeable to His Mojefiy’s Government, and ‘the Dise 
bursements by the Paymafters General, are not carried down to so late a period as 
moft of the other items. 

Subject to these qualifications, the inferences suggefted by the Result firft thewn, 
the correctness of the prineiples-on which it is drawn, together with the adjuftments 
adyerted to, Your Committee humbly submit to the judgment of The House. 


21 June 1811. 


APPENDIX. 


Aftsis of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 375 


APPENDIX. 


No, 1—EXAMINATION of Wiiliam Wright, Esq. Auditor of Indian Accounts p. 377 
No. 1.(a.)—An Account of the Amount of the Bond and other Debts owing by the Eatt 
‘India Company, at the several Presidencics in {ndia, on the go April 1809; 
corrected according to the latelt Advices 3 ee se SS Be 78 
No, 2.—SraremeEnt, thewing the Amount of the various Adjuftments required to be made 
in the Accounts of Debts and Assets in India presented to Parliament, for April 
1792 and April 1809, in order to reconcile the same with the Receipt und Appli- 
cation of the Funds of India (exclusive of those derived from Europe) between 
5 the years 1792-3 and 1808-9 inclusive ==  =- = = = = ibid, 
No, 3.—An Account, fhewing the it of all Supplies received from Eugland at the 
several Presidenci meats in India respectively, in Goods, Stores, and 
Bullion; also by ange or Certificates on the Court of Directors, 
thewing likewise the Amount of all other Receipis for which England is credited, 
from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclusive - - - = p,38o 
No, 4—An Account, fhewing the Amount of all Supplies from the several Presidencies 
and Settlements in India respectively, by uveftments of Goods or Cargoes cony 
signed to England; thewiag likewise the Amount of all Payments for which 
England is debited by the said Presideacies and Settlements, trom the year 
: 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclusive, - = z be > = bid. 
No. 5.—An Account, thewing the Invoice Amount of al! Goods and Stores, and Bullion, © 
exported by the Balt Ludia Company to their several Presidencies and Settle- 
ments in India respectively, to the Island of St. Helena, and to their Faétory at 
Canton, from the sexson 1791-2 to the season 1809-10 inclusive, diftinguifhing 
eachiseagon <5) \=)6)) > = 1) a SR is Se Treen piss 
No. 6.—An Account, fhewing the Amount of all Bills of Exchange and Certificates paid by 
the att India Company in each year, from March 1793 to March 1810 inclusive; 
diftinguithing India from China, aud specifying, as far as practicable, such as were 
for liquidation of Indian Debt, and such as were for general purposes - p. 384 
No. 7.—An Account of the Amount of the Losses incurred by the Eatt India Company 
in their Cargoes outward to India and China respectively, from season 1791-2 
to 180g-10 inclusive ; diftinguilhing each Year - = = p85 
No. 8.—An Account-of the Sums received at the Presidencies of Fort William, Fort 
St. George, and Bombay, for Sales of Import Goods and Stores, from the year 
1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclusive = /s=), eileen en, = ahid. 
No. 9.—An Account of the Amount of the Assets of the Eaft India Company at the 
several Presidencies in India, on the got April in each year, from 1792-3 to 
‘ 1808-9, both inclusive; corrected according to the lateft Advices - p- 386 
No. 10—An Accounn, fhewing the Amount of Intereft paid in consequence of the poft- 
ponementof Bills of Exchange running on the Eaft India Company, from the 
year 1793-4 to the year 1509-10 inclusive meee =) 0 eri Sp. 388. 
No, 11.—An Account of the Yotal Annual Amount of the Revenues and Charges of the 
several Presidencies in India, by the aétual Accounts for the years 1807-8 and 
180S-9, with the Eftimate of the same for the year 1809-10, corrected according 
to the lateft Advices; diliinguilhing, as to the Revenues, the Revenues of the 
Company's Possessions exclusively from the Subsidies from Native Princes, or 
Collections from the Ceded and Conquered Countries; and, as to the Charges, 
the Military Charges and the Charges for Buildings and Fortifications, from the 
Civil, Reyénue, Judicial, and Marine Charges; thewing also the Supply to Ben- 
coolen, &e. and the intereft paid on the Debts - - - - ibid, 
Nov 11. (A.)—Sratemenr of the Revenues of the Coinpany’s Possessions exclusively at: 
Bengal, Madras, and Bombay, by the aéinal Accounts for the years 1807-8 aud 
1808-9, with the Effimate of the same for the year 1509-10; corredied accord=, 
ing to the lateft Advices RM aEEN SL ial) <5" Late toe ye gu: 
No. 11:(B.)—An Account, fhewing the Gross and Net Receipts, from Subsidies under 
Treaties with the Native Princes of India, or from the Nevenues of the Ceded 
and Conquered’ Countries, by the aétual Accounts for the years 1807-8 and 
1808-0, with the Eftimate of the same for the year 1809-10; corrected accord- 
ing to the lateft Advices ~ mi dideinetln is Etta ae Fe abd, 
No, 11. (C.)—Sratemenr of the Civil, Revenue, Judicial, Marine, and other Charges, (ex- 
clusive of the Civil Charges of the Ceded and Conquered Countries) at Bengal, 
Madras, and Bombay, by the a¢tual Accounts for the years 1807-8 and 1808-9, 
with the Eftimate of the same for the year 1809-103 correéted according ta 
thelatefi Advices - - 2 - * > = = @& © ibid, 
250. 5c No. 12., 


f 


No. 28.—Compntation of the Rate of Interest payable on the Indian Debt, on fea 


376 Appendix to III‘ REPORT from the Select Committee on the {List of 


No. 12.—An Account of the Commercial Charges not added to the Invoices at the several 
Presidencies in India respectively, from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-¢. 
Gnclasive® #6) =) SE eh. <0, 2h as eke an) = epg 
No. 1g,—An Account of the Number of the Members conftituting the Board of Trade 
at Bengal, in April 1792 and April 1809, and their Salaries and Allowances 
respectively ateach period == = = = = = = = = =_ ibid, 
No, 14.—An Account, fhewing the Amount of all Advances made at the several Presidencies 
and Settlements in India, for the purposes of Commerce, in so far as regards the 
purchase of [nvefiments for Europe; from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 
inclusive = = - - =. s eae 4 Ps 304 
No. 15.—An Account, fhewing the Amount of all Supplies from the several Presidencies 
and Settlements in India to the Fa¢iory at Canton; from the year 1792-3 to 
the year 1808-9, inclusive - - - - - - ibid, 
No. 16.—An Account, thewing the Amount of all Supplies received at the several Pre- 
sidencies and Settlements in India, from the aétory at Canton; from the year 
1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclusive - - - - i 
No. 17.—An Account, fhewing the Amount of the Claims of the Eaft India Campany upon 
the Public, on account of Advances and Supplies at the several Presidencies in 
India, which were admitted by the Select Committee of the House of Commons 
in 1808; diftinguifhing the part thereof included in the Charges and Interett 
paid atthe said Presidencies, in the Statements annually presented to Parliament, 
from the part not so included; specifying each head aud year respectively, as far 
as the same can be made out - + 1p BR Reo nes - Pp 395 
No, 18.—Copy Lerrer from the Coart of Dire&tors to the Governor in Council at Fort 
St. George (Political Department); dated 20 January 1796, and Extract 
_ Leuer in reply, dated 16** Auguft 1796 - - - - Pp. 397 
No, 19,—An Accounr of the Amount paid at Fort St. George to the Creditors of the 
Rajah of Tanjore, between the years 1794-5 and 1796-7 mis pe 998 
No, 20,—Extract Lerrer from Court of Directors to Goveruor in Council at Madras, 
(Political Department) dated 19" September 1792 Py ee. ibid. 


- ibid, 


No, 21.—Extraét Treaty with the Rajah of Tanjore, dated 10% April 1787 = — p. 399 
No. 22.—An Account of the Loss arising from Remittances or Consignments from Port 
to Port in India, trom 1792-3 to 1808-9 inclusive - = =p 400 


No, 23.—An Account of the Sums written off the Books of the several Presidencies in 
India respettively, as Losses, from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclusive, 
which have not been inserted in the Charges of the said Presidencies ibid. 

No. 24.—An Accounr of Treasure consigned from Bengal to Madras, excluded from the 
Bengal Quick Stock Account, and not received at Madras in time to be included 
in the Madras Stock Account, dated go Aprili809_ - - =  p, 4ot 

No. 25.—An Account of the Increase of Dead Stock in India, consisting of Plate, House- 
hold Furniture, Stores, &c. &c. between April 1792 and April 1809, the 
Expense of which is not included in the Charges ; dittinguifhing what was pur- 
betes in India from what was supplied by England, as far as the same can be 

lone= ae oe oe seed ee eed ibid. 

No. 26.—An Account, fhewing the Amount of Extraordinary Funds received into the 
Treasuries in India, with the application of the same, from the year 1799-3 to 

4 the year 1808-9 inclusive - - meh fmt) NSIS 

No. 27.—Srate ent, thewing generally the Causes to which the alteration of the 

Balance in India, as per Appendix No. 2, is presumed to be inmediately 

aliribatable = - < Pa a i a = = P+ 403 


April 1792 and got April 1809 ibid, 


No. 29—Extraé& Lerrer from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial Depart- 


e Pte dated 4® Janvary 1811 - = = pe 404 
0, 30.—Extraét Lerrer from Governor General i i] at Bengal (Financial Depart- 
ment), dated 22¢ Oétober 1810 fe s Capel x i B ibid. 


No. 31—Copy Lerrer from the Court of Direétors to the Governor General in Council at 
; - Bengal (Separate General Department), dated 15tSeptember 1785p. 405 
No.32,—Extraé Lerrer from Governor General to Secret Committee of Court of Di- 
_Tectors (on the Finances), dated 16" November 1786 - =p» 408 

No. 33.—Extra& Letrer from the Court of Direétors to the Governor General in Council 
at Bengal, (Separate General Department), dated 31" July 1787 - ibid. 

No, 34-—Extra& Lerrer from the Court of Dirediors to the Governor General in Council 
at Bengal (Public Department), dated 25 June 1793 - = = ibid. 

No. 35.—An Accounr of the Amount of Debis subscribed in India, between the 30” 
April 1792 and the 1 May 1809, agreeable to the Orders of the 158 Septem- 

ber 1785, the 31°t July 1787, aud the 25"June1793, drawn from the Accounts 


Presented to Parliament) | Fe ait Uk, of Sage oe 
S No. 36 


Appendix.] . Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 377 
“No. 36.—Extra@ Letren from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Secret Depart- 


a ment), dated 16" March 1798 - - = pe 410 
No. 37-—Extraé Lerrer from Governor in Council at Madras (Public Departm 

ORS duiplag® OBaberxyoo | <page ae Ae 

No. 38.—Copy Letrer from the Court of Direétors to the Governor General in Council at 

Bengal (Public Department), dated 1 June 1803 ay ee ibid. 

No. 39.—Extraét Levrer from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial De- 

. partment), dated 224OGober 1810 - = - - - = By P. 412 

No. 4o.—Extraét Lerrer from the Court of Direétors to the Governor General in Council at 

Bengal (Public Department), dated gt December 1807-  - —- ibid. 

No, 41.—Extraé Lerrer from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial Depart- 

ment), dated 14** May 1808 ~ - = = a si as ibid. 

No. 42.—Extra& Lerrer from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial Depart- 

ment), dated 22° OGober 1810 ~ e of te a: ibid, 

No, 43.—Extra@ Lerten from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial Depart- 

ment), dated 28° May 1810 SIGN, fed A ALEC. ie MT ee 

No. 44.—Extraé Letrer from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial Depart- 

ment), dated 4** Jannary 1811 - - - 2 - Pe hes ibid. 

No. 45.—Extraét Lerrer from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial De- 

s partment), dated 4° January 1811 - - - - - - ibid. 


No. 46.—An Accounr, thewing the Amount of all Sums paid by the Eaft India Company 
from their Treasury in England, supposed to be chargeable to the Territories in 


India, from the year 1793-4 to the year 1809-10 inclusive ~ p- 414 
No. 46. (a.)}—Examination of Charles Cartwright, Esquire, Accountant General of the 
Eaft India Company pees We ec) rt 7 ibid. 


No. 47.—An Account of the Amount of Losses incurred by the Eaft India Company in 
their Cargoes homeward from India and China respectively ; from the year 1792-3 
to the year 1809-10 inclusive, diflinguifhing each year - = = p. 41h 


Appendix, No.1. 
Committee on the Affairs of The Eaft India Company. 


Jovis, 20° die Junii 1811. 
Examination of WILLIAM WRIGHT, Esq. Auditor of Indian Accounts, 


A® E you Auditor of Indian Accounts ?——Yes. 
Is it the duty of your office to draw up the Accounts of Revenues and Charges, and of 
the Debts and Assets of the Company in India ?—Itis. 

Are the Statements in the Annual Budget Accounts, termed Abftrat Receipts and Dis- 
bursements of Bengal, Madras and Bombay respeétively, Abftraéts made of Statements in 
detail received from those Presidencies ?—They are. - 

Do not the Statements so received purport to be in general the entire Cash Transactions of 
those Presidencies, comprizing the Revenues and Charges as well as the Extraordinary Re- 
ceipts and Disbursements ? rainly. 

Do they not form the basis of the Accounts drawn by you, thewing diftinétly the Revenues 
and Charges of those Presidencies under their respestive heads ?—They do. 

Has it not occurred both in Receipt and Disbursement, that articles included under the 
head Extraordinary in the Statements received from India, have been considered as Revenue 
or Charge, and carried to account as such ia the Accounts to which the laft queftion 
refers ?—Certainly. vee : 

Has it not occurred, with regard to the Bengal Accounts particularly, that the Military 
Charge has been calculated on the Advances made to the Paymafters, because the detailed 
Disbursements had not been received in time for completing the Accounts ?—It has. 

Ta such cases, as well as others, when Documents are afterwards received from India, 
which render it necessary to make alterations in Accounts presented to Parliament, are you 
aotin.the habit of so deing?—Conftantly. % 

Are not Books kept at the several Presidencies, termed General Books ?—Yes, 

Are not the General Books supposed to include, in Abftraét at leaft, the whole of the 
‘Financial Transaétions of those Presidencies ?—Unqueftionably. ; 

Are the Statements of Receipt and Disbursement firft alluded to, supposed-to be drawn ig 
conformity with the General Books ?—They are. 

Are you in the habit, as occasion may require, of examining the connexion between the 
General Books and those Statements, and of adjufting the Accounts accordingly i—Yes. 


aan, :;»,-2-7-:_J__~<—»©kw’ 


Appendix, 


578 Appendix to III! REPORT from the Select Cominiitee on the 


Appendix, No. 1. (a.) 


Aw ACCOUNT of the AMOUNT of the BOND and other DEBTS owing by the EAST INDIA 
COMPANY at the several PRESIDENCIES in INDIA, on the 30% April 1809; corrected 
according to the lateft Advices. 


DEBT at Interest. FLOATING DEBT. INTEREST PAYABLE, 


ve : Ge 


2,780,783 6 1,686,247 


Sinking) so. ‘Sinking s5a95 (Sinki 5 ee 256,018 
Pave f as0hT Fund ca Fund 


BENGAL 17,487,011 2,735,288 20,222,299 1,429,329 


6,497; i 7,059,079 ‘epe 509,419 
Sinking 2 o Sishing 626,266 Sinking? soo 
Fund § Fund Fuud § 


MADRAS - 5,871,468 561,045 . 6,433,413 459,318 


BOMBAY - 3,719,727 408,131 4,127,858 301,275 
FORT MARLBRO’ 1 1,625 17,246 28,871 1,162 


Tomine 3) oe 27,089,831 3,722,610 30,812,441 2,191,084 


Sennen 
India Board Office, j 
Whitehall, 17% May 1811. (Errors excepted.) 


Thomas Nicholas Wittwer, 
Accountant, 
Ty Ee aL, ONE PRPS ce WEST nee oer ee le 2 
Appendix, No. 2. 
14 

STATEMENT, fhewing the AMOUNT of the various ADJUSTMENTS required to be made in the Accounts of, 

DEBTS and ASSETS in IND TA, presented to Parliament, for April 1792, aul April 1809, in order to 

Teconcile the same with the Receipr and AvvuicaTion of the Punps of ixpra, 

from Europe) between the years 1792-3 and 1808-9 inclusive, 


(exclusive of those derived 


} 
PRINCIPAL, | etiga wie 
bearing 


INTEREST. br 


DEBTS, $0 April i792 se tt a RS - . 29,99 
TRaisinenie’ : | Coe 
Dedu& Arrears of Allowances, &c. due in the Civil and Milita 
Departments at Bengal - - - Sy gee = » 454,310 
Madras - - - - : - > 426,548 
Bombay stn ee = 269314 


Net adjutted Amount of Debts of 30 April 1792, 7,129,934 g 7,992,548 
pace a 
PaaS rapa abt Saat eet hr ee | 27,089,831 | 3,722,610 |! 30,812,441 
Dedué Arrears of Allowances, &c. as above, &c. > 
Bengal, Arrears, &c, mer! TA £. 1,383,059 
Madras, Debts - - - = 229,550 
Bombey, Arrears = SL = 302,090 


1,91 
Lorseg ff 1.91460 
Net adjufted Amount of Debts on 30t® April 1so9 - £. | 27,089,831 1,807,911 |} 28,897,742 
Nncrease of Debts between 30 April 1792 and 30% April 1809 - £. | 19,959,897 945,297 |} 20,905,194 


\ 


the Affirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


379 
————— — a = 
Appendix, No, %.—cortinued. 
ASSETS, 30° Apnl792 “<6 BS) ee pe ee 7,553,834 
Adjuftments + P 
Deduét—sundry bad Debts, alee of to Dead Stock in Bengal 
Accounts = a 2, ‘ - = £. 69,966 
. Revenue Balances, Ditto - ~ + - = 299,410 
369,376 
Sundry bad Debts in Madras Accounts - = = 106,843 
Revenue Balances, Ditto - es - 572,761 
Due from Nabob of Arcot - = = =. = 1,092,739 
Due from Rajah of Tanjore - - = = = 399,301 
—|_ 2171344 
Sundry bad Debts in Bombay Accoants eee Is Mm 325) | 
Revenue Balances, Ditto ~ - - #2) = 5 79,890 | 
98,505 
Sundry bad Debts in Fort Marlhro’ Accounts =  - = - 34,358 
£.| 2,695,583 
‘Assets in Goods, &c. .in Import Wwarehites being created by 2 
Supply trom Europe = - 401,512 
Stores—amount remaining, £. 986;852.5 of hich, two-thirds l 
eftimated to have been received from Europe Bay = habe 657,901 
Total Adjuflments, April 1792 = = of. 3,752,996 R 
ies eee 
Net adjufied Amount of Assets on 36% April1792_ == Ps 
ASSETS, 30" ApriP1809 = * 2 =) = © =F = ie 20,127,707 
Adjuftments + 
Dedué—Expedition to Egypt, improperly continued in the 
Bengal Accounts us an Asset, Co eee ering eee. 4 
beeu liquidated in England - £:1,733,328 
Sundry bad Debts in-the Bene ‘Accounts’ - + 76,878 
Revenue Balances - - - = = 529,849} 
aot 2,940,055 
Bad Debts in the Madras Accounts = = = = ey 
Due from Nabob of Arcot - - - ee 
Due from.Rajab of Tanjore - = = =) = 8035220) ~ 
cRevenue Balances - = = ==) = 1,210,145 Eat 
- ————]_ 5,641,398 
Sundry bad Debts in the Bombay Accounts - + 43,197 "a 
Revenue Balances-- - Ditto - = = = 
oe 102,143 
“Sundry bad ‘Debts in the Fort Marlbro’ Accounts = + 65,697 
. , 6,149,293 
Assets in Goods, &e. from Europe ~ - 1,181,718 
Assets in Stores—A mount remaining, £- 1,938:371; of which yas 
:thirds.eftimated to: have been received from Europe, - = | 1,292,247 
; Total Adjufiments, April 1809 6,623,258 - 
£. |l1,504 449 
-Add—Amount of ‘Treasure consigned from Bengal to Madras, excluded from the 
Bengal Quick’ Stock Account of 30% April 1805 not received in time for insertion 4 
in the Madras Accounts.of that date - oo.) Sages ees 717,561 
‘Net adjufted Amount of Assets on 30 April 1809 - £. = | 12,229,010 
Dedu@: : 8,421,172 
Due on Advances Be inveftment, Aue 18909 - = = + a ae 2, 2 eS 
“Ditto - = Spal T7ODS aera) 2 a ek PR 371,976 
i | 122,506 
oF £. | 8,298,666 
—_—$——— 
‘Eat India House, 
7 June 1811, (Errors excepted.) 
| We Wright, 
Auditor of Indis Accounts, 
a 
Se 
250, 3D 


. 380 Appendix fo I® REPORT from the Select Committee ov 


ae 


“As ACCOUNT, shewing the Bee : ib 
- cand Settlements in India respectively, in Goods, Stores and Bullion, also by Bills of Exchange 0 
Court of Directors ; shewing likewise the Amount of all other Receipts for which ‘England is. 


1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclusive. 


BENGAL. BOMBAY. 


Ds : as 


Bullion Me ee ee | 5,322,198 853,654 | 1,052,272 


Bills on the Court of Directors, including 
thove for Principal and Interest on the >| 8,129,215 || 4,298,456 | 2,245,588 


Debs = °- - - 3 
Cargoes, including Stores - 
Indigo Contractors, one-fourth Proceeds & 

of Sule to be accounted for in Tondon ¢ BUEAES 
Becht sf fs) =e eed 29,474 
Received on account Supplies, &c: to 

King's Troops - = == te 
D° - D° Supplies, &c. to Navy - 7,596 2 

Sundries - See ee 3 38,605 47,840 "34,140 


Toran - £.| 18,390,730 | 7,618,189 | 7,209,413 


- =| 4,838,529. }, 2,485,239 | 3,877,413 


; h : Appendix, No.4... - 

AN ACCOUNT, shewing the AMOUNT of all SUPPLIES from’ the several Presidencies and 
reepe@ively, by Investments of Goods or Cargoes consigned to England, shewing likewise the Amo 
“ahi England: is debited by the said Presidencies and Settlements, from the year 1792- 
inclusive, ome 2 


Tnyestments for Europe | 14,914,793 
,Charterparty Advances, Demorage, &c. 673,733 
Advances to His Majesty's Nayy, &c.  - 136,518 


Bills drawn by Gove: i As 
MrOeat: mt} sisiesg 


Paid Officers and S ips - j : 
Seamen of lost Ships 25,987 ¥ . - 25,087 


_ Freight and Compensation to Rice Ships, ? 
Bie f Colnp ips, ee : 
ok. he Ba ek 182,358 3 a 182,958 


ae ; ; : 
33 oot Contractors © 70,806 : i - 70,806 
Le ganlelgicg oP) Be ae ty 85,370 Pa acts 

On account building Ships, including - 389) 
Shipssold - 0 st Mea  xps,ass 


"27,736,385 


caer S 


382 


Appendix #0 III REPORT from the Select Committee on 


— 


Appendix, 


Ax ACCOUNT, shewing the Invoice Amount of allGOODS and STORES, and BULLION, exported by the EAST INDIA 
‘ from the Sedson 1791-2 to the Season 1809-10 


wey 


he 


— 1802-3 


Season 1791-2 
—! 1792-5 


— 1793-4 / 


— _ 1799,1800 
1800-1 © 
— 1801-2 

— 1803-4 
“= 1804-5 


— 1905-6 © 


Eaft India House, 
7T* June 18, 


al 


197,384) 
148,919] - =~ 
211,600) 
203,60 

216360) 
210,882 d 
256,859 


248,427 
396,816) 
314,479) 
458,175| , 


407,059)1,016, 


270,625) 592,048 


977,435)1,146,632| 
269 io isis 
$36,509] -- - 
410,963} 200,921! 


455,338) - = 


984,500) = - = 


ee, 3 0983 63) 


j 


MADRAS. BOMBAY. BENCOOLEN. 
“Goods jeods 
Total. lj and | Bullion, | Total, Bullion, | Toto! ‘and. | Bellion. | Total, 
eg Pa ; Stores. 

| ce i 2 ei 

3 STs dee | 2 Cae oaks lg. | 6 
197,988 ‘raise 138,385] 213,370 ana | 199,448 4,113) 13,184] 22,207 
‘Assgrof razagl = 2 =| 73,749) = = =} 144,762] “2,401 10,998] 12,299 

of 4 2 

J = 114,056}| “138,866} ~~ ¥ 38,866) 2,522] 10,298] 12,820 
ia 7% Ei50\204 60,162). - + 60,163] ‘3,028 Ns 8,028) 
+> - | 201,977} 226,974) - = 226,74 10,884|- - -| 10,88 
= +, -| 174,543]| 216,834) "1 -) 916,834] 8,075) 20,784] 28,855 
159,777) 275,121]| 256,377] 42,047] 298,424] 2,575] 17,58 | 20,150 

| 340,44 101,015) 193,501)) 291,298) $04,568] 795,858] - - -} 17,990) 17,9 
20,742| 184,377|] 203,881] 100,697] 904,578 ae 540} 
~ 639,847|) 143,847, 200,793) 350,640)| 293,262) 131,966} 424,628] 18,149) 19,937| 38,080) 
772,307 bas 3 Mes.ass| 984,215) a64,241 364,824) 6,361). - -| 6301 
1 425,602] 284 *814,339] 327,125) 101,473 ee. 15,496) - + - | 15,496 
362,669) 160,403), 369,699) 222,150) ~~" - | 92,150) 20,8831 - . -| 20,sso} 
1,524,067] ites 5} $71,439) 125,359) 200,793) $26,153) 25,120, - - -]| 95,190} 
771,300) 142,363 142,303} 318,775 - 2°) $18,775] 20,3031. - -| “20,309 
446,352 238,930) 258,930 454,061) - — -) 454,061]) 15,963, - - -| 15,963 
Gxisil 203,6: 208,654] 271,480|- - - |) e7aasol} Gaiz}- - -| 6217 
isss0sh 163,415) 168,418] 307,599} - ~ =| 807,599] 10,960]- - - | 10,969 
384,506] 166,761! 166,761) 314,750! - - | S14,750] 3,853|- - -| 3,858 
19,984,036] 3,090,571 Lape easta air uo spt 176,393) 115,172) 291,563 


(Errors excepted) 


ale 


Cha Cartwright, 
Acct General, 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 383 
SE. Tee 


No. 5. 


COMPANY to their several Presidencies and Settlements in India respe@ively, to the Island of St. Helena, and to their Factory at Canton, 
inclusive, distinguishing each Seasom| 


Prince of | | Saint ‘ 
Wales | TOTAL INDIA. hedie CHINA. TOTAL 
Island. 
Goods Goods 
aod and Bullion. ‘Total. 
Siores. | ‘Stores. 
aes ; - — 
fig LOL | ee og & whee 
-| 415,730} 156,769} 572,499} |. 23,353 || 629,160! 573,507 | 1,007,676 |) 1,068,952 
G 5 “ R 
- | 368,831 10,998 ] 379,829 4 SG 1,193,314 
-} 467,044 rog98|- 4 77,842 - 1,835,806 
- || 406,599//=) so | eae hee 58 
- |] 655,095}- = <4} | 655,095 38,494 1,582,943 
¥ 5 , : 
b 610,334] 20,784) 631,118 40,138 || 544,495] 201,530 1,194,967 } 1,417,281 
- |} 631,155] 219,405} $50,560 38,851 || 550,161} 414,280] 964,441! 1,920,167] 633,685 | 1,883,852 
* u \ ; 
- |} 632,007] 723,984} 1,355,991 40,503 || 868,020} 505,076) 1,973,096 }] 1,540,530 } 1,229,060 | 
| 3 
|| 764872) 221,439) | 886,311 7 $7,043 | 912,033] 141,487 | 1,053,470 |] 1,713,948'| 262,876 
J it \ 
7,976 777,700} 883,471) 1,361,171 68,888 | 1,025,274] -  - — - |’ 1,023,274 |} 1,869,862 583,471 
- |] 1,088,290] 499,517] Hi.se7 807 48,032 || 1,156,476 = - =|} 1,156,476 || 2,292,798 | 439,517 | 2,752,315 
ci | eS a. 
- |i 1,088,699)" 1,148,975 ee 49,377 || 1,205,502] BES 1 2,288,578 | 1,722,085. 4,010,663 _ 
- 674,061} 801,340} 1,475,401 57,811 }} 1,521,813 Bee 1,510 - 2,053,685 | 990,122 | 3,043,807 
S 2G " ‘ a a t ‘. ; 
76,748 773,156) 1,750,370 80,732 |} 1,151,305 sf 202, 2,005,171 } 1,952,651! 3,957,892 
27,889 || 778,920] soi,s0x 280,380 $3,232 |} 1,224,500 ee ut ; 9,086,721 | 702,671 | 2,789,392 
40,624 | 1,198,130} - - =| 1)196,150 104,797 || 1,249,344]- — - 2,550,271 | - - = ) 2 pean se 
| u% < ay 
16,350 973,664] 200,921] 1174585 75,183) 1,201,783] -- - = | 1,201,785 }} 2,248,630 | 200,922. 249.5 
i ‘ 4 
60,600 |} 1,002,924) - - = toxset 25,805 |} 1,095,317} - + =)| 1,095,317 || 2,124,046] -  -  - 2,124,086 
| pa F: 2 
38,253 | 908,198} - -  -| pos128 41,998 }} 943,919] - = - | © 943,919) 1,893,085] - - - | 1,894,085 
| ; 
528,140 |] 14,158,345} 6,088,968 ropes 928,544 |i 18,175,426] 2,845,471 | 21,090,897 |}-33,262,318 | 9,534,439 | 49,796,757 — 


| 


Memyandum—f- 10. per Cent. is added to the Prime Coft of Goods and Stores, which contiitutes the 
Invoice Amount, £.19,414, the Invoice Amount of Goods and Stores, and 
d £-100,397, the Amount of Bullion consigned to India by the Ship Britannia, lost 

4 outward bound, was repaid by Government (o the Company. 


* 


384 Appendix zo ITT* REPORT jij the Select Committee on 


Appendis, |No..6. 


Aw ACCOUNT, shéying*the Amount of all BILLS of EXCHANGE and CERTIFICATES 
paid by the Easy Iypra Company in each year, from Mareh 1793) to March 1810 inclusive ; 
distibguifhing India from Cina, and specifying, as far as pratticable, such as were for liqui- 
dation of Indian Debt, and fuch as were for General Purposes. 


M x ae TOTAL SAINT. in 
YEARS, INDIA DEBT, INDIA HELENA. CHINA, TOTAL. 
on ee les : 
f. £: L. £- L £ 
1793-4 - 1,008,637 120,052 95129,289 15,424 113,016 1,257,729 
I79LD. 933,095 181,029 | 1,114,124 22/4405 469,395 1,605,889 


3798-6 508,857 | 438,010" J 941,871 11,440 AT3,084 1,426,395 
Ney a6 538,75 204,559 vi roost 19,044 4 476380. |) 3,256,758 
Re 502,753 225,697 728,450 26,944 665,544 1,420,038 

age 478,461 | 200,511 678,072 15,785 430,081 |} 1,104,808 

°* 1799-1800 620,992 | 367,961 988,953 22,97 | $31,827 1,842,917 
1800-1 796,510 358,414 1,154,924 23,900, | 653,216 1,831,440 
1801-2 475,590 632,209 : 1,107,889 13,800 475;729 1,602,448 
1802-3 312,115 | a 845,544 657,659 15494 ¥ 395,941 1,069,094 
1803-4 ; ‘252794 | 44,074 697,408 11,288 | 250,627 959,383 
1804-5. 22,378. 466,600 _ $88,978 19,016 513,159 1,021,14% 
1805-6 48008 | 553,970 | 598,978 17,748 442,867 || 1,059,593 
oe 64,078) ye $43,135 28,309 — 641,995 1,213,439 
80758: 20,864 | ys 840,026 860,890 29,045 | .797,967 |! 1,687,902 
{908-9 IVW77795 04,922 1,082,017 43,128 : 907,984 2,033,129 
1809-10 © 694,468 | 1,260,135. | 1,954,644 20723 155,703 || 2,151,070 
7,472,090 | 8,017,495 })218)489,575 24,544,076 

ie 

” Eaft India Houte, (Errors excepted.) 4 

7 June 1811. } Chat Cartwright, 
; a Acct Gen!. 
i ; aa 


Memorandum.—It has been found impra@icable to diftinguith the whole Amount drawn for 
‘gentral purposes, from the Principal and Intereft of Indian Loans, no complete separation 
having been made in the Advices; but the column of Indian Debt fhews the amount drawn on 
that account, as far as can be positively specified, 


‘the i 385 


by the East Inpia Coxrany in their 
from seasou 1791-2, to 1809-10 


1792-3 6 
1793-4 
1795-6 
1796-7 
1798-9 - 
1799-1800 


1802-3 


1804-5 
1805-6 
1807-8 
1808-9 


1806-7 
1807-8 


Appendix ¢@ TT REPOR' Wa 


209,149 


187,208 


116,203 


676,641 |} 13 
= | 
G)342,987 


520,450 jesess2s | 345,06: 


178,255;614 || 593,909 | 543,501 
i 


} 9827-486 | 633,200 |44. 9,385 


re 440,212 


-? 
} 


195,939 


131,857 


15,195 
138,612 


127,945 


7 | 136,034 


453,057 


OonG 


M777 


6,878 


469,110] 767: 


996,915 


995,112 


250,250. 


128,168 


| 153,020. 


oF the Pofipouewent of B 
boa 3 


Appendis, 


al Accounts for the 
the Guancus, the 


TOTAL. 


1,921,029 | 7,998,259" 


Ss pe 
poaas.sra | ,2uiar9 | 7.976296 


ee 
103i } 3,292,815 | 7,770.693 


% 
F. 


No. 10. 
EXCHANGE ramming i 


ADRAS and BOMBAY, by the Actual 


| | 


7,068,206 
6,819,318 


1,259,926 


1,278,076 


i } 
Ul, 17 May 1811. 
ese 


Appendix, 


fey 
the Civil Charges of the Ceded | 
‘of the same for the year 


*| the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 391 


No. 11. (A.) Td 


Accounts, for the years 1807-8 and 1808-9; with the Eftimate of the same for the year 1809-10; corrected according to the lateft Advices. 
$$$ 


MADRAS. BOMBAY. 

; GRAND 

Lad ana ef aha Dott 
Pot Ofice. | Sra Caftoms. | Laud Reremucs | ‘wad Beences. | Setiementss eke 
| 
fe Le ian 

114,316 1,059,971 281,599 8,584,050 
| 152,933 | 1,057,693 7 268,468 8,979,484 
20,000 216,502 | 1,184,253 256,448 8,307,585 


(Esrorsexceptid,: 


No. 11. (B) 
.+ ee - 
or from the Revenues of the CEDED and CONQUERED COUNTRIES, by theactual Accounts for the years 1807-8 and 1808-95 


corrected according tothe lateft’ Advices. rR fa 
NIZAM; SUBSIDY, je ae Coen: TOTAL 
( Grose 4 
Receipt Net 
iB fa L ' L 
718,037} 127,567 1,585,639. 7,117,096 | 2,298,868 | 4,818,169 
631,807 | 129,467 1,319,280 7167.48 | 2,175,113 | 4,992,351 
% 
7ST7A01 | 2,116,191 | 5,201,210 


709,202 | 89,452 1,490,903 


No. 11. (C.) mt \ 
ae ue 
and Conquered Countries.) at BENGAL, MADRAS, and BOMBAY, by Ge acta ‘Accounts for the ence 1607-8 and 1808-9; 
1809-10; corrected according to thelateR Advices, ‘ mas 
BOMBAY. 
Stamp orate 
L ME 


5,619,912 » 


12,318 | 2,389,398 3,419,671 


11,600 | 2,588,426 ee 


(Errors excepted.) = 


ast: 


392. Appendtx to I11d Report, frém ‘the ‘Selett “Committee, on 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPA} 


393 


_ Appendix, No. 12. 


Ay ACCOUNT of the COMMERCIAL CHARGES, not added to the Invoices, at the 
several Presidencies in Inp1a respectively, from the year 1792-3 to the year 1803-9 inclusive, 


BENGAL, MADRAS. BOMBAY. 
pe 
L L L 
7923 2 = 2 = es, 80,185 41,108 11,158 
W793-4 = = 2 2 © 83,735 51,253 10,016 
WS = = = = « 98,122 78,837 16,032 
1795-6 - - = = =] 95,220 85,949 18,268 
WT - 2 eee 99.616 44,770 8,515 
97-8 2 5 6 ee 93,763 51,360 14,420 
Cs a 91,692 | 49,978 13,897 
1799-1800 «© = = = 110,242 81,852 10,659 
1800-l - 2 - = + 105,648 47,574 11,860 
180-2 - eee 100,496 42,366 14,151 
1023 + + - = 106,238 47,976 10,722 
1808-4 + = = = =} 106,071 54,582 12,695 
18045 = 2 ee 714,494 90,102 13464 
1805-6 2+ «© 2 +2 « 88,214 68,945 13,892 
1806-7 + = 2 = | 83,569 84,318 18,299 
wo7-8 = - 2 = = 82,841 75,016 15,350 
1808-9 = = = = s 84.926 69,359 11,554 
Toray - | 1,625,072 | 1,065,345 225,862 
Sas fat (Errors excepted.) 
ieee W» Wright, 


132,431 
145,004 
192,991 
199,437 
152,901 
159,543 
155,567 
202,753 
165,082 
157,013 
164,936 
173,278 
219,060 
471,051 
186,186 
173,207 
165,839 


2,916,279 


Auditor of India Accounts. 


Appendix, No. 13. 
Ax ACCOUNT of the number of the Mznens constituting the Boar of Travg at Bencat, 
in April 1792, and in April 1809 ; and their Salzries and Allowances respectively at each period. 


BOARD OF TRADE, 
April 1792. 


President, no Salary = - - i = - = 


Senior Member = = = = = © 5 2 


“Three other Members ee 


April 1809. 
President, noSalary ~ <= - - - © & 
Senior Member - 


’ 
« 
’ 
, 
’ 
a 
' 


Second Member ee 
Third Member = = 2 = 2 = 2 © 


Allowance for House Rent 


Fourth Member= © = © © = « 


(Errors excepted.) 
East India House, 
7 Jone 1811, 


250. 


Sicca Rupees 
each 50,000 


SR 


or £. 


Sicca Rupees, 60,000 
Extra Allowauce, 10,c00 


WwW Wright, 
Auditor of India Accounts. 
5 


50,000 
5,000 


sR 
or £. 


SALARY 
Per Annum. 


60,000 
1,50,000 


2,10,000 
24,360 


394 Appendix fo III‘ REPORT from the Select Committee on 


Appendix, No. 14. 


Aw ACCOUNT, thewing the Amount of all ADVANCES made at the several Presipzncizs - 
and SertLewents in Inpta, for the purposes of COMMERCE, in so far as regards the 
Purchase of INVESTMENTS for Europe; from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclusive, 


1792-3 . - - 1,703,085 
1793-4 - : - 1,989,684 
1794-5 - - - 1,619,879 
1795-6 = = - 1,945,501 
1796-7 - - - 2,049,147 
1797-8 - : 1,864,738 
1798-9 - - 1,095,506 
1799-1800 - - 1,890,738 
1800-1 - - - 1,208,909 
1801-2 = - - 994,039 
1802-3 - - - 1,787,600 
1803-4 - - - 2,151,299 
1804-5 - - - - 1,132,114 
1805-6 - - - - 994,401 
1806-7 « = 7 : 1,274,567 
4807-8 . ei aS = 1,140,749 
1808-9 id od = - 1,395,650 

£-26,088,266 

Eaft India House, (Errors excepted.) 
7* June 1811. . 


W» Wright, 


Auditor of India Accounts. 


Appendix, No. 15. 


Ax ACCOUNT, thewing the Amount of all SUPPLIES from the several Prestpencres and 
SerTLemeEnts in Ivp1a, to the Factory at CANTON, from the year 1792-3 to the year 


1808-9 inclusive. 


Paid into the Treasury at Canton - ee ee £892,041 
-Cotton, Sandal-Wood, &c. sent = - = - =e eo . 931,333 
Paid Freight of Cotton, &c. = = = ee 3.752 
Billsof Exchange drawn - + - - © + = = 3,369,845 
Toran - £.4,698,971 

=o 


Eaft India wort Errors excepted.) 


7 June 1811. 2 
Wm Wright, 
Auditor of India Accounts, 


Appendix, No. 16. 


Ax ACCOUNT, fhewing the Amount of all. SUPPLIES received. at the several PresipENciEs 
and SetrLeMents in Inpra, from the Facrory at CANTON, from the year 1792-3 to the 


syear.1808-9 inclusive, 


Bullion - = = ee ee ee + £1,310,818 
Stores - - - - 18,014 
Received for Freight of Conta - 7 is - 998 
Payments at China = ° - - - 33,051 
Biils un Canton eof ef ed 22,936 


Toran -. = £.1,385,317 

: j —— 

Faft‘India Hous>, Errors excepted.) 

7” June 1811, - Bt 
WO Priest, 

Auditor of India Accounts. 


the Affuirs of The EAST INDIA COMPAN 395 
eee ———— 


Appendix, No. 17. 


Aw ACCOUNT, thewing the Amount of the CLAIMS of the East Inpra Company upon the PUBLIC, on 
account of Advances and Supplies at the several Presidencies in [xpta, which were admitted by the Sznect 
Commitee of the House of Coarons in 1808; distinguithing the part thercof included in the Charges and 
Intereft paid at the said Presidencies in the Statement annually presented to Parliament, from the part not 
80 included ; specifying each Head and Year respettively, as fur as the same can be made out, 


A Included in Indian | Not included 
i CEATMS ADAUTTED: Charges or Knterett. in 
HEADS OF CLAIMS. ee, 
coo 7 ages 
Principal, | Interet. | TOTAL. | In Charges. | In Tateret. | yutorete 
: 2 . L k £ £ L & 
Intended Expedition againft Mauritius, 
1794-3 - = = = = «| 125,610 | 102,091 | 225,701 | 123,610 | 109,091 _ 
Cape of Good Hope. 
3795-6 2 + - - - - $s 82 93 
W797-8- = = 2 far Jae! 8,768 10,619 8,708 
1800-1801 - - + = = 1,990 1,852 1,999 
1801-2 - = = = = «| 18,423 10,174 13,493 
1802-3 + - is 2 a ‘a 337 149 337 
180-6- = + «© «- -{ 10972 1,014 | 10,972 


40,603 23,340 | 40,603 


Intended Expedition againft Manilla. 


$15,423 230,973 284,450 
13,014 | 6542 | 6,472 


287,515 | £90,922 -_ 


MR em 8 
M98-9- = ee 


L 


+ Vessels, &c. and Stores for King’s Ships. 


230,973 
6,542 


W978 - = eee 29,605 65,454 | > - 35,851 29,603 
1798-9- - - + - ~{ 29,703 | 99,387 | 59,090| - = 29,387 | - 29,703 
1799-1800 - = = = « 18,811 14,327 $3,138 | - - 14,327 18,811 _ 
1sc0-I80L = ee 13,200 8,974 22,174 | = - 8,974 13,200 
1801-2- = = = = -| 25154] 13,891 | sgor5 | -  - 13,891 | 25,154 
18023 -  - = + = -« 5,703 2,379 goose | = - 2,879 5,703 
1808-4- + = » «+ -| 21,472 7444 | 23,916 | - TA | (21,472 
1804-5 - = = + = =| 30381 8,952 | 39,833 [+ - 8,952 | 30,381 
18056 - = + «© = =] 20,749 25499 | = 4690 | 20,749 


194776 | 125,895 | 520,671 | - - | 123,893 | 194,776 
31,593 22,087 88,685 | - - 22,087 31,598 


163,178 | 108,858 


Deduét Bills drawn in favour of the 
Court, for part of the above = 


267,036 | -  - | 103,858 | 163,178 


Danifh Captures, 


“WBZ - ee ee 13,010 


Carried forward - £. 593,27L | 203,78) 


396 Appendix fo.III‘ REPORT from the Select Committee on 


Appendix, No, 17.—continued. 


Included in Indian | Not included 
Charges or Interett. in 


CLAIMS ADMITTED. 


HEADS OF CLAIMS. Fearne RIO Pr oe 
on 


— Intereft, | TOTAL | In Charges. | In Interet. | Interet. 


£ rs L L L 4 
Brought forward -{ 588,165 | 533,971 | 1,121,730 | 384,684 | 533,271 | 203,781 
Egyptian Expelition. 
1798-9 = = + = «© «| 17,058 16,273 33,331 17,058 16,273 
1800-1 - + + = «= =| 673,903 | 458,119 ] 1,152,022 | 673,903 | 458,119 
1801-Z- + + = «+ =| 681,779 | 376,535 | 1,058,334 | 681,779 | 376,535 
1802-3 - - + + + «=| 469,047 | 195,623 | 664,670 | 469,047 | 195,623 


SL. | 1,841,807 | 1,646,550 | 2,888,357 | 1,841,807 } 1,046,550 


j 7 ‘ aa sa 
7 pba series of Orden yt 80,000 | 40,000 | 120,000 | 80,000 | 40,000 oe 


£- | 1,761,807 | 1,006,550 | 2,768,357 | 1,761,807 | 1,006,550 
Ceylon Charges admitted in full. 


W795-6- = + © = ©] 364,021 | 320,557 | 684,578 343,237 | 320,557 20,784 
180-2 - = ~ = = =| 304,544 | 168,203 | 472,747 168,203 | $04,544 


023 - = = + + =! 70682 29,479 | 100,161 : 29,479 70,682 
1803-4 - + - eof oe 68,827 23,860 92,687 23,860 68,827 
1804-5 - a - 55,834 16,452 72,286 16,452 55,854 
1805-6 - 5 eee] 13,594 3,073 16,667 é 3,073 13,594 
1800-7 + = = 2 = =] 24,951 2,597 | 26,948 2,597 24,358 


£ 1,466,074 564,221 558,616 


Ceylon; part admitted. 
1796-7 to 1801 (A) half allowed > £. 559,554 | 1,205,656 352,497 


Fattern Islands, part admitted. 


1798-6 to 1805-6 (B) half allowed £. 524,382 | 1,821,859 | 712,130 | 524,982 | 85,347 
in ae ae gs 23,400 


Expense in India of Prisoners captured 
atSea se ee 


} | {30,000 


Toran ~ - el aaa 3,313,268 | 8,212,372 | 3,675,533 | 3,313,268 | 1,293,572 


(A.) As the Balance-of Property in December 1801, deducted from the Charges in this period, muft be cons 
sidered xs arising from the remittances of many preceding years, the amount of Charge in each separate 
year cannot be fiated. : 

(B.) ‘This is an cftimated division, and cannot therefore be diftinguished into the different years comprehended 
ia the period, 

Ext India House, (Errors excepted.) 
7® June 1811. 


We Wright, 
Auditor of India Accounts} 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 397 


Appendix, No. 18. 


Copy Letter from the Court of DireGors to the Governor in Council at Fort St. George 
(Political Department), dated 20 January 1795; and Extract Letter in reply, dated 
16 Auguft 1796. 


Par. 1—IN a former dispatch we gave you dire@ions for the liquidation of the Debts 
owing by the Rajah of Tanjore to his privaie creditors ; at the same tine we intimated our 
intention to take into our consideration the more considerable claims of the Crediturs of the 
Nabob of Arcot; and we uow transmit to you our directions on this subject. 


2. As the Debt to the Crecitors in the Cavalry Loan is already discharged, our present 
directions extend only to the claims of the Creditors in the Consolidated Debt of 1777. 


3. As the Compan: , under the conditions of the treaty of 1787, found it necessary, in 
order to provide for the defence of the country, to take possession of the Nabob’s territories, 
and to apply the revenues arising from them to the expense of the war, and uot to the 
payment of the sums which, if peace had continued, would have become annually due to 
nis Highness’s private Creditors, according to the arrangements dire@ed by the Court’s 
Orders of December 1784; the Company are to be considered as having borrowed the sums 
which would have been payable to the, Creditors, if the Nubob had fulfilled his engagements 
prior to the treaty of peace made by Lord Cornwallis, which money is to be accounted tor 
agreeable to the arrangement above mentioned, Those suins appear to be as follow: Firtt, 
the Lutereft on Pagodas 54,98,300. The Principal due to those Creditors at six per cent. for 
two years, from Auguft 1788 to Auguft 1790, being Pagodas 6,59,820; which Lntereft is the 
thare of the twelve lacs of Pagodas per annum, which they were entitled to receive by the 
Orders in our said Letter of g* December 1784, until the Cavalry Loan thould be discharged ; 
but, # it (hall appear that the Creditors of 1777 have received a proportion of the sums paid 
by the Nabob, on account of those two years, such proportion is to be dedu&ted. Secondly, 
As the Cavalry Loan would, if the payments to the Creditors had been duly made, have been 
discharged before _31*t of Augatt 1790, five lacs of Pagodas became annually due to the 
Creditors in the Debt of 1777, which for two years, from that date to the date of Lord 
Cornwallis’s treaty made in July 1792, amounts to Pagodas 10,00,000, naking together 
Pagodas 16,59,820. On this sum, or such amount as fhali be found due on these principles, 
intereft at six per cent. fhall be allowed to the Creditors irom Auguft 1792, being the month 
after Lord Cornwallis’s treaty was made ; which Intereft on the above sum amounts to Pago- 
das 1,99,198 for two years to the 31° of Auguft 1794; making together Pagodas 18,59,018. 
This sum or such other amount as shall, on the principles here laid down, be found due to 
the Creditors, we direét that your Government fhall discharge, either by cath, or by notes 
bearing six per cent. Intereft from 31‘ Auguft 1794, payable only at Madras; but in the 
latter alternative, the Creditors are to take the notes at the current premiuin or discount. 
But in order to prevent the inconvenience which might arise from so large a quantity of 
notes being issued immediately, we direct that they be issued progressively in such propor 
tions as to prevent the market from being overftocked, and the value of your notes in ge- 
neral thereby reduced from bearing a premiom to be issued at a discount. 


4. To prevent our Orders on this subjeét irom being misunderfiood, we send a Statement 
(No. 1.) containing the Debts which we suppose will Tae been found due by the Company 
to the Creditors on 31't Augutt 1794, in the Consolidated Debt, according to the arrange- 
ments we have mentioned; and a Statement (No. 2.) fhewing the amount of what will re= 
main due by the Nabob to those Creditors after the notes we have mentioned thall be given, 
and after the kifts for two vears payable by the Nabob, according to Lord Cornwullis’s treaty, 
Ahall have been paid to them, 


5. We also dire@, that as the payments which the Nabob was bound to make in every 
year to his Creditors have been, for the accommodation of his Highness, reduced from 
72 lacs of Pagodas, to 6,21,105 Pagodas; the payment of the said 6,21,105 Pagodas to the 
Creditors in the Consolidated Debt of 1777 thall not henceforth be suspended on any 
account whatever, but {hall be regularly made to those Creditors, until the Debt due to them, 
with Lnterelé at 6 per cent, frail be fully paid, 


We are your loving Friends, 


(Signed) STEPHEN LUSHINGTON. JACOB BOSANQUET. 


DAV1!D SCOTT. FRANCIS BARING. 
JOHN ROBERTS. GEORGE TATEM, 
LIONEL DARELL. SIMON FRASER. 
CHARLES MILLS, ABRAHAM ROBARTS, 
HUGH INGLIS. PAUL LE MESURIER, 


GEORGE SMITH. 


250, 51 


398 Appendix fo Tl’ REPORT from the Scle& Cominittee on 


Extract Letter in Reply, dated 16" Auguft 1796. 


Para. 1. We have had the honour to receive your commands, dated the got January 
laft, relative to the claims on the Company by the Creditors of the Nabob of the Carnatic ia 
the Consolidated Debts of 1777. 


2, Having transmitted to the Regifter of his Highness’s Debts a copy of your Orders, 
with diredtions to make up the Account on ihe principle laid down by your honourabie 
Court, he addressed us a Leter, accompanied with three Statements, by which it appeared, 
that the Principal suin due by the Company to the Creditors, amounted to twenty-three lacs 
and forty-six thousand four hundred and cighiy-four Pagodas, thirty-one favams, and 
thirteen eath (23,46,484. 31. 13.) and the Intercft to three lacs eight hundred and ninety~ 
seveu Pagudas, four fanams, and forty-one cath (3,00,897. 4. 41.) 


Appendix, No. 19. 


Ax ACCOUNT of the Amonnt paid at Fort St. George, to the Creditors of the Rajal 
of Tanjore, between the years 1794-5 and 1796-7. 


AMOUNT paid to Tanjore Creditors, 1794-5 to 1796-7, Pagodas - 6,62,782 
Oi which transferred to London for Payment, 1796-7- - - ~ ~ 5,02,673 


1,60,109 


At8s. £.64,044. 


Eaft India House, 
7 June 1811. } 


(Errors excepted.) 
Wo Wright, 
Auditor of India Accounts. 


Appendix, No. 20, 


Extra@ Letter from Court of Direftors to Governor in Council at Madras (Political 
Department); dated 19** September 1792. 


Para. 4. AS by the 7 Article of the Treaty with the Rajab of Tanjore of the 10 April 
1787, (which fiipulates that, in the event of war, four-fifths of the Revenues of the Tanjore 
country, (hall be annually appropriated to the military expenses) all payments on account of 
the Rajah’s private Creditors virtually ceased on the commencement of hottilities ; so by the 
10% article, which flipulates that the said annual four-fifths of the Tanjore Revenues, fhall, 
afler the term ion of the war, continue to be applied to the discharge of all debts and 
expenses that may be incurred or arise during the course of the war, until the Rajah’s pro- 
portion of one-fifth of the whole expense is discharged, the private Creditors are not entitled 
to any payment till such proportion thail be completely liquidated. 


&. The dividends hitherto made to the Tanjore Creditors have been improperly calcu- 
lcted in the proportion that the a:mual Intereit due to them bore to the actual Receipt; we 
therefore think it necessary to lay dewn a rule for your future guidance, whenever the 
period fhall arrive for putting the Rajah a; into possession of bis country, upon all 
“arrears of Subsidy being discharged, and his proportion of the expenses incurred in the war 
completely liquidated ; viz. 


The full amount of the Subsidy, agreeably to the kifts mentioned in the treaty, muft in the 
firft inftance be secured to the Company. As the Company are to provide for the general 
defence of the country, aud as the Hiaja's roportion of the military expenses has been 
settled on a fair caiculation, this is indisputable. 


After the amount of the anoual Subsidy fhall have been thus previously secured to the 
Company, agreeably to the fiipulations in the 2¢ article ef the treaty, the Creditors thall 
receive’ their proportion of the sums that may be paid to the Company under the 14" ar- 
ticle. But as the Company, since the conclusion of the treaty of 1787, have, for a valuable 
consideration, obisined aright to the annua! Peishcufh usually paid by the Rajah to the 
Nabob of Arcot; and also to the lage arrear that was due thereon, and have in consequence, 
in order to afford relief to the Rajeh’s finances, consented to make for the present a very 
cons‘derabie reduction in the sams to bé annually paid by the Rajzh on those accounts, 
agrecably to the ftipulations in the 14" article, you are to observe, that fhouid the Rajab’s 

* paynients 


the Affsirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 399 


payments on the various accounts specified in this article, unespettedly fall fhort, at a fue 
ture period, of the redeced amount to be received from him, under the abatement before» 
mentioned, the Creditors proportioa muft be calculated not upon the reduced amount, but 
upon the whole three facs or in the preportion of $0,000 to 2,20,000. But if the Rajah’s 
payments under the 14® article (hail, in the tirft inftance, secure to the Company the 
reduced amount they have agreed for the present to receive on account of the current Peith- 
cuih and arrears, we fhall have no objedion to the Creditors receiving the whole benefit of 
the flipulation in this article (if the ftate of the Rajah’s funds fhail be answerable thereto) 
notwithftanding the very considerable abatement that is to be made on account of the 
Company. And_ this we think a very fair and equitable arrangement with respect to the 
Tanjore private Creditors, and perfectly cousittent with the sentiments and directions cou- 
tained in our Dispatch upon this subje@ of the 12" April 1786, upon which the arrange- 
ments in the treaty were founded; indeed we have rather relaxed in favour of the Creditors, 
from those orders, by consenting, as we haye done in the preceding para. to their receiving 
their proportion of the payments to be made under the 14" article, whereas, by the Orders 
of 1786 the plan for the Rajah’s Private Debts was in nowise to interfere with the payment 
of his annual proportion of the Charges for the general defence of the Carnatic and former 
arrears, nor with the discharge of his engagements with the Nabob of Arcot. 


Appendix, No. 21. 
Extra@ TREATY with the Rajah of Tanjore, dated 10" April 1787. 


* Article 14. THE late Rajah of Tanjore having been, at the time of his death, indebted to 
his Highness the Nabob of the Carnatic for arrears of Peithcuth since the year 1776, which, 
at the commencement of the Fuzley 1107 or 12 July 1787, will amount to the sum of twelve 
lacs fifty-seven thousand one hundred and forty-two Pagodas,and having also been indebted to 
Britith subjects, whose names are set forth in a Schedule hereunto annexed, for various sums 
of money ent by them to and for the use of the Rajah, which, with Iutereft, are computed to 
amount to about the stm of four lacs of Pagodas; Itis hereby ttipulated and agreed, ‘That 
for the liquidation of the said arrears of Peillicufh, his Excellency fhail appropiate annually 
thesumof = - - <= = Pagodas 1,05,715 


To this annual Peifhcuth to the Nabob thesum of - = - 114,285 

And to his Excellency’s private Creditors the annual sum of 80,0c0 

Inallthree lacs of Pagodas - - - = = +  3,00,000 
Payable in kifts as follows, 

In November - - - © © = 10,000 

December - deh See tie 10,000 


January - - ee - 10,000 
February - = =. = = - 10,000 


March - - oe es = 10,000 
May - - - ot ee - 60,000 
June - += - + = = = 60,000 
duly - = = = = =  * — §0,600, 
Augutt - eo - - - 40,000 
September - = - = = = 40,000 


Star Pagodas - = 300,000 


400 Appendix fo III‘ REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 
Appendix, No. 22. 


An ACCOUNT of the LOSS arising from REMITTANCES or CONSIGNMENTS 
from Port to Port in Inp1a, from 1792-3 to 1808-9 inclusive. 


Bengal Books, at 2s, the Current Rupee.) 


£ : L 
Supplies to Madras net, except Supplies to Bombay net, except 
1807-8, not received = - - | 13,827,113 1807-8 - 13,022,401 
Add 1807-8, per Bengal Receipts Add 1807-8, per Bengal Receiy pls rs. 
and Disbursements = - - 558,552 and Disbursements = - 445,105 
£1 14,385,665 13,497,500 


Bombay Books, at 2s. $d. the 


Fort St. George Books, 
Bombay Rupee, credit Bengul | 13,185,922 


at 8s. the Pagoda, 


credit Bengal - £.13,098,285 : — 
Aaa Taare Mise: Difference - £./ 903,584 
pan en 


defte and Blanche, 

charged in Bengal 

Books, not credited 

at Fort St. George - 717,561 
——— | 13,815,846 


Difference - 569,819 


Bengal supplied Fort St. George, more ies credited in Fort 


St. George Books < = = = £569,819 
Bengal supplied Bombay, more than credited in Bombay Books - 303,584 
£- 873,408 
—— 
Eaft India House, (Errors excepted.) 
» 7 June 1811, 3 


W~ Wright, 


Auditor of India Accounts, 


Appendix, No. 23. 


An ACCOUNT of the SUMS written off the Books of the several Prestpexcies in 
Inpra respedively, as LOSSES, from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclusive, which 
have not been inserted in the Cranes of the said Prrsipencirs, 


BENGAL - - = - = = = £.293,351 
MADRAS = © 2 = - = = 107,327 
BOMBAY - 2+ 5 7 5 © of 60.750 


Torax written of - £.461,423. 
——= 


Eat India House, (Errors excepted.) 
7® June 1811. 
We Wright, 


Aaditor of India Accounts. 


‘the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 401 


Appendix, Ne. 24. 


-Ax ACCOUNT of TREASURE consigned from BENGAL to MADRAS, excluded 
from the BexcaL Quick Srock Account, and not received at Mapas in time to be in- 
«eluded in the Mapras Stock Account dated 30th April 1809. 
PerM@DESTE - + © «© + £.557,196 
‘BLANCHE -~ s # # #8 160,365 


£717,561 * 
= 


‘East-India House, 
7% June 1811. (Errors excepted.) 
We Wright, 
Auditor of India Accounts, 


‘Appendix, No. 25. . 

Ax ACCOUNT of the Iucrease of DEAD STOCK in INDIA, consisting of Pirate, 
Hovstuotp Fursirurs, Stores, -&c. é&c. between April 1792 and April 1809, the 
Expense of which is not included in the Charges; distinguishing what was purchased in Ix ptay 
from what was supplied by Exeuanp, as far as the same'can be done, 


Le 
1,342,461 


462,923 
306,791 


‘BENGAL (at 23.-the Current Rupee) = me we ee 


‘MADRAS (at 8s, the Pagoda) - + - - - = = 


308,338 


910,086 | 


[BOMBAY (at 2s. 3d.-the Rupee) ee ed 


2,112,178 


Deduct Sums included in Charges in India 272,800 


‘ 

& 

‘ 
. 


1,839,375 
. 
910,084 


Deduct asin1792 = wee 


929,291 


200,000 
729,291 


‘Expense since 1792, not included in Chargesin India + + © = - 


‘ 
’ 
. 
. 
' 


of which suppose to have been purchased in India 


s 
‘ 
. 
, 


supplied by England 


} 929,291 
reo ‘ 
East India House, 

7 June 1811. 


(Errors excepted.) 
We Wright, 
Auditor of India Accounts, 
256, 5K 


402 Appendix fo III¢ REPORT from the Sele& Comthittee on 


Appendix, No. 26. 


As ACCOUNT, shewing the Amount of EXTRAORDINARY FUNDS received into the Treasuries in Inpr1a, with 
the Arriicatio» of the same, from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclusive. 
. 


RECEIPTS. - 


Appendix, N° 2. | Money borrowed on Loan ip India, between the years 1 1792" -3 and : & 
1808.9 ; or tacrease of Debt at Interest = = -] 19,959,897 
ibid. Money received on Bills, Deposits, oon iu same period or Tncresse: 
of Floating Debt = - - - 945,297 
< 20,905,194 
Received in Supplies from England: 
Appendix, N° 8. Sales of Goodsand Stores - = © « « «= =| 8,904,068 
— = N38, InBullion = = 2 “© 2 2 + © + =| 7,360,752 
ibid. For Bills ‘of Exchange on the Court of Directors, including those 
for Principal and Interest of the Debt = + es - | 14,746,038 
ibid. Received on suadry Accounts es 393,372 
$1,404,280 
Torat Recetrts - - - £.] 52,309,424 


DISBURSEMENTS. 


Appendix, N° 11, | Excess of Political Chargesin India = = - - 2 2© - # © © 5,078,015 
Disbursements, principally Commercial, or in direct Supply of England:  £. 
— N12 Commercial Charges not added to.the Invoices - = = - 2,916,279 
— Nea Advances for the purchase of Investments 2 2 = ©] 25,038,266 
- N15, & 16, ‘Supply to Canton, net Amount - - - - - - 3,313,654 
ae N° 4. Advances to Commanders of Chartered Ships, on ac- . 
6 count of Freight and Demorage - - = £946,422 
ibid, . D° - - on Freight, &c. on Rice Ships + 182,358 
1,128,780 
ibid. Advances on account of His Majesty’s Navy, &e. + 
ibid. Ditto to the Governor of Ceylon, on his Bills upon His 
Majesty’s Government - - 
ibid. Ditto for Ships building for His Majesty’s Service + 
; _ 913,778 
ibid, Advances upon sundry accounts for which London is debited = - 286,678 34,597,435 
Appendix, N° 27. Advances on account Ceylon and the Eastern Tlecds (not includ- 
b} ed in Territorial Charges) repaid in England - - - 1,223,571 
ibid, Advances on this account (not included in Charges) not admitted AST,774 1,661,335 
Appendix, N° 18, | Payment to private Creditors of Nabob of Arcot ee ee - oe 1,058,953 
— X19, ] Ditto to private Creditors of Rajah of Tanjore - = - = = - = 64,044 
—  N*22, | Loss on Remittances and Consignments from Port to Port in India - : ce $73,403 
—  Nea3, | Losses at.the several Presidencies, not included in the Charges - - - 461,428 
— N°2, | Increase of Assets, in eo far as it was produced by the application of Sadia Funds 
at the three Presidencies and Marlbro’ - os 8,298,666 
—~ N*25, | Increase of Dead Steck in India, estimated to have been purchased by Indian Funds 200,000 
£. {| 52,293,289 
Balance to be accounted for - - - 16,135 


nee seseataiey 
Toran Dispursements - £.| 52,300,424 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 403° 


oe EES 


Appendix, No. 27. 


STATEMENT, shewing generally the Causes to which the Alteration of the Balance in 
India, as per Appendix No, 2, is presumed to be immediately attributable. 


Inerease of Debts - + = 2 = © £.20,905,194 
Increase of Assets - = = = === 8,298,666 


Difference « + © -f. 12,606,528 


—————aas 
‘Appendix, 
Neat, | Excess of Political Charges in India - = 2 + © +©{ £.5,078,035 
N° 12, | Commercial Charges not added to the Invoices - - 2 oe 2,916,279 
N26, | Advauces for supply of England in ‘Excess of Receipts = + ~ -. 276,926 
Ne17. | Advances on Account of Ceylon and the Eaftern Islands, not in- 

cluded inthe Indian Charges - = = «ese 1,661,345 
Ne18, | Payment to private Creditors of the Nabobof Arcot’ - = =| 1,058,953 
Neg. D®? - - - D° - = ‘ofthe Rejahof Tanjore = + - 64,044 
I 22. | Loss on Remittances and Consignments from Port to Portin India 873,403 
N° 93, | Losses at the several Presidencies, not included in the Charges - 461,428 
N°95. | Purchase of DeadStock inIndia- --- - + se 200,000 
£L] 12,890,393 

— 


Appendix, No. 28. 
‘COMPUTATION ofthe RATE of INTEREST payable on the Indian Debt, ‘on the 
‘30th April 1792 and S0th April 1809. 


Debt atInteret - = 1792 - - L£.7,129,934—Interctt payable £. 616,075, or 8,64 per Cen’. 
= + = = = 1809 = - 27,089,831 - + -- ‘= 2,191,084) or 8,088 per Cali 


‘N. B.—Measures have Jately been successfully adopted for the-Redudtion of the Intereft on 
4 the indian Debt, to the Rate of 6 per Cent. (See Appendix, N° 29.) 


India Board Office, } 


‘Whitehall, 17th May 1811, (Errors excepted.) 


Thomas Nicholas Wittwer, 


Accountant. 


re et terete ne tern re terme 


AO4 Appendix ¢o III‘ REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


Appendix, No. 29. 


Extva@ Letter from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial Department), 
dated 4** January 1811, 


Para. 47. THE Revenue of India in the aggregate is computed to amount, in 1810-11, to 
the sum of Rt 14,25,08,000, and the Charge of the year is efiimated at the sum of 
Ra 36,000; thewing an actual Surplus in India to the amount of R* 31,72,000. This 
Sarplus may be subjeét to the deductions noticed in the 16 paragraph of the Accountant 
General’s letter, to_ the amount of R# 18,08,922 5. but the excess in the produce of the 
‘Opium Revenue in Bengal, will, we *hope, fully compensate the deductions to which the 
Revenue of Fort St. George and Bombay may be liable. 


48. Your honorable Court will hold in mind, that this Surplus is likely to be drawn from 
your Indian territory during a period of aétual war, when it is found necessary to main- 
tain our military eftablifhments upon a high scale; when the Charges for political services 
are necessarily high ; und whenconsiderable advances are made from the resources of Lidia 
for the gencral service of the empire. Recollecting, as you will de, this fiate of things, we 
are persuaded that your honorable Court will contemplate with the utmoft satisfaction, 
snd not perhaps without surprise, the fac of a Surplus Revenue adtually exifting in India, 
under such unfavourable circumtiances. 


49. SatisfaQory too as the result muft appear, when it is remembered that this Surplus 
has been produced under every disadvantage, we hope to see a very considerable improve. 
ment effected in the ensuing year. The measures which are now in progress will, we are 
confident, succeed in accomplifhing all the objecis which we have proposed to ourselves 
in their fulle(t extent ; and in that case, the [ntereft of the Debt of India will be reduced, in 
a very fhort time, from 8 to 6 per cent. per annum. This saving alone will form a very cou- 
siderable addition to the Surplus Revenue of India; and even if it fhould not be found 
practicable to effec any material reduGtion in the Military Charges, and to place the public 
eftablifhments generally upon a footing of greater economy, we may venture {ill to assure 
your honorable Court, that there will exift a considerable Surplus in India, and that it will 
not probably fall Mort of those expectations which have at different times been entertained 
of it. : 


Appendix, No, 30. 


Extract Letter from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial Department), 
dated 224 Odtober 1810, 


Para. 79.—WE cannot ftate with precision at present the saving of Intereft which is likely 
to tuke place when our plans fhall have been carried into complete effet; but the foliowiug 
Aketch will give your honorable Court some idea of the reduétion of Charge which: may be 
expected : i 

Intereft on G per Cent. Treasury Notes outftanding on the go" April 1810, 

to be discharged R* 1,20,00,000 - - - - - - - — 7,20,000 

Saving of lntercft on the remainder of the Treasury Notes outftanding on 

* the 3c! April, R* 60,00,000, by reducing the rate from 6 to 4 per cent. 1,20,000 

Interelt on § per Cent. Debt to be extinguithed, R* 1,19,00,000 - - — 9,52,c00 

Saving of Iutereft by reducing the rate from 8 to 6 per cent. on the 

Regifter Debt, which is expected to remain at this Presidency, on the 


go April next, R* 15,51,00,000 - - 31,02,000 
‘ 48,94,000 

Deduét Intereft payable in England on Debt transferred, R* 2,00,00,000, 
at 5 per cent. per annum ad - - - - - - = 10,00,000 


Net Saving of Interet- + « - = 38,04,000 


80. Should these expedations be fortunately realized in their full extent, the Intereft on 
the Debt of this Presidency will be reduced to about 95,00,000 Rupees; and although the 
operation for effecting this reduétion may require more or less time, according to circum- 
fiances, we are perfeGtly confident it will ultimately succeed, and that the charge of Iutereft 
will be reduced very considerably at an early period. " 


S81. We cannot at present form a judgment with respect to the reduction which will be 
effected in the charge of Intereft at Fort St, George and Bombay. At Fort St. George the 
Public Debt has already been reduced to an inconsiderable sum; but as we purpose to 
furnif the Government of Bombay with large Supplies, and as our eftimaté provides for the 
transfer of Debt from the two Presidencies, to the amount of Kupecs 1,00,00,000, we enter- 

tain 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 405 


tain hopes that there will be a considerable reduction in the charge of Lutereft at Bombay, 
aud probably some redu@tion at Fort St. George. 


Appendix, No. 31. 


Copy Letter from the Court of Direétors to the Governor General in Council at Bengal 
(Separate General Department), dated 15°" September 1785. 


WE have taken into our serious consideration the large amount of Debt owing by the 
Company to our servants and others iu India, the alarming ftate of our Credit there, and 
the embarrassments in which our Governments are involved in consequence thereol. After a 
moft attentive review of every-purticular of our situation, both at home and in India, we have 
resolved to grant you permission to draw biils upon as on account of our Indian Debts, at the 
rates and to the amount hereinaiter specified. We proceed therefore to give you our direc- 
tions for carrying into effeé this important operation; but, previous to our entering on its 
detail, we think it proper to remark to you, what cannot however escupe your notice, how 
great a reliance we have fhewn by this measure, on sour zeal, integrity and firmness, in the 
adminiftration of the Government entrufted to you. We have adopted this plan from a 
alecided opinion, that our resources are adequate to its support. But we are not ignorant 
that misconduét in our servants may produce a failure in Usose resources, the cousequences 
of which might be in the highett degree detrimental to our incerefts. _We doubt not, that 
this consideration will operate as un additional motive to you for the friGeft and molt un- 
remitting attention to every circumfiance which may diminith our expenses, extend our 
resources, and promote the welfure und prosperity of the provinces under our Government. 
Impressed as we are with the ftrongeft conviction, that by such a line of conda& alone we 
can hope to be relieved from the embarrassments under which we labour, and to answer the 
extensive demands to which we are liable, we call upon you to assift and co-operate with us 
in the great object. We have not been wanting to the ease und relief of our Settlements in 
India, Bt have even subjected ourselves to heavy burthens at home, in order to eftablith their 
-eredit on a firm and latting foundation. On your part we expect an cqual atteation to our 
interefts, and, above all, a rigid and impartial economy ; assuring you of our determination to 
support you to the utmoft in the discharge of a duty which we know to be difficult and 
arduous. 


In the discussion of the subje& matter of this Dispatch, our attention was, in the-firf in- 
fiance, direéted to the amount of the demands which may be made upon ys in India. The 
exaét sum we found ourselves unable to ascertain with accuracy, particularly as epee of whaf 
appears on the ftatements lately received consifts of arrears in accounts not finally adjutted ; 
besides which, we 2onceive there is jut ground te expect, that befure the arrival of this 
Letter, some considerable part, particularly of the Military Arrears, will have been dis- 
charged uut of the Surplus arising from our Revenues, after the reductions made by our 
servants indndia, and those direéted by us in our letter of the 11** of April laft. 


We have therefore determined to authorize you to draw bills upon us on account of our 
Debts in India, 4o an amount not exceeding six hundred lacs (600,00,000) of Current 
Rupees, at the terms and in the manner hereinafter dire@ed. A preference is to be given to 
the bond-holders at our different Presidencies, and bills are,in the firft inftance, to be offéred 
to them by public advertisement, for the whole or any part of their Debts which they may 
-choose to subscribe for this purpase. And a reasonable time is to be given, not less than six 
‘nor more than eight months from your receipt hereof, in order to allow to the bond- 
holders at all the different Presideneics, to signify to you, their acquiescence in the terms- 
offered; and, at the expiration of thut period, you are to draw bills upon us in favour of such 
bond-holders as fhail have so signified their acquiescence, taking care to receive from them 
(Proper acquittances tor such part of their bonded Debts as they thal! have subscribed. 


After this operation fhall have been completed, it is our intention that you fhould be 
allowed to draw for the remainder of the 6,00,00,060 on account of so much, of the other 
Debts due at our different Presidencies, as arise either from arrears of fixed salary to any of 
our Civil or Military servants, to which such servants may have a clear and indisputable 
clan, not depending on any further inveftigation to ascertain their amount, or from any 
otier arrears which have been fully ascertained, after proper inveftigation of the nature and 
-extent of the Debt, and the Accounts or circumftances on which it depends; taking care 
not to include therein any supposed Balances on Accounts ftill depending, or any Sums 
which have not been.completely liquidated before the receipt of these Orders, 


And as it is our intention that an equal benefit of this operatiqn fhould be allowed to our 
-Creditors at all our Presidencies, you are to require our Governments there, to transmit to 
you Accounts of the amount of all such Debts as above ftated, the Creditors on which fhalt 

we acceded to this plan within a limited time after notice to be given to them by public 
advertisement for that purpose at each Presidency ; taking care lo include in such Account 
xno Debis which do.not fall under the description ‘above fiated. When such Account fhall 
have been received by you, you are to add its amount to that of the Debts under similar cir- 
seumftances in Bengal, the Creditors on which fhall, in like manner, have signified to you 
their acquiescence; and if the whole hall not exceed the difference between the 6,00,00,000 

B50. 5L above 


408 Appendix fo III‘ REPORT from the Sclc& Committee on 


above ftated, and the-amount of bonded Debt subscribed for, you are then to grant to such 
Creditors, bills to the whole amount of such Debts, on the terms hereinafter direéted. But 
if, on the contrary, the amount thall exceed such difference, you ure then to give such 
Creditor’s bills, to the whole amount of such difference, at an equal per-centage on the 
amount of their several claims respectively, and to receive acquittances from them for so 
much of their Debts. 


All these bills, bot for the bonded and the other Debts, are to be drawn at an exchange 
of one filling and eight-pence the Bengal Current Rupee, and at a proportionable rate of 
exchange for the Pageda and Bombay Rupee, to be seitled by our Governor General and 
Council. They are also to be made payable 548 days after date, with an option to the 
Company to poftpone the full payment thereof on paying Lotereft upon them half yearly, 
at the rate of 5 per cent. per annum, from the date of their becoming due, and also in pay- 
ing inflalments of not less than 10 per cent. on the Principal in every year after the 1* 
March 1790, unless it fhall suit our convenience to discharge them by curlier or larger pay- 
ments: and Jor the purpose of rendering those Bills more convenient to the holders, they 
are to be issued to each Creditor in bite of Five hundred pounds aud oue biil for the 
SraGtional part, if any such fhall be owing to'him. 


‘The funds for these payments at home, and for those which are necessary to answer the 
demands which may be made upon us before the above period, muft arise from an increase 
in our Inveftments for that purpose, beyond the sum allotted in our Reports to the House of 
Commons. From every consideration which we have been able to give to the subject, and 
‘on an examination of all-the materials in our possession which might tend to elucidate il, 
particalarly of the observations of our Accomptant General al Bengal on our Reports, we 
are fully convinced that if our Revenues in India ore properly adminiftered, there mutt arise 
a Surplus beyond our reduced efablifhments, amply sufficient for the purpose of this plan, 
On this head, therefore, we have only to repeat our general injunctions, to which we cannot 
too often recur, that. you ‘observe the utmoft economy in every department, aud that you 
pay a proper atteniion to the due collection of the Revenues. é 


With regard to invefting this Surplus and our other funds in India in goods marketable in 
Europe, the amount of such inveftment is a consideration of ng little difficulty. We have 
attended to it, not only with a view to the necessary supply of our sales at home, but also 
in so far as it may affect the propriety of our possessions in India. We conceive that there 
is danger, left by bringing to Europe too large an amount of the Revenues of those Countries 
im goods: for which oo return is made, we thould occasion @ drain which our territories may 
be unable to support; especially after the pressure of those diftresses under which they have 
so recently laboured: on the other hand we observe, that our Accomptant General, in his 
observations ftates, and we think with reason,-the mischief which might, arise from any 
considerable reduction of the sums which have been annuaily difiributed amongft the manu- 
fa@urers of the country, and from which they have derived the means of subsifience and 
the reward of labour and ingenuity. 


We have therefore had recourse to the experience of former years. It appears, that on 
‘an average of five years, ending in .1778,. goods were iuvefted from India for Europe to the 
amount of 120 lacs; and in the two iatt of those years to the amount of 139 lacs of Current 
Rupees, exclusive of what was sent to China, amounting, on an average of the same periods 
to £.67,106, and £.88,928 ; exclusive of what was sent.by our servants, and what was 
remitted through foreign companies on the capitals of our. servants, or brought home in 
specie; of either of which we are able to form no exact eftimate, although many considera- 
tions induce us to believe that they would amouat to a very large sum. Under ali these 
circumftances, when we consider the means of remittance which this plan offers to our 
servants for bringing home their fortunes, and the consequent reduction which muft take, 
place in the trade carried on by foreigners on their capitals; we think that we incor no 
danger of too large a drain on our Indian possessions, by directing an inveltment for Europe 
from all India, to the amount of 150 lacs of current rupees for the ensuing seasva, aud thé 
same for that which will follow it, unless orders to the contrary thal previously be received 
dy you. The diftribution of this to be as follows, viz. 


From Bengal: +: - 215 Lacs of Current Rupees, 
From Madras - - 25 De D° ‘and 
From Bombay -  -- 10 De b 


150 Lacs of Current Rupees. 


The funds to be provided by the usual amount of certificates, by. the ‘sale of exports, and 
the remainder from the Surplus of the territorial Revennaes; and this to be exclusive of what 
you may be enabled to send to China. 


We truft that when you refle& how mach the welfare of the Company is committed on the 
success of this plan, it is annecessary for us to recommend the amon caution in the purchase 
of the Inveftments, in order that they may be such, both in assortment and quality, as may 
realize to us the greateit profit on our sales; and for this purpose, we enjoin a particular 
atteunnon to the Abftraé of Indent herewith transmitted, requiring that our Board of Trade 
fat! fiute to you at large their reasons for any deviation from it. We have flated that no 
allowance is made in the above sum for exports te China, and the ‘observations, of your 


Accomptant 


the Affairs of The EAST-INDIA COMPANY. 407 


Accomptant General seem to point out that you have little expeCation of being able to apply 
any considerable amount to that purpose. “You mutt, however, be sensible that the sale of 
Bengal produce or manufactures there would afford the greateft assifance to the Company, 
in carrying on; that valuable and important branch of their trade, and you are therefore 
direéted to use every exertion tor that purpose. : 


We think it also proper to remark, that a great profit arises to the Company from the sale 
of Coat goods, It hus been suggefted to us, that the amount of this article might be 
considerably increased, and that funds for the purpose might be provided, by sending to 
Madras un annual supplygt Bengal commodities, marketuble there: we-have also reason 
to believe, that from both if. Coafts there might be procured, in exchange for the manutac- 
tures of Bengal, goods adapted to the consumption of China, particularly sandal, pepper, 
and cotton. 


To this subje& we dire your particular attention, as it would be an essential relief ta our 
situation at home, could methods be found of supplying our China parchases from Bengal, 


without draining that country of ‘its circulating specie, which fhould, on no consideration, 


be admitted of. Every article also of internal trade, by which the wealth of onr provinces 
can be increased, so as to enable them the better to support the annual remittances to, 
Europe, mutt be encouraged and extended with the utmott care, as the plan now adopted, 
retts in a great measure on a consideration of the amount which we think can be annually 
brought from India, either by the Company or its servants, consiftently with a due attention 
to thé prosperity of that country. 


You are, as soon as possible, to acquaint us with your proceedings in consequence of these 
Orders, and you are to wait our further direétion respecting the fieps tobe taken for the 
discharge of capital on such of our bonded Debts as {hall not be subscribed into this plan ; 
continuing, nevertheless, regularly to pay the Intereti thereon. : 


With respeét to the remaining Arrears, you. are to José no time in adjufting the several 
Accounts on which they may depend, paying particular attention to the nature and juttice 
of the diferent claims; and using every proper mode of enquiry to prevent our being 
charged with any demands for which a juft consideration has not been received. We have 
given similar dire@ions to our other Presidencies, and fhall, after receiving the final account 
thereof, transmit to you our further orders on the subject. 


As we conceive that this measure will preclude the necessity of drawing any. bills upon 
us, except for the execution thereof, we firittly prohibit your drawing bills on any other 
account, except only the usual certificates to Commanders of fhips, And you are also to 
observe, that as this plan has been calculated on a limited sum, you are to dedu& from the 
above amount of 6,00,00,000 Current Rupees, which you are allowed by this Letter to draw, 
the amount of any bills which may have been drawn by you or our other. Governments of 
India, of which we are not now advised: for this purpose we have subjoined an account 
of the lateft advices which we have received of bills drawn from any of our Presidencies. 


Our bonded Debt at Bencoolen is to be included in this operation ; and as that Settle- 
ment has now become a subordinate to Bengal, the Arrears there due are to be included in 
Account of Bengal Arrears. - oo: 


As by the present arrangement we have made so equitable a provision for the remittance 
of the fortunes of our servants in India, we think it incumbent upon us to advert to the A& 
of Parliament of 1783, whereby it is ena@ted, “ That it fhall not be lawful for any servant 
“ of the Eaft India Company, or any other. Britifh subje@ residing in India, to lend avy 
« sum of money to any foreign Company, or to any foreign European Merchant, or to 
“ purchase any goods in. India on the account of such foreign Company or European Mer~ 
“ chant, nor to be concerned in lending any such sums, or purchasing any such goods, or 
“ farnifhing such foreign Company or European Merchaut, with the credit of the bills 
“ drawn upon the correspondents of any such servant or Britith subject, or any other person 
“ ia Europe,” under the penalties inflicted by the said AG. a o 


And therefore we direé you to attend to the provisions of the said Adt in a more especiat 

anner, and to see that they are carried into firict execution. Our servants would at no‘time 
te juttified in departing from the regulations prescribed by Parliament; but would be ttilf 
less so now, becanse they can have no pretence whatever to complain of any supposed bard- 
fhip they might apprehend from a firi@ enforcement of the Act, as an easy and advan- 
tageous channel is opened under the syitem we have here laid down for the remittance of 
such fortunes as may have been juftly and honourably acquired. : 

We are your affectionate Friends, 


W. DEVAYNES, JAMES MOFFATT. 
NATH. SMITH. SAME SMITH Jun‘. 
L, SULIVAN. - HUGH INGLIs, 
THO’ FITZHUGH. JOHN TOWNSON, 
JOHN MOTTEUX, GEORGE CUMING. 
JOHN ROBERTS. JOHN MITCHIE. 
THO® CHEAP. THOMAS PAKRY. 
F, BARING, E. BOEHM. 


CHARLES MILLS, 
London; 15" Sept 1785. 


408 Appendix to 11 REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


Appendix, No: 32: 


Extract Letter from Governor General to Secret Committee of Court of Diregtors, 
(on the Finances), dated 16 November 1786. 


‘Pura. 6%, FHE plan of remitting the Debt, suggefied in Europe, if it had succeeded, 
‘would certainly have operated to a diminution, and ultimately to the extinction of all our 
énibarrassments. But however fair the principles on which  ityyas founded, however solid 
the reasons by which it was supported, ithas not answered the Mblic expectations. 


62. Amongtt the causes to which this disappointment is owing, we may enumerate the 
following : the low rate of Exchange ; the remote period held out, for liquidation of the 


Billyon Europe; the advantages made in this country by the purchase of Paper; und the 


superior profit derived from remittances by foreign.channels. 


Appendix, Na. 33. 


Extract Letter from the Court of Direétors to the Governor General in Council at 
Bengal (Separate General Department), dated g1* July 1787. 


Para 47. 1T was on “Hachette + that we transmitied to you, in September 1785, a Plan 
for trensferring-our Indiin Debt te England. 


48. We are urach concerned to find that this Plan has, in a great degree, failed of suc~ 
cess ; but we are {till impressed with the satne convidtion of the advantage to be derived 
from a measure of this mature, provided it be carried into effect in such « manner as not to 
make the compensation to be given by us of anure veal yalue to our Creditors than the aétual 
‘discharge of their Debts in India. : 


49. For it is evident, that even if such payient could now be made by us, some consi- 
dérable diminution would arise to such of our Creditors as were desirous of remitting to 
Europe the amount which they had received ; and it is therefore clearly juft, that a due con- 
sideration fhould be hud of this vireumftauce, when the Company otier to carry on that 
operation for them, and to take upon themselves the expense and risk of the transfer. But 
as there are su aaiy points in the application of this principle which depend.on local and 
temporary circuinftinees, of which we have found it impossible for us to acquire a sufficient 
knowledge, and as wé repose a full and perfect confidence in your zeal, abilities and inte- 
grity, we now authorize you to draw Bills upon us on account of our Indian Debts, including 
those at Bencoolen, for such a sum as, together with those drawn in consequence of the 
orders now referred to of the 25° September 1785, {hall amount in the whole to six crores 
of current rupees, for the acceptance of which we have obtained the consent of the Lords 

‘ommissioners of His Majety’s Treasury, a copy of which is herewith enclosed. 


50. The rate of Exchange at which subscriptions are to be received, és left to your discre- 
Hea but the terms muff, in other respects, be regulated by the following orders ; viz, That 
the Bills hall bear date on a day to be fixed by you, on which day Interett is to cease on 
them in India; and that Intereft at such a rate as you find expedient, notexceeding 5 per 
cent. per annum, (the amount of which muft be considered in fixing the reft of the terms) 
fhall commeice in England at one and a half year after date; that we fhall bind ourselves ‘to 
discharge our Indian Debts so transferted” by half yearly payments of not less than’ 
(£. 500,090) five hundved thotsand pounds in each “payment, to commence from the 
1** September 1790, but that in such payments a preference thall be given to those Creditors 
who have Consenied to the terins offered in our Jeuter of 15% September 1785. ‘The rate of 
exchange with the other Settlements, and ‘the other meusures of detail for carrying these 
orders into execution, we leave as before for your adjufiment. F 


51. In assuming the total of Debts, the Carrent Pagoda in which the Madras Debts are 
Rated, have been valued conforinable to his Lordthip’s calculation, at 425 C* RF per 100 Pa- 
godas, but this valuation is considerably higher than that preceding the war; nor can we 
admit of the Debts at Madras being Converted into C' Rupees, in order for their being 
drought ‘hone at so high a valuation. We have so rited them Here only to preserve con 
fermity in the comparison, and because we were not willing to undervalue the amount of the 
Debtsin general. * 


Appetidix, No. 34. 


‘Extract ‘Getter from the ‘Court of Direéors to the Governor General in Councif at 
‘Bengal(Public Department), -dated 25'* June 1793. 

Para. 163. IN discussing the several heads for‘forming the late arrangements previous to 
sthe passing of the AG, it ‘was deemed ineligible to reduce the Company’s Debt in India, 
bearing Intereti, below two crores of Rupees, ‘or-two millions of Pounds Sterling. By the 
clause, the Company’s Indian Debts bearing Intereft, are taken at seven sg os Sen 

upees, 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. — - 409 


Rupees, or about seven millions of Ponnds Sterling. Agreeably therefore to what is enacted 
in this respeé, we authorize you to deaw Bills upon the Court of Directors, from time to 
time, towards the liquidation of the Company’s Indian Bond Debt, until it fhall be reduced. 
to the sam before mentioned; butit is not our intention to limit the amount of Bills to be 
annvally drawn upon us on that account, provided that not more than to the amount of ~ 
£.500,000 be made payable in any one years if therefore in-1704, the Bills called for in 
consequence of the eee for. that purpose thall exceed £. 500,000; thie excess beyond 
that amount may be sy with an option to the Company to poftpoue the» payment 
thereof, on allowing Tat on the Bills: payable lialf-yearly, at the rate of 5 percent. per 
annum, from the date of their becoming due, The rate of Exchange for the ensuing year, 
is not to exceed 15, 11d. per Current Rupee. 7 tot 


104. In case the Company's Creditors in India thall declineito accept Bills to the amount 
of £. 500,000 in any year, thie clause points oat the modelin which this deficiency is to be. 
supplied. In the execution of these Orders respeéting the drawing the Bills on account of 
the India Debt, the Governor General in Council mutt take the leadyand our other Presi- 
dencies muft be bound by the orders they thall receive from them on this subject. 


105. We are already under Acceptances to the amount of £- 392,000, to be paid on the 
1** March 1794; if therefore you thould not procure Bills at the before-mentioned rate of 
as. 11d. the Current Rupee, we authorize you to discharge, in cafh, so much of our Bond 
Debt, as will make that amount equal to £. 500,000, provided you hive not already drawn 
upon us to complete the sum of £. 500,000 by the expected {hips of this season, of which 
we have not yet received advice. 


Appendix, No. 35: { sf 


ry pe ‘ 

An ACCOUNT of the Amount of DEBTS subseribed in India, between the 30th April 179% 
and the Ist Muy 1800, agreeable to the Orders of 15th September 1785, the 31st July 1787, and 
the'25th June 1793; drawn from the Accounts Preeptes to Parliament. ; 


a FORT. 
BENGAL, MADRAS. eS eo tH MARLERO.| TOTAL, 
~ 
L ie: 
4792-5) =- - = 971,973 341,813 
179-4 - + 2) $92,937 47,393 953,944 
17945 - 7 = 594,472 229,008 1,332 || 877,668 
1795-6 -. toes 504,019 194,613 |= se 678,062 
WET - =e 407,573 28,685 |- - =|| 587,202 
1797-8 wy tu 191,999 120,505 15,801 9,454 | 8375819. 
1798-9. - - - 94,600 166,654 1,211 1,600 204105 = 
17991800 - "= 128,166 195,876 * Cheres ~ DVS 332,798 
1800-1 - = 73,390 3,579 BGs] Sf 81,583. 
os V-()) Oar 180,343 8,301 S895 |= - =} 142,539 - 
19033 = = 9 132 4,096 I. 288m 
18034 -  - = ie ptt 
180455 =90- = 2,716 2,716-% 
2805-6 = = = a 
1800-7 = Se 
1807-3 =p = 
18689 = 5 4 — pie 
\— a eel 
Toran = =f 1,258,713 | 471,409 | 30,727 


eee 


. fudia Board Office, } eth cele 
ans " . ay 
Whitehall, 17th May 1812. Thomas Nicholas Wittwer, 


Accotntant, 


250, 5M 


410 Appendix fo III‘ REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


Appendix, Ne. 36. 


Extra& Letter from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Secret Department), 
: dated 16% March 1798. e 


Para. 6. THE Governor General laid before us a Letter from ccountant General, sug- 
gefting the eftablifhment of a Sinking Fund for discharge of th@@xifting and future Debts 
of the Company io India. 


7. Lor raising a Fund for the liquidation of the exifting Debt, which amounted at the 
end of December daft to about six crores and fifty lacs of Sicca Rupees, it is proposed, that 
‘Bills thall be drawn upon you quarterly for S* K* 325,000 or 13 lacs of S* R* per annum 
(being equal to 2 per cent. on the whole Debt, until the extinction of the Debt, which, 
according to the calculation in the Accountant General’s letter, will be effected in about 
twenty years. 


8. The liquidation of any future annual addition to the present Debt, is to be provided for 
in the same manner. 


9. Although the Plan may not be produttive of all the advantages ftated in Mr. Myer’s. 
Teter, we are satisfied, that besides providing for the discharge of your Debts in the moft 
advantageous manner, it will contribute por to uphold the value of public securities, 
especially at periods when the exigencies of Government may render it necessary for them 
to avail themselves of their credit to a considerable extent; and consequently that we thall 
be enabled to raise Supplies, not only to a larger amount, but on terms more favourable than 
has hitherto been practicable, without, at the same time, occasioning that great depreciation 
of the public securities which had hitherto invariably followed every extraordinary demand 
on our resources, and which in its operation has been equally injurious to your interefis, and 
to those of the great body of the holders of your securities. 


10, For the details of the Plan, we beg to refer you to the Accountant's letter. We fhall 
here only add, that from the considerations above flated, and being of opinion that the Plan 
did not, in any respect, interfere with the engagements between Government and its present 
Creditors, we resolved to adopt it, and the Accountant General has been called upon to lay 
before us a Draft of the Rules for the application and management of the Fund. 


—_— 
Appendix, No. 37. d 


Extraét Letter from the Governor in Council of Madras (Public Department), 
dated 19** Oétober 1709. 


a6. THE Governor General having fiated his convidtion of the absolute necessity of adopt- 
ing immediate measures for the rettoration of the credit of the Public Securities ona per- 
maneht basis,-thought no measure better calculated for that purpose, than the efiablifiment 
of a separate Sinkiug Fund for the gradual discharge of the Company’s Debts at this 
Presidency. 

a7. A Commission has accordingly been appointed, according to the recommendation of 
the Governor General, whose proceedings will be conduéied on the principles of the Sinking 
a eftablifhed in Bengal, for liquidating the whole of the Debt in India, on the 3° of 

pril 1798. - ‘ r 7 


Appendix, No. 38. 


: Copy Letter from the Court of Diredtors to the Governor General in Council at Bengal 
+ =. (Public Department), dated 1* June 1803. - 


HAVING taken into our moft mature consideration the present amount of our Indian 

| Debt, ‘and the large charge of Intereft payable thereon, we deem it indispensible, as well for 

the purpose of deriving to our affairs theamportant advantages which muti resuit from an 

eatly reduétion of the rate of Intereft abroad, as’also with a view of relieving India from the 

\ burtbens thrown upon it by the war, to adopt the moft active measures for the liquidation of 

that Debt; and fhould insurmountable obfiacles not oppose themselves to the execution of 

the'measures Hereafter detailed more at length, it appears from tbence, and from the Efti- 

mates we have had before us, that the result may be, that we fhall be able to pay off not less 
than two millions (.£.2;000,000) of the said Debt in each of the two next years. 


That 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. au 


That you may be enabled to frame your measures with a view to the execution of this im= 
portant objeé, we think it proper to apprize you, that it is our determination to sénd out 
from hence such a Supply of Bullion (fhould it be procurable in Europe) in addition to the 
Export of Geods and Stores, as we truft will be more than svfficient, when aided by the 
Surplus Revenue in India, to provide us with an Inveftment in India and China, of at leaf 
£.4,000,000 in each year, the separate appropriation of which will be as follows: 


China, about =o - - = £.2,000,000. 
India, aboug be ty, Hebe s = 2,000,000. 


We eftimate the Funds for the Invefiment as follows: * ¥ 
Surplus Reyenues- = - = = | £. 1,000,003. 
Goods and Stores = 2 = = = 2,060,000, 
Bullion +92 0 * =e rh. 1,000,008. tien 


£. 4,000,000. » 


In suggefting the aboye preportions, it will naturally occur to you, that.it is impossible to, 
foresee with precision the exact amount, either of Exports or of Bullion, which cireumiiances 
may enable us to send from hence ; but-confidently hoping that we may haye it in our power 
to furnifh, in these articles together, a Supply at leaft equal to’the proposed extenty‘and that 
the residue will be forthcoming from the Surplus Revenues in India, it will be your duty to 
take care, that at all events, the purchase of our Inveftment, according to the directions which 
will be hereafter more amply detailed to you, (hall have precedence’ of every other applica~ 
tion of any part of our Funds under your adminiftration, #: $ agk 


Ge 

Tf there fhould occur any disapointment upon this Eftimate, we direét the deficiency of 
the Fupds above pointed out, below four millions, fhall be made up by Bills. of Exchange 
upon the Court of Directors at Home, so-as to complete: un Tuveftment from India and 
‘China, to the amount of four-millions in each year. We hope this will not be the case, 
Dut that, on the contrary, we may be able to procure from Funds properly applicable to the 
reduction of Indian Debt, further Supplyiot Bullion. In whatever. amount the supply of 
Ballion may be extended, or the Indian Surplus may exceed the sum at which itis above 
a you will have Funds to a certain extent disposable towards the liquidation ‘of 

ebt. oi Ai oa TL yigd ‘ay 


Reckoning as we do, therefore, with some degree of confidence upon your being enabled to 
supply above one million, (.€.1,000,000) even in the firft year, from the Surplus Revenue ” 
towards the provision of an Invefiment, and which matt, we fhould hope, be increascd in 
every subsequent year by the saving in the charge of Intereft, we authorize you for the two 
next years to draw Bills on us for such farther sums as may be required, to enable you to) 
Jiquidate two millions (£.2,000,000) of Debt within the year, mayen the/amount of Bills 
drawn for this purpose, including those drawn for the Invefiment, if such fhould be necessary, 
thull in no case exceed the difference between the amount of the value sent out in, Bullion 
and Exports, and the sum of five millions, which is the utmoft extent of Funds whith it is 
heels for us at prefent conveniently to provide, and sct apart at Home for the seryice of © 

ndia in any one,year. In-whatever sum the Surplus Revenue (hall exceed a milligf, ‘a ¢or- 
responding redaction will of course take place in your demands upon us, six millions being 
the aggregate annual sum which muft be realized in your Treasury, for the puFposes "of In+ 
vefiment and liquidation of Debt. Z en 


‘ ¥ 5 ee Sh rth . 
We fhall take care to keep: you accurately informed of ‘the ai wiht of Bullion and Ex-" % 
ports which may be in progress of exportation frombence,,so’ that youymzy know before 
pe with precision, how to proportion your Dills accordingly, taking care to include in the 
above sum whatever may be payable in this country, either for Principal or’ Intereft upon s~ 
* the Decennial and other Loans, which may be remitted to Europe; and you may be assured, 
that it will be our endedvour to send: out as liberal a Supply of Bullion as possible, in order 
that you may not be driven to the necessity of drawing Bills to an extent which muft have ) 
an injurious effeét upon the rate of Exchange. E | 


That no possible misunderftanding may exift npon a sibjeé so important to the Company's 
interefts, we think it necessary to. repeat, and specially to direct, that the provision of 
Invefiment to the extent mentioned in the former part of this Letser, that is to sa 
£.4,000,000, (four million of pounds Sterling) is to take place of every other application 
our Funds, whether they aris tony! tus Reveiitie, the Sale of Se hence, 
from Bullion, or from Bills on the Court of Diredtors. ee P ee i; 

- . ee the Fased Tia 

Y@ahwill ‘receikel font timerte tame! infignehtonedar the dire@tow bi cond sith 
reference to this important object; in the meantime we'rely on your tiuking the mo! judici iS 
measures for deriving to our ‘ioangpe al the benefits, both ia the early reduction of Intereit, 
as also'in the favourable Fate of Exeh » which may naturally be expected to resol idle 

rigs we | 
re 


rae 


the application of so large w Sinking Fund in cach year to the liquidation of our 
Debt, ; - we ‘ 


412 Appendix to III‘ RERORT from the Sele& Committee on 


Appendix, No. 39. 


Extract Letter from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial Department), 
dated 224 Ociober 1810. 


IT is proper to mention that the amount of the Government Securities redeemed by the 
Commissioners of the Sinking Fund, has been deducted from the Debt of this Presidency at 
both periods, as your honorable Court will observe from the Leiter of the Accountant 
General, recorded on our Proceedings of the 23* March laft, arid from that officer’s Letter 
of the 29" ultimo; iathe proposes to close the Account of the Sinking Fund in the General 
Books, and to-curry at once, to the Credit of the-Acconnt Current London, the amount of 
any Bills which may henceforward be drawn apon your honorable Court, 


Extra@’ Letter from Accountant General: of Bengal to Mr. Secretary Tucker; 
; dated 29 Sept: 1810 :—(Enclosure to the above.) 
The progress of the Sinking Fund has been suspended for a considerable time paft, and 
itis therefore my intention to recommend that the Account be closed on the 3ot April lait, 
and the Securities belonging to the Fund cancelled. Di 


bo phe . 


‘Appendis, No. 40. 


Extra& Letter from the Court of Direétors' to the Governor General in Council 
at Bengal (Public Department), dated g" December 1807. 


Para. 4, WE take this occasion however to observe, that it is very desirable that no more 
Loans fhould be made in India with an option of payment in Englaad, because cireumiflances 
nay exift to render the punctual liquidation of such Debts at home abselutely impracticable. 
The reasoning contained in your Letter in the Public Department of the 23* April 1807, with 
the aneRmens which you have urged in favour ofsuch’an option, have not served to reconcile 
us t syltem, nor to remoye the ftrong objections which we entertain to its continuance. 


Appendix, No. 41. 


‘Extra&t Letter from the Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial Department), 4 
| , dated the 14% May 1808. 


Para. 2. SINCE ovr Dispatch of the above-mentioned date, we have had the honor to re~ 
ceive your honorable Court’s Letter, dated the of* December 1807, im reply to our Dis- 
patches from this Department of the 18'* February, 23" March, 23¢ April, 25° May, and 
theg™June 1807, F sb f ps q 

3. The important points discussed in these Letters, at present occupy our moft serious 
consideration. 


Appendix, No. 42. Snes as 8 
Extract Letter from Governor General in Couineil at’ Bengal (Financial Department), 
f dated 224 O&ober1810. R : i é 


* ¥ eye 
; 


Para. 48. THE operation by which the Optional Loans have been deprived of the privilege 
oF transfer to England, was parti¢ularly explained in our Letter of the 28 May Ire, and 
“we have. great satisfaction in reporting to your honorable Court, that the measure has been 
attended with complete sucess. - ens . 
x sy eee. Thy a + dans St 5, ite 
83... Wehave already had the/honour to mention to your honorable Court, that the firft 
‘ undertaken by us was attended with complete success,'and you will no doubt 
iénce peculiar satisfaction in: learning, that we haye at length accomplifhed what has 
“been $0 long pe ae by you as an objeé of the greateft importance. The pablie Debt of 
>this Presidency has now been placed upon the footifig which was considered by you so 
desirable, and which muft preclude all future solicitude originating in an apprehension of its. 
“sudden transfer to England, fea ell + : 


aa ™ > ¥ i ~ 


e _ the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 413 


Appendix, No. 43. 


Extra& Letter from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial Department), 
dated 28% May 1810.° 


Para. WE have lately considered very deliberately, the measures which it might be ex- 
pedient to pursue for the purpose of placing the Debt of India upon the footing so ftrongly 
recommended by your honorable Court, as well as for the purpose of effeéting a reduction 
in the annual charge of Intereft which that Debt bears at present; and having had the 
benefit of a private communication with the Governor General on the subject, we finally 
determined, with the concurrence of his Lordfhip, to adopt a course of measures for the 
accomplifhment of this important object. 


50. The Letter from the Accountant General, which your honorable Court will find » 
recorded on our Proceedings of the 11" infant, fhews the nature of the firft operation which 
we have undertaken, and for your more particular information, we thall explain concisely 
our views in offering to the Public Creditors an opportunity of exchanging the securities at ~ 
present held by them, for notes to be issued on the terms of the advertisement which was 
publifhed on the recommendation of that Officer, 4 


51. The firft and moft important object which we had in view, was, to take from the exift~ 
ing Debt the liberty of transfer to England, and with this view your honorable Court will. 
observe, that the Principal of the new notes is made payable in Bengal only. x 


+ 


Appendix, No. 44. 
Extra& Letter from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial Department), 
dated 4 January 1813. ‘ote 


Para. 11, WE have the honour to forward to your honorable Court, in the packet, copy of 
8 Letter from the honorable Gompany’s Supracargoes at Canton, from whe aee will pera 
ceive that the plan projected by us for effecting remittances to engaed through the Trea-- 
sury at Canton, is likely to be carried into effeét.’ Should the Supracargoes succeed, as 
they give us reason to expeét they will do, in furnifhing your honorable Court with a 
Supply of Bullion to the extent of about a million sterling, the circumftances. will be to us 
the source of infinite satisfaétion, and it will, we doubt not, be regarded by your honorable 
_ Court with sentiments of approbation. It has been our anxious wilh to apply the extensive 
Funds which we have had at our command for some time paft, to afford relief to the Trea~ 
sury at Home, and no means have been neglected by whicli we could hope to efleét a re- 
mittance without disadvantage to the honorable Company. 


Appendix, No, 45. 


‘Extra& Letter from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial Department), 
“dated 4™ January 1811. 


Para. 50. THE Letter from our Accountant General of the 28" ultimo, containing: par- 
ticular explanations with regard to the amount of the Bulances at the. different Presidencies, 
and the progress expected to be made in the reduction of the Indian Debt, we do not think 
it necessary to enter into details in this place. We thall only notice, that the aggregate 
Balances in the Indian Treasuries, on the goth April laft, amounted to the very large sum of 
Rupees 9,06,91,239; and that, by the application ofa part of these Balances to the payment 
of Debt, it is computed that the Principal of the Debt will be reduced in. the present year in 
the sum of R* 5,52,69,940. SUE ts 


250. 5N 


44a Appendix ¢o III* REPORT fiom the Scle& Committee on 


——————— 


Appendix, No. 46. , 


Ay ACCOUNT, Miewing the Amount of all Sums'paid by the East Inn1a Company from their 
Treasury in England, supposed to be chargeable to the Territories in India, from the year 1793-4 


to the year 1809-10 inclusive. 


yh Pax to = Paid for Sundries | 
van.) | Pee Milo | NOV Rineuak | emeeaed ae | eins | EET ropa n 
Huneward, and Charges General. ow the 
‘ Retiewent Voyage to India. 
3 nie Seite ‘ ; £. =: 
1793-4 > - 23,079 | - = > |. 1953508 18,322 371,392 
ee eee Ufo Lule | cavenli 195,811 14,536 163.399 
“175-6 = = 47109 | ==" 136,470 "| 6,268 199,128 
“1786-7 + + 95244 fo op eo 239,772 17,604 375097 
yaqo7-8 -. - fF 14,549 25,225 “417,100 | ° 44,961 203,784, 
17089)!" - 90,652 373125 129,079 | 251456 300,736 
s799-1800 -} 438419 1 35,855 |. 9 °268,060, | 2554 | 20,937. {| 273,817 
1800-1 - = 31,054 40,622 177,851 5.913 AG,195 ~ (307,635 
59517 Sale 49,216 | 240,083 7) ~ 14,038" > 120,218 ~ 482,730 
56,4220 60,163 -| * 231,722 9,229 we 35,671 393,207 
38,894 96,667 é 203,432. 41,423 $4,808 435,224 
755315] 112,254 .222,082 | 10,339) J -75,418' = ]) 485,604 
124,035 | 328,507 | 4 /250,492,.|.. 22,806 |" 50,865 5759795 
7515451 441,319 |}, 226,732 91540) 38,947 493,083 
94,637 | 9258101 |) 405,026 | 8,079" | 34,054 55,797 
100,606.) 166,048 200,574 4,502) 78,886 550,766 
“70,999 | 171,018" 233,019 | 42,710 | 77,285, || 565,931 
& y - seasons Rae 9232,813 ” | 166,089 | 800,121 | 16,482,125 
, x 
e Deduét, repaid by GovéFament. ~~ © 280,076 ; 289,076 


. ; nee a 


@ Tneia Mouse, 2 ‘ 
paduneisi1, J (Errors excepted.) 
f va i Dg & ©. Chat Cartwright, 

rs i Acct General. 
Raite 


® 


ro a 
~ “Appendix, No. 46. (a.) 
* ovis, 20° die Junii, 1811 


‘Examination of CHARLES CARTWRIGHT, Esq. Accountant General of 
4 © the Batt India Company, 


IT is the cuftom at the India House té add 10 per cent. to the prime coft of ‘the consign~ 
ments of Goods sent from England toTndia ; What is the reason for inserting this article ? 
Ivis.avery ancient usage, the origin of which I cannot undertake to ftate; bat L conceive 
it to be for the ‘purpose of covering contingent Charges, suclr as Insurance, and probably 
Freight, and the lutereft of Money, and a proportion of the Charges of Eftablifhment. 


In your’ Aecount, dated 7th June 1811, entitled, "An Account fhewing the amount of 
«all Sums paid by the Eatt India Company from their Treasury in England, supposed to be 
chargeable to the Territories in India, from the year 1793-4 to the year 1809-10 inclusive,” 
there is. a-bead of, * Political Charges included in Charges Generai;” What is the nature 
of the articles’contained under that head?» Ae - 
bs Commissioners for the Affairs of India, 
“~~ Eali india Volunteer Reginients. 


Sasi tie 


we - 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, 415 


Annuities and Pensions for political Services. 
_Company’s Stud. 
‘Cadets and Military Seminary. 
Eaft India College. 
Depét, Isle of Wight, and Recruiting, 
Payment to King’s Military Oflicers and Soldiers. 
Payments on account of india. 
Packets overland. 
Persian Embassy and Subsidy. 
Proportion of the Expenses of the Home Eftablifhment, for Salaries, ce. 


There is another head, entitled, “ Paid for Sundries for the use of the Military on ‘the 
“ voyage to Indias” What is contained under that head?—Necessaries fhipped for the use 
of the troops embarked, which are consumed generally on the voyage. 


There is another head, entitled, Political Freight and Demorage;” explain that head? 
—FPor thort Tonnage on which Freight is allowed in consequence of the room reserved tor 
accommodation of ‘troops; Demorage; and every other Charge incurred in consequence of 
the (hips having been employed in carrying military ftores, &c. from one Presidency to 
another in india; or as Cartels; or while engaged in any other political service. ; 


Appendix, No. 47. : 

Ax ACCOUNT of the Amonnt of LOSSES incurred by the Eaft India Company 
in their Cancoxs homeward from In pra and Cuina respectively, from the year 1792-3 
to the year 1§09-10 inclusive ; diftinguifhing each year. 


Lady J. Dundas ~ 
Jane Duchess of Gordon 
Europese ie) + 
Sueatham = 2s 


YEAR, ofa hs tatie, 4 INDIA, CHINA. 
1 de s ae yl ere 
Boyd - e. Pa Sate ~ 17,060 =_ 
Prince Frederick = - 9 3 0 5 50,981 | = 
Thomas:'#sy=\.) a3 ho I 999,088 —_ 
Royal Charlotte ~ =. 24 2 8979 | i 
Eduiund and George - 2 = 6,100 | = 
Syl Ui cate Sane eo =} 93,548 
Zephyr Ee ane by = >) 24554 —* 
Lion - -— - pe 8272 — 
Princess Amelia = - b I 22,061 = 
Raymond -  - — - = me 8,053 = 
Woodcott = - * = 7 zs f 20,021 — 
+ Caftor = - - = = ~ 7878 _ 
— Friendthip. + = Pas 4.948 = 
_ Exrl Fitzwilliam + & ¢ Pt 46,250 —_ 
n802-3 -| Culland’s Grove - - i. ~ 24,640 = 
2803-4 -| Althea - - - - ~ = — 
i Prince of Wales = - = = — 
a Hope - Pa Se) = 
1804-5 -] Coromandel "4- 0 - Les 95,768 
ia Experiment = - - ¥ = 45,004 
* 1805-6 ~} Warren’ Haftings =~ pie 104,051 
a Ganges - - = ey oy 126,614 
1807-8 -| Walpole = =" 2 ~ 
1808-9 -| Lord Nelson bei. Sled 
lixperiment’™= "5 S085 PL s 
Glory.\=— is ata hl satan is, oS 
Calcutta - - me Sy s 
Bengal aah oS 4 = 


VYVAVVA 


paves 


1,027,209 344,579 


Ealt India House, (Errors excepted.) 
7m June 1811, a s 


Chat Cartwright, 
Acct Gen’ 


"Fourth Report from the Select Committee oni the Affairs of The Eaft India Company. 


Tur Appendix, No. 47—(Further Documents refpecting the Private Trapr)—forms 
a SyprLement; and will be delivered in a few days. . 


2 May 1812, 


"7 
FOURTH REPORT 
FROM quln 
SELECT COMMITTEE 
ox THE 


Affairs of The EAST IN DIA Company. 


—— 


Ordered, by The Uouse of Commons, fo be printed, 10 April 1812. 


a 


The Serecr Commirrex appointed to enquire into the presen 
State of the Affairs of The East India Company, and to report the 
same, as it shall appear to thém, to the House, with their 
Observations thereupon ; and also, their Proceedings from time 
to time to. the House ;. Have, pursuant to the Orders of 
the House, further examined the Matters to them referred ; and 
have agreed upon the following REPORT: 


yor Committee, in their Second and Third Reports, have submitted to the 
House the results of their enquiry into the State of the Affairs of the East 
‘India Company, as far as related to the Receipt and Expenditure of the Treasuries 
‘of the several Presidencies and Settlements in India, during seventeen years, from 
1792-3 to 1808-9 inclusive; and having stated the Ordinary and Extraordinary 
Funds, with the sources from which they were respectively derived, together with the 
application of them, have cndeavoured, in the latter of the above Reports, to shew, 
the general effect produced upon the Balance in India by the various and compli- 
-cated transactions which had been the objects of their detailed exaniination. 


Your Committee anxiously desired to pursue the course of enquiry proposed in 
their Third Report, and complete the investigation of the State of the Finances ge- 
erally, both abroad and at home, during the fast Session of Partiament; but found 
the time insufficient to cnable them to enter so fully into the Financial transactions 
termed those of the [ume Concern, as the importance of the subject rendered in- 
dispensable, notwithstanding the Accounts and Documents connected with. it were 
neither so numerous, nor apparently so complicated, as those which had already been 
brought to the notice of the House. 


Your Committee having already described generally the nature of these Accounts, 
and stated their intention of considering the China ‘Trade, and the Expense of the 
Settlement of the Island of St. Helena in connection with them, now proceed to re- 
‘view these branches of the Company’s Affairs. 


The Home Accounts commence in 1793, and end in 1$10; those of ‘China and 
‘St. Helena in 1792, and terminate in 1809, embracing respectively, like these of 
India, the space of seventeen years. 

The House is already apprized, that although the transactions of the Treasury at 
home are in their cha’ Y ipally Commercial, they are nevertheless clesely in- 
terwoven with others of a Political nature, and that to a degree which yenders the 
Cifficulty of distinct separaticn much greater than has been experienced in the cxa~ 
amination of the Aeccunts confined to the Affairs in India, The manner in which 

as, 5 0 the 


“Cra, 


Appendix, N° 1, 


418 Fourth REPORT from the Seteét Committee on the 


the Rooks have been kept in the latter case, enabled your Committee to make some 
distinction, and to offer such Statements and Results as they trust will have fur- 
nished the means of assisting the judgement of the House in distinguishing the Poli- 
tical transactions from those more sti ctiy Commercial; but in the Home Accounts, 
the entire Receipt and | penditure in cach year is compressed into one gene- 
mal Cash Account, in which, as to the Disbursements particulerly, what is Political, 

v blended toa considerable amount with what is apparently a Charge 
mmercial. ‘This Account has been presented annually to Parliament, 
under the ions of the Act of 1793, accompanied by the Statement of the 
Debits and 3 of the Company at home. Other Accounts have been also pre- 
sented to the Hense (as that entitled the Stock by Computation and the Amount of 
the Sales of Goods in cach year) on distinct motions for the same. These several 
Accounts will form the basis of the investigation proposed to be pursued; but Your 
Comittee will, us occasion nay prescribe, add'to their Appendix such further State- 
ments as shall appear r ite lly to elucidate the subject, and enable them to 
bring the wile to the view of the House in the most intelligible manner. It will 
not be in the power of Your Coumittee to adhere precisely to the course they have 
pursucd in respect to the Indian Accomnts; as upon many occasions recourse must 
be had to e: » for the exhibition of certain results; but in every case the grounds 
of the calculations will be distinctly explained, that the House may judge of the cor- 
s of the principles upon which they are made. 

Itis not however meant by this remark to queftion the propriety of the mode in 
ich the Books of the Company at Home have been kept, or to imply that the 
Accounts piesented annnally to the House unter the directions of the Act, are not 
of a deseription to tuvnish the information intended by the Legistature. « Your Com- 
mittee, on ‘the ec er it due to the Court of Directors to state, that with 
respect to this branch of the Accounts, which is under their more immediate control, 

the | provisions of the Act have been most punctually attended to, both as to the mode 
of Statement (which is upon a very general principle) and the time. The Accounts in 
question appear to have been pr epared i in strict conformity to the system under which 
the Coinpany’s '3 affairs have been ‘conducted, of combined Political and Commercial 
management, the separation of which has not been hitherto required. 


diectly { C 


The Concern in Crna being the most import tant branch of the Commerce of the 
Company, Your Committee will examine the employment of Frnds in that ‘Trade, 
hefure they review the effects produced by it upon the Home Treasury. ‘Phe Ex- 
peuses of the Settlement of the Island of St. Helena, which are principally defrayed 
by Supplies from. England, will be next considered. By this process the enquiry into 
the state of the Company's Affairs abroad will have preceded that of the Home 
‘Treasury, and by a gradual course the combination of the whole, as originally pro- 
posed, will finally be effected. e 

‘The connection-of the Company with China is entirely ‘of a Commercis! nature, 
and although any lenathened explanation of the principles upon which this highly 
imports at branch of th ‘cmmercial economy is conducted inay be superfluous, 
ar nature of it presctibes the propricty of offering some general remarks 
uation of the Liouse. 

‘Trade witly China has for a very long period formed a part of the exclusive 

yy ge of, the Company, and has been carried: on upon principles conducive, in a 
very ctuinent degree, not only to the advantage of those embarked in it, but likewise 
terests of the British Empire in its Revenue, in the emp! loyment of its 
re dina steady end continned demand for its Manufactures. It is never- 
jess fact universally known, that the Company have no footing whatever in 
China coming under the denomination of permanent; that the intercourse with the 
Merchants of that extensive Empire is very limited, being exclusively confined to a 
sinall Pactory.in the vicinity of the City of Canton, occupied by the sufferance of the 
Court of Pekin, under strict regulations, designating the parties with whom, andthe 
‘manner in which the Trade is to be conducted. ‘The Fu ‘actory of Canton may there: 
fore be considered as the place of mere occasional residence for the convenience o| 
the Agents of the Company in their transactions with the Merchants, ‘who are termed 
Hong) ferchants, expressly licensed by the Chinese Government to have dealings with 
them. These MM Merchants re very limited in number, being in 1793 twelve, and 


The 


-in 180$ fourteen. 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, 419 


The official designation of the Agents of the Company is that of Supra-Cargoes. 

‘hey are united in one Commission, aud gencrally the four Senior are termed the 
President and Select Committee, who are assisted in the transaction of the busi- 
ness of the Factory by the remainder, and by Writers and others holding sub- 
ordinate appointments, the whole being under special covenants for the periormance 
of the duties committed to them respectively. A description of the several persons 
thus employed is added to the Appendix. ‘I'he residence of the Supra-Cargoes and 
their Assistants at the Factory is only during the season of their intercourse with the 
Chinese Merchants, for receiving and paying for the produce of the Country. The 
purchases of this produce used to bein part made by the barter of the Woollens 
and Metals consigned from England, and in part by Cash. But for some years this 
plan has been altered, and an absolute sale has been made of the Exports of this 
Country, the produce of which, combined with the other Funds of the Canton Trea~ 
-sury, is applied to the discharge of the demands ofthe Merchants of China, for the 
goods supplied by them. 


The business of the Season being finished, and the ships laden and dispatched on 
their return to England, the Supra-Cargoes retire from .the Mactory to the Island 
of Macao, a Settlement belonging to the Portuguese, where. they continue till the 
opening of the ensuing Season. The periods of the commencement and close of the 
‘Season are. not distinctly laid down, being affected by various contingencies; and as 
to what is termed the official year according to the books of the Factory, Your 
Committee find that no precise period has ever been fixed for its definition; but the 
balancing of them has generally been governed by the conclusion of the Season, which 
has been most communly in the months of February or March. ‘The species of 
Coin made “use of in the books of the Factory, are Tales, Mace, and Candarines, 
which are nominal. The common valuation of the Tale being at 6s, 8d. Sterling, 
will be assumed in the sequel of this Report. 


The produce of the Chinese Empire, immediately the object of the trade of the 
Company, consists at present only of ‘I'cas, Silk, and Nankeens. In former years 
China-ware was purchased to a considerable amount, but was relinquished in conse- 
quence of the improvement of the British manufacture, which has superseded the 
necessity of the.importation of that of China. 


The extent of this branch of the Company’s Commerce, with the result of it, and 
-the Funds by which it has been carried on, will be brought into view in other parts of 
this Report. Your Committee will therefore only add in this place, that.a consider- 
able part of those Funds was produced by Exports from this Country in Woollens and 
Metals, carried to the utmost extent that, from: the best information, it was conccived 
.the market.in China would.admit. ~ : 


Ab Account of the Expenses of the Factory of Canton having been annually pre- 
sented to Parliament during tie period to which the present enquiry is directed, 
Your Committee have thought proper to add to the Appendix a Statement com- 
prizing in one view the whole of these Accounts. This Statement exhibits the Charges 


of the Factory, as far-as relates tothe Salaries, &e. and the accommodation of the - 


Supra-Cargoes and others employed in the business of it, and the Expenses attend- 
ing the receipt and delivery of the Goods imported and exported ; . but it should be 
remarked, that it includes the emoluments of the Supra-Cargocs in part only, the 
remainder being made up in England in full of the commission allowed to them on 
the sale of the goods ; and that the amount of Charge as shewn in the Statement now 
adverted to, is uniformly added to the Invoice Price of the goods. There is, however, 
a further apparent Expenditure not included, which comes under the denomination 
of Loss, which will hereatter be more distinctly noticed. 


Your Committee having thus explained the principles upon which the Company's 
Commereial intercourse with China may be said to exist, and has been conducted, 
will examine this very important branch of the Concern as directly connected with 

*the Financial Affairs of the Company in India and in England, together with the 
+ final Result in existing property, as it applies to the Factory at Canton exclusively, 
for the period in question. 


The Sources from which the Funds realized in the Treasury at Canton were 
derived, are of two Kinds;. first, Supplies from the Indian Presidencics ; secondly, 
Supplies from England. 


The 


Curva, 


Appendix, N°1. 


Appendix, N® 2. 


Appendix, N° 3. 


420 Fourth REPORT from the Select Committee on the 


Cursa, The former have already becn brought to the notice of the House by Your Com- 
‘ ag, Mittee in their Jast Report, in which the net amount of the Supply to Canton by 
8! Report. p. 364, NEES An a oe cbon adaearenen ‘ ties th 
‘Appendix to g¢_ the Indian Presidencies was shewn, in order to account for the employment of the 
Report,N“15416, Funds which came into the Treasuries of these Presidencies. But it must be 
observed, that the Accounts from which that view was given, being necessarily and 
properly drawn from the books kept at the Presidencies of India respectively, will 
not be applicable to the purpose now in contemplation, without a more laborious 
investigation of the detail, on a comparison with the books of the Factory at Canton, 
than the time of Your Committee would admit, or indeed is at all required. It has 
therefore been thought proper to call fur Accounts prepared from the Factory books, 
as affording the best means of attaining the end ity view, viz. the Receipt and Appli- 
Appendices, N° 4 cation of the K ‘unds of the Canton Treasury. By these Accounts, which are inserted 
Gee in the Appendix, it appears that India is credited in those books for Supplies, by 
g Lills of Exchange, Lullion, and consignments of Cotton, Sandal Wood, &c. to 
Appencix, N° 4. the amount of £. 4,946,393. and that india is debited for Returns by Canton in 
various ways, but principally by consignments of Bullion, which the necessities of the 
: former required at the periods they were made, amounting together to the sum of 
Appendix, Xe 5. £, 2,069,232; making a Balance in favour of India, or shewing the net Supply by 
: India to have amounted to the sum of £. 2,877,161, which is less by £. 430,493 
than the net amount stated trom the Account in the Appendix to the Third Report, 
which was drawn from tbe books of the Indian Presidencies. ‘This difference is 
principally to be attributed to the remittance of Bullion from England originally 
destined to China, but arrested in transitu and applicd to the service in India, as 
* Report, pp. 262 adverted- to in that Report, for which remittance Canton credited England and 
& 364. debited Pengal. 7 
Your Committce having observed some transactions to have occurred between the 
Settlement of the: Island of St. Helena and this Factory, think it right to notice 
" Appendix, N°6. them in this place. The Supply received from St. Helena amounted to £. 29,039, 
Appendix, Ne7. and the Consignments made to that Tsland to the sum of £.110,730, making a 
balance in favour of Canton to the amount of £. $1,697. 


The next object of enquiry relates to the Funds arising out of Supplies from 
England. Your Committee have added to their Appendix, an Account of the Amount 
Appendix, N° 8. for which England is credited in the Canton books during the period under review, - 
which Your Committce will examine in connection with what has been debited by 
Appendix to ‘England, 23 appears by an Account inserted. in the Appendix to their Third 
3? Report, Nes. Report. 
The Total Amount for which England is credited in the books of the Factory of 
Canton between 1792-3 and 1808-0, is £. 26,399,981. Of this sum f£. 2,846,051 
was in consignments of Bullion. ‘The Debit by England on this article, from 1791-2 
to 1807-8, amounted to £. 2,845,471. the difference between the Debit and Credit 
being £. 580. 
The Bills of Exchange drawn by the Supra-Cargoes onthe Court of Directors 
‘js the next article of Supply; England is credited On this account in the Canton 
books tor £- 7,569,378, and debits for the payment of Bills of Exchange between 
1793-4 and 1$09-10 (the period in which the Bills drawn as above may be presumed 
Appendix to to have become due) in the sum of £. 8,694,406, -which excceds the Credit above 
3? Report, N°6. stated -by £. 1,125,028, ‘Ihe explanation of this difference is, that the Credit first 
shewn is for the Amount actually drawn in China, calculated from Tales into sterling 
at the fixed or book rate of exchange of 6s. 8d. cach; whercas the Amount paid in 
England for which China is debited, is the amount of the Bills in Sterling moncy at 
the actual rate at which they were drawn, which rate is a varying one, and gencraliy 
: exceeds the book rate. ‘The exccys from this circumstance will account for 
Appendix, N° 10. £.990,434:; the remainder £. 128,594, is the Amount of Lills falling due and paid 
dn England, which were not drawn in China within the period in question. 


Your Committee have great satisfaction in observing, that a very large proportion 

‘of the means of carrying on the ‘Trade with China, has been furnisicd by the export 

of the Manufactures abd Metals of this Country. ‘The Amount for which England is 

Appendix, N°8. credited for Cargocs actually received in this period is stated at £. 15,947,430, which, 
on the average, is at the rate of £. 938,084. 


‘These Exports form an important feature of the Commercial proceedings. of the 
Company 5 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 421 


Company; Your Committee have therefore minutely examined the extent of the Cutxs 
Consignments to China, and the Result of them. The Account annexed to the 3d A pendix to 
Report, lately referred to, shews the great efforts made by the Company for the 3 Report, N’ 5. 
promotion of the national interests in this respect, and that the value of goods 

exported, which in 1791-2 was only £.629,169, and in the next seven years, 1792-3 

to 1798-9, was on the average only £. 722,990, was on the average of the following 

ten years £. 1,154,140 ; excceding the year 1791-2 by £. 524,971, and the average 

first shewn by £.431,150. In several years the Export exceeded £. 1,200,000, and 

in the year 1803-4, it was more than £. 1,300,000. 


That the Exports have been carried to the utmost extent of the demand, is fully 
established by an Account shewing the quantities annually indented for and exported, Appendix, N° 1. 
also by the advices from China, Extracts of which are inserted in the Appendix; Appeadix, N° 2+ 
from which it appears that although the various articles were disposed of by the 
Company, the Chinese purchasers were frequently under much inconvenience from 
want of a market, and their Stores being overstocked. It is also found that different ee 
trials made for the introduction of new articles, as Scotch and Irish Linens, and the Appendix, N°15- 
coarser kind of Woollens, have failed of success. The cause, as to the latter article 
in particular, is in part attributed tothe Duties levied on importation, which made no 
distinction between the finer and coarser sort of yoods. 


It is obviously necessary that the Treasury of Canton be furnished with Funds for 
the atin the Teas, &c. but in a Commercial point of view the mode of Supply 
by Exports has proved far from advantageous to the Exporters; for reckoning the 
Invoice price with the moderate addition of 10 per cent. to cover the Charges of 
every description, including Freight, an aggregate loss has resulted to a very con- 
siderable Amount, The net Loss on all transactions at the Factory is stated at Appendix, N14. 
995,243. 

The Debit by England for Exports in the years or seasons which may be supposed 
to correspond with the Credits in the Canton books, stated at £. 15,947,439, Appendix, Ns. 
amounted to the sum of £. 16,136,190. The difference between this sum and the Appendix to 
Amount credited as received is £. 188,751, of which £. 116,367 is ascertained to 3¢ Report, N° 5, 


have been lost or captured. ‘The remaining difference, £. 72,384, is supposed to: be Appendix to ‘ 
in the short deliveries of the Cargoes, which for the most part are chargeable to the 9! Reports Nt7. 
Owners:of the Ships. 
There appear likewise in the Canton books, Credits to England on various ac- 
counts, amounting together to £.37,113, which do not require any particular 
remark. 
Combining the various Supplies stated to have been realized in the Canton Trea- 
-sury, the following is the Result: 
From India - + = = = = $4,946,303 Appendix, Ne 4, 
From St. Helena - 7 + - rs 29,039 NG, 
From England - - - - = 26,399,981 Neg, 
The Total - -- 


£ 31,375,413 shews 


the amount of Funds which were at the disposal of the Supracargoes between 
1792-3, and 1808-9. Of this suf £.°2,069,232 was returned to India, and Appendix, Ne 5, 
£- 110,736 disbursed.on account of St, Helena, as already shewn. Appendix, Xo 7. 


In enquiring into the Disposal or Application of these Funds, it appears that the 

amount for which England is debited in the Canton books, is £. 27,583,054. Of Appendix, Ne 9. 
. this sum, £. 27,153,575 was in Consignments of the produce of China of the i 

description already noticed, which exhibits the extent of the Company's Trade in this 

respect, and with the exception of the part lost or captured on.the voyage to England, Appendix to 

amounting to £. 344,579 may be considered as the amount brought to sale by the 3¢ Report, Ne yz 

“Company. 

\ The remainder of ‘the ‘Debit on the Canton books under this head, amounts tog snendixeNe 

£. 429,179, and is.composed of Advances to Commanders of the chartered Ships, 9% 

and on account of His’ Majesty's Service, &c. which’ is to be accounted for in 

England. - Contrasting ‘the Amount of-the Supply by England, viz, £. 26,399,958 

5 


E in Appendix: Nys 
748 with . 


Carina. 


Appendix, N* 9. 


Ibid. 


Appendix, N° 14, 


Appendix, N° 15 
& 16, 


Sr. Hrrena. 


Ne 10. 6. 
Annual Accounts. 


Appendix, N°17. 


Appendix, N°18, 


422 Fourth REPORT from the Select Committee on the 


with that of the Return, which has been shewn at the sum of £. 27,583,054, a 
Balance will appear in favour of Canton, amounting to £. 1,183,073, which sum 
must have been furnished by the Funds received from the Indian Presidencies, : 


It having been stated that the Funds at the disposal of the Supracargoes, 
amounted to £. 31,375,413 and that of those Funds £. 27,583,054 had been 
employed in the purchase of Investments consigned to England, and in sundry. 
payments to be accounted for by the Concern in England, and that £. 2,179,968 was. 
disbursed on account of India and Saint Helena, Your Committee will pursue their 
enquiry into the disposal of the remainder, amounting to £. 1,612,391. 


It appears that the direct and established Charges of the Factory are uniformly 
added to the Invoice price of the Investments consigned to England, and that other 
Charges were incurred, and Losses experienced in the course of the management of the 
business, which were not so added. By an Account, which is inserted in the 
Appendix, it appears too that the amount of the Charges and Losses of the descrip- 
tion now alluded to, was £.995,243. The Loss in this instance is however only 
apparent as applied to the entire concerns of the Company, because the calculation 
is made after crediting England for goods imported from thence at the invoice price 
of them, which is charged with the addition of £. 1,449,767, being 10 per cent. upon 
the real cost. Adjusting this sum with the Loss above shewn, a Profit would be 
exhibited amounting to £.454,524. : 


The Balance of Stock in China in favour of the Company, in January 1792, was 
£- 687,906. In March 1809 it was £.1,306,606; being an increase amounting to 
£618,700; adding this sum to the Charges and Losses, the total will be & 1,613,043, 
which exceeds the Amount to be accounted for by £. 1,552} @ variation which is not 
of suflicient importance to require particular investigation. 


The proprietary possession of the Island of Sr. Herena, the expense of which is 
next to be considered, has from a distant period been vested in the East India Com- 
pany. In the’ reign of Charles IL it was granted as a port of refreshment for 
ships engaged in the India ‘Trade, on their homeward-bound voyage, and transferred 
to the present United Company on their first incorporation. 

An Account of the Revenues of the Island, and the Charges incurred in its main-" 
tenanee and defence, was annually laid before Parliament_in the same manner as 
those of the other possessions of the Company. Your Committee being informed 


‘that some of those Accounts required correction, have called for an amended Account, 


shewing the Revenues and Charges during the seventcen years, from 1792-3 to 
3808-9. This, Account is inserted in the Appendix. It should however be here 
observed, that the books of this Island are closed on the goth September in each 
year. According to this Account, the Civil Charges amounted to £. 236,369, the 
Military to £.772,637, and the expense of Buildings and Fortifications to £.71,908 ; 
making a total gross Charge of £. 1,080,914. The Revenues of the Island, arising 
from Reots, Farms, or Licenses, for the exclusive privilege of dealing in particular 
articles of consumption, and Customs, amounted to £. 14,256 ; so that the nct Charge 
of the Island during this period was £. 1,060,058. 

The importance of this Settlement has occasioned the necessity of particular atten- 
ticn to its security, the effect of which, in increased Charge, is apparent on the view. 
of the Statement now referred to, especially in the Military Expenses, and in the For- 
tifications. The increase of Charge is likewise to be attributed to additions made to 
the personal allowances of both the Civil and Military Servants of the Company. ‘The 
net Expense of the year 1792-3, previous to the War, was £.33,850, and it increased 
almost progressively till the year 1807-8, when the Amount was £. 102,437. In the 
next year it fell to £.83,150. On the average of the whole period, the net Charge’ 
amounted to £.62,744. But Your Committee having likewise enquired whether any’ 
further expense may not have been incurred in addition to what has been already! 
stated, find that on the transactions more immediately Commercial, as the sale and‘ 
issue of the various articles imported into the Island, a net Loss is stated on the books’ 
amounting to the sum of £.48,540. The Account shewing this Result is added to 
the Appendix, and exhibits the amount of Profits in the several years, at £.180,132, 
and the Losses at £. 228,672, producing the Result before stated. But the actual Loss 
is not tothis extent, because the Invoice price of the Consignments from Europe was, 

a or us 


“Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 423 


in common with the other Exports, calculated with the addition of 10 per cent. on the 
prime cost. : 

For the purpose of examining the mode in which Funds were derived for defraying 
the Expenses, Your Committee have called for an Account shewing the various up” 
plies received at St. Helena from England, India and China, during the period ; 
also of the Supplies returned from the Island to those places respectively. By this 
Account it appears that the Supplies from England were, in payment of Bills of 
Exchange, £. 317,762, and in consignments of Goods and Stores, but mostly the 
latter, £.865,137, together £.1,182,899; which amount nearly agrees with the 
Debits by England in corresponding years, as stated in the documents inserted in the 
Appendix to the Third Report. The Supplies from the several Presidencies and 
Settlements in India amounted to £. 165,339, and from China to £. 99,018, from 
the Cape, &c. to £. 56,438; being a Total Supply credited in the St. Helena books, 
amounting to £.1,503,694. ‘The Returns debited in these books, were to England, 
for Supplies to His Majesty's and the Company’s ships, and other payments to the 
amount of £.98,213; to the Presidencies and Settlements in India, £. 50,018; to 
China, £. 29,039; to the Cape of Good Hope, £. 26,455 ; and to Sundries, £.16,024: 
The Total of these Returns amounted to £. 219,749, and the net Supply derived at 
St. Helena was £. 1,283,945, the disposal of which sum is to be accounted for as 
follows: In liquidation of the net Charge above stated, £. 1,066,658; net Loss 
incurred, £. 48,450; together £.1,115,198. Of the Amount then remaining, viz. 
£-168,747, the sum of £. 106,803 is found in the increased property, by comparing 


the balance remaining in 179% with that in 1809. The sum expended so as to cause- 


an increase in Stores, &c. falling under the head of Dead Stock, amounted. to 
£-62,589, the application of which sun will cause the Disbursements to exceed the 
Funds now stated by £.645. Your Committee do not deem it necessary to direct 
their further attention to the means of reconciling this small difference. og 
: —_!,, 

Your Committee now proceed to examine the AccouxTs of the Treasury n Ene~ 


LAND, or the General Result as it has affected the interests of the Proprietors of India, : 


Stock as well as those of the Public. It has already been observed that the Home 
Accounts presented annually to Parliament, in pursuance of the Act of 1793, are 
only two, denominated, “ Annual Account iriade up to the 1st day of March (in each 
“ year) containing the Amount of the Proceeds of the Sales of Goods and Merehandize 
of the East India Company in Great Britain, and of their Commercial and other 
“ Receipts, Charges and Payments, in Great Britain, under the several heads thereof ;” 
and “ A Statement of their Bond Debts, and Simple Contract Debts, with the rates of 
“ Tnterest they respectively carry, and the Amount of such Interest, and the State 
“ of Cash remaining in their ‘Treasury, and other effects appertaining to the Company 
* in Great Britain and afloat.” 


._ The former of these Accounts contains the entire Receipt and Expenditure of the 
Cash of the East India Company in course of the year, including the Receipts and 
Payments on the account of Private Traders, which by the Act are to pass through 
the medium of the Company. As further observations will hereafter be necessary 
upon this point, all that is at present requisite is, a general explanation of the Account 
as it relates to the Company's Concerns exclusively. A cursory inspection of this 
Account will shew the Sources from whence the Funds were derived, and the: mode 
in which they were applied in the conduct of the Affairs of the Company. : 


Your Committee have caused the whole of the Accounts which have’ been presented 
tothe House from year to year, during the period under examination, to be drranged 
and drawn up inone General Statement, distinguishing the Company’s Concerns from 
those of Private Traders, By this mode a view inay at once be taken of the whele of 
‘the: Cash Transactions of the ‘lreasury in England; from the ist:March 1793.t0 the 1st 
March 1810, and the examination may be made how far the :prescriptions of the 
Regulating Act of 1793, and of subsequent Acts,. have been complied with: - In 
oxder.to render the view more complete, as well as to preserve uniformity in their 
enquiry, Your Committee have, according to the plan adopted in their Second: 
Report in respect to. the Indian branch ofthe Accounts, introduced: a column: 
shewing the Estimate'produced by the Court of Directors in the. year -1.793,: upanr 
which the, arrangements were made, and'the expectations were grounded in referene¢* 
to their, financial Affairs; in. England. This, Statement’ is added to.:the Appeadixs 
tbe gopsideration of it under the heads itito which it divides itself will pe 

our 


“Se. Henena,. 
pila 


Appendix, N° 19. 
& 20, 


N& 5&6. 


Appendix, N°23. 


Ibid. 


Homgz Accounts. 


Appendix, N° 22. 


424 Fourth REPORT from the Sele& Committee on the 


Homz Accounts. Your Committeee into some detail, although their observations are not designed to 
a ee apply so much to the principles upon which the Commercial affairs of the Company 
are conducted, as to the Receipt and the Employment of the Funds in a financial 
view. ni 
Your Committee have likewise caused a statement of the Debts and Assets to 
be drawn up, shewing at one view the Amount of them respectively during the whole 
of the period. It will be remarked both in the detail and totals, that the first and 
last years of the Statement are somewhat different from the Accounts originally 
presented by the Company. The differences are to be ascribed to their having 
obtained a more accurate comparison of the periods, by balancing the Accounts at 
corresponding dates, so that at each period a precise conformity as to the official 
year, both abroad and at home, should be established. ‘The Home Stock Account 
delivered in 1793, was made up to January instead of March, and the adjustments 
of the Indian Accounts at various dates. The Stock Account in 1810, though balanced 
as to the Home Concerns to March, was made up in reference to the Foreign Concern 
at discordant periods. These adjustments of the foreign Accounts in both instances 
could not be avoided, from the necessity of calculating the Stock by Computation in 
. the Home Accounts on the latest advices received at the time. The general State- 
” Appendix, N° 23. ment of the Debts and Assets thus corrected is added to the Appendix. 


The Funds of the Home Treasury on the Company's account, exhibited on the 
Appendix, N°22. Receipt side of the General Statement first referred to are of various descriptions; 
: the amount of the Sales of Goods from India and China; Monies raised upon the 
credit of the Company, on Bonds and on Capital Stock ; Charges and Profit on Private 
Trade; Re-payments by His Majesty’s Government on Advances and Disbursements 
by the Company on account of the Public, abroad and at home; and Receipts on 
sundry Accounts not necessary to be detailed. ‘The Application of these Funds will 
be attended to in its proper place. 


The first head-of the Account which will be adverted to, shews the Amount received 
from year to year on the Sale of Goods, embracing one of the most prominent objects 
‘of the present enquiry and Report; viz. the whole of the Trade of the Company from 
India and China. 


“The consideration of this subject will naturally induce the examination of the nature, 
-extent and result, of the Import Trade of the Company. It will likewise afford an 
opportunty of ‘bringing into view the nature and extent of the Imports by Private 
Traders, or in the way of Neutral Commerce, &c. under the Act of 1793, and 
other Acts, by which the entire Sale Amount of the Imports into the port of London, . 
from India and China, during the period in question, will be ascertained. 


In the Accountof the Amount of the Sales of Goods annually presented (as has been 
observed) to the House on distinct motions, a detailed description is given of the 
different species of goods which have been disposed of, distinguishing those sold on 
the immediate account of the Company, fromthose sold for Private‘l'raders, or under 
the denomination of Prize Goods or Neutral Property. It having appeared to 
Your Committee that by drawing these Accounts as presented from year to year into 
a General Statement, the'nature and extent of the Trade according to the Sale Pro- 
duce during the whole period would be exhibited at one view; it has accordingly been 

Appendix, Ne 24, carried into effect, and the Statement will be found in the Appendix. A reference to 
it will shew. the increase or decrease in the Sale Produce of each of the various 
Imports, and the fluctuations in each year. Your Committee have added also the 
Estimate of the produce of the Sale of the Company's Goods according to the ex- 
pectations entertained in the year 1793, in which of course no view could be given 
upon this principle of what might be sold for the account of.Private ‘Traders. 


Reserving many remarks which are suggested by the inspection of the detail of 
this Statement for other parts of the Report, Your Committee will content themselves 
here by stating, in respect to the extent of the Trade, according to the Sale Produce 
of the Goods, that from 1793-4 to 1809-10, that of the Company's Goods ex- 
clusively amounted to £. 103,028,600; of Private Goods, to £. 33,991,256; andof © 
Neutral and Prize Goods, to £. 3,803,601. The Total, £. 140,823,457, is what 
7 this principle may be taken as the extent of the Sale Amount of the Import 

‘rade from India and China poy lead period of seventeen years, exclusive of the 
value of Saltpetre delivered by the Company to the Board.of Ordnance under'special 


Affairs of Tae EAST INDIA COMPANY. 425 


contract, The various articles detailed in the Statement itself will shew the nature 
of the Trade. 


The Amount received into the Treasury of the Company, on account of the Sales 
of their own Goods, is shewn, by the Statement adverted to first, to have been 
£. 103,353,633. which is more than the gross’ produce just stated by £. 325,033. 
‘To account for this excess, it is to be observed that the Payments made into the 
Treasury include what remained due on the Sales which took place in the year 
1792-3, and were exclusive of what remained unpaid on those of 1809-10. The 
readiest mode of accounting for the difference above shewn is by an adjustment 
taking in these Balances. 


The Sales amounted to - =e - =  £.103,028,600 
There remained due in March 1793 on 

former Sales, exclusive of Private Trade - £. 616,190 
‘There remained unpaid of the Sales of 


1809-20 - 258,351 
Difference - + - - - 357,839 
Total computed to be received + - + — £.103,386,439 
Actually received a 103,353,633 


The remainder - - f£. 32,806 


is the-difference between the computed Demands and the actual Payments, respecting 
which an exact agreement between the amount of the Sales and the Receipts is not 


to be expected on various accounts, but particularly on that of Re-sales, which are- 


occasionally made in consequence of purchasérs not fulfilling the conditions of the 
Sale. It is satisfactory however to find in so extensive an amount the deficiency so 
small as that now stated, being only 7%d. per cent, which Your Committee cannot 
but observe suggests an impression highly favourable to the management of this branch 
ot the Commercial Concerns of the Company. 


The Receipts on Sales made of Private Trade and Neutral, &e. Goods, compared 
with the Sale Amount, is reserved for consideration iv another part of this Report. 


Your Committee having shewn the nature and extent of the Trade of the Com- 
pany, will next proceed to the examination of the Result of it upon their Finances, 
or in other words of the Profit derived from it. ‘This point, in so far as the Trade 
from India is concerned, has led to such variety of opinions, and has been the 
subject of so much controversy amongst those whose general information on Com- 
mercial subjects and particular acquaintance with the Trade in question gives their 
opinions great authority, as to render any conclusion that may be offered a matter 
of considerable delicacy, it being hardly possible that any decision between the con- 
flicting parties should escape objection. 


It would be obviously hopeless to arrive at any determination respecting the Profit 
alluded to, from the Statements already the subject of discussion, as they ouly shew 
the Sales, the Receipts and the Payments made, with the Proceeds, as a simple 
Balance of Cash from year to year, according to the system upon which the Com- 

iny’s Concerns have been uniformly conducted; which, owing to its being so 
intimately involved with the affsirs of the Territories in India, cannot be properly 
termed a mere Commercial one. This circumstance necessarily imposed modes of 
arrangement and management most conducive to the interests of both. The com- 
bination of these interests having so repeatedly been brought to the notice of the 
House, Your Committee only here make a reference to it in order to justify the 
necessity of resorting to calculations upon Estimate, for the purpose of affording 
any intelligible view of the Result or Profit upon the Import Trade of the Company 
from India and China. 


Your Committee are fully aware of the objections that may be started to this 
mode of calculation, if it be contemplated on principles abstractedly Commercial, in 
as much as, upon. those principles, the Profit or Loss upon Commercial adventure, 
ought to be ascertained with strict precision; but they trust that the observations 
already made will explain why this is absolutely impracticable, and those observa~ 

tions 


Homs Accounts, 


Appendix, N° 22. 


Appendix, N° 23. 
Ibid. 


426 Fourth REPORT from the. Select Comimittee on’ the 


Home Accounts. tions will be admitted as suggesting a sufficient excuse for the mode which they feel 


Appendix to 
Exposition, B. see. 
2¢ Report, p. 65. 


Appendix, N° 25. 


themselves under the necessity of adopting, unless what in their judgment is a very 
material feature of their enquiry should be entirely passed over. 


Tt may not however be improper t® remark, in more detailed: illustration of the 
necessity of having recourse to calculation by estimate, that the Shipping employed 
by the Company have, in conformity with their system, been for the most part, 
during a very long period, constructed for Warlike as well as Commercial service ; 
and have been frequently, and in fact constantly used for Political purposes, either 
in conveyance of Troops and Military Stores, or in Expeditions against the Posses- 
sions of the Enemy. The part ofthe Freight therefore chargeable to the Trade can 
only be ascertained by estimate. Further, a practice has prevailed, whether correct 
or not Your Committee do not pretend to determine, of charging the largest propor- 
tion of the whole Freight of the voyage to the homeward-bound trade, ‘The Charges 
also directly appertaining to the Trade are so interwoven with those of a Political 
nature, that it would be extremely difficult to make a separation ; it has been there- 
fore the practice to calculate a certain part of the General Charges in England as 
‘Commercial, assuming § per cent. on the Gross Sale Amount of the Goods as the 
fair proportion so chargeable. The difficulty of ascertaining the particular Fund 
from which the purchase of the Goods was made, might likewise be mentioned, 
from the effect which would be preduced upon the Invoice price of them in the rate 
of Exchange. 4 


From these several causes, but more particularly from those applying to the 
Freight and Charges, such difficulties have ever existed in the way of celculating the 
Profit or Loss on the Trade“upon actual Accounts, that the custom has obtained of 
shewing them-upon estimate. Estimates of this description have, on many occa- 
sions, been laid upon the Table of the House, and particularly on the renewal of 
the Company’s Charter in 1793. So late as the Session of 1810, the Court of 
Directors inserted in the Appendix to an Exposition of the state of the Company's 
Finances, a computation of the Profits upon the Trade, drawn upon similar prin- 
ciples. It must be remarked, however, that the Invoice price of the Goods, in the 
several doctments now adverted to, is calculated with reference to the Exchange 
on such part of the purchase as was made by Monies procured for Bills upon the 
Company in England. 

As the Result proposed to be shewn, canriot therefore be ascertained otherwise 
than upon estimate, the attention of Your Committee has been particularly directed to 
the principle to be observed in the framing of such Estimate. In respect to the 
Freight and Charges upon the goods, they do not at present see reason to depart from 
the course usually pursued ; but as regards the Invoice price of the goods, upon every 
consideration connected with the plan which has been laid down in the prescnt 
enquiry, and as applicable to the general combination proposed to be made of 
the Result of the Financial operations. abroad.and at home, itis desirable that the 
Disbursements from the several ‘Treasuries in India and China,. for the purchase of 
Goods, as shewn in the Invoice Amount of such as were brought to sale, should uni- 
forusly be converted into Sterling moncy at the same rate of exchange used in the 
several Accounts that have been hitherto the objects of examination. 


This mode of calculation Your Committee readily admit is liable to observation, 
and perhaps exception, because according to the rates of exchange thus used, an 
unfair view might be said to be given of the outlay of money in the purchase of the 

oods, in so far as those purchases were made by money raised by Bills upon the 
Company, in which case the real exchange at which the Lills were drawn and paid, 
should be the rate used in computing the ‘Invoice price. ‘The only method by which 
this objection is to be met, is by ascertaining the difference between the Amount of 
the Bills drawn, calculated at the rate now assumed, and the Amount actually paid. 
This difference would be a fair deduction from the Profit upon the Sales. As to 
China, the whole would be deducted; but as to India, considerable difficulties would. 
be in the way of distinguishing the Bills drawn for Commercial, from those drawn for 
Political purposes. 

These observations Your Committee trust will explain the obstacles which present 
theniselves in the way of this part of their enquiry, and evince the neccssity of 
estimate in order to furnish the information desired. ‘They have therefore added to 
the Appendix, an Estimate of the Profit upon the Trade from India and China 

respectively, 


Atsirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 427 
rspectively, from 1793-4 to 1809-10 inclusive, calculated upon the principles now 
adverted to; also an Account of the Amount of Bills drawn trom India and China, 
paid by the Company within the same period, compared: with the Amount of such’ 
Bills, converiing the Foreign Coins into Sterling moncy at the exchanges used in the 
calcuiation of the Invoice price in the Estimate. 


Your Committee will introduce in this place an Abstract of the Totals of the various 
heads detailed in the Estimate, and the Result ultimately siewn, with such observa- 
tions thereon as have been suggested by their examination. 


*. INDIA CHINA TOTAL. 
Invoice Amount or Prime Cost of the Goods) é. é. é. 
sold by theEast India Company, from 1793-4 S| 23,060,334 | 27,157,066 | 50,227,400 
to 1809-10 inclusive - = = = 5) 
The Cust. id from the C ’s Trea+ 
sury on tho Goods = es sf] 5553054 | 265,524 | 5,819,478 
E f Frei: i hi 
Acer ea apen teen eiMaed to Mere) a 7aqas8 | 10,886,017 | 19,610,275 
The Charges estimated to have been incurred 
in England, computed at 5 per cent. on the 2,249,504 2,894,815 51352409 
‘Gross Sale Amon a a - a - 
Total Cost an arges = = | 39,579,140 | 41,203,422 | 80,782,562 
3 f the Sales is sh to 
Saleen eee een Ly 44,841,680 [572896274 [102,737,954 
Fromwhich, deducting the Cost and Charges, 


Bs 21,955,392 


a Profit is exhibited in the Sum of 


/ 5,262,540" | 16,692,852 


The Amount produced by the rate of exchange at which the Foreign Coins are 
converted into Sterling in the column of the Prime Cost of the Investments, cannot, 
for reasons alaeady assigned, be assumed as exhibiting a correct view of the actual 
cost of the foods to the Company, as far as they have been purchased by Funds 
raised on Bills drawn upon the Court of Directors. With respect to the part con- 
signed from India, it is not practicable to ascertain with precision the Amount of the 
Funds applied to the purchase of the goods which were derived from this source. 
‘The amount of Bills of all descriptions drawn from thence during the period in 
question was, according to the exchange in the Estimate,: £. 13,995,920; the sum 
actually paid on those Bills was £.14;516,719, exceeding the first calculation by 
£-520,799. -Assuming, however, <he Amount of this excess to be Commercial, the 
propriety of which is doubtful, the Indian Prime Cost would be pro canto increased, 
and the Profit of course.equally diminishsd. 


As to the Consignments from China, the same difficulty does not exist; the trans- 
actions of the Canton Treasury being totally Conimercal, the entire amount of the 
Bills drawn by the Supra-Cargoes must be supposed to have been applied to the 
purchase of the goods, and consequently the whole of the difference arising, upon 
the principle now under consideration, is chargeable to the ‘Trade, and is an addition 
to the Prime Cost. The Amount of the Bills drawn, according to the exchange in the 
Estimate, was £.7,569,944; and the sum actually paid on those Diils was 
£.8,566,378, consequently the Invoice price will be increased and the Profit 
lessened in the sum of £.996,434. ee) 


The total deduction to be made from the Profvexhibited in the Estimate, will be 
found to amount to £. 1,517,233; so that the net Profit will then be £. 20,438,159 ; 
which is the sum to be assumed as the Result of the homeward-bound Trade of the 
Company, in so far as it has been productive of Funds in aid of the general opera- 
tions of the Treasury in England. : 

The Result thus shewn is merely the Profit upon the Goods in one view. The 
entire of the Commercial Profits of the Company, and a General Result on the whole 
of their Commercial Concerns, is a question far more extensive, which it is intended in 
another part of this Report to consider, and to submit to the House the best view 
that tlhe documents procured by Your Committee will admit, in order to shew what 
may be supposed (upon principles which will be explained) to have been the powers 


of 


Home Accounts, 


Appendix N* 10 
it & 26. 


Appendix, N° 26. 


Append’x, N°10. 


Home Accounts, 


Appendix to 
34 Report, Ne1g. 


Appendix, N° 27. 


Appendix, N° 25. 
N°26. 


Appendix, N° 25. 
Ppa Xe 10. 


Cap. 59. 


428 Fourth REPORT from the Select Committee on the 


of the Commerce as applied to its own immédiate Concerns during the period in 
question. 


The partial view already given of the Profits being purposely confined to their 
effect at home, the Disbursements in India termed Commercial Charges not added 
to the Invoices, amounting to £.2,916,279, have not been taken into the present 
calculation; they will however be brought to account hereafter. 


The nature of these Charges has been adverted to in the Third Report of Your Com- 
mittee; as well as the duties of the Boards of Trade, and the Officers under them at 
the several Presidencies, the Pay and Allowances of which Departments they include. 
It is clearly just that the largest proportion of the sum now stated, should be deemed 
a Charge upon the goods purchased in India under the superintendence of these De- 
partments, and from being in fact an addition to the Invoice cost of the goods, must 
tend, pro tanto, to diminish the Amount assumed as the Profit on the Trade; but the - 
difficulty of determining the sum that may be so charged to the goods exclusively, is 
great, if the general duties of the Boards of Trade is taken ‘into consideration. These 
duties, including the direction of the manufacture of Salt and Opium at Bengal, the 
Customs at that Presidency, and in part at Madras, cannot be considered as exclu- 
sively Commercial, independent of the consideration that the Marine Department, and 
the business of providing Shipping for Political purposes, are under its conduct. 


For a more detailed explanation of the various functions imposed on these 
Departments, Your Committee beg leave to call the particular attention of the 
House to a Statement delivered in by one of its Members, and inserted in the 
Appendix. , : : 


The examination of the detail of the Estimate from which the Result upon the 
Company’s Trade has been produced, renders some further explanation requisite; 
and first, in reference to the general connection of this Estimate with the Statement 
which has been before referred to, in order to shew the nature and extent of the 
Trade as exhibited by the gross produce of the Sales, that the difference between the 
produce thus stated, and the Amount in the Estimate, is in part to be ascribed to the 
effect of re-sales, and in part to the sale of Rice and Wheat not brought to account 
in the Estimate. : , 


The extent ofthe Trade from India and China has been shewn by the produce of 
the Sales of the goods from thence. ‘The extent of this Trade, according to the sum 
annually embarked in it, so as to produce this Sale Amount, is to be ascertained by 
reference to the Estimate now brought forward, by which the Prime Cost of the goods 
imported from India and brought to sale, appears'to be £. 23,060,334. ; adding the 
difference in the rate of Exchange £. 520,799, the Total is £. 23,581,133, and is the 
Amount employed during the seventeen years.in the purchase of goods from India, and 
brought to sale, being on an average £. 1,387,125. 


The Prime Cost of goods imported from China was, on the same principle, 
4, 27,157,066 ; difference in rate of Exchange £. 996,454; Total £. 28,153,500, 
which is onan average £. 1,656,088. 

The whole of the Amount so employed during the period, is £. 51,734,633, and 
shews the extent of the Trade upon this principle, trom whence it will re-uit that the 
anual Expenditure for the purchase of goods from India and China, as far as they 
have been brought to sale in England, was upon an average £. 3,043,214. 


It will be remarked that after tse year 1798-9 the Customs stated in the Estimate 
to have been paid upon the good: “mported from India, amount to much less than in 
former years. Your Committee having examined into the cause of this difference, 
find that it is not to be imputed to a positive defalcation in the Duties levied on the 
importation of goods from India, but to.an alteration in the mode of their payment, 
in consequence of an Act passed in the year 1799, iatituled, ““ An Act for permitting 
“ certain Goods imported from the East Indies to be warehoused, and for repealing 
“ the Duties now payable thereon, aud granting other Duties iv lieu thereof.” 


An explanation of the particular causes which led to the passing of this Act, is to 
be found in several documents already upon the Table of the House, which were 
presented end printed in. pursuance of their Orders of 12th, 15th and 18th June 
1801, ‘These documents comprize a Memorial from the Directors of the East 
India Company to the Lords of the Treasury, dated 7th May 1797, on the subject of 

reyguladng 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. acy 


regulating the Duties on East India Goods, with sundry Papers annexed ; 
Memorial of the Merchants and principal Agents in England for persons r r 
the Kast Indies, to the Lords of the ‘I'reasury, dated May 1797, sctting forth the 
advantages that would arise from lowering the Duties on East India CGroods; and 
another Memorial of the Merchants, Buyers of Goods at the Kast India Company, 
Sales for exportation, to the Lords of the Treasury, dated the 31st May 1797, 
tating their entire acquiescence in the reasonings contained in the Memorial of the 
Court of Directors. ‘The principal objects of the respective Memoriaiists appear to 
have heen the removal of some serious impediments to the effect intended to be pro- 
duced by the Regulating Act of 1793; by which removal such a facility would be 
afforded to the export ot India Goods to the Continent, as effectually to maintain a 
compeiition in the markets with Foreign ‘Traders. Circumstanced as the ‘Trade was, 
the purchaser of the goods at the Sales was obliged to employ a capital to the extent 
of the Sule price, including the Duties payable on them, a drawback being returned 
on their exportation. Some advantage was likewise expected to be derived as to the 
goods sold for home consumption. 


The proposition of the Court of Directors thus acquiesced in by all the parties 
interested in the Trade, was that all goods from India and China, except Tea, 
should be allowed to be imported and warchoused without being subject to any Duty 
till sold, and then to be subject only to a positive Duty of 2 per cent. on the Sale 

. Value, to be paid by the Company out of the Sale Price, and to remain with the Crown, 

whether the goods were exported or not. The goods taken out of the warehouse for 
home consumption to be subject to the amount then payable, a3 also to the 2 per 
cent. additipnal Duty. . 

Such were the general principles upon which the Act above adverted to was 

founded ; and the sum inserted in the column of Customs upon - the goods since the 
“time of passing the Act is to be considered as the Amount paid from the Company's 
‘Treasury upon those principles, exclusive of the Duty upon ‘Tea, but of course is not 
to be looked upon as the entire Revenue derived from the Company’s Trade, the 
remainder being paid by the purchasers on clearing the goods for home con- 
sumption. 

The principle upon which the Freight of .the goods is estimated has been already 
adverted to, it only now remains again to remark, that it is doubtful .whether it is 
perfectly correct to charge more Freight upon the Imports than actually belongs to 
them, because the accuracy of the Result, as applicable to them exclusively, is thereby 
questionable. 

The Charges being estimated at 5 per cent. on the Gross Sale Amount, as already 
stated, certainly bears the appearance of an arbitrary calculation, and in fact may be 
so considered. It should however be here observed, that from an anxiety to ascer- 
tain how far the calculation thus made has been justified by the Charge actually in- 
curred within the period, Your Committee have called for an Account of the portion 
of the sum disbursed, under the general head of Charges Merchandize, which may 
justly be considered as chargeable to the Commercial branch of the Company's affairs 
athome. ‘The Total of these Charges on the goods in the Estimate is £. 5,135,409. 
The ‘Total of the adjusted Commercial Charges is £. 5,969,786 ; respecting which it is 
to be observed, that from the Company incurring many Charges of a Commercial 
nature exclusive of those dircctly on their Imports, it may be inferred that the pro- 
portion thus calculated upon those Imports is not far from a correct one. 


In drawing this branch of their Report to a conclusion, Your Committee cannot 
help offering to the House the remarks that naturally suggest themselves on_a com- 
parison of the actual extent of the Trade of the Company, according to the Produce 
of the Sales, with the Estimate of the same which was presented to the House pre- 
viously to passing the Act of 1793; also on the comparison of the Prime Cost of the 


Hoxr Accounts. 


Appendix, Ne 28, 


goods, and the Profit during seventeen years, according to the Estimate now pro- - 


laced, with the Estimate last adverted to. 


The extent of the Trade, according to the Sale Produce, was estimated in 1793 
as follows : : : 
India - - 5 = 2 2 =  ££2,314,900 
Ching ~ = ee 2,673,400 


Total- - - — £.4,988,300 
5R The 


Appendix, No29, 


Hox Accounts. 


Appendix, N°25, 


Aprendix, N° 29. 


Appendix, N*25, 


430 Fourth REPORT from the Select Committee on the 


The Trade from India is from its nature far more liable to be affected by contin- 
gencies than that from China, and especially from the circumstance of a very ma- 
terial part of the goods being purchased at the Sales in England for exporta- 
tion. The operations of the Act of 39th of Geo. III. already adverted to, for 
warehousing the goods, may be supposed to have produced some effect upon the 
Gross Produce of the Sales, which in the Estimate of 1793, and till the year 
1798-9, included the whole of the Customs payable upon the goods. The extent 
of the Sale Amount trom the years 1793-4 to 1796-7 considerably exceeded the 
Estimate; it fell below it in 1797-8, but in the next year it was more in a twofold 
degree, and from 1799-1800 to 1801-2 a considerable excess was maintained ; frem 
that period till the year 1808-9 a diminution is exhibited, but in 1809-10, the last 
ycar of the Account, a revival again appears. 


The extent of the Sale Produce of goods from India on the seventeen years, is 
on the average £. 2,637,746, exceeding the Estimate by £. 322,846. 


The Amount of the Sales of goods from China does not exhibit so much fluc- 
tuation as that from India. In three years, 1793-4, 1796-7, and 1797-8, it was 
below the Estimate ;. but in 1794-5 and 1795-6 it was above, and trom 1798-9 
to 1809-10 the excess was considerable in each year. On the average of the 
whole seventeen years, the Amount was £. 3,405,663, being more than estimated by 
47325263. 

‘The Gross Produce of the Sales was estimated in 1793 at £. 4,988,300, as before 
stated. The average of the seventeen years was £. 6,043,409, which exceeds the 
estimated Amount in the sum of £. 1,055,109. ‘ 


In the Estimate of 1793 the calculation of the Prime Cost of goods was made 
upon a rate of exchange different from that in the Estimate with which it is to be 
compared; and the Charges are proportioned at six instead of five er cent. upon 
the Sale amount, as in the latter Estimate; and considering that the comparison 
proposed could. not be correctly made without some alteration, Your Committee 
have caused an Estimate to be prepared, calculating the Prime Cost at the rates of 
exchange, and the Charges according to the principle required. 


The Result drawn by the Estimate in 1793 was on a calculation including the 
whole of the Customs, and on a Peace Freight ; whereas in the Estimate of the sub- 
sequent years, the whole of the Customs is only included for a part of the period, 
and the Freight is almost universally upon the principle of a War Freight, the difter- 
ence of which must have affected the Result in those years, but to what extent it is 
impossible to determine. 


The extent of the Trade estimated in 1793, as to the Prime Cost of the goods, 
was 
India . - - - - - - - £.1,121,300 
China - 1,388,531 | 


Total - ~- £.2,509,831 


Tn the several years from 1793-4 to 1805-6 the Prime Cost of goods from India 
brought to sale considerably exceeded the Estimate, with the exception of two years 
only, 1797-8 and 1804-5, which were below it in a small Amount. In the years 
1806-7 and 1807-8 this Trade suffered a considerable depression, but recovered in 
188-9, and in 1809-10, the last year of the Account, the Prime Cost again ex- 
ceeded the Amount originally estimated. On the average of the seventeen years, the 
extent as to Prime Cost was £. 1,356,490, being more than estimated by £. 235,190. 


As to China, the years in which the Prime Cost fell short of the Estimate, were 
1793-4, 1796-7, and 1797-8. In all the other years an exccss is shewn, and 
frequently to a considerable amount; and the average of the seventeen years is 
4.1,597,474, being more than the Estimate by £. 208,943. 


The average Prime Cost on the whole Trade is £. 2,953,964, being more than es- 
timated by £. 444,133. 
The 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. , 4ys 


_ The Result or Profit estimated to be produced on the scale of the ‘Trade in imme- Hous Accouwrs. 
diate prospect when the Estimate of 1793 was framed, was — 
India 7 ‘ot . - £.267,615 Appendix, N° 29.» 
China =- = + = 636,919 


Total - - £904,534 


The Results on the Trade from India appear to have been exposed to fluctuations : 
in an extraordinary degree. During the five years 1793-4 to 1797-8, the Estimate Appendix, N° 25. 
of 1793 was far from being realized, with the exception of 1794-5, when it was 
exceeded. From 1798-9 to 1804-5 the Profit again exceeded the Estimate consi-. . 
derably, and in the year 1801-2 to the Amount of £.647,494; but in 1805-6 it 
fell off, and in the two following years, the Trade was carried on with a loss. The 
years 1S0g-10, however, exhibited a more favourable view, by'an excess. ‘The ave- 
rage Profit on the Trade from India during the whole of the period was, on the prin- 
rien now assumed, £. 309,561, exceeding the Estimate of 1793 in the sum of 

- 41,946. . 

The Result or Profit exhibited on the Trade from China has becn mueh less affected 
by the contingencies of the times than that from India, notwithstanding the addi- 
tional Duties which the exigencies of the Country have imposed upon it. These 
Duties are not stated inthe Estimate now referred to. It however appcars that in- the 
first five ycars the Profit upon this Trade was not so regular and steady in amount as 
the extent of it, both in Prime Cost and Sale Amount, warranted the expectation of. 

In 1795-6 indeed, the Estimate of 1793 was considerably exceeded, in the following 
year the excess diminished, and in 1797-8 the Profit was below it. 


From the year 1798-9 a great improvement is exhibited, the Estimate being ex- 
ceeded in several years, particularly 1808-9 and 1809-10, to a large Amount. e 
average Profits on the China Trade on the seventeen years was £. 981,932, exceeding 
the Estimate by £. 345,013. 


The average Profit on the whole of the Trade from India aid China was 
£.1,291,493, exceeding the Estimate by £.386,959. 


Your Committee feel it needless to explain particularly the fluctuations in the 
Trade from India, which are sufficiently accounted for by a. reference to the occur- 
rences of various descriptions incident to- the existence of war both in India and 
Europe ; and it is with some satisfaction they observe, that in the course of a period 
the most eventful that has perhaps ever occurred in the political history of the world, 
the expectations entertained at the commencement of it have not been ina greater 
degree disappointed, and that at the close of it, a Result is exhibited far more favour- 
able than that of the year 1793-4, with which it began. 


The item of Receipt next to be noticed is that for Saltpetre delivered to the Board 
of Ordnance for the public service, under the directions of the Act 31st George IIT. 
cap. 42. ‘The value of the Sultpetre so delivered is not included in the General 
Amount of the Sales of Goods, but the sum paid for it must be considered as so much 
in addition to the Trade of the Company froin India. 


The sum received from the Board of Ordnance, for the Deliveries between the 

years 1793-4 and 180g-10, is stated to have amounted to £. 961,941. The Com- Appendix, N*22. 

pany were bound by the Act of Parliament to reserve and deliver to the Board of ° 

Ordnance, Saltpetre to the extent of 500 tons annually, at the average prices at 
which it was put up at their public sales. Your Committee have called for an 
Account of the Result produced by this transaction upon the Finances of the Company, 
as the amount shewn in the Statement is merely the’ sum actually paid for the article 

within the period. By this. Account it will be observed, that with the exception of the Appendix, N° 30 
Prime Costand the Amount receivable, itis necessarily drawn up upon estimate. During 
‘the period in question, it is caleulated that the Company have sustained a loss, by sup- 
plying the Government with this article, to the Amount of £. 436.689, or on an average 
of £.25,687 per annum. The delivery insome years was belew the Amount prescribed, 
‘and in the year 1802-3, a year of peace, there was none issved; but in consequence 
of the increased demand of war, the anticipations by Government have created a very 
considerable excess, so that upon the whole, the issue originally fixed at 500 tons has 
been carried to an average of 1,456 tons annually. The data upon which the Toss 
‘ has 


Momr Accotxts. 


Appendix, Ne22. 


Act 33 Geo, HIT. 
eap. 52. sect. 99. 


Appendiz, N° 23. 


Act $3 Geo. III. 
cap. 47- 


Votes, 4% April 
1811. 
Appendix, N° 22. 


Ibid. 


“Appendix, N° 22. 


432 Fourth REPORT from the Select Committee on the 


has been thus calculated, will appear in the Account referred to. The Prime Cost is 
taken from the Amount actually paid, the Customs, Freight and Charges, according 
to the expense computed to attach to the article, and the Sale Produce at the sum re- 
ceivable from the Ordiance Board, of which £961,941 has been already paid. It is 
remarked in a Memorandum added to the Account, that a new agreement has been 
entered into by the Company with the Board of Ordnance, for a supply of Saltpetre 
upon a considerably enlarged scale, at an increased price. 


Your Committce now proceed to consider the Amount received for Charges and 
Profit on Private Trade, which was £.2,440,937- 


This head of Receipt is not to Le assumed as entirely a Profit, because it is in part 
a reimbursement of the expense incurred upon the Goods of Privileged and Private 
‘Traders, from the time of landing them to their final delivery trom the Warehouses, 
cither to the original Owners or Consignees, or to the Purchasers. These trans- 
actions, in reference to the Privileged Traders, originated at the time of passing the Act 
of 1793, when eularged facilities were granted to individuals to participate in the 
commerce of the East, this Charge was then reduced from 7 per cent. to 3 per cent. to 
be levied as a Duty or allowance upon the Gross Sale Amount of all Imports by Private 


“ ‘Trade, over and above the Freight chargeable on the same. ‘The expenses of this 


description actually incurred by the Company upon these goods, being for the most 
part blended with their General Charges, it is not practicable to state with accuracy the 
net advantage accruing from this species of agency. It should however be remarked, 
in explanation of the excess which is apparent beyond what would arise on the Gross 
Sale Amount of Private Trade goods in the manner directed by the Act, that this 
head of Receipt includes likewise certain dues the Company receive upof: goods im- 
ported under an indulgence to the Commanders and Officers of their chartered Ships, 
which are calculated at various rates. 


‘The sum stated to have beer received from Government for Interest, amounting 
to £.629,225, is the Interest on what remains due from the Public to the Company on 
what are called East India Annuities, which sprung from Loans from the Company to 
the Public, made from time to tifne in consideration of renewals of their exclusive 
privilege. The Principal Sum of these Annuities was in the year 1750, £. 4,200,000, 
bearing an Interest of 3 per cent. per annum. Under powers for that purpose granted 
by the Act of 26 George III. cap. 62. these Annuities were sold by the Company to 
the Amount of £.2,992,440. 5s. reserving the sum of £.1,207,559. 15s. yielding an 
Interest of £. 36,226. 158. 10d. ‘The management of the Annuities, as to the payment of 
the Interest, was vested in the East India Company, and an allowance on that 
account was made by the Public up to the years 1793, when an Act was passed trans- 
ferring the whole to the Bank ; and the Principal Sum now rémaining due to the Com- 
pany on these Annuities, viz. £.1,207,559. 158. is the Amount payable by the Public on 
the determination of the Charter of exclusive privilege, a notice respecting which 
was given to the Company during the last Session of Parliament, 


The Receipts from Government, in’ payment of Advances and Supplies to the 
service of the Public, having been so amply discussed in the Reports of Your Com- 
mittees in 1805 and 1808, Your Committee do not feel it necessary to dwell on 
this bead, nor do they deem it requisite to do more than merely mention the other 
head of the Receipts from Government for the purchase of Hemp in India for His 
Majesty's Service. 


‘The sum stated to have been received upon the Loyalty Loan, amounting to 
£.1,727,122. is the Sale Produce of the Portion of that Loan which became possessed 
by the Company as Subscribers. The payment side of the Account shews the 
Amount of the Advance upon this account to have been £. 1,835,000; consequently, 
on this view, a Loss was incurred by the transaction, amounting to £.107,878. 


Passing over the several other subordinate heads of Receipt, as not requiring particu- 
lar notice, Your Committee proceed to examine the Funds which were raised upon the 
Credit of the Company, the first of which is the Receipt on the increase of the 
Capital Stock, amounting to £. 2,027,295. The Capital Steck of the Company, 
at the commencement of the year 1793, amounted to the sum of £. 5,000,000, 
bearing an Interest of 8 per cent. perannum. By the Act of the 33d of His present 
Majesty, cap. 47. sect. 8. & 13. the Company were empowered to casas thet 

Sapital 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. °: 433 


every one hundred pounds of Capital, or at snch other 
tors of the Company, with the approbation ef the Lords 
ivect. And in another Act of the samo year, cap. 52. 
sect. 131 and 124, the Dividends or Interest payable upon the Capital was in- 
creased to the rate of ten and a half per cent.; a principle was also laid 
said Aci sich, alter the specified appropriations of the net proce 
Company's affairs should have been satistied, the remaining proceeds were to be 
applied to the © went of a Fund, as a guarantee to the holders of Capital 
Stock, to the ex 


nt of ‘Twelve millions Sterling; but as the state of affairs never has 
been such as to admit any payment on account of this Fund, any remark on the 
subject would be superfuous. 

The Amount above stated is the only sum received on the increase of the Capital 


Stock of the Company ing the period in question, notwithstanding perniission was 
granted by the Act of the 37th of His present Majesty, cap. 31. to incroase the 
Capital then standing at six millions, by raising two additional millions upon the 
same conditicns as those which applicd to the existing Capital by the Act of the 
334, cap. 52. 

One of the stipulations of the Act of the 33d, cap. 47. was, that of the Money so 
to be raised, a part was to be reserved for the purpose of reducing the Bond Debt of 
the Company to the sum of £.1,500,000; and certain modifications or restrictions 
have, by subsequent Acts, been imposed upon the increase of Capital allowed under 
the Act of the 37th, which, as relating to the extent to which the Company are 
allowed to “use their Credit in raising a Loan on Londs, will fall more properly 
under consideration with the enquiry into the state of their Bond Debt. 


The sum stated to have been received on the issue of Bonds during the whole 
period has amounted to £.7,081,800. This is, of course, the accumulated Amount 
of issues and reissues from year to year. The Total Amount of Bonds paid off and 
paid in upon the Sales, shewn on the payment side of the Account, is £.5,373;199 ; 
the difference between this sum and the above is £71,708,601, and is the Amount 
in which the Principal of the Bonded Debt appears to have been increased on the 
1st March 1810, by the exercise of the powers vested in the Company to raise 
Monies upon this species of security by the Act above adverted to, also by one sub- 
‘sequently passed in the year 1807. 


When by a provision of the Act of the 33d of the King, cap. 47, a portion of the 
sum raised on the Capital Stock created under that Act was directed to be reserved 
for the purpose of reducing the Principal of the Bond Debt of the Company to the 
sum of £.1,500,000, a power was at the same time vested in the East India Com- 
pany, with the consent of the Board of Connnissioners for the Affairs of India, to 
make an addition to the above Amount to the extent of £.500,000. The maximum 
of the Bond Debt, as allowed by this Act, may therefore be taken at £. 2,000,000. 
Ta March 1793 the Principal Sum owing by the Compaby on Bond was £.3,200,000. 
In the course of the year 1793-4 the suin applied to its liquidation amounted to 


See Docurent 
printed by Order of 
24th March 1806, 


Sect. 14. 


Appendix, N° 22. 


%- 1,028,475; but afier carrying the provisions cf the Act into effect to the extent - 


of £.1,150,775, the state of affairs rendered an application to Parliament necessa’ 
This led to the passing of the Act of the 34th of the King, cap. 41, which relic! 
the Company from further payment, in consequence of the preceding Act directing” 
the application cf Monies arising from the Subscription to the Capital Stock to the 
reduction of the Bond Debt to £. 1,500,000, by allowing the continuance of it at 
£-2,000.000, at which amount it was fixed. ‘This Act also provided, that with the 
approbation and consent of the Koard of Commissioners ior the Affairs of India, the 
‘Company should be empowered to borrow. for the purposes of: their Trade, any 
further sum or sums of Money on Bond, not exceeding in the whole one million; 
so that in tact the maximum of their Bond Debt was then extended to three 
dnillions. 


It docs not seem that the Company have availed themselves of the powers granted 
under this Act to the full extent. From 1796 to 1804 their Bond Debt was 
frequently less than £. 1,500,000, and never reached £. 2,000,000. In 1805 it was 
£.2,396,575, in 1806 £. 2,582,375, and in March 1807 £. 2,882,775. In the 
jatter year an Act passed, enabling the Company to raise a further sum upon Bond 
to the extent of two millions, instead cf adding one million to their Capital Stock of the 


5s two 


de 


47 Geo. 11D. Sess, 2. 
cap. 41, 


Home Accounts, 


Appendix, N° 


Appendix, Nas, 


Appendix, N° 


Appendix, N 


22... 


20, 


° 23. 


434 Fourth REPORT from the Select Committee on the 


two permitted to be added under the Act of the 37th; and it was enacted that 
prodaced by any addition to the Capital Steck to ‘be thereafter inade, should 
be £ t applied tothe reduction of the Bond Debt, at the rate of £. 200 for cach £. 100 
E til that Debt should be again reduced to £.3,000,c00. By this Act the 
extent of the Bond Debt is limited to £.5,000,000. The outstanding Bond Debt 
on ist March 1810 was £.4,900,600, heing en excess beyond its amount in 1793 
sum of £. 1,700,000. By the Act of the 5ist, cap. 64. the Company have been 
again allo wed to borrow a further sum on Bond to the extent of two m: lions, and 
ons of the Act of the 47th, cap. 43, pr ing the application of monies 
sed by the increase of Capital Stock in reduction of the Bond Debt, 
danda proviso made, that when monies sliall be raised by virtue of the se- 

37th, 47th, and 5 1st, now adverted to, which together shall amount to 
0138, no farther sum shall be borrowed on Bond. T. he extent of the Prin- 
« Bonded Debt may therefore be considered to be now limited to seven 
ns, as it provided that ‘all money to be henceforth raised by increase of 
Capital Stock, by virtue of the Act of the 37th, shall be applicd in discharge of the 
Bond Debt. 


The Receipts on the issue of. Bonds appearing to exceed in amount what might 
possibly be expected from the limitation imposed on the Eond Debt by the Acts 
referred to, Your Committce observe that ii las in great measure arisen fromthe 
re-issue or re-sale of Bonds paid in by the purchasers of gcods at the Company's 
sales, which is to be attributed to their always bein received at par in payments upen 
those occasions; consequently, whenever the Bonds of the Cor bear a discount 
in the money market, an advantage accrues to those pure sin the amount of 
such discount, from obtaining possession of these Bonds in order to pay for the 
goods. 


___ Athird Source from which the Company have derived aid to the Funds of the Home 
Treasury on. their own credit, is found to have been in occasional Leans from the 
Bank. The entire Receipts upon this account, during the period in question, amounted 
to £. 1,600,000. A reference to the other side cf the Statement will shew, that in 
several years repayment was made of these Loans to the Amount of £. 1,400,000. 
By the general Statcusent of the Debts, it ‘appears s thatin March 1793 the Company 
were indobte: od tothe Bank in the sum of £. 600, ,000, and.in March 1810 to the 
amount a £. 800,600; ‘and this difference is confir med by that which appears 

receipts and payments. Oi the Debt thus stated to be duc to the Bank, 
EF 20,080 is on a species of mortgage of the sum cue from Government to the Com. 
pay termed the East India Annuities, and £. 200,000 is on Bonds. 


net. Total of the sums thus raised on the credit of the Company on Capital 
ue of Bonds, and by Leans from the Bank, has amounted to 


are rep: 
veral 


In the years 1804-5 the Resting by the Company for the Duty on Tea are first 
introduced into the Statement of their Cash Receipts, In that year the sum of 
£.500,000 only is brought into the Aceount, but the Balance in the Company's 
hands on those Duties appe sto have been added to the Cash Balance at the com- 
mencement of the following year 1805-6; to which cireumstance the diiference 
between the Balance remaining at the close of 1804-5, and that stated at the com- 
mencement of 1805-0, is to be attributed, the former being £. 12,020, and the latter 
£ 572,628. From this period the entire "Receipts and Payments of these Duties are 
inserted in this Statement; so that trom 1804-5 to 1809-10, the sum which passed 
through the ‘Treasury ou Reccipts of this description amounted to £. 17,080,166. It 
was however paid over to the proper Departinents of Government, betwee n 1805-6 
and 1809-10, to the Amount of £. 16,454, 358. as appears by the other side of the 
Account, and the difference, being £. 6 5,808, is found in the Statement of Debts 
included in what is due for Customs and Excise.on the 1st March 1$10. It is un- 
necessary to enter into any detail respecting the particular rates of these Duties. 
Your Conuittee will therefore confine themselves to giving some explanation of the 
mode of levying them, under which the Treasury of the Company i is the medium of 
their passing into the hands of the Commissioners of Excise and the Collector of 
Customs. ‘This praétise commenced under the Act of the 24th of His present’ 
Majesty, cap. 38. sect. 2, which directs the Duties then enacted, being a per centage 
oa the Gross Amount of the Sales of Tea, to be received by me Company, who are to 

pay 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 435 


pay the same into the Offices above mentioned within forty days after each quarterly Home Accounts. 
Sale. From this circumstance it has occasionally happened that a Balance accrued — 
‘in the hands of the Company. It could only remain, however, a_ short time as 
the directions of the Act were imperative in reference to the period of payment, and, 
no delay could take place without the pei ion of the Lords of the Treasury. Your 
, tee have considered it a part of their duty to enquire into the cause of the 
‘oduction of the Receipt and Payment of these Duties, heretofore kept distinct, 
into the Accounts of the Company, and the reason why the Payment in 1807-8 
particularly was so far below the amount of the Reccipt. The general answer to 
tue enquiry upon these points arises for the most part out of the situation of the Com- 
pany’s financial aflairs at these periods, in consequence cf the large advances made by 
theta at home and abroad for the service of the Public, the payment ef which was 
g to a difference of opinion upon the principle of the demand between 
y's Goverament and the Company, which was only at last settled by an 
of the House of Commons in the year 1805, on whose 
Report a million was voted to the Company upon account, and the detail of their 
Claims ordered to be examined by Accountants, to be nominated by the Lords of 
the Treasury and the Company, on their respective parts, In the Session 1806 i* Report, p. 5. 
another million was voted to the Company, on the Report of the Accountant to the 
‘Treasury that it was less than their Claim; but the Account between the Company 
and the Public was not fully made up till the year 1808, whca on the Report of your —_4* Report. 
Committee a vote passed for £. 1,500,000. the Balance according to the Accounts 
then presented. During the remainder of the period under review, the payment of 
these Duties has been made according to the directions of the Act, with the oxcep- 
tion of £.1 30,000, which becoming due in January 1810, was pestponed till the Appondix, N° st. 
7th of February following, when it was discharged. The suux due upon this accouat 
in March 1810, arises out of the common course of the transactions, and the sus- 
pensions or accommodations as to time occasionally granted to the Company, appear Ibid. 
to be justified by the circumstances, 
The agsregate of the several heads of Receipt in the Home Treasury, between the 
years 1793-4 and 1$09-10, including the Balance of Cash on ist March 1793, and 
the Balance of the Tea Duties in March 1805, appears by the Statement to have 
amounted to thé sum of £. 143,593,248. Deducting from this sum the amount bor- Appendix, N° 22 
rowed or raised on the credit of the Company, the Tea Duties, and the sum advanced 
by Government for the purchase of Hemp, it will be found that the affairs of the 
Company, partly Political, but mostly Commercial, produced the Receipt of Monies 
oto the Home ‘Treasury to the Amount of £.115,643,987. Ibid. 
ne 
Having thus ascertained the sum received, Your Committee have directed their 
attention to an examination of the purposes to which it was applied, as exhibited on 
‘the Payment side of the Account. Jt must be premised, however, that the expendi- 
ture immediately connected with the Reccipts of Monies raised on Bond or by Loan 
from the Bank, will be passed over without any further remark; also that their 
observations will be merely directed to the principal heads cf Disbursement, or such 
as are conccived to require particular explanation. 


The first item is the Amount disbursed from the Company's Treasury, in paywvent 
of the Customs .on the Goods disposed of at the Sales, on their own account 
exclusively. . 

he Total of this Payment is £. 6,239,008. The remarks already offered in explana-, 
tion of the heads of the Estimate of the Profit or Loss upon the Trade from India and* 
China respectively, preclude the necessity of any addition in this place beyond what 
may be requisite to account for the ditference between the Amount actually paid and 
that estimated, or rather proportioned as a charge on the goods sold. ‘The sum 
thus proportioned was £. 5,819,478, which is less than the actual Payment, by 
£.419,530. ‘The ditference is occasioned by the Balance due under the head of 
Customs in March 1793,- which was.paid in 1793-4, being greater than the Balance 
left due in March 1810. 


Ibid. 


Appendix, N° 25. 


The importance of this head ef Payment, as connected with the Resources of the 
Empire, has induced Your Committee further to examine it, in order to shew the 
real Amount of Revenue directly derived by the State from the whole Trade. from 
Jndia and China during this period. 

The 


Home Accousts. 


Appendix, N°! 52 
& 33. 


Appendix, Ne, 25. 


Appendix, Ne 22, 


436 Fourth REPORT jfrom the Select Committee on the 


‘The Payments through the Company's Treasury, exclusive of the Tea Duties, 
combined with the Customs and Duties paid through the same channel on Goods 
sold for the account of Private Traders, amounted to the sum of £. 7,808,685. ; and 
by the Accounts furnished by the Boards of Customs and Excise (added to the 
Appendix) it is ascertained that the Duties of Customs realized from January 1793 
to January 1810 inclusive, amounted to the sum of £. 9,912,126, and the Duties of 
Excise to £. 29,436,232. . 

‘The Total of these sums shews that the Revenue drawn by the State from these 


‘branches of Trade during the seventeen years have amounted to no less than 


£- 39.348,3583. being on an average £. 2,314,609 per annum, of which £. 399,555 
was-on the Trade from India exclusively. 


‘The particular rate of. these several Duties is not the object of the present enquiry, 
which is confined to what was actually received. On the whole period of seventecn 
years, the Duties on the Trade from India amounted to £. 6,792,434, being on the 
average £.399,555, as before stated. In the eleven years ending January 1810, they 
amounted to £. 5,054,170, or on the average £.459,470; and on the four years 
ending January 1810, the average was £525,005. The produce in the next year 
was £. 457,489. It should be remarked, that the Export Trade of this Country, in 
‘the several years last mentioned, was involved in difficulties of an unprecedented 
nature. Your Committee have been more particular in their explanations of the 
Duties upon the Indian Trade, as that from China depends much more upon home 
consumption; but the average produce of the Duties on the latter in the eleven years 
ending January 1810, omael the average of the seventeen years, in the sum of 
4£-525,721, and the sum realized in the year ending January 1811 was more 
than that average by £. 1,788,012. The produce of Duties and Customs on the 
the whole of the Trade from India and China in the year ending January 1811, 
amounting to £. 4,160,555, exceeded the average on the antecedent seventeen years by 
£. 1,845,946: it likewise exceeded the produce of the preceding year by the sum of 
£- 682,397. Your Committee entertain the greater satisfaction in offering to the 
House so favorable a view of the productive powers of this very important branch 
of the Trade .of the Empire in aid of its resources, from being enabled at the same 
time ‘to state, that the Profit of the Company on the whole of their Trade in the year 
ending March 1810, was greater than in any year during the whole period, with the 
exception of the years 1800-1 and 1801-2, : 


The next Disbursement of the Home Treasury that offers itself to attention is 
the sum paid for Freight and Demorage; it amounted to £. 23,645,283, exclusive 
of £. 1,572,375 charged in another part of the Statement to the Private Traders, 


. which is simply a deduction from the Gross Amount paid under the head of Freight, 


Appendix to 
‘3 Report, N° 46. 
Appendix, N° 25, 


founded upon the actual repayment made by Private Traders, as shewn on the 
Receipt side, but is by no means to be assumed as the real Charge incurred for 
Freight ou Goods imported: in Private Trade. For in whatever amount the re- 
payment by the Private Trader for the Freight of his Goods, falls short of the rate 
actually paid by the Company, it becomes a Charge upon the Company, and is 
accordingly so left in their general Disbursement for Freight ; but the discussion of 
this point will be resumed hereafter with more particularity. ‘The sum stated to 
have been paid by the Company, which is the present object, comprizes au Expen- 
diture partially chargeable indecd to the Territories or to the Political Concern, 
but principally to the Commercial one. ‘The part chargeable to the Poiitical Concern 
is stated, in an Account inserted in the Appendix to the last Report of Your Com- 
mittee, to have amounted to the sum of £. 1,854,133. while that appertaining to the 
Commercial one, amounts to £. 21,791,150, of which £.19,610,275 has already 
been stated as directly chargeable on the Goods. ‘The remaining £. 2,180,875 
anust be supposed to have been an expense of this description upon other branches 
of the Trade, and including what has been incurred by providing Tonnage for the 
accommodation of Private Trade, under the directions of the Act of 1793, In excess 
of the Amount stated to have been repaid upon that account. An addition is still to 
be made to the suin last stated, as the Total of the original Disbursement for Freight 
is merely what, on the Balances, is ascertaincd to be due to the Owners from the 
Home ‘Treasury on the making up of the Accounts of their respective Ships. In 
these Accounts the Company are credited for Advances made from the ‘Treasuries 
abroad, to be accounted for at home, as adverted to in the Third Report of Your 

Counnittee, 


Affais of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 437° 


Committee ; also for short Deliveries, &c. charged to the Owners of the Ships. The Hose Accounts. 
addition to be made on these accounts is £.1,390,260, but. the effect of it will be — 


A .. pire: . Appendix, N* 34- 
brought more immediately in view into other parts of this Report. ik Ya) aid 


The Expenditure of the Home-Treasury in Consignments and Supplies to India 
and China, as exhibited in the several heads of Exports of Goods and Stores, India- 
Debt, Bills of Exchange, and Bullion exported, being a point distinct in itself, will 
be so,considered, notwithstanding Your Committee may find occasion to offer some: 
remarks upon cach of these heads separately. 


The observations made by Your Committee in their last Report, upon this point, 
as far as relates to the Supply to India realized at the several Presidencies, from the 
year 1792-5, to the year 1808-9 inclusive, will be found im a: great degree applicable 
upon the present occasion, and a minute investigation of the subject would tend to 
confirm the same conclusions. ‘The extent of the Supplies from the Commercial to 
the Political Concern, was then the object of research; the calculations were there- 
fore made upon distinct Accounts of those Supplies. In the former part of this 
Report, a view has been taken of the Supply furnished by England to the Factory 
at Canton, and to the Island of St. Llelena, for the saine period. The Disburse- 
ments made in payment for those several Supplies are now for consideration. 


Upon the face of the Statement, it appears that the demands for the whole 
of the Supplies to India and China have been liquidated, and Your Committee are 
not aware that any useful end would be answered by marking the periods when the 
Payments were respectively made; it is sufficient to advert merely to the connection 
subsisting between the Cash payments, and the Accounts of the Home Concern, 4) endix to 
which were inserted in the Appendix to the Third Report, in order to explain the 3¢ Report, N*S 
causes of the differences between the Results of those Accounts, and what would be & 6. 
produced from the actual Payments made in corresponding periods, namely, 1793-4 to 
1809-10. This process is necessary to obviate the‘conclusions which might other- 
wise be drawn touching the accuracy of the several Statements. The differences in 
the Accounts to be explained are as follow : 


The value of the Exports of Goods and Stores, shewn in the Appendix to the Third Appendix to 
Report, is calculated in the seasons September to September, whereas the Payments 5* Report, N° 5. 
are made from March to March in each year, consequently an exact agreement 
between the value and the payment is not to be expected. The promptness of pay- _ 
ment on the part of the Company, for Manufactures, &c. exported by them, cannot 
be better exemplified than by the Statements of what was left due in each year on the 
Exports of former seasons. The difference in the value of the Exports, compared Appendix, N° 23. 
with the Amount of the actual Payment, is very considerable. The value of the 
Exports of the seasons 1793-4 to 180g-10 inclusive, was £. 31,060,752. The Appendix to 
amount actually paid for Exports from March 1793 to March 1810, amounts. to 5 Report, Nes. 
£. 28,417,196, being a difference of £. 2,643,556. Appendix, Ne 2. 


This apparently large difference between the two Accounts is principally to be 
ascribed to the want of agreement in the periods of making them up. ‘The value of 
the Goods actually exported is stated by a note to the Account, to be calculated with Appendix: to 
the addition of 10 per cent. to the Prime Cost. Deducting the sum thus added, 3 Report, N° 5. 
namely, £. 2,823,704, the actual valuation would be reduced to £. 28,237,048. 
By the actual Disbursement it appears that the payment of £. 28,417,196 included 
£- 1939755, the Debt owing in March 1793 on Exports of former seasons. It in- Appendix, N°23, 
cluded also the value of the Exports in the Warehouse on the 1st March 1810, to , 
the Amount of £. 1,196,095, with the exception of £.164,090 left due at the same Ibid. 
period. The adjustments necessary in the Payments on these several Accounts 
would reduce their Amount to £. 27,191,436; which compared with the value of the 
Exports, shews the latter to have exceeded the Payment in the sum of £. 1,045,612. 
This is chiefly owing to the dates at which the two Accounts arc closed, and to a part 
of the Goods, which remained in the Warehouse on the 1st March 1810, being 
shipped previous to the end of the season in September. 


Assuming the sum of £. 28,237,048 as the Amount of the Exports of the Com- 
ny, in the 17 years, the annual average was £. 1,661,002. The Exports consisted 
in part of Goods and in part of Stores, but were principally of the former description ; 

the latter amounted to £. 5,883,329, and cedurane the 10 per cent. aaded the Appendix, Ne 35, 
: 5 é invoice 


438 Fourth REPORT fromthe Select: Committee: onthe 


Hour Accounss. Invoice valué therein stated) to'£:.5,348,484,.or. ofr:the average £! 314,616; so-thaty 


Appendix to 
3¢ Report, N° 5, 


Appendix to 
5° Report, N° 9, 


the. net Amount of the Export of Goods ‘was £. 22;888;567.- 


The Export in Stores‘ was chiefty to India, and’ in point of extent governed by the 
sexigencies of the Service. That-made in Goods.was.both to, India. and.China, and 
regulated by.the probability, of: Sale. es 
The Experts therefore to India‘and China-whieh may be supposed-to have-reactied: 
their: destination within the period; according to the: Account inserted’ in the: Third! 
Report, have materially increased: during: the last ten years ~under review. On: 
the average of the first seven years, 1791-2 to: 1797-8, the Amount, deducting the 
Jo per cent. as ustial, was £. 1,116,109, The average on the ten. following years,, 
1798-9 to 1807-8, was £.1,877,290. ‘The largest proportion in each was in Goods, 
sent to China, which were almost entirely disposed’ of by, the Company’s Agents. 
Respecting the part sent to India, a reference to a Document attached, to. the same, 
Report, will shew that both of Goods and Stores, the value remaining on hand between, 
1804 and 1809, was to an Amount very far excceding that on the antecedent years. 
betweén'1792 and 1804, and what remained on the Export Goods on the 3oth. April 
7809,.amounted to more than £. 900,000 Sterling ; from which it is evident that the. 
Indian markets have been supplied ‘to the.utmost extent of their demand, independent 
of Consignments made by Private Traders. The'increased residue of Stores does 
not appear so great in proportion as. that of Goods, and: is not liable to the same 
observation, because although Sales are occasionally made; the increased demands of 
the Service-from the extension of-.the Territories, must be- opposes to bave. required 
a al afore It.is moreover to be remarked, tliat a part. of these Stores was pur- 
chased in India. : 


Apfendix, N°s6. _ Your Committee have called for and added to their Appendix an Account of the 


Profit and Loss on the Sale of ‘the Exports from Europe to India:and China, calcu- 
- dated on the actual Prime Cost of the same, by which it appears that the Profit in 
India amounted to £.837,940.. and the net Profit in China to £. 266,404. together 
£.1,104,344. This Result is produced without reference to any Charge on the Con- 
signment for Freight or otherwise, it being designed for a particular application in an 
ulterior part of this Report. 3 ah ? 
‘The Revenues derived by the State-from ‘the Exports to India ‘and China, in the 
shape of Tonnage and other Daties, between January 1794 and January 1809, 


Appendix, N° 37..-amiounted to £.660,555. ‘Fhe amount paid by the Company on this account is not 


~ separately stated in their Accounts, but is iacluded under the head of Customs. 
“The ‘Payment for Bills of Exchange from India and China, including those drawn 


“Appendix; Ne22. jn liquidation of the Indian Debt, amounts to £. 23,493,054. By the Account in the 


Appendix to 
3 Report; Ne 6, 


Appendix to the Third Report, the Amount paid on this account is £.24,544,076, 
exceeding the Amount above stated by £.1,051,022.. This difference is owing to the 
mode of making up the Cashi Account in respect to Bills of Exchange, which is done 
by inserting the net actual Payment only, after deducting the Amount received for 
Bills drawn in favourof the Company. « It seems more simpl¢ and convenient that the 
entire Payment should be shewn on one side of the Aécount, and the Receipt on the 
other. To supply this deficiency, and to explain the difference, a Statement of the 


Appendix, N* 38." Receipts is added to the Appendix,’ which will in a great measure account for it. 


Appendix to 
3° Report, Ne 5, 


The. sum paid for Bullion exported amounts to £.8,956,879. The Export of 
Bullion in the several seasons 1793-4 to 1809-10, is stated at £.8,988,165. The 
difference between the two sums is comparatively small,. and must be considered as 

“referable to the discordant periods at which the Accounts are completed. 


The Total of the Payments thade by the Home Treasury, which may be taken asthe 
Supply to the several Foreign Settlements between the years 1793-4 and 1809-10-in- 
elusive, amounts to'the suin of £. 60,867,129: an‘adjustment however of the sums 
.due on Bills of Exchange,-and_of' Exports at the commencement and at the con- 


Appendix, N°23. -clusion of the period, according to the Statement of the Debts, would make the Total 


Supply £.60,988,674, as more was owing in March 1810 by £. 121,545, ‘which 
-should be taken as an augmentation of the former sum. . 

.. The head designated Charges General includes, -with a few particular exceptions, 
‘the whole of the Disbursements of’ the Company for the Charges incident to ‘the 
snariagement of their Concerns, both Political: and Commercial, in England. “An 
mie f : Account, 


Affairs of The. EAST-INDIA,COMPANY. + 439. 


y 
Account, distinguishing the various heads.of Charge comprehended under this. nead: Kom: Accounrs, 
during the-veag. 1809-10, is. inserted in the Appendix, which will afford the House © | == 
. information. of their nature; and also the Abstract of an Account Appéndia, N° 39, 
ise adkled to the. Appendix, apportioning so much of thé Charges as, in Appendix, N28, 
y of the Coyrt of Directors may justly belong to the Commercial branch. 
a also an expenditure, for the purchase of" property, the 
9 fia the Assets: of the Company. : 


2 Aacuunt now adverted to appears to. have been drawn up with particular care, 

“-but ihe separation, of. Charge being in many instances imate upon Proportion or 
‘Estiuiwte, the introduction of. it, upon the present occasion must not be considered as 
pledging Your Committee to the perfect accuracy of the distinctions adopted ‘in it, 
‘The view is more an hypothetical one, taken for the-express purpose of furnishing the 
grouncl of certain Results drawn upon a similar ‘principle, to be hereafter submitted to 
the Judgment of the. House. : 


‘The Total. disbursed under this head is stated at £.11,602,500.. A distribution of it 
thas “been made into—Political. Charges, £. 3,178,212;—Commercial’ Charges, 
- 5,909,286 ;—and other Articles classed with Charges General not properly be- 
longing to. them, £932,158. Articles for which valué remairis, to the Athount of 
a 1,513,341. M% 
The Charges exclusively Commercial may be taken at £.6,901,944 ; for notwith- 
ing the column of the Account from which the above distribution is taken, 
he sum of £. 932,158 as an expenditure not properly belonging’to Charges 
, it comes under the denomination of a Commercial.one, being for Interest 
‘on occasional Loans, Freight of Bullion, Maintenance of Lascars, &c. &c. Of the 
~ Amount at which the Comercial Charges may be sfatéd, the stim of £. 5,135,409 Appendix, Ne 25. 
has becn calculated ag directly chargeable to the Import Trade of the Company; the 
+ xemainder, £. 1,766,535, arises in great measure from the expense incurred on the 
Goods ef Private ‘Fraders, the repayment of which has been noticed in the obset- 
vations on the Receipts. : ae OS 


The Payment for Dividends on the Capital Stock of the Company, and Interest on 
- ‘their Bonded Debt, has ‘amounted to £.12,512,284. including what was paid; atthe Appendix, N° 22, 
«commencement of the period, on the India Annuities previous to the transfer of them 
%0 the management ofthe Bank. Of the above Amount, £. 10,636,845. was for Divi- Appendix, N*40, 
dends on Stock, £. 1,812,734 for Intcrest on Bonds, and £.62,705 tor Interest’ on YY 
the Annuities. " oe ‘ a3 
_ The sums stated to have been paid to Government in. the years 1793-4 and : 
1794-5, amounting to £. 500,000, were two half-yearly Payments, as prescribed by Appendix, N° 22. . 
‘the Act of 33d. cap. 52. sect. 127. ‘These Payments standing alone, have led 
Your Committee to enquire why the directions of the Act have not been carried 
4nto effect in more instances ; dnd the Result of their enquiry will be brought forward 
in another part of the Report, where its immediate connection with a subject they 
propose to discuss, appears more properly to suggest its introduction. « a 
An item appears-on the Payment side of thé Statement, termed the Chinsurah 
Cause. ‘The sum paid on this ge amounts.to £. 120,665. This Payment arose 
from Prize property that came into the possession of the Bengal Government on the 
capture of Chinsurab from the Dutch in the year 1781, which, by a decision Of: the 
Court of. Admiralty in England, was ordered to be paid to the Captors, subject to Appendix, N° 41. 
such distribution as His Majesty should be pleased to direct. The sum of £.59,143 
on the other side of the Stateunent, is the net Amount received by the Company 
in consequence of the decision on the case. 7 


Tn the years 1764-5, 1795-6, and 1796-7, a sum was expended for the purchase : 
of Teas upon.the Continent, amounting to £.489,266. ~This transaction calls for Appendix, N* 22, 
aio.further remark, than that the purchase appears to have been made by the Com- 
pany under a permission granted by the Act'18 Geo.. II. cap. 26. see. 10. and for 
the purpose of keeping up the stock of Tea in their Warchcuses to the extent 
required by the Act 24 Geo. IIT. cap. 38. sect. 5. : : 


The expenditure of £. 47,000. for Seamen for Government in- the years 1795-6 Thid, 
_, and 1796-7, in this Account, took place at-a.most critical period in the affairs-of the 
_ Empire, when every class of the people were vieing with each other in loyal efforts 
y te 


Home AccouyTs. 


— a 


3¢ Report, p. 365. 


Appendix, Ne 22. 


2* Report, p, 39. 


Appendix, N° 42. 


440° Fourth REPORT from the Select Committee on the 


to meet the exigencies of the State; and although doubts may be entertained of the 
owers of the East India Company, restricted as they are in the disposi of their 
Funds by the Act of 1793, to make such a Contribution, yet credit must be given 
to the Court of Préprietors for the forward and dutiful zeal which prompted them 
in such a crisis to address to His Majesty an offer to raise three Regiments of In- 
fantry for the Public Service, afterwards commuted at the wish of the Government 
for the supply of 3,000 Men to the Navy, raised at the expense above stated. 


The sum disbursed to liquidate Bonds in the hands of Creditors of the Rajah of 
Tanjore, amounting to £. 225,056, is inunedintely connected with the Territorial 
affairs of the Company, and is the part of the Rajah’s private Debts, which, under a 
particular arrangement, was made payable in Kngland, The part of these Debts 
paid in India has been-adverted to in the last Report of Your Committee. 


A Payment on account of the private Creditors of the Nabob of Arcot, to the 
Amount of £. 10,960, in the years 1808-g and 1809-10, is likewise a Territorial Pay- 
ment, and was accasioned by. the operation of the Act of the 46th of the King, 
cap. 133. gt ; : 

The Payment of £. 100,000. to Government, for Troops, does not require further. 
notice than a mere reference to the observation miade in a former part of this Report, 
onthe sums received by the Company from His Majesty's Government. 


The Payments on the Loyalty Loan-in 1796-7 and 1797-8, amounting to 
£. 1,835,000, having already been adverted to in mentioning the Receipts on the sale 
of it, no further remark appears necessary. 


The sum paid to Military Officers on furlough amounted to £.1,229,090. The 
first Payment on this account aj sin the year 1796-7 to the Amount of £. 25,225, 
and a gradual increase is exhibited in each year. ‘The Payment in 1809-10 was 

. 171,918. The expenditure in this instance is evidently of a Political description. 

1 cause of it is to be found in the new arrangement of the Military system in 1796, 
and was noticed, with the grounds of it, in the Second Report of Your Com- 
mittee, 9s : , 

The Tea Duties, and the Amount of Bullion consigned to India for the purchase of 
Hemp on account of Government, not requiring observation, the only remaining 
head of the Expenditure on which explanation seems requisite, is the sum paid to 
the Captains of Ships worn out in the Service, amounting to £. 355,190. ‘This 
Payment is connected with the Charge for Freight. It is a temporary expense, as 
it began in 1796-7, and ended in the year 1803-4, and was occasioned by an altera- 
tion adopted by the Company in their Shipping system, about the year 1795. _-Ante- 
cedent to this period, a presumptive right to the commands of the Chartered Ships in 
the service, as to a species of Property, had been created by continued usage, so 
that when a Ship had run the number of voyages stipulated in the Charter-party, and 
became unfit for service, a claim was kept upon the part of the Owners to supply 
another Ship in her stead, and of the Captain to have the command of it when so sup- 
plied. ‘The abolition of this claim was necessary to the substitution of the new system, 
which rested upon the principle of open competition, and it was thought equitable on 
abolishing it, to make a proportioncd compensation to the Captains, which in the 
aggregate amounted to the sum above stated. A considerable saving of expense was 
anticipated from the measure. 


Although the question as to the degree in which this expectation was realized, does 
got fall within the immediate scope of the present discussion, Your Committee consider 
it an object of attention from its connection with the disbursements of the Company. 
Adverting to the rate of Freight now paid, on a comparison with the rate paid in the year 
1796, before the change of system, it is found that the present average rate on a Ship of 
800 tons for India, is £.42. 1s. 8d. perton, and that the rate paid in 1796 was £.42. 196.14. 
On a Ship of 1,200 tons for China, the present average rate is £.40. 5s. 4d. which 
in 1796 was £. 38. 5s. 10d. ; being less at the present period on a Ship of 800 tons, 
by 178. 5d. per ton, and more on a Ship of 1,200 tons, by £.1. 19s. 6d. per ton. 
These calculations in each period include the extra ex; for Lascars, &c. but are 
exclusive of the Insurance borne by the Company. iis, however, is not entirely a 
correct principle of comparison, as the enhanced cost and outfit of the Ships in 1810, 
compared with what it was in the year 1796, is known to be very spa Your 
ommittee 


Aduis of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 4a 


Committee have called for Accounts shewing the cost and outfit of Ships of these de- Hose Accounts. 
scriptions at the respective periods. , According to these Accounts, the Amount on a —_ 
Ship of 800 tons, which in 1796 was £. 30,004. 1s, was in 1810, £.45,760. 158. Appendix, N° 43 
being an Excess in the latter period of £. 15,756. 148. and the cost and outfit of a &4aa 
Ship of 1,200 tons, which in 1796 amounted to £.41,785, in 1810 was £.04,124. 19s. 

‘being likewise an Excess in the latter period, amounting to £. 22,539. 19s. Calculat- 

ing the vate of Freight in propottion to these Amounts at the two periods, the Result 

which would bc produced, will furnish the presumption at least that the cffect of the 

alteration in the system had been advantageous. - It is as follows : 


Ona Ship of 800 tons - - - £.65. 10. per ton. 
Ona Ship of 1,200 tons- - - 58. 15. per ton, 


exceeding the Amount paid in the year 1810, in the first instance by £.23..8. 4. per 
ston, and im the second by £. 18...9s. 8d. per ton. 


The Payments of the Home Treasury between the years 1793-4 and 1809-10 
‘have amounted ‘to £.143,201,383, the Receipts to £. 143,593,248, the Balance of Appendix, N° 42. 
the Account on the 1st March 1810 will therefore be £.391.865, which added to the : 
sum of £.262,302, the Excess of Receipt over the Payment on account of Private 
Traders, to be hereafter considered, amounts to £..654,167, the final Balance of 
Cash at the close of the period. : : 


Your Committee having in the adjustment, of the Receipt, endeavored to separate 
the monies produced by the reaction of the Funds of the Company, which were 
realized from Sales and other Sources, from those raised by Loan and received on 
account of Government for Tea Duties, &c. will adjust the Payments on the same 
principle, which will be the means of pointing out some of the causes which created 
a Deficiency in the Home Treasury, and imposed the necessity of a Loan from the 
Public in the year 1810-11, Taking thereiore the Expenditure at £.143,201,383. 
after deducting the repayments on Tans and Tea Duties, it will appear that the 
-direct Disbursement in Supplies to India and China, and for various Charges, was 
£- 119,893,583, exceeding the Receipt by £ 4,249,596, which is the Amount .of 
the extraordinary aids required by the Home Treasury during the 17 years ending 
in March 1810. ‘The aid thus required was, with the exception of a comparatively 
small sum, derived from the Credit of the Company, exercised in the several instances 
by the permission of Parliament. The Capital Stock of the Company was increased 
in the year 1793 in one Million, the Money raised by which amounted to £.2,027,295. “ 
The net Amount raised on Bonds was £. 1,708,601, and the sum of £. 200,000 was 
‘borrowed from the Bank: these sums amounted to’ £. 3,935,896, and leave 
-£.313;700 still to -be accounted for. ‘The Company are indebted to the Public for 
Tea Duties not payable on 1st March 1810, £. 625,808. More had been received Appendix, N* 93. 
from Government for the sale: of Hemp than had been applicd by £. 79,757 and 22, 
amore on Private Trade Goods than was paid by £.262,302, making together 23. 
&- 967,867; the difference between which sum and ®hat above stated amounts to 
‘&. 654,167, and is the Balance of Cash remaining in the Treasury. 


That a very different Result from what has now been shown, might have been ex- 
spected, from the prospects held out in the year 1793, is not to-be denied. These 
prospects however were grounded on calculations to be realized only by the continuance 
sof peace. ‘The effect of a state directly the reverse, which has with little intermission - 
subsisted since that time, and which, in producing the most unfavorable influence a 
the Affairs of the Company abroad, could not fail to have one little less so.on those.al 
home, and, in fact, the pressure on the Treasury in England, with the interruption. of 
-resources, owing .both to European and Indian war, has been severely experienced ; 
though not perhaps to the degree naturally to have been apprehended, when the 
demands for India, great beyond the measure of all former precedent, are adverted 
to. Viewing the subject in this light, coupling it with the Charge arising out,of the 
Military arrangements in 1796, and the extraordinary increase in the Homé 
Expenditure, both Political and Commercial, incident to the war, that a Deficiency 
.should have occurred in the resources, and the necessity have arisen of resorting to 
-extraordinary assistance to meet circumstances of extraordinary difficulty, is not to 
-be wondered at. But it must not be forgotten, that this extraordinary aid has not 
been required by extraordinary demands for an Expenditure by which so much pro- 
;perty was sacrificed. The Money shewn to have been raised upon Capital, was 
y 5U received 


442 Fourth REP-ORY from the Select Committee on the 


Hour Accounts, received in the year 1793 to be applicd to purposes specified in the Act of that year, 


Appendix to 
3¢ Report, Ne 2 


Appendix, N% 15 
& 16, 


Parvare Trades, 
&e. 


‘The amount hitherto raised on Bouds, was chiefly in commutation of a further addi- 
tion to the Capital allowed by Parliament, to give room for the enlargement of the 
Commerce of the Company. ‘That the Capital employed in their Trade bas been to 
a larger Amount than in the year 1793 is demonstrated by a comparison of the Prime 
Cost of the Investments, as estimated at that period, with its Amount on the average of 
the seventeen following years, the former being £. 2,000,481, and the latter 
£. 2,953,963, being an Increase of £.917,482 calculated at similar rates of exchange. 
As far as the Commercial Application of the Funds is implicated, the Result which will 
be exhibited hereafter is satisfactory, from shewing that it has been so far successful 
as not only to provide for the expenses computed to be strictly Commercial, but to 
furnish funds for the payment of the Dividends to the Proprietors of the Capital 


“Stock, and the Interest on the Bonded Debt, that too when struggling with many 


difficulties and occurrences of unusual disaster. As the Amount of the Supplies from 
the Home Treasury to the Concern abroad, appears to have exceeded that of the 
Returns made from thence, a very large proportion of the increase of the Assets in 
India may be assumed to have been produced by the Expenditure of the Treasury in 
England. The increased Amount of the value of Import Goods in the Warehouses in 
India, between 1792 and 1809, was £. 780,206, and of Stores purchased in Europe 
£.634,346, as stated from the Quick Stock Accounts for those periods. ‘The increase 
of Dead Stock, principally consisting of Stores furnished frem the same source, was 
for a like period £. 729,291. ‘The Total of these sums is £.2,143,843, but deducting 
the 10 per cent. in the Invoice amount, £: 1,948,949. Although the period in which 
this coniputation is made is not in strict agreement with that of the Agcount imme- 
diately under examination, the view thus given is sufficient to demonstrate the extensive 
effects of the Expenditure of the Home Treasury. This observation is likewise appli- 
cable to the increase of the Stock in China and St. Helena fora like period, amounting 
together to £.711,340. The increase of the Assets in England, including the Debt 
supposed by the Company to be due from the Public, is stated to have amounted to 
£. 4,287,856. The combination of these several sums will shew, that notwithstanding 
the accumulated Demands upon the Treasury have so far exceeded the ordinary Re- 
sources, as to require the aid of auxiliary Funds, the situation of the Company has 
undergone less positive deterioration than the first vicw of the case might have led 
to the apprehension of. 


The Transactions which relate to Private and Neutral Trade, and to the sale of 
Prize Goods, are shewn separately at the bottom of the Statement. 


Although Your Committee have, in a former part of their Report, brought to the 
attention of the House the nature of the various Imports from the East under these 
heads, and the extent of them according to the Sale Amount, they conceive it pro- 
per here again to advert to the subject. In a former part of the Report it has been 
stated, that the Sale Producgof the Private ‘Trade Goods, from 1793-4 to 1809-10 
inclusive, amounted to the sam of £. 33,991,256. and of Neutral and Prize Goods 
to £. 3,803,601. together £ 37,794,857. 

Under their successive’ Charters of exclusive privilege, the Trade between Eng- 
land, and India and China, was in the strictest sense vested in the East India Com- 
pany, before the period of passing the Act in the year 1793; and till that time no 
British subject, either abroad or at home, could embark in it, except under the express 
|e prima of the Company, while the Commerce of Neutrals was wholly interdicted 

ill the passing of another Act in the year 1795. 

Any discussion of the particular causes which produced the Enactments, giving a 
limited admission to the Trade of individuals with India in the year 1793, is unne- 
cessary. 

To examine at large in what degree the intentions of the Legislature have been 
realized, is hardly consistent with the course which Your Committee have thought it 
their duty to adopt for the general conduct of their present enquiry, which has been 
studiously confined to the state of the Finances of the Company. Feeling, however, 
that a strict adherence to this line would admit of little tetoan. a mere Statement of 
the connection between the Sales of the Goods and the Receipts and Payments of 
the Home Treasury, they trust no improper deviation willl be imputed to them, if 
referring to the Documents already before the House, and others in the possession of 


Your 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 443 


Your Committee, they venture in this instance to take a somewhat wider range of Patvatz Trade 
observation. &e. 


The Account of the Sales of Private Trace already referred to, from biending in 
one view the Private Trade of all descriptions, making no distinction between the 
‘Tvade with India and that with China, although sutticient for every purpose of 
application hitherto required, is not adapted to the object now in view: Your Com- 
mittee have therefore culied fur another Account, making the necessary distinctions. Appendix, N°4s. 
In this Account the ‘Trade is separated into two heads, Pi e Trade and Private 
Trade. The Privilege Trade (contrary to the cousnon ptation of the term) is 
that which was establisicd under the Act of 1793. Vat is, called the Private 
Trade, is that enjoyed by the Commanders and Officers ci the Company's Ships, by 
an indulgence of ancient practice in the Service, under whica a Tonnage to a_certain 
extent iree of Charge tor Freight, was conceded to them in various proportions ac- 
cording to their respective ranks. Upon this extent the Charge amounted to 7. per 
cent. upon part of the Private Trade trom China, and te 3 per cent. upon that from 
India, being the rate alse established by Law upon Privilege ‘Tvade from India, but 
upon all Excess beyond this indulgence, the amount of Cliarge was regulaied at the 
<iscretion of the Company. The Privilege Trade, as shewn in this Accouni, # with 
India oaly, whereas the Private Trade is both with fadia and China. 


The aggregate of the Sale Amount of the whole agrees of course with the Total 
already exhibited. The distinction is as follows : : 
Privilege Trade - - - - - + £.21,217,283 
Private Trade, India - - £L.7954.5076 
China - = | 5,230,597 5 
To 12,773,973 


Total - - £.53,991,256 


ose 


The species of Trade denominated in the Statement originally adverted to Neutral Appendix, N° 2& 
and Prize Goods, will not call for remark further thatras it passes through the medium of 
the Company. Its first appearance was in the year 1795-6, in consequence of the new 
state of affairs upon the Continent of Europe. About the latter end of the year 
1794, the French made their irruption into the United Provinces, which was followed by 
the conquest of the country. This event imposed on His Majesty's Governmentnew 
measures relative to the Dutch Trade with India and China, which was then con- 
siderable. These measures apply to this species of Trade, the provisions which 
governed the Indian Trade under the existing Laws. A special provision was at the 
same time made in favor of such Subjects of the United Provinces as maintained 
their allegiance to the Stadtholder and chose to avail themselves of it, by Orders of 
Council dated 16th and 21st January 1795, afterwards confirmed by the Act of the 
35th of the King, cap. 15. and again by another Act in the same year, cap. 80. and 
other Acts since passed. 


The East India Prize Goods included with thé Neutral Property, though not dis- eon cap. 5, 


tinguished, were sold at the Company's Sales under the direction of the several Acts 59 — ¢qh° ha 
relating to them, 43 — cap. 134. 


The Amount of the Sales of Neutral Property and Prize Goods was £. 3,803,601, Appendix, N° 24, 
which, added to that of the Privilege and Private Trade Goods, makes the Total of 
these heads £.37,794,857. The Amount received into the Company’s ‘Treasury in 
payment of the Goods thus sold, was only £. 27,120,430, being less than that of the Appendix, N° 22. 
Sales by £. 10,674,427, which arose from the Private Trade Goods having been fre- 
quently delivered (after Sale made in order to ascertain the Duties) to the original 
Owners or Consignees, 


The Receipt for Cuftoms, amounting to £. 1,569,677, being accounted for by the 
Company, in common with the Duties on their own Goods, requires no remark. 
That for Freight, amounting to £. 1,572,305, is on the calculation of the Amount 
chargeable on the Privilege Goods in conformity to the directions of the Act, but as 
formerly observed by Your Committee, falls short of the Expense incurred by the 
Company upon this account. The Total of the Receipts on the Sales of these several 
descriptions of Goods, and for Customs and Freight, was £. 30,262,412. The wore 


+444 Fourth REPORT from the Select Committee on the 


Private TRavE, 

a, &e. 
_ Appendix, N°23.° 
Ibid. N° 22. 


33Geo. I1.cap. 52. 
sect, 87. 


Appendix, N° 46. 


side.of. the Statement shews that the whole of this has.been again issued from the 
Couipany’s ‘Lveasury, with the exception of £.262,302; which has already been 
mentioned in the explanation of the Balance of Cash, and. is included in the sum 
staied to be due ty the Proprietors of Private ‘Frade, in the Account of the Debts of 
the Company ; the specitic payment on Datch Goods, amounting to £. 1,032,244. was 
made to the Comtissicners appointed for the purposes mentioncd in the Act of the 
35th, cap. 80. sect. 21. : 


The quantity of Tonnage to be furnished by the Company for the use of the 
-Privilege ‘Trade was fixed by the Act of +793, at 3,000 tons, subject to increase or 
decrease, under the direction of the Board of Commissioners for the Affairs of Tadia. 
The rate of Freight to be charged for such Tonnage was restricted in time of peace 


“to the sun of £.5 per ton outward, and £.15 per ton homeward, to be augmented in 


time of war in proportion to. the increase paid by the Company. That Loss has been 
incurred in consequence of thus ‘providing Tonnage for the Privilege Trade is un- 
deniable, but it is extremely difficult to fix the Amount of it with accuracy. By an 
Account called for by Your Committee, it appears that inthe seasons for the year 
1795 (the first year of importation: under the Act of 1793) to 1810 inclusive, In- 
dividuals were supplied with Tonnage outward to the extent of 21,743 tons, and 
homeward 70,444 tons; Total 92,187 tons. It further appears, that Tonnage was 
occupied by the Private Merchants in India-built Ships within the period, estimated at 
56,780 tons, with the Freight of which the Company had no connection whatever, 
The Total Tonnage employed in the Privilege ‘Trade, according to this Account, may 
therefore be taken at_ 148,967 tons... For the Tonnage furnished by the Company, it 
is computed that they paid £.2,022,994, while the Amount received by them was only 


. £:1,611,281; being a difference of £.411,713. - Adding to this sum the expense 


Appendix, N45. 


estimated to have been incurred for the maintenance of Lascars employed in this 
Trade, amounting to £.32,580, the ‘Total, £.444,293, is the sum which on this cal- 
culation may be stated as the Loss sustained on’ the part of the Company by the trans- 
action daring the sixteen years; the average Amount of which is £. 27,768, and the 
average of the enna furnished by the Company is, outward -1,359 tons, and homes 
ward 4,402 tons. The average of the entire of the Tonnage employed in Privilege 
‘Trade, outward and homeward, 9,310 tons. 


It will be observed, that during the first eight years, from 1795 to 1802, the 
‘Tonnage outward was engaged but to a very small extent; in the year 1801 indeed 
guly 19 tons, and during this period in the Total Amount only of 1,466 tons; or, on 
the average, 183 tons; although the Amount allowed was 3,000 tons annually. 
Representations were made during this period by the Private Merchants, of various 
circumstances tending in their view to obstruct the operation of the Act, whether 
founded in justice or otherwise Your Committee have not felt it their duty to judge. 
In the 1802 proceedings took place in the House of Commons in reference to 
this subject, and an arrangement was made by the Court of Directors, by which 
Shipping of an inferior description, termed extra Shipping, was provided and chartered 
ata cheaper rate. From 1803 to 1810 it will thence appear that an increase is 
shewa on the Tonnage outward, as the Amount engaged in those cight years was 
20,277 tons, or on the average, 2,534 tons. In the year 1805 it extended to 3,719, 
and in 1809 to 4,501 tons. “These several calculations are of course exclusive of 
what may have been shipped outwards by the return of the India-built Shipping 
not under the mariagement of the Company; but it should be remarked, that even in, 
these instances the :Amount stated cannot be taken as the real extent of the Tonnage 
employed by the Privilege ‘rade, as by a note to the Account of the Sale Amount, 


‘it appears that the Merchants are in the habit of engaging the Tonnage allowed _by 


the Company as an indulgence to the Commanders and Officers of their Ships, but 
in what degree is not shewn.. 

Notwithstanding this remark applies equally or perhaps in a greater degree to the 
Tonnage homeward, the ceewloeticn of the quantity furnished by the Company to. 
the Privilege Traders, leads to.a Result different from what has been shewn as to that 
outwards. In the first eight, years, 1.795 to 1802, ‘Tonnage homeward was occupied to 
the extent of 3,775 tons on the average, which exceeds the stipulated quantity by 
775 tons. In the next eight years the effect. of the arrangement in the year 1802 is 
shewn, by an increase of the average to 5,030 tons, which is more than the quantity 
fixed under the Act by 2,030 tons, exclusive in each period of the Tonnage employed” 
by the Merchants in India-built Shipping. 

This 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 445 


*. This remark likewise applies to the extent of the Privite: 


3 


cording to the Account of the Sale Amount, to which Your Committee will now direct 


ze Trade homewards, ac- Parvars Trap 


&e, 


their attention, premising that although the extent shewn will be assumed as that 4 sneadix, N°43; 


yproduced by the operation of the Act, it must be remembered that thé columns 
«designated Private Trade, comprize likewise impertations by Privilege Traders. : 
The Total Sale Amount of Privilege Trade imported, both on the Company's and 
“India-built Shipping, from 1793-4 to.1809-10, is shewn to have been £. 21,217,283. 
Deducting however the first year, £.181,710, as not being an importation under the 
Act of 1793; the sum subject to observation will amount to £.21,035,573, beiig on 
the average £.1,314,723. . 
In the five first years after the passing of the Act, namely 1794-5 to 1798-9, the 
* faéilities given by it were not ina very great degree employed; the average of the 
Imports: sold‘ in those -years- amounted to £.617,365; but from the mecasures 
‘adopted by the Bengal Government, in allowing the Merchants in India to make 
» their Consignments on: India=built Shipping, combined with those taken by the Court 
‘of Directors in 1802, the average of the next nine years, 1799-1800 to 1807-8, 
amounted to £. 1,780,234. In the year 1808-9 this Trade became depressed, and 
the Sale Amount in that year was only £. 797,229; but ia the year 1809-10 it rose 
-again, and amounted to £. 1,129,408. 

_On-the average of the. 16 years, 1794-5 to 1809-10, the goods sold in Privilege 
Trade have been shewn to amount to £. 1,314,000. The average of the Company's 
Trade from India in this view, for the same period, was £. 2,656;000 ; the difference, 
£. 1,342,000, is the Amount in which the Sale Produce of the Company's Indian 
‘Trade exceeded that of the Privilege Traders. 


As the average Sale Amount of the Company’s Goods considerably exceeds that of 
former years, and.as the Privilege Trade existed but in a small degree antecedent to 
‘the year 1794-5, it is to be inferred that the effect produced by the facilities granted 
under the Act of 1793, combined with the arrangement of 1801-2, has ‘given em- 
ployment to the Capital of British Subjects in the ‘I'rade from India, in a way to oc- 
¢asion Imports into the Port of London, the Sale Produce of which, in 16 years, 
syielded the sum of £.21,035,573- A great part of this may fairly-be claimed as a 
clear advai tothe Country, and rescued from Foreign channels into which it 
sould probably have been directed. , 


It is scarcely practicable to ascertain with accuracy what effect has been produced 
‘in the Export Trade from England by these facilities. The Tonnage engaged out- 
ward was net a third part of that homeward, but the increase of the former, shewn 
in the last eight years of the Account, leads to a belief that the increase in the Exports 
-must have been in some degree proportioned. to that of the Imports. 


. Adverting to the whole Amount of the Tonnage furnished and,paid for by the 
Company antecedent to the year 1802:upon the od Gs plan, and from 1803 to « 
1810, when the Extra Shipping was introduced by the Court of Directors, inorder to 
~examine the effect of the New Arrangements, as applicable to the Finances of the 
“Company, Your Committee find that the Tonnage furnished outward and home- 
sward in the first period amounted to 31,669 tons, for which was paid by the. 


ibid. 


«Company the sum of £. 741,254, and that they received £. 648,348; making a Loss Appendix, Ne 46, 


sef £. 92,906, or about 12 per cent. The ‘Tonnage furnished in the second period 
was 60,515 tons, for which was paid £.1,281,740, and received, £. 962,933 ; making 
-a Loss of £.348,807, or nearly 25 per cent. 


- The alteration in the mode of Supply has enhanced the loss to the Company in a 
-double-ratio, notwithstanding: the Slipping is understood to be of a description in- 
ferior to the regular Shipping, 

Whether the provisions made by the Act of 1793 for the enlargement of the 
Privilege ‘Trade were-fulfilled, or more than fulfilled in the subsequent practice, as is 
alleged cn one side, or whether they were not fulfilled, asis alleged on the other, is a 
yestion which Your Committeé have not thought it within their province to decide. 
he consideration of thisimportant subject is connected with a variety of cireum- 
stances arising out of.the state of public affairs during the whole of the period, as 
well the effects of almost unremitting war, as the extraordinary obstacles opposed to 
commerce by the Government of France in the course of the last five years ; nor must 
it in justice be assumed, that if the Commercial and Political relations of ee 

5x cn 


hy 


446 Fourth REPORT fromthe Select Committee on the 


Private Trape, been during this period under the influence of peace, a very considerable portion of 


&e. 


AprRoeRtations, 


Appondix, No 18, 


the Foreign ‘Trade with India would not have continued im. its jormer and natural 
channels. That the experiment has succeeded, even under these unfavorable cir- 
cumstances, cannot be doubted, if the ‘Tonnage employed in the Trade and the Sale 
Amount of the Goods imported may be taken as the criterion, : 


But notwithstanding the success of the Act may be contended for in this point of 
view, the proceedings in the year 18u2, and the various documents laid upon the 
Table of the House, both before and subsequent to that period, imply that the 
facilitics in this Trade ad not been dispensed in ‘a manner to afford satisfaction to 
those concerned init. Among the complaints on the part of the Private Merchants at 
an early period, those felating to the rate of Freight,-and the remedy furnished by 
the Court of Directors, have already been noticed: — In addition to these, the general 
resirictions belonging to the node of management by the Company, as the time of 
ing the Tonnage, the payment of Freight in advance, the assortments of Cargoes, 
pericds of Sailing, deviations for Political purposes,.and other causes which Your 
Couunittee refrain trom minutely detailing, appear to have been the principal matters 
of dissatisfaction. 


A: subject of this magnitude being thus already before the House, the attention of 
Your Conmmittee was naturally drawn to it, and though: not competent to pronounce 
any opinicn upon it, did not feel it consistent with. their duty, or what might be the 
expéctations of the House, to pass by it without notice. They have therefore, as far 
as appeared within the line of their functions, endeavoured to collect such informa- 
tion iu respect to it as might assist the House.in forming its own judgment. For 
this purpose some Gentlemen engaged in the Trade have been examined upon the 
leading points referred to. ‘The Court of Directors of the East India Company were 
pertuitted to offer their observations upon the complaints and the evidence in support 
of them, and the Privilege Traders were further allowed to reply to the observations 
of the Court. 


Copies of the Evidence so taken, ‘and of the Observations adverted to, are in- 
serted in the Appendix. These documents, combined with those already upon the 
‘Fable of the House, appear in the opinion of Your Committee to embrace the most 
material points applicable to the subject, and to exhibit the general grounds on which 
the Privilege Traders rest their complaints, and the replies of the parties to whoin the 
occasion of them was imputcd. 


‘The various causes to which the failure of the Cash Resources of the Home 
Treasury is attributable, with the further expected Demaids upon this Treasury, by 
the transfer of the Debt of India, having been already brought to the attention of the 


“House, and the measures adopted by Parliament to enable the Company to meet 


the pressure as far as it has been hitherto ascertained, Your Committee proceed to 
examine how far the transactions of the Home Treasury are in conformity to the 


directions of the Act of 1793, by which they were to be regulated. a 


‘The labor of Your Committee in this respect has been considerably assisted by the 
Order of the House of the 15th March 1811, for an Account intituled “ An Account 
* of the Net Procceds of the East India Company's Sales of Goods at home, with 
“ the Duties and Allowances arising from Private Trade, and all other Profits of’ 
“ the said Company in Great Britain, after providing for the paymeit of Bills of 
Exchange accepted by the suid Company, as the some have become due; and for 
“ the current payment of other Debts, Interests and other Outgoings and Expenses 
“ of the said Company (their Bond Debt always excepted) from the year1793 to 
“ the present time, distinguishing cack year, and specifying how much of the said 
“ Net Proceeds have been applied in each year in payment, Lirst, of a Dividend 
“ of £.10 per cent. per annum on the Capital Stock of the said Company: Secondly, 
* of £.500,000 per annum for the reduction of the Company's Debt in India to 
“ the sun of £.2,000,600 Sterling: Lhirdly, of a sum of £. 500.000 per annum 
« into the Receipt of His Majesty's Exchequer : and Fourthly, in further reduction 
« of the said Company's Debts in India and at home;-in augmentation of the said 
<< Company's Diviuend; in providing a sum of £. 12,000,000 as a Guarantee Fund 
« for the Company's Capital Stock ; and whut Surplus thereof, after the Payments 

. -  *-gorementiond, 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 4a7 


« gforementioned, have been paid into His Majesty's Exchequer, and placed to the Atrnorniarioxs. 
“ account of the Consolidated Fund, as the property of the Public in full right ; ST 
* according to the words and provisions of the Act 33 Geo. LIL. cap. 53. sect. 1115” 

which Account was presenteu, and ordered to bi printed on the 29th March 1811. 


Your Committee consider this Account as a general reply to the question proposed, 
and will only add such observations as are suggested by the examination of it. As 
the title-of this Account details all the Appropriations directed by the Act referred to, 
it only remains to enquire in what degree these Appropriations have been carried 
into effect. : 


‘The detail of this Account is principally extracted from that of the Statement of 
:the Cash Transactions, and’is drawn up exclusive of any Receipt-arising outdf the 
Credit of the Company. This mode of ‘Statement is conformable to the object in 
wiew, and to the literal directions of the Act. 


The Payment directed to precede all others, after the liquidation of ths Demands, 
-as described in the Act, Outgeings, and Expenses, is that of the Dividends; an 
Enactment, made no.doubt under the proviso that Funds should exist for the liquida- 
tion of the Demands first mentioned, antecedent to this Payment: although it is to be 
remarked that there is no restriction preventing the Company from paying the Divi- 
-dends from any other source whatever, in the event of the I'unds enumerated iv the 
Act proving in any:one ycar insuflicient for the discharge of the current Demands. 


Taking the aggregate Receipts and Payments of current Demands from 1793 to 
1810, there,will appear a Surplus in the Receipts, after the liquidation of all the 
Demands in question, in.some years, to. very considerable Amount; in others to an 
Amount exceeding that of the Dividends ; but in the years 1801-2, 1803-4, 1804-5, 
1806-7, and 1807-8, it was otherwise. It might be argued that the Payment of the 
Dividends in these years is not in literal conformity with the stipulations of the Act; 
Your Committee therefore think it their duty to observe, that a satisfactory justifica- 
tion of the Payment will be furnished by a consideration of the circumstances in which 
the Company stood at the period at which it occurred. That the actual Cash Funds 
-of the Company were then below the Amount required cannot be disputed, but the 
cause of it must in justice be adverted to; Monies had been advanced by the Com- 
pany in India and Europe, om account of the ‘Public, to a very considerable Amount. 
Had their Demand upon this account, which, according to their own shewin, 
amounted in 1801 to £. 2,672,400, and in 1803 to £.3,573;339, been Tiquidated, 
their Treasury would have been amply replenished, and the Deficiency in those 
years prevented.. Even in 1803-4 the. re-payment made was only in the sum of 
_£-1,000,000, and in the following they received nothing, notwithstanding the Debt - 
-of the Public to the Company had increased to £.4,018,000. In the year 1805-6, ” Tid. 
-oua Report of Your Committee, a Million was voted to the Company in part Fiqui- 
-dation of tueir claim, and the Surplus Receipt exceeded the sum required for pay- 
ament of the Dividend ; but in the next year, notwithstanding a further vote of a 
Million, 2 Deficiency again appears, and in the year 1807-8 the Surplus ‘of the Pay- 
"ments beyond the Receipts was very considerable. ‘At this’ period the claim of the’ - 
“Company is stated at £.2,460,000. In the year 1808-9 Your Committee having Ibid, 
made a final examination of these Claims, the sum of £.1,500,000-was voted by the 
House, and a Surplus Receipt was accordingly produced in a largé Amount in that 
and the following years. From the above explanations it: is clear that every sup- 
posed departure from the direct letter of the Act, in these instances, is tobe imputed 
to the disappointments experienced by the Company in the recovery of their Claims 
on advances for the Public Service. ‘The remarks already made relate principally 
to the particular years in which, from the causes now assigned, the Surplus Proceeds 
were not such as to enable the Company fiterally to comply with the prescriptions of 
the Act. This however is not, in the opinion of Your Committee, the fair way of con- 
ssidering the injunctions of the Act, which have rather a view to the egeregate Proceeds 
" than to those of particular years; and if the conclusion is drawn from the aggregate, 
it will appcar that those Injunctions have been literally obeyed. ‘The Receipts : : 
amoun d to £.115,060,576, and the Payments to £. 101,327,685; leaving a Surplus Appendix, N* 48, 
‘of Funds, amounting to 2. 13,741,891, applicable to the Payment of Dividends on ~~ 
the Capital Stock. The Sum paid on this uccount amounted to £. 10,636,845 5 
leaving £.3,105,046 for other Appropriations directed under the Act, the Act of 
. which | 


Appendix, N* 23. 


448 Fourth REPORT from the Select Committee on the’ 


Arrxopniatioxs. Which is the payment of ‘Bills of Exchange drawn in liquidation of Indian Debt, 
to the annual extent of £. 500,000. 


The sum paid in the year 1793-4 was £.1,008,637, and in 1794-5 £. 933,095 ; 
together £. 1,941,732; excecding in these two years what was apparently allowed 
by £.941,732, and exceeding .the Surplus Receipt, after paying the Dividends, by 
£. 883,551. In order to account for this circumstance, Your Committee have 

251Geo. IIL ¢.52. referred to the beginning of the section of the Act now under consideration, and find 
sect, 111. that payment was directed to be made of Bills already accepted by the East India 
Company, as well as of other Appropriations ; but if it had not been:so enacted, an 
-obligation rested upon the Company for the payment of these Bills, which in March 
Ayrendix, N 23. 1793 amgunted to £.2,452,300, including upwards of £. 1,300,000 on the Indian 
Debt. It is evident, therefore, that some inadvertence must have occurred in 
framing the Act, if the Amount of the Appropriations after payment of the Divi- 
dends on.the Capital Stock, and all other Demands,’ Outgoings, &c. was intended to 
be governed by the estimated Amount of net Prdceeds,laid before Parliament pre- 
See Account or- Viously to the passing of the Act.. ‘These Proceeds or Profits were then calculated at 
dered to Le printed the sun of £. 1,239,241; under an understanding that the Surplus Revenues of India 
1793, would steadily contribute the sum of £.1,000,000-annually to produce :them, as 
l.c. 52. assumed in the Act. A Surplus Revenue actually existed at that time in India, and 
continued during the years 1793-4,-1794-5, 1795-6 and 1796-7, but the general 
demand of Funds tor condacting the Company's Affairs, and particularly. for, the 
exigencies of War, su operated in addition to the amount required for the ulterior 
Appropriations, that the Deficiency of Funds to carry into effect the Provisions of the 
Act as to the Payment from the. ‘net#Proceeds, was felt in the very first year. “This 
event was in fact anticipated by thé Act of the 33d, cap. 47. for increasing the 
Capital Stock, and in the following year that Deficiency so operated as to induce 
the Act of the 34th, enlarging the extent of the Bond Debt. It is not thought 
necessary to’ make any remarks on the Excess of payment of Bills in some other 
years. In two years only it was to any considerable Amount, and on the average 
from 1795-6 to 1809-10, the Paynient was much below the Amount prescribed. 
The average Payment on the whole period was at the rate of £. 439,534 per annum. 
3* Report, p.362. Your Committee have already remarked, in their Third Report, on the subject of 
the ne drawn for the liquidation of the Indian Debt, to which they beg to refer 

«the House. 


t 
Appendix, N° 6. 


‘The last column of this Account is termed Government for Participation, and 
velates to the payment to be made by the Company into His Majesty's Exchequer, 
sagreeably to the stipulation of the Act of the 33d. cap, 52. sect. 111. the more parti- 
-cular consideration of which was deferred in a former part of this Report. 


This stipulation was founded on an agreement between His Majesty's Govern- 
ment and the East India Company, that the Public were eventually entitled toa 
-certuin portion ef the Profits accruing to the Company from the. prosperity of their 
Revenve and Commerce. According to the mode of calculation laid down in the 
Act, this conditional Participation could accrue only from the following seurces, viz. 
:from the Surplus remaining of the net Proceeds of the Sales of Goods at home, from 
:the Duties and Allowances arising by Private Trade, and from all ether Profits of the 
Company in Great Britain, after providing for the payment of Bills of. Exchange 
already accepted; for the current Payment of ether Debts, Interest, and other 
Outgoings, Charges and Expenses; (the Bead Debt computed in another part of the 

-clause at £. 1,500,000 always excepted) for a Dividend on the Capital Stock at 10 per 
-cent. per annum, ‘increased to 103; and lastly, for Bills of Exchange in liquidation of 
sthe Debt contracted in India, to the extent of £. 500,000 per annum. Provision 
having been made for these several Payments, the annual sum payable to the 
Public in the way of Participation, was fixed at £. 500,000, to be set apart hali- 
yearly, on the 1st July and the 1st January in cach year, beginning with July 1793. 
Provisions were likewise made in the Act to ensure punctuality in the payment of 
sthese sums into His Majesty's Exchequer ; but it was enacted, that in the event of a 
Deticiency in the Amount of- the Proceeds (after making the Payments to which 
-precedence was given) arising from extraordinary Expenses incurred in time of war, 
-or preparations for war, or from cireumstances incidental to war, that the 
Deficiency or Deficiencies were net to be made good from the Surplus of the 
‘future year or years, but were to be dtectned a Debt to be made good to the Public 
sat the determination of the exclusive ‘Trade of the Company, in case their ene 
Assets: 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, 449 


Assets should be more than sufficient for the payment of all their just Debts, and for Arrrorntations, 
making good the value of the Capital Stock, rated at £.200 for every £.100 of © © ~~ 
such Stock. 


The Payments shewn in the years 1793-4 and 1794-5, from having been made 
when a Deficiency of-Funds for the purpose, according to the privciple of Participa- 
tion laid down, is fully apparent, Your Committee think it right to state to the 
House, that a reference to the 124th section will furnish an explanation of the trans- 
action, by shewing that the Payment was specifically directed to take place antecc- 
dent to the addition of the £ per cent. to the Dividends of the Capital Stock, and that 
it must be considered to have been made from the Balance of Cash in the hands of the 
Company, distinct from their net Proceeds of the year. 


As to the Sources from which the Participation of the Public was to be derived, 
namely the Surplus Proceeds, &c. as described in the beginning of the section, Your 
Committee cannot avoid reverting to the Estimates on which this arrangement was 
evidently founded, and again remarking that the Supply of a Million annually from 
the Surplus Revenue in India, as directed in the 107th section, must have been 
assumed as the basis of the expectations then held out to the Public, because it seems 
clear that the Surplus Proceeds in contemplation by the 111th section of the Enact- 
ment, were in reality the combined Profit derived from Revenue and Commerce. 
And this conclusion is further supported by provision being nade for failure of payment 
in the event of a Deficiency of Surplus Proceeds happening from war. As the Deft- 
ciency which has in fact existed from the time of passing the Act, is to be ascribed to 
the wars in Thdia and Europe, no further Payment has been made to the Public under 
the directions of the Act, but Your Committee observing that in some years a Surplus 
of Funds is shewn in the Account notwithstanding the war ye making the payments 
for Dividends, and on Bills of Exchange for Indian Debt) have thought it necessary 
to ascertain and to state to the House the causes why payment was not made on the 
Participation in such years. 


The Payments stipulated by the Act considerably excecded the Funds in the first 
year from which such Payments were to be made, consequently recourse was had to 
Funds that could on no consideration be looked upon as Profit, the only source from 
which the Proceeds described could be derived. ‘The excess of Payment thus made 
was supplied by Monies raised by the Company, either on new Capital or on Bond, in 
excess of the £.1,500,000, to which that Debt was then limited, and became a Debt 
ayable from the net Proceeds, taking priority of the public claim to Participation. 
The Deficiency ef Funds for the liquidation of this claim is shewn by an Account 
inserted in the Appendix. Appendix, Ne 4p. 


From a variety of circumstances therefore, but chiefly from those consequent upon 
war, the net Proceeds of the Company's Treasury in Great Britain have not been 
sufficient for the payment of the Participation to the Public according to the Act, and 
with the exception of the sum of £. 500,000 paid in the manner above described, the 
whole has fallen in arrear, and become a Debt due by the Company under the 122d 
section, subject however to the reservation contained in the Act as to the liquidation 
of it, that is “ in the event only of the Company's General Assets amounting in 
“ value to more than sufficient for the payment of all their just Debts and the reali- 
“ zation of their Capital Stock.” . 


Your Committee, in their Third Report, stated the direct effect which had been  Bataxce or 
produced upon the Barance or Proverry in India by the various Cash Transactions. Prorznry. 
A similar course has been pursued in this Report, with respect to those in China and 34 Report, page 
St. Helena, and it was intended to have given the same view as to the effect of the 35s. 
Transactions of the Treasury at home ; but as the object in the latter respect will be 
more satisfactorily attained by viewing them in connection with the other branches 
of the Company’s affairs, with which they are so closely involved as to render it 
scarcely practicable to make the requisite distinctions, they will here exhibit merely 
a Comparison of the Debts and Assets of the Home Concern separately, on the 1st 
March 1793, and on the 1st March 1810, as shewn by the Statement in the Appendix, Appendix, Ne 23, 
with such adjustments as are necessary, 


5Y¥ 7 The 


450 Fourth REPORT -from the Select Committee on the 


BALaNce OF ‘Tbe Debts owing by the Company on the 1st March 1793, 
Proviniy. amounted to - - - - - - -£. 10,983,518 


Deduct, due to the Annuitants, being the East India 
Annuities transferred to the Bank - - - 2,992,440 
—_—_— 
Net Amount of Debts at Home, on 1st March 1793 - £- 7,991,078 
The Amount of Dcbts on 1st March 1810, is stated to have 
been + - - - - = e = - 10,357,088 


So that the Increase of Debt was - - - - £. 2,366,010 


Of which, £.1,700,000 was in Bonds, and .£. 200,000 borrowed of the Bank: 
‘The additional current Debt on the whole of the enlarged Concern is therefore 
£. 406,010. 


‘The value of Assets on the 1st March 1793, is shewn to have 
amounted to - - - 2 = bg = - £.13,176,904 
Deduct, the part -of. India Annuities as 
above - : - - - - £. 2,992,440 
Sundry Claims of Government, written off 
under directions of Act 33° cap. 52. 


sect.127 = - - - * 443,632 
3,436,072 
Net Amount of Assets on 1st March 1793 - - - £. 9,440,832 
——— 


The value of the Assets on the 1st March 1810 is stated at £. 14,504,944. 
Deduceting from it their Amount on. the 1st March 1793, there will be an Increase in 
the sum of £.4,764,112. The Increase thus shewn, however, calls for some 
observation and adjustment. 


The value of ‘Assets under the head of Goods in. the Warehouse unsold in each 
of the periods, is computed on Estimate governed by the sale price at the time, and 
conscquently includes the Profit after defraying all Charges. As the value of goods at 
the latter period very considerably exceeded at the former, the computed Profit 
on the 1st March 1810 was likewise much greater. The excess amounted to 

Appendix, X° 50. _£. 998,000, and should be deducted from the Increase of the Assets, because, although 
it may fairly be assumed as a future available Profit, it has no immediate reference to 
the Cash proceedings of the period. Credit is likewise taken for the sum of 

Appendix, N°23. £. 960,000 as a claim upon Government for Stores supplied, Advances, &c. This. 
article cannot but be considered as disputable, if not wholly objectionable, if reference 
is had to the Balance settled and paid after the Report of Your Committee in 1808, 
although it may not from its connection with the Disbursements, be excluded in the 
view to be now given. Deducting therefore the increased Amount of the Profits, viz. 
£- 998,000, from the additional Amount of the Assets as above shewn, the Increase in 
the period will be reduced to £.3,766,112. The Increase of the Debts has been 
shewn to amount to £. 2,366,010, consequently an improvement would at first view 
be apparent in the sum of £.1,400,102. The Money raised in the year 1793 upon 

Appendix, N° 22. Capital Stock, to the amount of 2,027,295, though included in the Cash Receipts, is 
not so in the Debts owing by the Company, as now stated. ‘The effect of this Receipt 
will fall more properly under consideration with that of the combined operations of 
the whole Concern upon the Balance of Property generally. 


5* Report, p. 368, | On the comparison madedn the last Report of the state of the Company’s affairs in 
India on the 3oth April 1792 and the goth April 1809, as shewn by ‘the Amount of 
the Debts and Assets at the two periods, it was stated that the Debts had increased 
in the sum of £. 20,905,194, and that the Assets were more at the latter period by 
£. 8,298,666. consequently, that the general Balance in India appeared more un- 

Toid. favorable in the sum of £. 12,606,528. The Result thus produced was calculated 
as confined to the application of Indian Fands alone, excluding from the Assets 
the value of Goods and Stores ascertained to have been furnished .by ‘Disburse- 

Appendix to ments in England. The -sums deducted in the first period upon this Account 

3¢ Report, N°2. amounted to 7.963,103, and in the latter to £. 2,249,060, after deducting from.eack 
sum the 10 per cent, charged.on the Invoice Amount. In order to give an accurate 

view 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 451 


view of the whole Concern, the difference between these two suns, namely £. 1,285,957, Baraxce or 
should be deducted from the Result first shewn; so that the unfavorable Balance of | Pxoreaty. 
the Indian Account may then be stated at £.11,320,571. The Balance in favor of ans 
the Company at China in the year 1792 amounted to £687,906. In the year 

1809 it was £. 1,306,606, being an improvement of £.618,700. ‘The Balance of St. Appendix, 


Helena in the year 1792 was in favor £. 40,824; in 1S09 it was £.147,62g N® 15 and 16. 
being an increase of £.106,805 ; but deducting £. 6,172, the 10 per on the Ibid. 
European goods in Warehouse, £. 100,633. No Account is given for Prince of 

Wales Island for 1792, but a Balance is stated for 1809, aimounting to £.215,786. Appendix, Ne 16. 
A Balance is also stated at the Cape of Good'Hope of £.14,085. ‘The ‘Total of Ibid, 


these several improved Balances is £.949,204, to which adding the improvement 
of the Home Concern, as lately shewn, viz. £. 1,400,102, the Total will then be 
£. 2,349,306. Deducting this sum from the Result exhibited above for India, it would 
appear that during the periods under examination, the Gencral Balance of the 
Affairs of the Company became less favorable in the sum of £. 8,971,205; but 
inasmuch as the Company raised Money for their gencral purposes by increasing 
their Capital Stock, the Amount so raised, viz. £. 2,027,295, though not included in the Appendix, N° 22. 
Debts, should be added to this General Balance from having contributed to the in- 
crease of the Assets: it will then appear, that on the comparison of the Accounts 
sto Debts and Assets abroad and at home at the periods under exzmiuation, the 
state of the Affairs of the Company on this view is less favorable by £. 10,998,560. 


Before the particular circumstances to which this apparent defalcation may be at- 
tributed are examined, it will be desirable to try the accuracy of the Result itself, by 
opposing it to'that produced by a comparison of the Accounts of Stock by Computa- 
tion, drawn up in England for the two periods, which have been added to the Appea- Appendix, N@15 
dix, calculated upon-the principles adverted to ina former part of this Report. & 16. 


‘Fhis Account -comprizes the whole of the Affairs of the Company both abroad 
and at home. It is drawn up annually to the 1st March, taking in the Balance of the 
Foreign Accounts, and making such adjustments as are suggested by the circumstances 
at home, or the Advices from-abroad. It is in fact the most accurate view that can be 
taken of the state.of the whole Concern at the time of drawing it up, and has been 
usually moved.forin Parliament, with an exclusion of the Capital Stock, from the im- 
“pression that Money. so advanced cannot be deemed a Debt, as not creating a liability 

“to demand; .and also that whatever might be forthcoming in the event of the winding 
<up of the Concern, must be furnished fom the General Balance of Property after li- 

quidating all just Debts. The Application of the Money so raised is another question, 
and has been so considered, 


On the 1st March.1793, ‘the ‘Balance is shewn to be in favor to the Amount of 
-£-1,956,866. On the 1st March 1810, it wes against the Company in the sum of Appendix, N° 15, 
.4- 6,025,505 3; shewing the state of the Concern,in amore unfavor- Appendix, N° 16, 
able view by - - - - - = = = $7,982,371 

To account for the difference from the Result before shewn, the 

adjustments to be made are as follow: 
Deduct: Sums written off the Assets of 1793 - = - 443,632 ‘Act 83¢ Geo. III. 

cap. 52. sect, 127. 


Remains = £ 7.538,739 

To which add computed ‘Profit on Goods, as in the other view £. 
Also net adjustment of Indian Stock Accounts, by deducting 
from Debts, Arrears, &. and from Agsets, Revenue Balances, 

Se. maling the Balance in 1792 more: unfa- “Appendix to 
vorable by - - - 2s - £1,543,41 . sient 

Balance‘in 1810, D® Set est y ier a xs : Resa * Any 8 % 

Difference + £957,855 

sIncrease-on.Advances for Investments = = - 122,506 

; 7 : £- 1,080,361 

‘Deduct: Treasure in‘ transitu between Madras 

sand Bengal, not included in Quick Stocks of 
@ither place + 5 5 = = + 717,561 Ibid. 
“——--___- 362,800 


Toid. 


peaseteiaties 
Total - — £1,360,800 


BaLance or 
PROPERTY. 


Appendix, N° 51. 


Appendix, N® 59, 


452 Fourth REPORT from the Sclect Committee on the 


Adding this Total to the sum above stated, will increase it to the sum of £. 8,899,539- 
to which adding the sum raised in Capital Stock, viz. £. 2,027,295. also the 10 per 
Cent. deducted from the increase of European Exports in Warehouse in. India and 
at St. Ilelena, amounting to £. 135,767, the variation of Property in this view, will 
then appear to have amounted to the sum of £. 11,062,591, exceeding that before 
shewn in the sum of £. 64,031; which arises partly from adjustments in the Account 
made up at home, found necessary by advices from abroad of a later date than the 
Quick Stock Accounts, and irom corrections in the Quick Stock Accomnt 
at Bengal after March 1810, from which the view first given was drawn, by 
which a more favorable Balance was exhibited at that Presidency, in the sum of 
£-42,025. 


The Amount to be properly assumed as that in which the General Balance of the 
Affairs of the Company has become more unfavorable during the period under 
exansination, is the Result last stated, with the deduction of £. 42,025. The sum to 
be accounted for will therefore be £. 11,020,566. 


Tu endeavoring to account for the alteration of the Balance which has thus been 
ascertained, Your Committee cannot avoid stating that they do not undertake the task 
with the same degree of confidence as they would have done could their conclusions 
have been supported throughout by actual Accounts. In a material branch of this 
enquiry they have been obliged to content themselves with Estimates, the necessity 
of which they trust they have satisfactorily shewn in a former part of the Report. 
‘The same necessity now exists in an equal degree, as the Result of the Commercial 
Affairs can only be drawn upon that principle. - 


‘The connection between the Political and the Commercial branches of the Concern, 
being so strict as to render.it wholly impracticable to make a proper distinction, 
Your Committée have divided the subject into three heads, viz. Territorial or Political; 
doubtful as to the part Territorial or Commercial ; and Commercial; and from the 
consideration that it would be the most intelligible manner of bringing it into view, a 
Statement has been drawn up and added to the Appendix, shewing the various 
Charges classed under the above heads respectively. As the detail of the items so 
classed have becn selected from the mass of the Accounts in the Appendixes of this 
and former Reports, and have.for the most part already been the subject of remark, 
the only observations now requisite are those which relate to the combination 
proposed. 


The extent in which the Political branch of the Affairs has contributed to produce 
the Balance, is stated at the sum of £. 6,364,931; which sum results from adding to 
the Surplus Charge of India every other positive expense belonging to the Territories 
which had not -been included in tHe Accounts of Revenues and Charges annually 
presented to the House, being in the greatest part Disbursements made in England, 
cither by His Majesty's Paymasters General for the troops serving in India, or by the 
Company at home for Freight of Military, or the expense considered to have becn 
incurred under this head, ~ ~ 


The Charge of the Settlements of Prince of Wales Island, Bencoolen, and 
St. Helena in a small degree, has been blended in the Territorial Accounts with the 
other Charges, and was defrayed mostly by Supplies from Bengal. ‘Ihe Amount so 
cartied to Account was £.2,817,146. It being very questionable whether these 
Settlements are more requisite for Political or Commercial objects, the above sum has 
becn deducted from this head and added to the second. The excess of Political 
Charge or Expense is exhibited at £.14,936,230. A considerable part of this sum 
consisted of Supplies and Advances for the Public Service, and in the expense of 
Expeditions, for which, upon an agreement with His Majesty's Government, the 
Company were to be reimbursed. The adjusted Amount of repayments in Cash, in 
Advances by the Paymasters General, &c. is stated at £. 8,571,299, and the net 
Excess of Political Charge is then £.6,364,931, as before shewn. 


The Total of the part termed Doubtful as to its application, is £.5;953,660. On 
this head it is only necessary to remark, that an adjustment has been made in the 
Supplies to Bencoolen, St. Helena, &c. from its having been discovered thatthe sa 

ol 


Aifairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 453 


«of the Charges and Losses at St. Helena had been brought to account inthe next Baraxce oy 
article, at the sum of £.1,046,653, the Result produced by the adjustment of the  Prorgrry, 
10 per cent. on the Exports from England, The part ef the Supply which was from ae 
India, being £.131,406, is deducted accordingly. Appendix, Ne 53, 


The Dead Stock abroad having been increased by the employment of either ‘the 
Indian or the [ome Funds, the Money so-employed should be brought to account. 
“The Total Increase in India is £. 862,992, and at St. Helena £. 58,698, which sums 3¢ Report to 
respectively are the net Ameunt, after deducting 10 per cent. on the part supposed to Appendix, N° 95, 
‘be invoiced from.Europe. Appendix, Ne 21, 


The combination of these several sums will produce, under the heads of Political 
‘Charge, Doubtful, and Increase of Dead Stock, the sum of £. 13,240,281, excecding 
the difference to be accounted for by £. 2,219,715. It is obvious this excess must 
have been provided for by an excess of Income or Profit upon the Commerce. 


The enquiry into the manner in which this provision has been made will afford an 
‘opportunity of carrying into cffect the intention mentioned in a former part of the 
Report, of furnishing some view of the Result of the whole of the Commercial Concerns 
of the Company abroad and at home. ‘That this view must be chiefly hypothetical 
or given upon estimate has already been shewn. The first sum exhibited under the 
‘Commercial head is the adjusted Receipt.on the Sales of Goods, after taking into view 
what was due at the conclusion of the period. ‘The net sum which is thus added to 
the Commercial Receipt is £. 700,097, which is for the most part to be attributed to 
the Receipt of Balances due on former Sales. ‘The Profit on the Sales of Goods 
from India and China is shewn from the Estimate of it, and after deducting the differ- 
ence on the Exchange of Bills for reasons before explained, is stated at £.20,438,159. 
adding to this sum the Charges and Profit on Private Trade, the Interest on the 
Annuities, the Net Profit at China, and the Profit on Sales ef Export Goods ia India, 
calculated on the actual cust of them, that on Stores not being stated ; the Total then 
is £.24,800,785, subject in the first place to deductions for the part of the Profit 
derived on the Sale of Spices from the Eastern Islands agreed to be paid to the ye p, 
Government, for which credit was given by the Company in their General Account Appendix, N*4. 
with the Public, and for the Loss sustained by the delivery of Saltpetre to the Board Appendix, Ne 30. 
of Ordnance. These articles, amounting together to £. 860,084, reduce the Profit 
to £.23,940,701, from which deducting the Commercial Charges paid in India, not 3¢ Report, 
added to the Invoices, the Net Profit will amount to £. 21,024,422, which added to Appendix, N° 12. 
the Receipts on the Sales of Goods of former years before stated, produces the sum 
of £. 21,724,519, as the Total of the Conzmercial Funds applicable to the payment of 
the further Commercial Charges, the Dividends on Stock and Interest on Bonds, or 
in aid of the other branch of the Concera. 


The other Charges upon the Commerce are shewn under their respective heads 
after deducting. from the Amount actually disbursed under each head, the sums 
carried to account under other heads, and making the adjustments of what was due : 
at the conclusion of the period. The sam thus remaining in the Customs is £.537,168, Appendix, N* 51, 
supposed to be in part chargeable on the Exports. That on Freight is £. 1,986,135, . 
and is to be considered as chargeable to the Exports, to the Loss on supplying ‘Tonnage 
to the Privilege Trade, to the outfit of Ships, “Tonnage and Deck Duties, &c. That 
on Charges General amounts to £. 1,596,096, which includes the Charge on ma- 
naging the Privilege and Private ‘Trade, for which the Company are remunerated by 
@ per centage, as formerly explained. The head of Losses outward and homeward, 
including Freight paid to Owners of lost Ships and Salvage, also-a loss by fire at the Appendix, N° 58. 
Saltpetre Warehouse, amounts to £. 2,543,493, which may torm the ground of Appendix, N° 35. . 
calculating the rate per cent. of the risk sustained by the Company in their Commer- . 
cial Transactions during 17 years. 

The Total of these several sums, including £. 355,190 paid as a remuneration ta Appensix, Ne 22. 
the Captains of Ships worn out, and £.29,620, the net expense of the Almshouses Ibid. 
at Poplar, amounts to £. 7,047,702; and being deducted from the Profits last fiated, 
leaves the sum of £. 14,676,817 as the computed uet Commercial Profits of the 
Company within the period, applicable in the first place to the payment of the 
Dividends to the Proprietors of Capital Stock, and of the Interest on the Bonds, 


amounting to £. 12,512,284. There will then remain a Surplus of Commercial Ibid, 
Profit of £. 2,104,533, which being deducted from £. 13,240,281, the excess stated 
52 under 


454 Fourth REPORT jrom tie Select Commitice on the 


Batawce or under the other heads, leaves the sum of £. 11,075,758, which exccels the sum 
Proverty. required by £.55,192. From the observations already made, no expectation could 
acct be entertained of the probability of accounting for the Balance with absolute precision. 
The necessary combination of estimated with actual Accounts, furnishes a sufficient 
reason for not accurately accounting for the difference which"has beef exhibited ; and 
it may be added, that in Accounts of this nature, involving a Receipt of nearly 365 
Millions Sterling, applied to so many and various descriptions of Service, it is rather 
a matter of surprize that it has been found possible to reach a Result approaching so 
near as that which is here offered to tue House. And with respect to the Result itself, 
it should further be observed, that although the occasion of the excess beyond the 
sum required, might be sufficiently accounted for from the impracticability of ac- 
curately ascertaining the disposal of the Stores exported to India, as adverted to in 
3d Report, p. 362. the Third Report, and consequently the Amount of the Profit as shewn in the present 
Report, and although every Receipt and Disbursement which has. been brought into” 
view is supported by official Documents, Your Comunittce fecl it incumbent to lay 
claim for an indulgent consideration, both of the combination and the conclusion which 
have been submitted by them, in the event of any inaccuracies in either being here- 
after discovered. 


The Result of the whole Financial Transactions of the East India Company during 
the period to which the examination of Your Committee has extended, namely from 
1792-3 to 1808-9 abroad, and from 1793-4 to 1809-10 at home, has been stated 
to exhibit a Deficiency of £. 11,020,556 on the comparison of the Balances at the 
commencement and at the close of it. The causes of this Deficiency have been ex- 
plained to be mostly in the excess of Disbursement beyond the Revenue‘in the ‘Ter- 
ritorial part of the Coucern, which is to be traced to the circumstances of the time 
having been such as to lead to unprecedented Expenditure both from the Indian and 
Home Treasuries. ‘To what extent the Disbursements of the former were affected, 
the Charges sufficiently shew, while the degree in which those of the latter have been 
enhanced, it is extremely difficult to calculate with accuracy, although the Profit 
upon the Trade has been stated to exceed by £. 2,164,533, the Amount required to’ 
defray the Expenses and Losses immediately incident to it, and to pay the Divi- 
sdends on the Capital Stock, with the Interest on the-Bonds, 


Your Committee having referred in their Third Report to considerations that 
scemed, in their judgment, to offer some counter-balance to the sacrifices of Funds 
which had been made, conceive it unnecessary to introduce any additional remarks on 
this head; but aiter calling to the recollection of the House, that the observations 
hitherto made on these extensive and complicated Transactions, and on the Result 
of them, have applied exclusively to the interests of the East India Company, Your 
Committee will procced to submit their view of them in their bearing on the general 
interests of the British Empire, which they trust is such as to lead to Results much 
more gratifying than those which have been exhibited in reference to the separate 
Affairs of the Company. The Invoice value of Goods and Stores exported by the 


Appendix to East India Company to India, China, and St. Helena, between 1791-2 and 1807-8, 
Sd Report, N° 3. was £, 29,244,227 ; deducting the Amount lost and captured, £.28,791,967. There 
Abid, was exported in Bullion in the same period, £.9,434,042. The total Export from 


England, supposed to have arrived between 1792-3 and 1808-9, was therefore 

£.38,226,009. The Returns made by India and China in consignments of Goods, 

‘Appendix, N25. amounted to £.50,754,400. The Charges upen these Goods, not added to the 
; t Repo rs Invoices, may be stated at £. 2,916,279, which will carry the amount of the Returns 
‘Appendix, Ne 12, to the sum of £. 53,670,679. exclusive of £. 1,371,788. lost and captured. On 
dbid. N° 47, which view it will appear that England received in Property from India and China, 
more than was sent, to the Amount of £.15,444,670; but the Result arising out of 

the Transactions of the East India Company alone is susceptible of a very consi- 

-derable addition, if the means existed of examining with equal accuracy the Exports 

and Imports in Privilege and Private Trade. The Amount of the Exports it is not 

practicable at all to ascertain ; neither can the value of the Imports be shewn, other- 

wise than by a general computation governed by the proportion between the Prime 

Cost and the Sale Amount of the Company's Goods. The Sale Amount of the Pri- 

vilege and Private Trade and Neutral Property was £. 37,794,857, the Prime Cost of 

avhich may ‘de calculated at £. 20,700,000. How far the purchase of these Goods 

was made by Exports from England, it is not possible to state; but no doubt soe 


Affairs of Tie EAST INDIA COSIPANY, 455 


‘of the purchase of them in this manner having been very considerably below the 
-amount of the Prime Cost now stated. Whatever the Amount of the Exports may 
shave been, the difference between that and the sum of £. 20,700,000. is so much in 
-addition to the Result above shewn, which would be still further enhanced by the 
wemittance of Fortunes known to have'been made in a variety of shapes, from India 
sto England, through extraneous and circuitous channels, to an Amount which there is 
mo possibility of tracing with accuracy. . 


‘Ifthe means were attainable of shewing the Result upon accurate calculations, the 
sadvantages derived to the British Empire would appear to a very large Amount.. ‘The 
-same-difhiculty, however, does not obstruct a Statement of the accession accruing to the 
general circulation, and the benefits derived from it both to India and England. 
Tn] India the industry of the subject has been encouraged and assisted by the cmploy- 
‘ment of forty-six Millions Sterling, or on the annual average £. 2,700,000 in the 
provision of Investments for England. 


The produce and manufactures of India purchased by this sum, combined with 
those of China sold in England, realized in Sale Amount to the extent of nearly one 
Abundred and forty-one Millions Sterling, or morethan cight Millions per annum. The 
general distribution and circulation arising out of this Trade may be stated to have 
been, 

In_the purchase of the Produce and Manufactures of 

England - - - - - - - +  £.29,200,000 
In the employment of British Shipping - oe oe 25,000,000 
In thespayment of Bills of Exchange - - - 24,500,000 
An the purchase of Bullion, the Import of which may be 

supposed to have been in payment for British Pro- 


duce - - - - - ~ 9,400,000 
In disbursement for Home Ch - - - - 11,600,000 
In Dividends to Proprietors ‘of Capital Stock and In- 

terest in Bonds - - - ~ - + - 12,500,000 


‘The Sale of Private Geods and Neutral Property amounted tonearly £. 37,800,000. 
of this sum about four Millions maybe supposed to be included above. If an 
adjustment could be made of the remainder, amounting to £. 33,800,000, the distri- 
bution of it could be precisely defined, 


It has appeared that the Duties on Imports collected through the Company, and 
realized at a very trivial expense to Government, amounted to £.39,300,000, 
and.on Exports to £. 660,000 ; together £. 39,960,000. 


The combination of these several sums, producing £. 185,960,000, shews, that on 
the average of the last 17 years, £. 10,900,000 per annum has been diffused in 
various channels through the whole circulation of the British Empire. By this its 
Manufactures have been supported, encouraged and improved ; its Shipping has been 
dncreased ; its Revenues augmented; its Commerce extended ; its Agriculture pro- 
amoted ; and its Power and Resources invigorated and upheld. ; 


List 


“{ 456 ] 


LIST or raz APPENDIX. 


Wo. 1.—List of the HONG MERCHANTS im the Seasons 1792-3 and 1808-9, and of the 
Establishments of the East India Company at Canton in 1808-9 - - oe Pp. 459. 
No. 2.—Extract GENERAL LETTER from Sout of Difectors. ite SupraCargoes at Canton, dated 
Sth January 1810 -  ~ p- 460, 
No. 3.—An ACCOUNT of the Expenses of is Factory at Canten, gfrom the year zoe to the 
year 1808-9 inclusive. + - ibid. 
No. 4.—An ACCOUNT, shewing the Amount of i Soptis received from the several Presidencies 
and Settlements in India, set ie Factory at Canton, from fhe year ia 2-3 to the year 
1808-9 inclusive = - = p. 461. 
No. 5.—An ACCOUNT, shewing the Amount of all Supplies from the Factory at Canton to the 


several Presidencies and Settlements ia India, ‘trom the year 1792-3 0 the year 1808-9 
inclusive - - - oe - 2 ‘S ibid. 


“No. 6—An ACCOUNT, shewing the Amount of all Supplies received from the Island of 
St. Helena, at the Factory at Centon, oom the > year 1792-5 to pte year 1808-9 


inclusive - oe - - ibid. 
No, 7,—An ACCOUNT, shewing the Amount of all Supplies from the Factory at Canton to the 
Island of St, Helena, trom the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclusive “+ ibid. 


No. 8—An ACCOUNT, shewing the Amountof all Supplies received from England at the Factory 
at Canton, from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclusive - 


No. 9,—An ACCOUNT, shewing the Amount of the Cargoes consigned from the Factory at Canton 
to England, likewise the Amount of all Payments for whieh England i is debited, from 
the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclusive - - - p. 462, 


‘No, 10.—An ACCOUNT of the Amount of all Bills of Exchange drawn upon the Court of Ficcu 
of the East India Compuny by the Suipra-Cargoes at Canton, from the year 1792-3 to the 
year 1808-9 inclusive, in Tales, converted into Sterling at the rate of 65. 8d. each, 
contrasted with the Amount of the Payment of; the be Bille: actually made in Sterling 
Money - °~- - se - - ibid. 


No, 11.—An ACCOUNT of Long Ells, Cloth, Camlets, Lead, ‘Tin, and sundry Articles of British 
*Manufacture, demanded from and exported to inne from 1793 to 1810, both 


inclusive ee es - - - 2 = Op 463. 
No. 12.—Representations from CHINA since 1794, of the Market being ¢ overstocked with Articles the 
produce or manufacture of the United Kingdom - - + p. 464, 
No, 18.—Attempts made since 1794 to introduce NEW ARTICLES into China, those Articles being 
manufactused in the United Kingdom - > = = tp OF 


No, 14.—An ACCOUNT, shewing the Amount of the Charges of the Factory at Cauiton, inso far as 
they have not been added to the Invoices of Goods consigned frem thence; also the 
Amount of the Net Profit or Loss incurred § in the said Factory, — the year 1792-3 
tothe year 1808-9 iyclusive - + eee = p.479. 


No. 15,.—An ACCOUNT of Stock per Computation on 1st March 1793 (exclusive of Capital Stock) 
the Indian Stock Accounts made up to 30th April 1792, and calculated at the rates of 
2s. the Current Rupee, 8s. the Pagoda, 23. Sd. te Bombay Rupee, 5s. theSpanish Dollar, 
and 6s. 8d. theChina Tale - - p. 480. 


No. 16.—An ACCOUNT of Stock per Computation on Ist March 1810 (exclusive of Capital 
Stock) the Indian Stock Accounts made up to $Oth April 1809, and calculated at the 
rates of 2s.the Current Rupee, 8s. the Pagoda, 2s. 3d. the Bombay Rupee, 5s. the Spanish 


Dollar, and 6s. 8d. the China Tale - - p- 482. 
No. 17.—An ACCOUNT of the Revenues and Charges of the Island es St Melena, from the year 
1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclusive a -  p. 484. 


No. 18—An ACCOUNT of the Profit or Loss incurred at the Island of St. Helena, exclusive of 
Rents and Revenues, and of Charges General, — the year 1792: -3 to the year 1808-9 

inclusive - - p. 485. 

No, 19.—An ACCOUNT, shewing the Amount of all Supplies received from England, the several 
Presidencies and Settlements in india and China, at the Island of St. Helena, from the 

year 1792-S to the year 1808-9 inclusive - - - - - - p. 486. 

No. 20.—An ACCOUNT, shewing the Amount of all Supplies made to England, the several Presi- 
dencies and Settlements in India and China, from ely sland of Stu Helena, from the 

year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclusive ~ - - - ibid. 

No, 21.—Aa 


LIST or rue APPENDIX. 437 


‘No, 21.—An ACCOUNT, shewing the Value of the Assets remaining at the Island of St. Helena 
‘on 30th September 1792 and 30th September 1809 respectively, distinguishing those 
Articles usually termed Dead Stock, as Buildings, Plantations, Stores, &c. - pp. 480. 


No, 22,-GENERAL STATEMENT, shewing the Amount of the Proceeds of the Sale of Goods 
and Merchandize of the East India Company in Great Britain, and of their Commercial 
Receipts, Charges, and Payments in Great Britain, under the several Heads thereof, 
for 17 years, from 1793-4 to 2809-10 inclusive - = - - ee p. 487. 


No. 23—-GENERAL STATEMENT of the Bond Debts and Simple Contract Debts of the East 
India Company, the State of Cash in their Treasury, and other Eifects appertaining to 
them in Great Britain and Afloat, on the Ist Merch: in each year, from 1793 to 1810 
inclusive cd le - = ~- ¥ - Pp 4389. 


No. 24.—ACCOUNT of the Sales of the Company’s, the Private Trade, and the Neutral and Prize 
Goods, estimated by the Court of Directors in February 1793 in respect to the first, 
and according to the actual Accounts in each year from 1793-4 to 1809-10 inclusive p.492. 


No. 25.—Estimate of PROFIT and LOSS upon all Goods sold by the East India Company, from 
the year 1793-4 to the year 1809-1810 inclusive; distinguishing India from China, aud 
specifying the Invoice Price, Customs, Freight, and Charges; also the Sale Amount, 
and calculating the Invoice Price at the Exchanges of 2s. the Current Rupee, 8s, the 
Pagoda, 2s. 3d. the Boinbay Rupee, 5s. the Spanish Dollar, and 6s. 8d. the Tale p. 494. 


‘So, 26.—An ACCOUNT shewing the Amount of all Bills of Exchange drawn upon the Court of 
Directors of the East India Company, from the several Presidencies and Settlements in 
India respectively, from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclusive, converting the 
Tndian Currencies into Sterling Money at 2. the Current Rupee, 8s. the Pagoda, 2s. Sd. 
the Bombay Rupee, and 5s. the Spanish Dollar, contrasted with the Amount of the 
Payments of the said Bills actually made in Sterling Money - = =p. 496. 


No. 27.—STATEMENT delivered in by ee Grant, Esq. a Member; of the Committee, on 
16th March 1812 - - p. 498. 


No. 282-An ACCOUNT of Charges General paid in Eagland fom 1798 4 bs 1809-10, distin- 
guished under the several Heads thereof - = + p. 499. 


No, 29,.~ ESTIMATE of Costs, Customs, Freight, Charges, and Profit in England, on Que ans 
Sale of the East India Company’s Goods, made up upon the principle adopted by the Court 
of Directors in their Estimate of 15th February 1793, excepting in the calculation of the 
Foreign Currencies, and the Rate per Cent, for Charges Merchandize in England - ibid. 


No. 30.—An ESTIMATE of the Profit and Loss upon Saltpetre > supplied the Honorable Board of 
Orduance 1793-4 to 1809-10 - = p. 500, 
No. 31.—An ACCOUNT of all Duties postponed by virtue of any Warrant or Order from the Lords 
Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury to the Commissioners of Excise, from the 
last Renewal of the Charter of the East India Company to ead 5th January 1811, and the 
Dates when the same respectively were discharged - - = p. 501. 


No, 32.—-An ACCOUNT of the Duties of Customs collected on Goods imported into Great Britain 
from the East Indies and China respectively, in ithe Righteen Years ending the 5th Ja- 
nuary 1811, distinguishing each year == - = ibid. 


No, 33.—An ACCOUNT of all Duties of Excise collected on Goods imported into Great Britain 
from the East Indies and China, in the Righteen Years ending Sth January 18u1, distin- 
guishing each year (so far as relates to En; land) - p. 502. 
No. 34.—An ACCOUNT of Monies advaneed to-Owners of Ships in India and China, and brought 


to their Debit in their Account in England, from 1793-4 to 1809-10 ; also of Monies so 
advanced not adjusted with theOwners - + 5 = = = ©  p, 50% 


No. 34, (a.) AMOUNT debited Owners in their Accounts of Freight aud Demorage from 1793-4 to 
1809-10, for Goods damaged and wanting Outward and Homeward - -  - ibid, 


No, 35.—An ACCOUNT, shewing the Invoice Amount of all Stores exported by The East India 
Company to their several Presidencies and Settlements in India respectively, and to their 
Factory at Canton, from the Season 1791-2 to the Season 1809-10 inclusive, distin- 


guishing each Season - - - . - p. 504, 
No. 36.—PROFIT and LOSS on Exports to India and 4 Chira, from 1792. 3 to 1808-9 (india) calcu- 
Javed upon the Prime Cost = = = > ibid. 


No. 37,—An ACCOUNT of the Duties of Customs collected on Export Goods exported from 
Great Britain to the East Indies and China respectively, in the Eighteen Years ending 
Sth January 2811, (as far as the same can be made up) distinguishing each year p. 505. 


‘No, 38.—An ACCOUNT of all Sums received by the East India Company on Bills of Exchange 
remitted to them from their several Presidencies and Settlements in India, and their 
Factory at Canton respectively, from the year 1793-4 to Gove 1809-10 inclusive, dis- 
tinguishing each year, and specifying the Department of overament or the Parties 


generally on which the same were drawn - + - = p.506. 
No. 39.—An_ACCOUNT distinguishing the various Heads jconmtataes! nader the Head of Charges 
General, in the year 1809-10 - - - - oe ab p. 508, 


No. 40.—-An ACCOUNT shewing the Amount actually paid by the bat India Company for Interest 
4 on Annuities, Dividends on their Capital Stock, and Interest on the Bonded Debt respec- 
tively, from the year 1793-4 to the ye year 1809-10, distinguishing each year - —p. 509, 

GA No, 41.—Extract 


453 LIST or ruz APPENDIX, 


No. 41.—Extract of MINUTES of Court of Directors, dated 20th January 1795 - i p- 569: 
No. 42.—An ACCOUNT of the Rate of Freight at which Ships » were engaged for India and China 


Outward, Seusons 1796 and 1810. = = s 5 Pp. 510. 
No. 43.—~An ACCOUNT of the Cost and Outfit of a New Ship of 800 Tons ee 3200 Tons respec- 
tively, in the year 1796, for China and for India - - p. 51s. 
No, 44.-~An ACCOUNT of the Cost and Outfit of a New Ship of 800 Tons aud 1,200 Tons respec- 
tively, in the year 1810, for China and for India - - - + ibid. 
No, 45.-SALE AMOUNT of Privilege and Private Trade Goods sold at the East India Company’s: 
Sales, 1793-4 to 1809-10, distinguishing India and China - - - - p. 514. 


No. 46.—ACCOUNT of the Tonnage of Privilege Goods exported and imported to and from India, 
in pursuance of the Act of Parliament of 1793 to 1810 inclusive; the Freight which bas 
been charged Individuals, the Freight paid by the Company for ‘the same, aud the Loss 
they have sustained thereon + - p. 515. 


No. 47.—Further DOCUMENTS respecting the Private Trade.—[This is a SUPPLEMENT to the 
Appendix, and forms a separate Paper.] 


No, 48.—An ACCOUNT of the Net Proceeds of the East India Company’s Sales of Goods at 
Home, with the Duties and Allowances arising from Private Trade, aud all other Profits 
of the said Company in Great Britain, after providing for the Payment of Bills of 
Exchange accepted by the said Company, as the same bave become due, and for the 
Current Payment of other Debts, Interests, and other Outgoings and Expenses of the 
said Company (their Bond Debt always excepted), from the year 1793 to the present 
time, distinguishing each year, and specifying how much of the said Net Proceeds have 
been applied in each year in Payment, first, of a Dividend of £.10. per Lentum 
per Annum of the Capital Stock of the said Company; secondiy, of £. $00,060. 
per Aunum fof the reduction of the Company's Debt in India, to the sum of £.2,000,000. 
Sterling; thirdly, of a.sum of £. 500,000. per Annum into the Receipt of Majesty's 
Exchequer; and fourthly, in fucther reduction of the said Company's Debs i in India and 
at Home; in augmentation of the said Company’s Dividend; in providing a sum of 
.£- 12,000,000. as a Guarantee Fund for the Compeny’s Capital Stock, and what Surplus 
thereof after such Payments afore-mentioned have been paid into His Majesty's 
Exchequer, and placed “to the Account of the Consolidated Fund, as the Property of the 
Public in full right, according to the avers and Provisions of the Act 33d George Hi. 
Cap. 52.Sect.1il.- = 5 ow ban 4 Wr, Fel ee DB IT: 


No. 149--STATEMENT shewing the Deficiency of Funds to make the Payment into His Majesty’s 
Exchequer, directed by the Act of 33d Geo, III, Cap. 52. Sect. 111. from the year 1793-4 
tothe year 1809-10 inclusive, calculated from the Account of Net Proceeds, ordered to 


be printed 29th March 1811 - - = = ee Ue p. 519. 
No. 50.—An ACCOUNT of the Profit estimated to arise on the Goods in Watehouse:s in England on 
the Ist March 1793 and on the Ist March 1810 - - - = ibid, 


No, 51.—STATEMENT accounting for the Balance of the Concerns of the East-India Company, 
between 1792-3 and 1808-9 abroad, « and between 1793-4 and 1809-10 at home, com- 
puted at the sum of £. 11,020,566 ee ee Re op. 520. 


No. 52.—ACCODNT shewing the Amount of Claims of the East-India Company upon the Public, 
on account of Advances and Supplies furnished in England, which were liquidated in 
the year 1797 ; also those admitted by the Select Committee of the House of Commons in 
1808 ; distinguishing the part thereof included in the Charges of the said Company in 


England fromthepartnotsoincluded = = + © - = =  p.d83. 
No. 53.—An ACCOUNT of Supplies from Bengal, Madras, and Bombay, to the Idand of St. Helena, 
from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclusive - - - ibid. 


No, 54.—An ACCOUNT of the Sums paid by the East-India Company for Freight and Salvage to 
the Owners of lost Ships from the year 17. 793-4 to the year 1809-10 inclusive, distinguish 


ingeach year > ~ ~ - ba Pr Set. 
No. 55.—ACCOUNT of Loss sustained by the Company on  Salipette: sconeumed by Fire at 

Shadwell in 1795. - a peas. 
No. 56,—Sale AMOUNT of Rice and Wheat imported by the Company, the Toss upon which was 

made good by Government + © = = ibid. 


“(459 -) 


APPEN DTI X. 


Appendix, No. 1. 


LIST of The HONG MERCHANTS in the Seafons 1792-3 and 1808-9, and of 
the Eftablifhment of the East India Company at CANTON, in 1803-9. 


HONG MERCHANTS, in 1792-3. 


NAMES IN THE COMPANY’S BOOKS. PROPER NAMES. 
Pan Rhegua Z 2 1 2 Tf] Voknown ot the Batt India Houte, 
“Chowqua - = + = = | Suppofed to be Loqua. 
Shy Kia - = = = = 
Geowgua [TT fT) 2 Tp] Unsnown at the Eaft India Houfe. 
ChiTai - - - - - - 
Mowqua - a = S - «= | Mowqua. . 
Yaoqua -  - = + = + | Unknown at the Eaft India House. 
Poigva - = += - + = | Howqua. 
Takes me, Gece ta 3} Unknown at the Eaft India House, 
HONG MERCHANTS, in 1808-9. 
Poan Khequaa - % - ~~ | Unknown at the East India House, 
Mowqua =  - + - = ° = | Mowqua. 
Puiqgua - = > - - = = | Howqua. 
Chanqua = - = = = = | Chunqua, 
Ponqaa =) - = = = = | Ponqua. ~ 
Grewqua- = - - = =< | Guewqua. 
Conieequa - - + = = | Confeequa. 
chin = = = © = + | Loqua. 
Manhop - - - - = = | Manhop. 
Poonequaa- - - = = -= | Poonequa. 
Lyqaa - - - - = = |} Goqua. 
Kinga - - - - = - | Kingua, 
Fatqua- - + - - ~ | Samqua. 
Fonquaa - - - - ~ += | Unknown at the Eaft India Houfe. 


ESTABLISHMENT at Canton, in 1808-9. 


‘Twelve Supra Cargoes. 

Two Servants whofe Writerfhips were expired, but who were not included in the 
Commiffion in the Seafon above-mentioned. 

Five Writers. i 

‘One Infpetor of Teas, 

‘One Ailiftant D®, and 

Two Surgeons, 


Mem.—Meniai Servants are not included in this Lift. 


Eaft India Houfe, 
the 10th March 2812. W. Ranfay, 
Secretary. 


6B 


460 


Appendix te IV" REPORT from the Selc& Committee on 


Appendix, No.. 2. 
Extra&t Generat Letrer to Canton, dated the 5th January 1810. 


Para. 154. TO this Merchants did not 
materially objeét; but contended ftrongly for 
a reduction ef 5 Mace in price of Long 
Ells, afferting that they could only obtain 
7 Tales for what coft them g: that great lofs 
was faftained, which muft ultimately fall on 
Merchants, you did not deny; but you con- 
Gidered it your duty to maintain prefent prices 
of Long Ells; and for this point you contended 
ou piea that confiderable profit ftill remained 
on Teas, and that if Long Ells were to be 
reduced, you mul infijt on Teas being deli- 
vered on lower terms than you propofed. Fux- 
ther arguments ufed on occafion; final ad- 
juttment deferred; but you confider it as 
fettled, that Woollens are to remain at for- 
mer prices; and on receiving only 40,000 
chefts of Winter Teas, Contra price of 
Congou is to be reduced one Tale per Pecul. 


Para. 76. By this intermixture of the trans- 
actions of buying and felling, we are coin- 
pletely in the dark as to the real prices given 
or received for the refpective commodities, 
and confequently are prevented from framing 
a corre& judgment of the true profit or lols 
upon any particular article. 

77. To avoid this in future, we dire& that 
every article bought or fold, be purchafed or 
difpofed of, which ever it may happen to be, 
upon the moft advantageous terms in Money, 
asan independent tranfaction, and that the 
purchafes and fales always fpecify whether 
they are for ready Money or on Credit, in 
order that we may be able to judge whether 
fufficient allowance be made jor the tormer, 
and of the profit or lofs upon every feparate 
article, both of our Exports and Imports. 

78. In our Letter of the 18th January 
1805, Para. 49, we have adverted to the fub- 
jeét of Barter; and in the 37 Para. of our 
Letter of the 12th February 1806, we have 
expreffed ourfelves nearly to the effect con- 
tained in the prefent Para.; we have alfo 
again had under confideration the 156,Para. 
of your Letter of the ggth April 1807, but 
we repeat that it is highly important that 
the profit or Jofs upon our Exports of Britifla 
Staples fhould be clearly fhewn, and we en- 
join the moft punétual attention to this order. 
‘Our goods mutt be fold tor their fair and full 


-| value, and not by way of barter. 


79. The contrary mode of proceeding goes 
to give the Merchant a felling price upon 
Tea,which the ftate of the China market dices 
not warrant, and deprives us of the credit 
which would refult from a general view of 
our commerce, viz. that of being enabled to 
thew, with precifion, the extent of the pecu- 
niary facrifices to which we fubmit, in order 
to extend the confumption of Brith Staples, 


a en 


Appendix, No: 3. 
An ACCOUNT of the Expenfes of the Factory at Canton, from the year 1792-3 


to the year 1808-9 


1792-3 
1793-4 
1794-5 
1795-6 
2799-7 
1797-8 
1798-9 
1799-1890 
1800-1 
1801-2 
1802-3 
1803-4 
1804-5 
1805-6 
1806-7 
1807-8 
1808-9 


Peer revere evrenrere 
Pevrevecereegatae 


ere rena, 


Ce rc 


inclutive. 


£.37,813 
41,271 
42.687 
27.434 
46,755 
40,6 

85,550 
37,886 
43,384 


Peer rere etree ans 
preven ae ee enneneny 


Pere tararrertranan 


The Tale is calculated at 6s. 8d. 


India Board Office, 
Whitehall, 10th March 1812, 


(Errors excepted.) 


Thomas Nicholas Wittwer, 
Accountant, 


the Affiirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 461 


Appendix, No. 4. 


An ACCOUNT, fhewing the Amount of ali Supplies received from the feveral Prefi- 


dencies and Settlen:ents in India, at tue Factory at Canton, from tbe year 1792-3 to the 
year 1808-9 inclufive, 


Received into the Treafury at Canton - - - - - £. 700,449 
Cotton, Sandal Wood, Be. - - - - - ~ = 1,000,165 
Freight, xe. - - - - = = - 107,470 
Bills of Exchange drawa ~ - ts ew eee 8,138,317 
Total - - - £ 
Eaft India Honfe, 


(Errors excepted.) 
aoth March 1812. . Wm. Wright, 
Auditor of India Accounts. 


eee 


Appendix, No. 5. 


Ax ACCOUNT, thewing the Amount of all Supplies from the Fa@ory at Canton tothe 
feveral Prefidencies and Settlements in India, from the year 1792-3 to ihe year 1808-9 
inclufive. 


Bullion - - oe - - = = - - - £.1,959119 
Stores - - 2 = = = = + 929,243 
‘Advances for His Majetty’ 8 Service - eee = 81,507 
Payments at Canton - ~~ me ee = 49;363 


Fatt India Houfe, (Errors excepted.) 


1oth March 1812. Wm. Wright, 


Auditor of India Accounts, 


Appendix, No. 6. 


An ACCOUNT, thewing the Amount of all Supplies received from the Ifiand of St. 
Helena, at tts: Fadory at Canton, from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclufive. 


~ £.295039. 


(Errors excepted.) 
: Wm. Wright, 
Auditor of India Accounts. 


Appendix, No. 7. 


An ACCOUNT, thewing the. Amount of all Supplies from the Fa¢tory at Canton ie 
the Hland of St. Helena, from the e year 1792-3 to the yeas 1808-9 inclufive. 
Goods and Stores - -£. 110,938 
Sundry Payments at Canton - - - - ~ 408 


Total - = £.110,736 . 


Eaft India Houfe, (Exrors excepted.) . 
aoth March 1812. Win. Wright, 


Auditor of India Accounts. 


a 


Appendix, No. 8. 


Ax ACCOUNT thewing the Amount of all Supplies received from England, at the Factory 
at Canton, from the year 1792-3 10 to the year 1808-9 inciutive. 


Bullion - - - = £.2, 846.051 
Bills on Court of Direétors - 5 ttt + 7,569,378 
Cargoes, including Stores - = = = = = 15,947,439 
Freight, &. | ee em 07,358 
Sundries - . - - - - - fas - 9,801 
Total - - £.26,309,981 
ms ——— 
Eaft Iidia Houfe, (Exrors excepted.) 
aoth March 1812, Wm. Wright, 


Auditor of india Accounts, 


"462 Appendix fo IV'* REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


Appendix, No. 9. 


Ay ACCOUNT thewing the Amount of the Cargoes configned from the Fattory at 
Canton to England; likewife the Amount of all Payments fer which England is 
debited, from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclufive. 


Inveftments for Europe - - 2 
Charier Party Advances, &c. > - 


£.27,153,875 
Advances to His Majetty’s Navy, &: =! 


Sundries « 
Total - - £. 
Eat India Houfe, (Errors excepted.) 
1oth March 1812. Wm. Wright, 


Auditor of India Accounts. 


Appendix, No. 10. 


An ACCOUNT thewing the Amount of all BILLS of EXCHANGE drawn upon 
the Court of Dire@ors of the Eaft India Company, by the Supra Cargoes at Canton, 
from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-g inclufive, in Tales converted into Sterling at 
the rate of 63. Sd. each, contrafted with the Amount of the Payment of the faid“Bills 
actually made in Sterling Money. : 


Amount of &.Sterling paid 
Tales. £. Sterling. £. Sterling more than at 
aétually paid. 6s. 8d. per Tale. 
ee eee eee Eee eee! a 
L L Le L 
17923 - = 1,322,519 440,839 AST.S74 46,535 
W7984-  - + 1,367,898 455,966 495,479 39,515 
W945 = 8 1,329,371 443,124 480,806 37,682 
. bo a $70,222 290,074 316,880 26,806 
ee 1,922,615 440,872 497,512 56,640 
eS a 3,881,716 627,235 719,036 91,801 
WSG- + - 1,631,000 543,067 ‘ 622,951 79,284 
1799-1800 + 1,869,612 . 623,204 714,089 90,885 
1800-1 - - = 418,808 - 139,603 159,961 20,358 
180l-2- =e 696,026 232,009 265,844 33,835 
1802-3 = 2 + 1,895,982 465,661 535,677 70,016 
W034 =. 0 = = 974,109 324,703 372,036 47,353 
18045 - = = 1,722,245. 574,082 657,803 83,721 
1805-6 - + + 2,149.90 TAG SAS $21,154 104,511 
1806-7 - = + 2,207,989 765,953 877,655 111,702 
1807-8 = +e $38,162 ° 279,387 319,145 39,758 
1808-9 - =e 620,766 206,922 222,956 16,034 
ames ventas ee 
£-| 22,709,840 


7,569,044 8,566,378 996,434 
a ale Lean! 


(Errors excepted.) 
Fall India Houfe, : 
the 10th March 1812. Charks Cartwright, 
Acct, Gent 


the Afiairs of The LAST INDIA COMPANY. 463 


Appendis, N° 11. 


ACCOUNT of LONG ELLS, CLOTH, and CAMBLETS, Demanded from, and 
Exported to Cuina, from 1793 to 1810 beth inelufive. 


228,600 238,840 9,000 8,827 
230,660 208,760 9,000 5,918 
160,600 210,900 | ~ 7,500 6,466 


3,299,400 | 4,035,282 | 113,415 | 132,887 


22,000 | 22,570 
22,000 | 20,160 
22,000 | 22,320 


LONG ELLs. CLOTH. CAMLETS.. - 
ip rs 
— Demanded. Frported. | Demanded. | Exported. | Demanded. | Exported. 
Pieces. Pieces. Pieces. Pieces. Pieces. Pieces. 
1793 - - 120,000 177,500 3,000 7,088 5,000 5,120 
A7Q4 = e+ 126,000 200,000 4,550 7,193 5,000 5,000 
1795 - - -| 163,000 174,000 2.915 4,462 2,000 4,480 
4790 - = - 124,000 124,000 3,000 3,196 2,000 6,640 
1797 = = -{ 124,000 143,980 3,000 3,144 1,700 2,086 
1798 - - - 200,000 216,070 5,000 719 5,000 6,020 
W799 - © - 180,000 213,060 5,000 7,174 | 6,000 11,500 
1300 - + - 164,000 240,340 4,500 7,130 8,000 11,600 
1801 - = - 180,000 261,422 5,000 7244, 10,000 | 23,400 
3802 - - -| 206,000 270,620 7,300 9,835 12,000 | 23,230 
3803 - - -| 228,000 279,040 7,550 9,822 12,000 | 20,270 
1804 - - -| 228,000 266,780 9,000 2,667 24,000 | 21,800 
1805 - - =| 228,000 268,240 9,000 9,567 | 24,000 | 24,010 
1806 -~ - =| 240,000 272,200 9,900 9,954 | 24,000 | 22,150 
1807 - - -| 228,600 269,520 9,000 9,081 22,000 | 21,394 


228,700 | 273,550 


Eaft India Houfe, . 
the 6th March 1812. J. Davifon. 


An ACCOUNT of LEAD and TIN Demanded from, and Exported to Curna, from 
1793 to 1810 both inclufive. 


LEAD, TIN. 
————_ | ——>——_—— 
Demanded. | Exported. 


Demanded. | Exported. 


Tons. ‘Tons, 


None, 1,230 
ae 2 580 
- 1,001 
890 


1798 
1794 
1795 
1796 
1797 
3798 
31799 
1800 
1801 
1802 
1803 
1804 
1305 
1806 
1807 
1808 
1809 
1810 ° 


peee 


=| 1,202 


verre roene 


err t ere rere n tienen 
Cr a ee 


-Aemorandum.—The increafe and decreafe of the quantity of Tin have not been caufed by the 
Company, who have been conftantly ready to receive eight hundred Tons and upwards 
annually; but have arifen from the circumfiance of the County of Cornwall being enabled’ 
to obtain a higher price in Europe for their Tin than formerly; in confequence whereof, 
the full deliveries have not been made to the Company. 


Eaft India Houfe, Ro. Wiffett. 
6th March 1812, £6 


464 Appendix o TV" REPORT ‘from the Sele& Committee on 


Ay ACCOUNT of fundry Artieles of Britith Manufaéture and Produce, which have been 
Exported to Cu1NA upon Experiment, not having been demanded by Indent. 


COPPER, WINDOW 
Manufactured. 
109 - 
1310+ - 
1811+ - 
Eaft India Houfe, 5 
‘6th March 1812. Rob. Wifet. 


Appendix, No. 12. 


REPRESENTATIONS from CHINA, fince 1794, of the Market being overftocked with 
Articles the Produce or Manufadture of the United Kingdom. 


Extract General Letter from Canton, dated 20th January 1795. 


WOOLLENS. 


Para. 44. The Honorable Court will have perceived in the foregoing part of this Letter, 
fome allufion to the unfavorable ftate of this branch of their Commerce, and it is with 
extreme concern we vow inform them that it is in a flate of extreme depreftion. 


45. Our intention of endeavoring at an increafe of price, in purfuance of the Honorable 
Court’s wifhes, bave been already noticed; and though the accounts we heard previous to 
the arrival of the (hips, were fufficiently alarming to suppres every hope of that kind, the 
confidence we had that the quantity would be-confiderably diminithed, banifhed any 
apprehenfion of a diminution of our former prices. 


46. The extent of the inveftment announced to us on the arrival of the fhips, quickly put 
an end to thefe hopes, and on our arrival at Canton we were foon convinced that a contider- 
able reduétion was unavoidable. 7 


47. It wasfome fatisfaGtion to us to perceive that this depreffion was not the effect of any 
difgui taken to the Munufaure itfelt, but originated in caufes which had affected every 
article of Import in fimilar manner. Cotton, the ftaple of the Country Trade, was fold as 
low as g Tales per Pecul; Tin at 14 Tales, and Lead in proportion ; fo the whole trade of the 
place appeared to be in a fate of perfe&t ftagnation. 


48. The canfe to which this was generally attributed is a terrible inundation of the Great 
River called the Wang Ho, which ‘had nearly depopulated the country through the whole 
extent of its courfe ; and of the few inhabitants who had efcaped its fury, the dittrefs was fo 
great that many thoufands were daily fed at the public expenfe. In fuch a fituation they 
would not be expected to parchafe foreign luxuries ; and as the part of the country con- 
fumed a very confiderable portion of the articles imported here, the effect was immediately 
felt by the Traders, who inftead of the ready fale they had been accuftomed to, found a 
country comparatively defert, and their urchates of the former Seafon remaining untold at 
a time they ought to return for freth fupplies. if 


49. As this calamity was more particularly felt by the lower orders of the people, fo it 
has in a peculiar manner affeéted the fpecies of goods they were the confumers of, the Long 
Ells and Coarle Cloths being very much fallen, while the Saperfines are little affected: the 
former in particular, which ated to be fold among the Chinefe at 10 and 11 Tales per piece, 

3 al 


and were an article of confiderable profit on our arrival at Canton, were as low as 7. 5, the 
very price we uled to fell at, and have fince, we are tuld, been fold at 6 Tales per piece. 


50. That we might not, by being too precipitate, accede to terms more unfavorable than 
the exigency of the cale required, we waited till the end of October, when finding the Lon, 
Ells rather failing than etherwife, and the final clearing of the thips being a meature whic! 
could not longer be retarded, we came to a conclufion with the Merchants on terms calcu- 
lated nearly to divide the additional tofs between them and the Company: thefe were, that 


T. 
the Superfines fhou!d remain at their former price of 2. 7 per yard; the fecond and third 
forts 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 465 


forts be reduced 1 Mace per yard, and the Long Ells 8 Mace per piece; the whole making a 
diflerence to the Honourable Company of about g per cent. on the foriner prices. The lols 
to the Merchants we were in hopes would not have been more; but we are concerned to fay 
that the value of the commodity has fince decreafed fo rapidly, that many dave loft upwards 
of £.25. per cent. by their purchafes. 


51. In this arrangement the Camlets were not included, as the demand for them was 
likewile in a ftate of confiderable depreffion, and the great additional importation this Seafor 
might have had the effeét of retarding the fale of the other Woollen. The knowledge of the 
quantity imported has, we believe, confiderably affected the fale of thofe brought out in 
Private Trade, which from the beft information we can get (uulefs their quality is very inferior 
to the Company’s) cannot have netted their firft coft; and though there appears as yet no 
Jenfible dinunution of the quantity imported in Private Trade, thefe repeated lotfes maft, in 
the end, we imagine, put an entire ftop to illicit importation, 


Extra& General Letter from Canton, dated the 2eth January 1795. 


Para. 53. The Camlets are not yet difpofed of, as the prices offered are ftill below prime 
coft; but we have hopes, when the effeéts of the general demand for Money, occafioned by 
the approach of the new year, bas fomewhat Cubfided, that we may be able to difpofe of then 
to greater advantage, 


55. The amount of the Indent tran{mitted by this Difpatch will be, as we caiculated, about 
%- 400,000; and in refolving to this extent we are rather influenced by our hopes of a 
favorable change, than guided by any fymptoms of that kind at prefent apparent. 1f the 
caufe of the great depreffion is truly flated, the effe& may and will probably be but tem- 
porary ; but confidering the immente quantities which we have the mortification to feein 
the hands of the Merchants yet unfold, and the extenfive Indent expeéted next Seafon, we 
dare not venture to recommend any addition. 


Extraét Company’s General Letter to Canton, dated 3d June 796. 


3 . = 29. It was with infinite concern we received an account of the 
ae Chins 20 tannery a7 9S A aleonitoas flate of many of the inhabitants of China, from the 
44 8 51) fat - eats sb terrible inundation of the river Wang Ho, and the difa ble 
: effect, in confequence thereof, to the fale of our European Exports. 
We had, previous to the receipt of thefe advices, made confiderable purchafes of Woollens, 
though not to the fall extent of what might probably have been made in the courfe of the 
Seaton; but we thereupon withheld our orders, fo far as could be confiftently done with our. 
revious engagements, and as far as appeared to us prudent with the encouragement that 
fas hitherto been givento the Woollen Manufatures of Great Britain. 


Extract General Letter from Canton, dated 14th May 1795. 
WOOLLENS. 


Para, 15. We are concerned to acquaint the Honorable Court, that the demand for 
this important branch of manufacture {till contiaues very mach depreffed, aud has, if any 
thing, rather declined fince the beginning of the Seafon. ; 


16. The Countries which we mentioned to have fuffered from Jnundations, ftill remain in 
afttate of moft lamentable devaftation, and till they recover in fome degree their former 
condition, the demand for our Imports in general muft continue very limited. 


17. Under thefe circumfiances, we thought ourfelves fortunate to get rid of oar Camlets 
‘on the following terms ; viz. 


T 
1ft fort, or fingle Camlets, at 35 p’ Pecul. 
2d do. worfted Do. 27, «De 
3d do, or fingle worfied Do. 24 Do. 


Hairbines at the Invoice price; and the feveral Merchants have confented to take them at 
thofe prices in advance on their Contracts for the enfuing Seafon: reduced as thete prices are, 
we _are aflured the market is fo overftocked with this article, that they will not lofe lefS than 
10 Tales per piece by them, 


Extraét of the General Letter from Canton, dated the May 18:0, 


39- With refpeét to the terms on which to fettle our reciprocal Contraéts of Imports and 
Exports, the large Inveftmeat imported on the fhips of this Seafon, combined with the 
information deduced from the Eftimate of Stock per Swallow, of the fill greater amount 
of the outward Cargoes of 1799-1800, preciuded iu our opinion the moft difiant hope or 
grounds, for the prefent, of any greater benefit than was fuccefsfully urged and obtained at 
the clofe of laft year; while, on the other hand, we apprehend danger Irom agitating a quettion 
which, as it wouid lead to an enquiry and difclofure of the total amount of the expected 
Imports, though we thould have been enabled todefine their exact component parts, might, to 
fay the leaft of it, have excited cautions ard furprize, if not perhaps alain, having no 
reafon to doubt what we colle&ed from the Merchants, that little more than half the Long 
Ells had yet left Canton for the Northern Provinces, and that this market was vot expected to 
° be 


466 Appendix to IV" REPORT from the Selc& Committee on 


be cleared before the 8th month or Moon of September next, at fooneft; and it might impede 
a provifional claim we had in contemplation to introduce in our Contradts, with a view to 
fecure a reduction in our Cargoes adequate to any advance it might be in our power to make 
at the clofe of our Book, which could not then be decided. 


Extract of the General Letter from Canton, dated the 14th January 1801. 


59. We have not yet agitated the queftion of our Tin, and are forry to remark, this 
article feems, for the prefent, in no demand. 


Extra General Letter from Canton, dated the 28th November 1802. 


Para. 27. It will be obferved by the Indent for 1804-5 tranfmitted, a number in the 
David Scott’s and Arnifion’s Packets, that we have limited the quantity of this article to 
12,000 pieces, and perhaps this number ought not to be exceeded for one or two years, as 
the pretent importation, added to what ftill remains on hand of the preceding Seafon, will be 
amply futlicient, as the Merchants aflert (and corroborated indeed by our own obfervation) 
to fupply the demand for at leaft two Seafons, 


LEAD. 
Extract General Letter from Canton, dated 28th November 1802. 


29. -We ftated to the Honorable Court, in our advices by the Canada, our expectations 
of ubtaining for the Lead of the Seafon, netwithfianding the increafe of the quantity, at 
Jeaft § Tales per Pecul, That we have failed in our endeavours, however, may be afcribed to the 
‘extenfive importation, to the fmall confumption, by the limited demand for Bohea, as well 
tor our own invefiment.as on the part of the Americans, Swedes, Danes, and Dutch, and to 
the recent difcovery of the Lead Mines in the Province of Houquang, which proved ex- 
tremely produétive, and from whence the ‘fea Country has been partly fupplied, on more 
moderate iertas than can be effected from Canton. 


30. {n the difpofal of this article we employed every means in our power, and the in- 
fluence we might be fuppofed to poflels with the Merchants, to induce an offer of 5 Tales, 
which would have been equivalent to a redudtion of 15 per cent. on the price of the laf 


: Tm ‘ 
Seafon (5. 8.) but our effort unfortunately proved fruitless. They urged the ftate of the 


: om 
market, ai precluded them from offering more than 4. 2, the fale price not exceeding 
Pom Tom 


4. 8 or 4. 9, and from whence the Datics and Charges of 7 Mace were to be deducted, nor 
: . om ‘ 

had they in any inftance given more than 4. 3. After much difcuffion, we finally prevailed on 
. om, 

them to agree to 4. 5 per Pecul. 


31. And although we cannot but lament our difappointment, and, the lofs which will be 
incurred, on the confignment, of this Seafon, this price, under every circumitance, may be 
confidered more favourable. than we had a right to expect, viewing the current value and large 
grantity inthe market; and, except when the Merchants can difpofe of it in barter for Teas 
‘or other goods, we are forry to remark, they muft inevitubly fuftain fome lofs. 


33- While the market continues in its deprefied ftate, we cannot therefore venture to rée- 
commend any auginentation of this article, or of the Lead, beyond the amount of the Indent. 
The latter indeed it might be advifable rather to diminith, the quantity ut prefent on hand 
being undoubtedly {ufficient for the confumption of three years. . 


: CAMLETS. 


Extraé of the General Letter from Canton, dated 4th February 1803. 

Para. 22, They declare, nor have we any reafon to doubt the aflertion, that the quantity 
in the market is adequate to {upply the demand for nearly three years, and that their loffes 
fall little {hort of 40 per cent, the average of the Company’s Camleis, including the Duties, 
being 48Dollars, and the retail price in the fhops, for a due proportion of the three forts, only 
34 and 35 Dollars. 


£3. Had the importation been confined to the Company alone, this depreffion would in all 
probability have been prevented, but 6 or 7,000 P* have been brought to market by foreign 
thips, and a {mall quantity in private trade; and though the prices at which they have been 
fold, not eding 22 Dollars, may deter future {peculations, the prefent injury thereby oc- 
exfioned is ferious and irremediable. z 


2 LEAD. 
Extra& General Letter from Canton, dated 21ft November 1809. 


Lead, we are forry to fay, is almoft unfaleable; the depreffion of the market for this article 
is faid in fome degree to arife from regulations prohibiting the exportation to the Northern 
Provinces by fea, from apprehenfons of its falling into the hands of the Ladrones, a ver: 

conGderable 


the Affairs of The LAST INDIA COMPANY. 467 


cdnfidereble proportion of the quantity imported lat ycar is remaining unfold, and even the 


7 m. 
nominal Chinefe price does not exceed 5; from wisich dedu@ing a Duty ef about 9 Mace, 
Bee 
not more than 4. 1. 2 could be afforded to the Importer. We {hall prefer keeping this 
articie on hand jor fome time, in the hope of a iavorable change in the market to accepts 
ing fuch terms; indeed even this low price, we might find difftulty in obtaining, as the 
Merchants neither collectively or individually appear defirous of becoming purcbalers, 


LONG ELLS. 
ExtraG&t General Letter from Canton, dated 214 November 1809. 


From the fmall quantity of Long Ells that have yet come ander the inipeion of the 
Merchants, we canuot fpeak with any confidence of their opinion of their quality; the re~ 
duétion in the quantity has proved extremely acceptable to them, as the price at which they 
have been fold in the market during the lait year has been very unfavorable, varying fro 

mT om aa 
6. 4 to 6. 8 per picce ; in confequence, many of the former years importation are remain- 
ing on hand, particularly with Mowqua. 


Extra@ General Letter from Canton, dated 3d-March 2809. 


” Para. 34. As a circumtftance affeGting the welfare of 2 numerous and induftrious clafs of oar 
fellow countrymen, as well as the general interefts of our Country, we much lament that we 
cannot recommend the importation of Long Elis into China, on the prefent extended feale; 
but we fhould be wanting in our duty to our employers, did we not fiate to them our opinion 
of the neceflity of contracting the quantity, at leaf for fome Seatons, unlels they conceive 
the advantages of-an éxtended importation, fuch as to-counterbalance a depreffion in price. 
Confiderable quantities of the importation of 1807-8 fill remain in the Merchants’ Ware- 
hovufes, and with thofe brought by the fhips of the prefent Seafon, form an aggregate whict 
we canvot hope will be difpofed of before the arrival of the next year; from this a lols 
mutt arife that there can be no queftion will ultimately, in fome fhape or other, full upou 
the Company. Some fales have been made under 7 Tales, leaving, with the addition of Duties, 
alofs of nearly 2 Tales per piece, to the original purchafe. 7 

35- In the Indent we have herewith the-honor to tranfinit, we have not reduced the 
quantity fated to be required for Seafons paft, being defirous-of recommending the iin- 
portation to the full extent that the market will bear; but even this quantity exceeds 
what many of the Merchants ‘think fhould be imported, and fhould not in our opinion be 
exceeded. ‘ 

36. We are willing to hope that the very dull fale which the Long’ Ells have experienced 
during the prefent Seafon, has arifen from caufes of a temporary nature, owing to the difap- 
pointment the Manufaéturers of Nankeen Cloth have experienced in not finding a fale for 
their goods among the‘Americans, and ‘eonfequently have been unable to purchafe this 
article of the Honourable Company’s import, iu which-they otherwife deal largely; and alle’ 
from many of the Up-Country Dealers hearing, on their way to Canton, the ditturbed ftate 
of the trade and country, returned, and have relinquifhed the trade for the Seafon; but from 
whatever caufe it may have arifen, the effect mutt be an overltocked- market, and which we° 
fear can only be remedied by a reduced importation. : 


eee ln neta 
Appendix, No. 13. ; 
ATTEMPTS made fince 1794 to introduce NEW ARTICLES into CHINA; thofe Articles’ 
being manufactured in-the United Kingdom. g 
ARTICLES for PEKIN, 
Extra& Company’s General Letter to Canton, dated 23d April 1794. 

Para. 16. HAIRBINES, {rith Poplins, ‘Tabbinets, and Irifh Lawns and Linens,“being 
recommended to be fent as a trial, 5 bales of Hairbines, marked No. 1 to 5. H; 3 cafes of 
Tria Linens and Lawns, marked No. 6 to 8.1. L. are fhipped on the Alired, and every 
iptormation mutt be obtained -refpeéting them, and the eftimation they are likely to be 
held in. 

17. The Hairbines fent as an experiment, being boiled to foften them, which procefs they 
had never undergone before, ‘about 4o pieces of them do not run their intended lengths, and 
are invoiced particularly. 

18. Not any Tabbinets are fent, as it appears every precaution has been pfed to prevent 
their being miidewed, and which lvas proved to be ineffectual. i 

20. There is fent per Canton a bale marked No. 251. F.C. containing 20 pieces figured 
Camlets, deferibed inthe Invoice, The fame attention mutt be paid to this, that has been 
required to every other article lately fent by way of experiment. 


Extraé General Létter from Canton, dated goth January 1793. 
“Para. 54. The Hairdirits have.beeu fewn to all the Merchants, and we are happy to find 
iicy are fo much improved by boiling, that no complaints are made on Lie feore of Mifnels,. . 
6D and 


468 Appendix toIV" REPORT from the Scle& Committee on 


and in generai they are not known to be other than Camlets. We are forry to-find they are 
fuhigh priced, as they-do not appear, in the opinion of the Chinefe, torank with the firft fort 
-of Camlets, and confequently will never fcll for a propertionate profit: if, however, the 
‘Honorable Court’s abjeét be merely to aid the Mauufacturer, that end may be accomplifhed 
without lofs whenever the demand for Camlets thall revive. We have accordingly inferted’ 
goo pieces in the Indentfor the prefent year; thefe. may be of the fame colour with the 
‘Camieis, except purple, which in the Hairbines feems rather defeAive, and liable to ftain. 


Trisu Lawns and Linens. 


Para. 55, Thefe, we are forry to fay, will not anfwer in any degree; the Chinefe have too 
litle knowledge of their value, and too little diftinction of their qualities, for us to hope they 
could be induced to parehife them at any price proportioned to their firft coft. We thall 
-endeavour, in the courfe of the Séafon, to force them into their notice, if poftible ; but the 
times are fo-unfavorable for experiments of this kind, that our hopes of fucceis are too fmall 
to juliify our recommending a fecond trial. 


Extra@ General Letter from Canton, dated 14th May 1795. 
[For Paras. 15 to 17, fee the other Collection.] 


Para. 43. We have already mentioned in cur Letter of the 2oth of January, the little 
probability there was that the Ivifh Linens and Lawns would find a vend in tis Conntry ; 
bat in order to afcertain that point more particularly, we have difpofed of the whole con- 
fignment ty Mowqua at the Invoice price, who has promifed to dilpofe of them in different 
fhops, and to keep an aecount of the prices offered for each degree of quality. é 


44. He feems at prefent to be of an opinion that the lower priced ones, not exceeding 3s. 
-per yard, may poflibly anfwer, but all above that are too dear for the wear of the Chinete. 


Suawis. 
Extra Company’s General Letter to Canton, dated 6th May 1795. 

Para 7. On the fame fhip we have forwarded a cafe marked C.S. No.1} it contains fome 
‘Shawls which we are’ defirons of trying as an experiment. You will difpofe.of them as toon 
-as poflible, and furpjfies with au account of the Profit or Lofa that fhall arife thereon; as 
allo your opinion how far it is likely they may prove an advantageous article of traffic, and 
to what extest we may fupply you therewith. 


Liken Cuorn, Sworn Buangs, and Stationery. 
Extra@t Company’s General Letter to Canton, dated 5th June 1795. . 

” Para. 7. We have taken into, ‘cenfideration the oth Para. of the Letter from our late 
“Secret and Superintending Committee at Cunton, dated the 10th March 1794, and alfo their 
proceedings of the gd February 1794, refpecting a Litt of Articles, which in Lord Macartney’s 
-opinion might be. introduced with advantage at Pekin, and which was delivered to them by 
his Lordihip previoufly tg bis leaving Canton. 

°°: 8, We content ourfelves; for the prefent with fending famples of three of thofe articles, 
aviz. Linen-Cloth, Sword Blades, and woe Paper, the recommendation in favor of which has 
been lately confirmed tous by Lord. Macartney. 

g. On the Ship Belvidere’ you'wjfl therefore receive the following articles,as particularized 

«in a feparate Invoice fent in the Packet; viz. 


! [Linen Cloth, Irifh, to the value of + - = - “ £.300 2: 
Do + ‘Scotch - - - - - = = 200 
“Gill's Sword Blades -~ eo - - - = 250 
Wove prefled Paper for-writing and drawing - - = 250 
: 1000 


,.10.'Tt is our with that no time may be loft in forwarding thofe fpecimens.to Pekin, under 
+fach circumtiances as may appear to you the moft likely to afford every advantage lo the fale, 
in order to determine.how far it may be proper to purfue the fpeculation in future. 


11. You will therefore-either accept the offer made by Shy Kinqua to our late Secret and 
“Superintending Committee (and which appears on their above-mentioned proceedings of the, 
3d February 1794) of fending thefe famples.to the Northward, under the.care of one of his 
-own people’; or x upon any other Chinefé Merchant who you may deem more likely to fulfil 
~our views in this inftance. 


Extract Company’s General Letter-to Canton, dated -3d July 1795. 
Para.-2. As it is effentially neceffary to our fuccefsin China, that upon no account what-" 
ever any caufe of offence fhould be given to the Chinefe ‘Government, we recommend to 
your particular attention that nothing of that kind fhall-eccur refgedting the articles of the 
Pade market, laden on the Belvidere, :and of whieb you will recei¥e advice in our Letter of 
the 5th ultimo. 
i 3. With 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 469 


3. With regard to the Sword Blades which form apart of that export, we are particularly 
anxious that the utmoft circum{pection fhould be obferved. For that purpole, we direct that 
yougive iminediate notice to the Government of Canton, of the Sword Blades being on board 
“the Belvidere; and no attempt muft be made to land them, until the coufent of the Viceroy 
fhall have been obtained. Should the Government of Canton be inclined to purchafe them, 
every altention mutt be paid to their withes. 


Extraét General Letter from Canton, dated 23d June 1796. 


Para. 60. We are concerned to inform the Honorable Court, that our endeavours to dif- 
-pole of the articles intended for the Pekin market, have not been attended with the fuccets 
we could with for. © 


61. The Scotch and Irith Linens and wove Paper were fhewn to Puan Khequa and 
Mowgua, the Merchants we judged moft likely to fulfil the purpofes the Honorable Court 
-have in view.; but the latter declined having any thing to do with either of the articles, and 
the former would be only prevailed onto take one cheft, of the Paper, which he 
promifed to fend to Pekin as expeditioutly as pollible, by a friend who was fhurtly to fet of 
for that place: he feems however to have little expectation that-it will anfwer us an article of 
‘trade which could be an object to the Honorable Company, though, a fall quantity might 
fell to advantage for the purpofe of prefents. a¥ 4 


62. That the confignment of Sword Blades fhould have been’ attended’ with even lefs 
:fuccefS than the two preceding, the Honorable Court will perhaps not be furprized at, as 
they feem to be aware. that fome difficulties might attend the introduction of them into this 
-country through the ordinary channels of trade: the nature of the confignment indeed was 
fach as precluded any individual from interfering with it; andas they could not be offered 
to Government but through the intervention. of the Merchanis, which the delicacy of the 
~commiffion induced them to decline, we have been under the neceflity of returning this 
-eonfignment by the Belvidere, from which. fhip it has never been landed. 


63. Thecafe of Shawls has been feveral times fhewn to the Merchants, but as no price 
has been offered, and they declined giving the prime coft, we have wrote them off in our 
sbooks as unfold, 


64. The great objeion to this manufacture appears to be the unfitnels of their form fou 
any prpofe of drels or furniture appropriate to the country; but fome of the Merchants 
-are of opinion, that if they were made twice the breadth, and about feven Covids long 
sinftead of ten, they would be liked as coverings for beds. 


Extra General Letter from Canton, dated the 8th June 1797. 
_ Trisn and Scorcn Linens and SHawis. 


Para 51. Thefe articles the Merchants have taken in equal fhares at prime coft, and we 
-alfo divided amongft them the remainder of the prefents on the Cirencefter, which has 
produced Ts. 1,403,200. : ; : 


Srationery. 


52. This confignment per Belvidere we are at laft under the neceffity of writing off our 
books by profit and lofs, as Puan Khequa, after the experience of fome months, declares it to 
be unfaleable at Canton, and too dear to bear the tranfit charges into the Northern Provinces; 
the reft of the Merchants confirmed this opinion, and as it was pertinently remarked :by them 
that it might be employed for the Company’s ufe, we could not prefs their bearing any lols 
in any article of that defcription. 

53. We mutt look therefore for an indemnification to the Honorable Company, for this 
unfuccetsful-experiment, in the retrenchments we fhall make in our future Indents. 


Extract Company’s General Letter to Canton, dated 12th May 1797. 


“Letter from China, 23d June 96. 
(63 & 64) The Shawls have been 
flewn to the Merchants, and are ftill 
-unfold—appear lo be unfit for drefs 
or furniture: fome Merchants are 
of opinion if they were twice the 
breadth and not {fo long, they might 
be liked as coverings for beds. 


Para. 104. When this article was fent out, there was very little 
expectation of it anfwering, and was only meant as an experiment ; 
therefore, when they are difpoted of, a feparate account of the fala 
muft be attended to, and tranfmitted in the Packet, that we ma) 
be reimburfed the lofs that may accrue thereon; and we fhall 
decline fending any more for the prefent; but if on further en~ 
quiry the fort for covering of beds is likely to aniwer, you will 
take care that we are made acquainted with. it. 


Extract of the General Letter from Canton, dated 4th February 1799. | - 


To China, January 1798. 
44. No more frilh and Scotch 
Linens and Shawls will be fent. 


Para, 59. phe Merchants are pleafed with this information. 


Extraordinary 


aye Appendix 74 IV" REP ORT. from she Sele@ Committee on - 


EXTRAORDINARY FINE AND DUTCH CAMLETS. 
- Extract of the General Letter from Canton, dated. 4th February 1799. 


Para. 130, .We have given the faircft trial to this article, and we 
are inclined to think, on reading our proceedings undér the date 
of the 10th of January, the Honorable Court will not judge it 
advifable to admit it into the lift of their Invetiments. 


To Canton, 20 April 98. 
(36.) Refpcets wo bales of extraor- 
dinary five Camlets for Fort William. 
* 


» Fetterto, dated goth April 1708. 


_ 131. Puiqua, however, from a prepoffefion that this latter ar- 
(57) Obiervations on an_experi=” oe may LG iurportes hes defired io have 500 piece on pas- 
went ininitation of Dutch Camlets. ticular account, o| imenfions notieed in our ini lent; in this fancy, 
however, he ttands condemned by the concurring opinions of other 

* , » .Meichants. “Vide Cons, 10 January. “ay 


* Extract Company's General Letter: to Canton, dated 24th. December 1709. 
i te Feb. 99. 
Gg T biden %b. 99. exe - Para. 48. TheCamlets of the firit fort not being in eftimation, and 
traordinary fineCamlets,und inclined the Mecchants having defired no more of them may be tent, and 
to think it will not be judged ad- this article being of the fame kind, we have declined ordering any 
-vifublc to admit them in the fit of te be fent you. 
-Invetiment. 2 ‘ au 
(132.) Puiqua, from a prepoffeffion. that this article (Datch Camlets) may -be imported, indents for . 
- -§09 pieces ; for which. flauds-condenned in the opinion of other Merchants. 


; INFERIOR LONG -ELLS. 
's Extraét General Letter to Canton,. dated gth April 1801. 


‘21. You. will receive by the thips of the prefent Fleet, ten thoufand Long Ells of an 
interior quality. to thofe that have been ufually exported by the Company, We fehd them 
. #s-pn experiment, ander.a belief that by affording them at a cheap rate, they may become 
- an article of gencral weat among the poorer claties of Chinefe; us from the information we 
have received, we are-incliued to think that it may be fold by the retailer on fuch terms as 
- will aiake it come to the parchafer at a price not mush dearer than that which he now pays 
for @ cotton’ garment of a like dimenfion : if-this can be efleCted, the manifelt advantage & 
Woollen diets muft poffefs over a Cotton, in more effeCually defending its wearer both 
from wet and cold, may make the demand for Long Ells of this defeription very confiderable. 
They have been packed in a different manner to the-others, not only with a view to reduce 
2 their"coft, but-to .prevéent their being mitiaken for the common Loug Ells, whereby the 
Chinefe might conceive that they-had fuffered a depreciation in quality; the outfide of the 
-bales are marked “ Cheap L. £7? 


22. If the inferior Long Ells ean be difpofed of at five Tales each, which is twoTuales lets 

* than you have obtained for thé ether Long Elis in the two laft Seafons, we fhall make them @ 

permanent article of export; you mutt imprefs on the Merchants the neceility of their 

endeavoring to effect a proportionate reduction inthe Duty, and we recommend your 

fuggetting. to them, tliat it would be more defirable if they could fell thefe goods to perfons 

who are accuftomed’ to trade te the Northern Provinces, where it is conceived the article 
would meet ¢ more fuceefsful competition with the Cotton garments. 


"+ Extra? of the General Letter from Canton, “dated 28th March 1802. 


Para. 23. We have been obfervant of the Honorable Court’s 
orders on this fubjedt, but neither the information we have been 
enabled to. collet, nor the opinions of the Merchants, lead us to 
recommend a repetition of fimilar configninents. 

24.-The prefent importation has been difpofed of at five tales, 
and we have prevailed on the Merchants to take their retpective 
proportions of the 30,000 pieces expected the enluing sealon, their 
opinions-on thefe Loug Ells are fully detailed in-our Cunfultations 
on that fubject; front whence it appears, ferious injury and much 
mifchief may be apprehended to the common fort, fhould the 
Honorable Court refolve to continue the exportation. 


“To Canton, “April 1801. 
21, 22,,Confignment of Cheap 
“Long Ells; which’ the Honorable 
Court are defirous of rendering a 
permanent article of Export, by af 
-fording to the poorer'clifles of the 
sinhabitantsa more fuitable garment 
+ to defend.them againit the-cold and 

wet. 


~-23. Thefe objedtions appear to reft on the-fuppofition that frauds may be attempted by 
- the dealers, and which from the prefent mode of. packing cannot be guarded againtt. It 
- is conjeGured that men who are ditpoted to pradtite atts of villainy, might eafiiy introduce 
into the-bales of the comuion Long Ells, pieces.of thefe inferior kinds, and by adding the 
+ tillets, there would be no means of detection until too fate to trace it to the perpetrator. Such 
- adeception would entail the moft ruinous coifegnences on our general Trade, by weakening 
the ecnfidence in the.Campany’s Mark, which M@pretent enfures their goods 2 ready pallport 

- throaghout the Empire, and gives fo muclr facifity to eur butiness.. 


26. Should the experience of the prefent and enfuing Seafon tend to prove the Merchants’ 
nhjcctions to-be ill-founded, and any quantity can be dilpoled of in addition to the prefent 
-Importation ot the feven Tales. Long. Fils, we tbalt wot fait to include. them in one futues 

P » . -Indents; 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, 4yt 


Indents; and as a fufficient time will be afforded forthe experiment, and to collect information, 
and the Merchants have expreiled their willingnefs to take their proportion at 5 Tales, the 
Honorable Court’s objeé may perhaps, ultimately, be realized. 


27. [fever we are able to accomplith the introdu@ion of thefe cheap Long Ells, without 
injury to the prefent fort, and it fhould anfwer the Company's purpofe to dye them of 
Te im 


different colors, the Merchants, it may be relied on, will give 5. 6 per piece; of the 
expence of dying, we poffefs no accurate information, and can confequently form no opinion 
of the comparative profit or lofs that might be derived by attending to this fuggettion. 


e8, Under every circumftance, therefore, we have not thought it advifable to include 

the cheap Long Ells in the Indent of Woollens now fent, the objections of the Merchants 

to their becoming a permanentarticle of export from England appearing fufficiently forcible 

to deter us from recommending to the Honorable Court a perleverance in the exportation 

of any goods which might eventually tend to endanger fo valuable a branch in the Com- 
rade, : 


pany’s 
Extraé General Letter from Canton, dated 4th February 1863. 


Para. 24. Itis with infinite regret alfo that we muft acquaint the Honorable Court, that the 
Merchants have pofitively declined renewing the engagements for the cheap Long Ells; 
the whole of the prefent importation, except in the inftance of Ponqua and Gnewqua, fill 
remain in the warehoutes, and are altogether unfaleable, even at 6 Dollars; nor does there 
appear the moft diftant profpedt of a rife, 


25. In this ftate of the market, therefore, we fhall derive confiderable fatisfaQion if our Ad- 
drets of the 28th March laf fhould have been received fufficiently in tiiue to enable the 
Honorable Court to countermand their orders for this article, whicii the experience of 
two Seaibns now fully proves cannot be rendered a permaneat branch of the Company's 
Woollen Trade. 


Extra@ General Letter to Canton, dated 17th Decmber 1So02. 


Para. 46. We have attentively perufed thefe paragraphs, as alfo 
your Confultations of theagd Be Bebraary and 8th arch, where- 
: . 4 In your fentiments on labject of this new article of export are 
pa Tebalive to the dif al a the nore fally detailed. You wil bear in recollection that our chief 

ngoment o! P tong MNS object in felecting this deferiptiou of goods was the probability of 

anextention of the Woollen Manufaéture, and in the event of its faccefs, to afford a re- 

: mittance on more advantageous terms than any other manufacture sf which your snus 

Inveliment is compofed. e latter object you have fully ac- 

for mathe Cheap Long Ells fold complithed by Obiaining for them the price at which we had 

ice £.1.1 oe "The ate fort fell eftimated ; their difpofal yielded, as you will perceive by “their 

fever T. les, 46s. 8d. The average Invoice, a profit of 3s. 4d. on each Long Ell, and which we per- 

Inv even fales, 4{ about aaa dd ‘3° ceive could have been inereafed two Mace, had you deemed it 

yavonee, price was about 47%/3¢: pradent to perfift in the advance ; while by the difpofal of the 
common fort at feven Tales, there is on the average a lofs of near fixpence each. 


47. Under thefe favorable circumftances, we cannot feel much apprehenfion, in a 
commercial light, left their introduGtion fhould attend a diminution of ibs common fort; 
we certainly had in view their introduction to a different clals of people, whofe circum- 
ftances would not permit thei to avail themfelves of the comfort of woollen garments at 
the prices they had been hitherto rendered at, and thereby increafe the means of fapplying 
the homeward Invefiment. We therefore cannot wholly concur in your obfervation, that 
one of the cireumftances to be apprehended is, Jeft the introduétion of Cheap Long: Elis 
fhould excinde “an equal cusber of the common fort, and thereby reduce the means of 
“ fupplying the Inveftinent 2 Tales per picce, and confequently necellurily add to the 
* exportation of Bullion.” Qn general principles of tvade, the cheaper any article can be 
yendered, in a greater proportion will its confumption be increafed ; and we can fearcely 
conceive it poflible, from the immenfe population of China, but this low article muft be 
fuited to the finances of a lower clafs of inhabitants, and that therefore the confumption of. 
ihe common fort will remain, with very little redudtion, as its former ftandard ; this idea feems 
alfo to be juftified by a comparifon with your prefent Indent fur Long Elis (2,20,000) 

Sic Orig. and that of 1702 (thirty-eight thoufand.) 


48. Another objection which you have ftaled, and which remains to be noticed, is the 
Merchants’ apprehention left fraud thould be attempted by the Retail Dealers, by fubitituting 
them in lieu of the common Long Ells. Thofe that will be configned you this Seafon are 

cked in a different fhaped tillet, and are preffed without a creale, like the fuperior Long 

lis, the quality of which it is impoflible they can, by the mofi hafty obferver, be miftaken 
for. We therefore trutt this ground of objection will be removed. It may be remarked that 
a fimilar objection might be made to the fecond Single Camlets, which are of the fume length, 
width, @plour and package, as the other two forts, and we have not yet heard of any fuch 
deceptidhs naving been praWifed on thefe goods, 

49. An equitable reduction in the amount of Daty, in proportion to the value of thefe, 


Long Ells with the common forts, we Should hope would be an object you would be able to 
1486 SE obtain; 


From Canton, 28th March 1802. 
23 &28, Stating their proceed- 


47 Appendix.to IV" REPORT from the Scle& Committee on 


obtain; but this only remotely affeéts the Company, in as far asit facilitates or impedes thé 
confunption of thefe Long Ells. = be 


50. We have been thus minute in calling your attention to thé points above mentioned, 
more with a view to aflift you in the inveftigation on the {pot into the expediency of con- 
tinuing this article in‘ the lift of our Inveftment, than to combat the judicious obfervations 
you have made. You will have ob{erved from what we have now written,as well as from our 
Orders of April 1801, that if this article facceeded, we had fanguine expectations that its 
export would be to a confiderable extent; but, however we ‘may have been impreffed with 
its ultimate importance, we have, in confequence of the fentiments you have communicated 
tous, deemed it proper to confine the export of this defeription of Long Ells to abont 13,000 
this Seafon; nor fhall we confign you any further quantity in the following Seaton, uniets 
your fubfequent reports fhould be more favorablees”” 


Extract of the General Letter from Canton, dated the 27th November 1802. 


Para. 21. In our Advices of laftSeafon we communicated to the Honorable Court the fenti- 
ments of the. Merchants on the fubjeé of the Cheap Long Ells. The reporis of the prefent 
feafon are infinitely more difcouraging to the continuance of any confignment of this articte, 
than we even then conjeélured. The Country Dealers are decidedly oppoted (o the importa- 
tion, as well from the great jateriority in the quality, as from their being fubjecied to dmilar 
Dut and Charges of Tranfport to the interior Provinces, as thofe of the eomimon kind; 
and while the fuperior wanufaétare can be obtained at very little additional advance, the 
Merchants requeit ne more may be fent on any account: the injary that may event 
refult from their introdaction, by the innumerable frauds and deceptions that can be 1 
tifed, to the evident detriment of the Seven Tales fort, exclufive of the lols to which they 
are likely to be expofed, being an additional motive to julicit the Honourable Court’s 
attention to this requeft. 


22. The prefent price barely exceeds 6 Dollars, and even at that rate there is litte or no 


“ démand; the lofs to the Merchants, therefore, may be fairly cltimated at 20 per cent. 


To Canton, 17 Dec. 1802. 

50. Anfwer to the objections 
to receiving cheap Long Ells, and to 
their forming part of the Indents for 


46& 


Woollens, 


Extra@ of the General Letter from Canton, dated 2gth January 1804. 


Para. 32. We traft the Honorable Court will believe it was as 
much our inclination, as i,is oyr daty and intereit, to promote the 
extention of the fale of our Woollensin this Country, and are con- 
cerned whenever opinions feem to convey any obtiacle to it. We 
mutt however adhere to our fentiments refpecting the cheap 
Long Ells, given in our Addrefs of the 28th March 1802, and 
particularly detailed in our Confultations of the 28th February of tht year; the truth of 
which, experience kas fully confirmed. 1n the early part of the Seafon we attempted to 
difpofe of thofe configned to us by the prefent hips, but found them fo generally depreciated 
that no offer was made, but what, if accepted, would have entailed confiderable lois. As 
we perceived the price of Woollens to be rifing in tlie market, we declined difpofing of 
them till a more favourable opportunity. Towards the clofe of November, Exchin was in- 
duced to offer us five Tales per piece for the whole quantity, on condition of our agreeing 
to purchafe nearly 3,090 chefts of Twaokay he had fhewn to us, which we had approved, 
and from 3 to 4,000 chefts of Congo; this we readily acceded to, as the fule price of thele 


Long Ells in the fhops is now four Tales, the Duty 1 “b confequently there is an apparent 
es 


= : 
lofs of 2. 4 per piece. This wil! probably be made up, in part, by the rate at which he may 
be able to pus thew to the Tea Merchants, and the profit he may derive from the fale of 
his Teas; but his principal inducement we believe to be, the credit this tranfadtion will give 
him with his countrymen, and the future favor and notice he hopes it will entitle him to 
from the Houfe. To thele circumftances we attribute our getting off this article fo favor- 
ably, on which otherwile the Company muft have fuffered confiderable lols. We confider 
this manofacture to have had now a fair experiment at this market; and, at the general defire 
of our Merchants, requeft that it may not form a part of the futare consignment of 
Woollens to this Country, Should there ever appear any change which will permit os to 
advile its introduction again, the Honorable Court may be affured we fhall watch the oppor- 
tunity of recommending it, 


EMBOSSED LONG ELLS. 
Extra@ of the General Letter from Canton, dated May 1801. 


To China, May 2800. Para. 43. This article, as well as the former, was firft fhewn 


Par. 19. 


By the Exeter will re- the Merchants in a body, and afterwards fent round to their 


ceive two cafes emboffed Long Ells, Hongs. We augur favorably from their having attracted the no- 


and as they are a new pattern, itis tice of the Hoppo, who has included both bal 


les in his prefents 


particularly withed they fhould be to Court, and we are fanGtioned by the Merchants in an Indent 
fhewn the Merchants for their opi- for five hundred pieces; requetling, however, that the obfervation 
nion; which, with fuch further re- fent apart, after a careful examination and defcription ch 
marks as can be collected, matt be piece, may be attended to. i — 


tranfmitted by an early conveyance 


44. Together with the obfervations on emboffed Long Ells, are 


to the Honorable Court. forwarded thofeon the embolted Cloths, fold at the former price 


of 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPAN 


473 
Tm 

of 1, 5 per yard, of which the Company may fend about 300 pieces, to arrive in 1802-3. 

The Indent however for both articles ought not to be exceeded, as on account of fo large a 

fhare being required by the Hoppo, to forward. to Court, it is evident they produce no 

profit to the Merchant; and witha view tolefien the grievance, it is requefied the pieces on 

yellow grounds may not be too many. 


CAMBLETEENS. 


Extra General Letter to Canton, dated 1gth February 1802. 


Para. 59. By the thips David Scott andCuffucls, we have configned you fix hundred pieces of 
Cambleteens, being an article which we underfiznd has occafionally béea earried out in 
American fhips, and fold to advantage; you will th © take an early opportunity of 
advifing us of the opinion of the Merchants on this defcription of goods. 


Extract General Letter frem Canton, dated 28th November 1802, 


Para. 34. In order to concentrate as much as poflible the information we have to commu- 
nicate, and to bring the fubjeét of Inports, as far as muy be, under one point of view to the 
Honourable Court’s notice, we fhall proceed to mention the dilpefal of the Cambletcens 
and Cochineal, although not immediately under reply. 


the margin, we beg to refer 


dings rintive to the fale of 


o c 35- To our Confultations in 
Gons, rath, 13th Sept. 6th Nov: the Tfonorable Court, for our 


the Cambletcens ;_ with much perfuafion, and after confide diificuity, we prevailed on 
the Merctiants to allow the Invoice Coft, or 8 Dollars per piece; it was however conceded 
under the exprefs fipulation, that this price fhould not be ettablithed as a precedent in the 
event of their again forming a part of our Inveftment. 


36. The moment for an experiment of this nature proved extremely wifavourable; the 
market being co:pletely overftocked and the prices comparatively low, could not fail to 
affect an article of fimilar manufacture and of inferior quality ; but exclutive of this caufe, 
the coarfenefs of the goods, and the open texture of a very large proportion per David Scott, 
renders them, in the opinion of the dealers, totally unfit for ute, and precludes the idea of 
their ever becoming an citablithed article of import; the Merchants therefore earnetily re- 
commend the experiment may not be repeated. 


37. We have not, after the moft firi& enquiries, been able to afcertain that goods of this 
deicription were ever imported by the Americans, nor were they at all known to the 
Chinefe, though it was difcovered on a reference to the Hoppo’s books, the French had 
formerly dealt in this article; but the prices at which they were ufually fold, we have not 
been able to learn. 


BARRAGONS, and EMBOSSED FLANNELS. 
Extract of the General Letter from Canton, dated 2gth January 1804. 


Para. 186. The report of our four principal Merchants, with that of feveral retail Deslers, 
has been very unfavorable to the experiment of the Barragons and Lwbofled Flannels 
forming a part of our Woollen Confignments. For the Emboffed Flannels the beft offer 

om 


was 4. 3, the Company paying the Duties; which, on a comparifon with the prihe 


m,"c. 
coft, 7. 3,1, would leave a lofs of 41 per cent. For the Barragons, whofe firt cot amounts 
to 39 Tales per piece, ouly 30 Tales could be realized, uot deducting the Duties of 11 Tales; 
and this manufacture, though fine in appearance, and approaching in the itiffnefs to the 
Dutch Camlets, is totally unfit for ufe in this Country; the thread of the warp being un- 
ufually large and clumfy, while thofe of the wool were delicate and fine; and it had 
altogether an appearance of coarfenefs which would prevent the richer clafles, for whom by 
its price it was alone attainable, from ufing it in drefs. 


187. The Emboffed Flannels, whether as regarding the manufadture itfelf or the patterns, 
were totally unfit for this country. Our Merchants, with their ufual liberality, have con- 
fented to relieve the Company froin the lois they otherwile mutt fuftain by thefe articles, by 
agreeing of their divifion among them at the prime coft, requefting at the fame time, that 
no more of either may be fent in future. 


188. And we mutt beg leave on this oceafion to remark, that we are decidedly of opinion 
that the extenfion of the fale of onr Woollens in this Country, is more likely to take place 
by keeping up the ftandard, or ameliorating the quality of the eftablifhed ailortments ofually 
imported, which we underfiand are of the kind moft beneficial to our Country, the raw 
material and labour being entirely Britith, than by attempting the introduétion of any novel 
articles, which the prejedices of the Chinefe, fo abborrent of innovation, will always refift: 
and it is to be obfaved, that there is little chance of introducing an inferior kind with 
fuccels, as it will probably be burthened with a duty equal to a fuperior manufattare; and 
this not confined to the Foreign Importation, but accompanying various internal Duties 
in its progrefs through the Empire, 

189, The 


474 Appendix 0 IV® REPORT JSrom the Sele& Committee on 


189. The Honorable Court have frequently been advifed of our ineffectual attempts to 
refift this arbitrary and capricious affeflment of Duties; but it feems now an etiablithed 
regulation at the Hoppo’s Office, that no article, however interior in quality, fhall be affeffed 
ata rate lower than that already and ufually imported. 


Mr. COOKE’s WOOLLENS. 


Extract Letter from Canton to the Secret Committee, dated the 2gth January 1804. 


Your Honourable Committee’s marked Inftructions called our particular attention to the 
difpotal of the, improved Woollen Manofaclure, and we fhould be happy to have to com- 
municate that there was a probability of its ever obtaining a favorable iale in this Country, 
‘or of forming a part of the Honorabie Company’s confignment. 


Our firft attention was to get it claffed at as low arate of Duty as poffible; for this pur- 
pole we called on the particular attention of our Merchants. Our endeavours for this 
objet were, however, unfuccefsful. The affortment was compoied of fuch variety of fabric 
and appearance, that Hoppo’s Officers exercifed their power of ¢laffing as their different 
femblances firuck them, or as their caprice diGated. he fame Cloths by different thips 
are diflerently claffed, and fome of them at a very high rate; and we have reafon to appre- 
hend, in future importations, they will abide by the higher affeflment; and the Honorable 
Court have been frequently adviled by us, in our public department, of our inability to refit 
this arbitrary valuation. 


We diftributed them among our Merchants, and the great retail of Cloth Shops, requefing 
® particular attention to attain a faithfal account of their v They were generally 
received with difapprobation, and many of them, from their mixture of colours, und as being 
firiped and {potted, were on fight declared altogether improper for this market. 


When the Accounts required were delivered, although there was fome difference in them, 
they appeared to us generally unfavorable ; but we could uot determine to what extent till 
the Woodford’s arrival, having neither Invoice, nor any other document which might inform 
us of theireflimated value. SThofe, when received, confirmed our apprehenfions, and their 
comparifon with the prices offered will prove the total impoffibility of introducing this 
manufa@ture with advantage; only 6,000 Dollars being offered for what is invoiced 
at above £. 5,000. 


With regard to prior advantageous fales of this manufacture noticed by the Honorable 
Committee, we muft remark, that on fome articles, particularly Woollens, the Duty bears 
fo great a proportion to their value, that a faving of part of that by a contraband fale will 
itfelf yield a profit, when a regular and honorable fale might occafion confiderable lols, 
And the fluuations of this market, particularly in the prices of the Exports, are fo great, 
and they fuffer fuch a depyeciation at certain periods, that {ales made by barter frequently 
have the appearance of being advantageous, when the fame articles, if fold forready money, 
might have entailed a heavy lofs. 


We underftand fome {mall quantities of thefe Woollens have been brought here in Private 
Trade, part of which have been difpofed of at a lois, part returned as unialeable. 


Extract of the Secret Letter from Canton, dated 6th March 1804, 


‘The Honorable Committee were apprized, by the fame conveyance, of our endeavours to 
ditpofe of the Cloth configned to us by the Ganges, Alfred, and Woodford, having proved 
ineffectual; fince that period, however, we have found lefs reluctance on the part of the 
+Chinefe to offer for thefe Woollens; and although their prices were generally low and mach 
under the Invoice value, we did not confider any advantages were likely to refult from 
delaying the fale until the enfuing Seafon, when poiiibly indeed an additional confignment 
might rather tend to lower their value. Weconfequently clofed with a propofal made us on 
the gd inftant, exceeding by 4,000 Dollars that of any other perfon, as per accompanying 
Account Sales, and have the houor tg inciofe a Bill for the ameunt, conformably with the 
infiructions conveyed to us by Mr, Secretary Ramfay. : 


Every poffible exertion has been employed to do juftice ta this experiment, and we regret 
that the refult is fo little calculated to afford encouragement to its repetition, or to anfwer 
the expectations formed; but the averfiou of the Chinefe to innovation is infurmountable ; 
add to which, they politively declare, that at the prefent prices both the Broad Cloth and 
Long Ells are a preferable manufaGure, and that Cloths of this defcription can never 
anfwer. 


We have neverthelefs reafon to imagine that could the Manufadurer be induced to alter 
the dimenfions of thele Cloths, entirely omitting the firiped and fpotted patterns, and 
proportioning the colours as in the Broad Cloth, that a fmall quaatity might annually be 
difpofed of at the following prices; viz. 


The Worleys, of 32 inches wide, at - - - - - - 7. 2 peryard. 
Templars, do. eee eee ee RH dow 


: 7 fn. 
Cloths, Gimilar to thofe in Bale N*1, 48 inches wide, 1. or 1. 2 per yard. Tie 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 475 


The foregoing prices, however, are exclufive of the Duties, which muft therefore be deducted 
from them, 


Extraét Company’s General Letter to Canton, dated 10th April 1804. 


Para, 2. By the fips Alnwick Cattle, Cuffnells, and Arnifton, we have configned to you 
aquantity of Woollen Goods of a defcription thet has been reprefented to us to have found 
a profitable market in China: the perfon who bas furuifhed thefe goods has entered into an 
engagement to guarantee that the taid Woollens (hall prodace in China a fum equal to their 
prime coft and charges in England; you will therefore, by the earlieft conveyance, inform 
us the terms on which you have dilpofed of them, and how fur they are likely to become a 
beneficial article of Invetiment. 


Extra@ Gencral. Letter from Canton, dated 34 March 1805. 


P Para. 4. Immediately on the receipt of thefe goods, the different 
Tetter, 1 dated solh. Apel Abode: Merchants were furnithed with ites; and after an attentive 
Bete of Woollen °C cods, per ¢x#tnination of them, the highet offer that any were difpoted to 
hiss ‘Ain wick Cattle, Cufinells, a make, and with which it was judged advifabic to clofe, wilt 
‘Arhifion «information to be feat by [ave @ lofs on the Invoice amount of more than 18 pet cent, 
die earlieQ conveyance of the ter y Thefe terms were offered by the perfon who purchafed the Con- 
ahi h thes ne dif ok dof, aad figoment of laft Seaton, and who pofitively afferted, that in the 
he er far dies ste lik el a becone a refent {tate of the market, he mult inevitably be a lofer by his 
be ficial ai sle of I y ts if argain; which, from the very low offers made by fome of the 
sicaleama tae Rk meme he other Merchants, and fubfequent enquiries, we have reafon to 
believe to be the cafe; and that thefe terms were offered under the idea that they would be 

acceptable to the Company, and give him a claim to their future fupport and affiftance. 


5. With the diflike of the Chinefe to all innovation the Honorable Court are fully ac- 
quainted, and mutt therefore be aware that time and repetition of the confignment will be 
neceflary to reconcile them to thefe goods; which, if ultimately accomplithed, it is appre- 
hended, muft reduce the importation of Long Ells and the 2d and gd forts of Cloth. It 
remains therefore with the Honorable Court to decide on the propriety of forcing this 
manofacture at the rifk of depreciating the eftablifhed and approved forts, or of endea- 
vouring with greater facility to extend their confumption, 


6. The principal objection to this new Woollen Manufacture appears to reft on their fall 
breadth expofing them to fimilar Duties with the Broad Cloth. The terms on which 
Gnewqua is willing to receive an annual quantity of thefe Cloths, of the dimenfions therein 
feted with his obfervations on their colours and qualities, are forwarded Numbers in the 
packet 

7. In this Account, it may appear extraordinary that the Dentous are ftated as not fale- 
able on any terms, although a profit is derived by thofe of the prefent Seafon. This arifes, 
we find on enquiry, from a miftake on the terms offered, the purchafer having formed an 
average of the whole, and in confequence paid litile attention to the proportionate price, fo 
long as the whole amounted to the fum he was dilpofed to give. : 


Extraét Company's General Letter to Canton, dated 12th February 1806. | 


Para. 58. You have already been advifed that it was not our in- 
tention to repeat a confignment of thefe articles. The diflike of 
the Chinefé to innovation, will precludeus in future from encourag- 
ing the fpeculative attempts of individuals, to the injury, as it 
now appears, of the ftaple article of our export. 


* Letter from, dated 3d March 1805. 
(4 to 6.) Mr. Cooke’s Woolless. 
Were foiced to fell them at a lofs of 
18 per cent. and Merchants a lofer 
thereby; but took them to find fu- 
ture favor with the Company ;_re- 
peat diflike of Chinele to innovations, It refts with Court whether they will force this manufa@ure at 
the ritk of the eftablithed approved forts. 


FUR SHAGS, 
Extra& of the Company’s General Letter to Canton, dated the 26th February 1808, 


77. By the thip Exeter we have configned to you fome Woollens of a new defcription, 
calied Far Shags; thele articles were fent at the particular requeft of fome Manufactarers 
in the Weft of England. From the reprefentations you have made to us of the diflike of the 
‘Chinefe to novelty, we are not fanguine of their fuccefs; but with a view to give every 
article of Britith manufacture a fair trial in a country whofe immenfe population raifes fach 
ftrong expedctations in the unind of the artift, we have been induced to permit the prefeut 
experiment to be tried. 


Extra& General Letter from Canton, dated 3d March 1809. 


3 - Para.167. We are forry to have to make a very unfavorable re- 

0 Chine bth Feb, 1808 je. Portof the reception theie goods met with, as the, neral opinion 

77.) Con! ‘Weatie oe ited. Yur as decidedly againit their being appiicable to any ufeful purpote in 
cription of Weorlens, calcd Fur China, aid no higher price than 10 Dollars a piece has been 

Shags. offered; from fome however with whom we ‘have coufulted, it 
oF appears 


1476 Appendix fo IV" REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


appears poffible they may come into ufe in the Northern Provinces. Until this point car. 
be afcertained, we have thought it better not to difpofe of them on the terms offered, whict 
might operate unfavorably on their future fale; conceiving that if we can bring them into 
ute, even the total lots of the finall quautity now imported is not an object. 


Extraét General Letter from Canton, dated 25th February 1810. 


Para. 280. We’ are forry to inform the Honorable Court that the Woollen Shags, con- 
figued to China laft Seafon, are entirely difapproved of. Every pains has been taken, and 
time allowed to the Chinefe to examine and form their opinion of this manufacture; but 
ail agree in confidering them perfectly inapplicable to any ufeful purpofe in China; few 
were willing to take them on any terms, and none offered more than the price of Long Ells, 
We have, however, prevailed upon thé Merchants to receive them at 10 ‘Tales per piece; 
a price which we are forry to Say will not fave the Company from lofs. 


SERAGLIO RATTEENS and MOSCOW.CLOTHS, 
Extra& of the Company's General Letter to Canton, dated 24th March 180g. 


Para. +9. Mr. Jofeph Cotton jun. of your Eftablifhment, having reprefented to us, that 
Exchin, one of the Hong Merchants, had applied to. him to bring outa few pieces of fuperfine 
Cloth of the defcription worn by Europeans, we have thipped on the Coutts, three bales of 
a Cloth called Seraglio Ratteen, and two bales of Mofcow Cloth, which we wish to be left 
at Mr, Cottan’s dilpofal, That gentleman having expreiled his confidence, that the higher 
claffes of Chinefe would prefer fuperfine Cloths of flouter fabric and finer appeurance than 
the general fupply, we with the fentiments of the Merchants to be obtained thereon, 


Extract General Letter from Canton, dated 26th February 1810. 


Para. 256. Thefe Cloths, agreeably with the Honorable Court's 
diredtions, have been left entirely at Mr. Cotton’s difpofal; but we 
are forry to fay the opinions of the Merchants do not juflify our 
fuppofing they will ever become in extenfive demand; as al- 
though the Cloths are admired, the price few are willing to give. 

: Thofe received the prefent Seafon have realized the firlt colt, as 
will appear by that gentleman’s Letter of the 2oth January, covering alfo an Indent from 
Tinqua, for feventeen bales of various colors, the patterns of which are forwarded ; and a 
number in the packet at the priee of about 205. a yard. 


To Canton, 24th March 1809. 

ag.) A few pieces of Sersglio 
Ratteens and Mofcow Cloths, fent 
out to be left at Mr.-Cotton’s dit 


pofal. 


Extra& General Letter te Canton, dated the 11th January 1811. 


Letter from China, dated 26th Para. 83. We haye not fent the Cloths herein requefted, becaufe 
February i810. they could not be invoiced at lefs than 26s. or 27s. per yard, and 
Para. (256.) Tranfmitting an In- which exceeds the price it appears Tinqua was willing to parchafe 
dent from Tinqua for 17 bales of them at. 
Ratteens, at 20s. per yard. , 


VARIOUS ARTICLES of EXPERIMENTAL CONSIGNMENT. 


Extract: Company’s General Letter to Canton, dated the 29th September 1809. 


Para. 20. From this fate of things itis to be expected your Treafury will fuffer a diminution 
of receipts for the fale of Britith Staples in the year 1810 to the full amount of Eighty 
thoufand Tales; being the difference between the Sale proceeds of Ten thoufand Peculs of 
Tin, of which we hall be deprived, and of Ten or Twelve thoufand Peculs of Lead, which 
we matt fubftitute in its place. 


21. Although this expected defalcation in the fale of Britith Staples, will have arifen from 
-circumfiances wholly out of our controul, it is ftill a matter which we greatly regret. We 
are fully imprefled with a fenfe of the duty and importance of endeavoring to extend in 
Afia the fale of the Produce and Manufactures of Great Britain and freland, as will be found 
in numerous inftances upon your records. And we take this occafion to direét that you refer 
to your foriner proceedings (particularly about the period of the Embafly of Earl Macartney) 
and that you make it a matter of efpecial confideration, whether the vend of Britifh Articles 
already known can be increafed, or other Britith Articles not known can be introduced. 
Your deliberate opinion, in anfwer to thefe enquiries, may be tranfmitted to us by the firft 
dhips of the Chinete Seafon, 18:0.—See our Letter of the 8th January 1808, para. 18. 


22. In confequence of the expeéted deficiency in the quantity of Tin, we have deter- 
miued to revive the export of Copper from this Country to China; but as the price of British 
Copper has advanced more than ity per cent. fince the period of our laft confignments, 
we haye detertained to limit our firftexperiment to Twenty Chefis only,.which thaliconfift of 
all the various affortments in general ule. 


23. We have likewife refolved to fend to you a fmall confignment of Window Glafs, upon 
which, as alfo upon the Copper, yeu will tranfmit to us all the information which you can 
procure, 


24. The 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 407 


24. The price of Britifh Bar Iron of good quality is become very reafonable, from the 
general ufe of machinery in the manutaciure of that commodity. Should the Miners 
continue to decline delivering to us their Tin, we are apprehenfive that it may not always be 
found convenient to fupply the deficiency with Lead, as well by reafon of the great fluctua 
tion in the price of that commodity in England, as by the fear of overftocking the market 
in China. We therefore think that upon this account, as well as upon the gencral principle 
of extending the fale of Britith Staples, it may be ceiirable to endeavour to difpofe annually 
of a quantity of Britith lron in China, which can be afforded at about four Tales five Mace 
per Pecul, We fhiall fend a fmall confignment in the approaching Seaton, by way of 
experiment. 


Extra& Company's General Letter to Canton, dated the goth March 1810. 


Para. 5. Our Experimental Confignments will be as follow ; viz. 
Copper, eon thine of all the deicriptions which we confign to cur Indian Prefidencies, 
Iwenty Tons, 
fh-Iron, of all deferiptions, Fifty Tons. 
Window Giats, part being of larger fizes than we fend to India, Fifty Chefts. 
Red Lead, Five Tons. 


6. We recommend this experimental confignment to your moft particular attention, and 
it is our delire that you report fully upon each and every article which we have now fent out, 
with a view to the exteafien of the confomptionof Britith Manufactures, ifa demand can pol- 
fibly be found, as more fully exprefled in the 214t Para. of our Letter of the 2ath Sepiem- 
ber 1809. 


7. At the fuggeftion of Sir George Staunton, and being at all times defirous of 
encouraging every endeavour to promote the confumption of Britifh Manufatures, we have 
dentby the fl hip Bombay, as an experiment, Ten Balesof Salifbury Flannels : fhould this article 
be approved in China, and a vend for any confiderable quantity be hereafter effected, it- 
would be produétive of advantage to a Manufa@aring Dittriét of England, which has not 
hitherto participated in. our Eaftern Commerce. 

8. As the Merchants have always thewn a reluctance to advance on the original price of 
any article, notwithitanding its value in England may have rifen, we would have the 
price of thefe Flannels in the firft inftance fixed fo as to meet an increafe of price in 
England, namely at an advance of from fifteen to twenty per cent. on the {nvoice price, 
as you may fee a difpotition in the Merchants to accede to. 


Extra@ General Letter from Canton, dated March 1811. 


Para. 47. Since the date of our laft Difpatch, we have taken every opportunity, ably 
to your Honorable Court's recommendation, of paying attention to the difpofal of our 
feveral experimental confignments, particularly that of the Salifbury Flannels. ¢ 


48. The ufual prejudices entertained by the Chinefe ageing any new article of . Import, 
were fully inftanced by the terms of the earlier offers made for thete goods, whether thofe by 
the Outfide Deaiers, or by the Hong Merchants; and their condué on this occafion appeare: 
to be” influenced by the general opinion, that the fuperior finenefs of the material was no 
adequate compenfation for its deficiency of fubflance. 


49. On a further examination, however, this manufadture feems to be confidered by the 
Chinefe more favorably, and under the idea probably that ufes will-be found for which it is 
better adapted than the other fpecies of Woollens already known, more fuitable offers have 
‘been made from different quarters, the moft advantageous of which, hitherto, are thofe of 
Conleequa, who has confented to give what may be confidered equivalent tu Invoice cott, 
namely 33 Tales for the Broad Flannels, and 28 Tales for the Yard-wide. . 


53. Among our experimental confignments of the prefent Seafon, the Duroys ftill remain 
‘on our bands, being hitherto unfaleable; with relpeee to the reft, we are forry to obferve 
we continue tu have but little encouragement from the Merchants, to recommend their 
future import on account of the Company, 


54. The Iron is the only article upon which we have bad any offers amounting to a profit 
upon the Invuice coft: bat we doubt whether any larger quantity would find a fale, or 
wheiber at all events fuch an article of trade would be found to merit the attention of the 
Company. 


, Tr 
55. Having had offers for the whole as high as 3,250 Per pecul, and the Invoice Coft 


being about 2,800, there appears tobe certainly a profit upon this confignment of about 8. 6. 
per cent.; but this we are inclined to believe could not be realized upon any extenfive im- 
portation, ss the Jron is not upon the whole approved, being too hard for the means of 
working it with which the Chinefe are acquainted. They are of opinion, however, that very 
finall rods, of abont 1% inch in circumference, being more convenient for ule, might fell 
as high as7 or 8 Drs. per Pecul: of the bars now imported, they value the large at about 
“3 Drs. and the fmali at about 5 Drs. pez Pecul, efteeming however the different kinds, taken 
together, at the average price above flated. : ‘ 

56. We 


478 Appendix fo 1Ve REPORT from the Selc& Committee on 


56 We have noticed on our Proceedings, our intention of tranfmitting to your Efonourable 
Court, fiatements of the feveral offers which we were in expectation of receiving from the 
Merchants and others, for the various articles of Copper manufaure fet out to us this 
Seafon ; and they have accordingly been repeatedly exhibited to them for this purpofe ; but 
we regret that we have been unable to obtain more than general offers for the whole, on the 
plea that the articles themlelves not being in ule among the Chinefe, their value depends 
folely upon the material, aid the form in which it is worked is accordingly indifferent. 


Ts. 

57. The moft favourable offer made us is only 18,700 per Pecul, and is altogether inade- 
quate, as the average cof on the Invoice is not lefs,than about 28 Tales; and although the 
intrinfic vatue of the feveral articles of Bolts, Nails, Staples, &c. night probably be realized, 
if they could be applied to the purpofes of Ship-bailding, for which they feem to be exclu- 
fively intended, their re-exportation from hence with that view would be attended with 
fach difticahies as would wholly defeat the object of rendering them a profitable article of 
export to the Company. 


58. The article ot Window Glafs, which is incladed among our experimental confign- 
ments, is not altogether a new Import, haying frequently been introduced into China ia 
limited quantities by the Commanders and Officers of the Company's thips, and fometimes 
with advantage; that it is not at prefeat however a profitable article, will clearly appear from 
the following comparifon of the Invoice Coft with the Market Price; ihe former, including 


Ts. Ts, 
the value of the packing cafes, is 34,530 per cafe, or 29,250, exclufive of the package. Thefe 
chetts, containing 200 fquare feet of Glafs in each, will not now obtain in this market a higher 
T 


% : 
price than 21,600. If the chefts contained 220 fquare feet of Glafs, which the Chinefe 
confider a more convenient quantity, they might be fold in this market, we underftand, for 


Ts. 
Sic O:ig. 2,448, or about 3 per cent. more; and at thefe prices it is conceived that a fale may be found 
for 4 or 500 chetts, but that a great fall would be the confequence of even a trifliig excefs 
-beyond that quantity. 

59. We may add that the Chinefe offer 35 Dollars per cheft of 200 fquare feet of Glafs, if 
the breakage is allowed for, and in proportion as much more for chefts containing 200 {quare 
feet of Glafs; but it is necdlefs to dwell Jonger on an article which at prefent expofes the 
Company to lofs, and it is obvious can never be introduced with profit to any confiderable 
extent. 


-60. The higheft offer made us for the confignment of Red Lead (and which has been the 
Te : 


. Ts, 
Market Price during the Seafon) is 5,040 per Pecul, and the Invoice Coft being 7,142, the 
out-turn of this asticle in this market, is {till more difcouraging than that of the preceding. 


61. The foregoing articles having remained open to general 
infpeétion for about two months, without producing more favour- 
able offers than thofe above ftated, they have at length been dil- 
pofed of to Fatqua at the following prices, as permargin, 


Iron - - - T*3,250 per Pecul. 
Copper - - - 18,700 

Window Glafs - 25,200 per Chet, 
the broken Glafs being allowed for: 

Red Lead- ~- ~ 5,040 per Pecul. 


Extra& Company’s General Letter to Canton, dated 31f January 1811. 


Para. 5. The nature of our exclufive commerce with China ren- 
ders this duty imperative upon the Company. Our Servantscannot 
be employed in a manner more advantageous to their Country, 
or more fatisfactory to us, than in farthering this object. 


From China, grft January 1811. 

Para. 14. Shall not fail to com- 
Mmunicate whatever information you 
may obtain tending to encourage an 
expectation that new articles of Bri- 
tith manufactures and produce may be introduced advantageoufly. 


Anfwer to the following Paras. of 6, In our Letter of the 10th Oétober 1810, we obferved, that 
Letters from China, refpecting fundry we had made you a configament of Britith fron; not from any 
experimental confignments of Bri- well grounded reafon to expeé it would meet with a fale at China, 
tith Manufactures ; viz, but from our defire to extend by all means the confumption of 
gift January 1811. Para. 15, 16,17, Britifh manufuétures and produce. 


and 136. 
= = 7. You ftate that, you had offers for the whole of the Iron as 
_ March er Para. 54, 55> 56 high as 3,250 Tales per Pecul, being at the rate of £.8. 10s. per 
579 581 59) 00, 01. cent, more than the Invoice; but ia your general Account Sales, 
the Iron is debited to Fatqua at three Tales per Pecul only ; if you have recorded the reafon 
for this reduction in the felling price, it has efeaped our notice. 


"8. We obferve with fatisfaction, that the Chinefe are of opinion that fmall Rod Iron 
may fellas high as 7 or 8 Dollars the Pecul, and fall Bars at § Dollars. We fhall confign to 
you in the prefent Seafon, 50 tons of finall (round) Rod fron, partly of the fize you mention, 
and partly of lef fize, which will be invoiced at £. 20. 118. 10d, perton; and 300 tons (or 
fomewhat more) of Iron in {mall Bars, which will be invoiced on an average of £. 17. 7% 
per ton. According to the prices quoted in your Letter, the round Lron will fell at £. 33. 125. 
per ton, and theBars at £.21. per ton. 5 
9. Bat 


the Affairs of The LAST INDIA COMPANY. 479 


g. Bat had the prices. which we hope to obtain from the above Iron, not been fo fatis- 
fadtory, it would {till have been proper to have made you fome confignment of Iron, as dead 
weight for the fhips (in the,ivant this Seafon of Tin and Lead for that purpote) rather than 
nave {ent them with ballaft,":fo long as Iron can be difpofed of in China at prime coft and 

arges. : 


10. The ill fuccefs of the other articles. of Britith produce which we configned to you on 
-experiment, has prevented us from continuing, at leaft for the prefent Seafon, our adventure 
therein, viz. Copper, both manufactured and unmanufactured ; Window Glals; and Red 
Lead; at the fame time we have to exprefs our concern, not unmixed with furprize, that 
none of the various articles calculated for Boats, fhould have been found ufefal in a Country 
dike China, which abounds in Canals and Inland Navigation, — 


11. We are defirous of receiving the beft information you can procure, of the commerce 
which is carried on in the articles, of Copper and Tin, in ‘enton and the neighbouring Coun- 
tries; we efpecially with to know the quantities of eag which are confidered to be aunually 
difpofed of, and the prices. A 


Appendix, No. 14, 

An ACCOUNT, thewing the Amount of the Charges of the Fa@ory at Canton, in fe 
far as they have not been added to the Invoices of Goods configned from thence ; alfo 
the Amount of the Net Profit or Lofs incurred at the faid Fa@ory, from the year 1792-3 
to the year 1808-9 inclufive. ; 


NET-L088, 

eel . 

: a L 
W7923- 2 ee 2 se Ce ee! 
W9S4- = = eee 1,328 
97066 co el teh et ee 107,425 
17986-  - + - ee 62,598 
WW96T- 2 ee ee 47,373 
wg78-  - Se eA 38,421 
W98-9- = ey eee 44,624 
1799-1800 - = -+ = - = 71,954 
W001- = = = © © = 51,715 
WBOL2- = = ee 87,056 
WB0M%3- = eee 130,654" 
WWOSHd- eee 91,782 
eons Se Sy BP 158,015" 
1805-6 = - - - - - - 101,538 . 
WOKET= = eee el Sega ets 
1807-8- Ce ee Oe 
1808:9- 2 = 2 sete | __ 12.883 

L 1,007,043 
Deduct various Re-payments and Receipts “Net Profit - 50,253 
L Net Los -{ 956,795 
38,448 
Torau-« -£. 
Eaft Tidia Houfey ~~ 7 ~—* (iro excepted.) 
10th March 1812, Wo Wright, 


: Auditor of India Accounts. 


6G 


480 Appendix fo.IV" REPORT from-the Sele&t Committee on 
a 
Appendix, No.15.  - - - - 


STOCK PER COMPUTATION ON 1* MARCH 
The Indian Stock Accounts made up to 30 April1792; and calculated at the Rate of 2s. per Current 


L 
TO what owing by the Company to the Annuitants - 2 = - = = = 2,992,440 
To Bonds bearing IutereR = = = © © = = = 5 = = 6 3,200,000 
To D® not bearing Interett Side Sapo ey Be Te. me oR aes 7,942 


To Bills of Exchange unpaid from China 2 ++ - «- - + = £,500,458 


To D* - - - ©. India and St, Helena o2 ete lay 6 a. 541,272 | + 2,452,303 


To De - - India, on account of Indian Debt, eet 1,410,573 
ing £. '30,000 for Tatereft payablethereon 2 - = - - eare 
‘To Cuftoms on Goods fold and ynfold - - - - - . - - - - 513,959 
To the Bank for a Loan on Mortage of the Annuities that may be fold agreeably to AG of vas 600,000 
To Freight and Demorage - - = - eS 257,500 
To Supra-Cargoes Commiffion on all Goods fold and unfold = - - + - - - 69,000 
To Proprietors of Private Trade on all Goods fold - fe RE et ve 220,210 
To Almshoufes at Poplar = + + = Ci eke ec eae a 69,813 
‘To Intereft on Military Fund, more than applied - + - = -2 = «© = 46,129 
‘To D® on Contingent D? - - D° - - - - - - . - - % 10,123 
‘To Warrants paffed the Court unpaid - = = = ye ee 41,100 
‘To what owing in the Department of the Committee of Shipping, exclufive of Exports - - 105,397 
‘To what owing for Exports of former Seafons - - - - f - . - 193,755 
‘To what owing for Teas returned by the Buyers and eld’. softs - te 5,944 
To what owing to Contra@ors of Indigo = = se 16,200 
To Interelon Annuities + = = = = 2 + © = # | | 55,019 
To D® - ~ Bonds - - - - - - - - - - - - - 73,371 
To Dividends on Stock ie sla Ee = a IE ih © Wah be SL SE Bide 53,813 
To eitge of Quick § Stock vat Bengal, gaint the | Company, madeup.t Soe oat 
Aes "The Sum paid by Lord Clive, for conftituting a Military Fund - — 11,50,720 - 
CYR. 3,20,53,138 
+ Dedua, ; 


Remittances ‘to Canton, not included in the Quick 1,084,964 
Stock, as per Memorandum of Floating Stock : 


Confignments of Rice to Fort St.George, not inclu-}? 
ded in the Quick Stock and per Ment.) of Float 7,18,623 
ing Stock - fe ; 24,038,587 


* CRS 2,96,49,551 at 2s, 


L.St8. 2,964,955 
‘Bills of Exchange drawn om England kcal clofing ed Quick a sand 
charged as Hy Debt in ‘Egat , ‘}_ 20997 | 


To Balance of Quick Stock, a inf the © Company at Bombay, made up to Soth, April 
1792, - e BY.R*, 41,65,771 at 20. 3d, - = £.468,649 


Dedu&, 
Bills of Exchange, drawn fince the clofe of the Quick Stock + «+ - (23,333 


L 
Balance in favor - . 


L 


Eaft India Houfe, 
10th March 1812. 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 481 
aa 
ae ee - . . Appendix, No. 15. 


1793 (EXCLUSIVE OF CAPITAL STOCK); 
Rupee, $s, the Pagoda, 2s. 3d. the Bombay Rupee, 5s. the Spanifh Dollar, and 6s. 8d. the China Tale. 


BY what due from Government tothe Company - - - - = 7 = = 4,200,000 
By Cafh, its Balance on 1 March 1793 (Morning) including Separate Fund’ - - = - 718,884 
By Cath referved to pay off Bonds advertifed tobe paidoff - - - - « = 7,942 
By NewSted 2.0 40 cw ae Re ele “36.000 
By Amouut of Goods fold, not paid for = - = ee 836,400 
By the Value of Goodsin Englandunfold = = = = ee 4,414,473 
By the Amount of Cuftoms on Tea returned by the Buyers to -_ Company, Shichi is claimed 
‘by the Company to be repaid them by Government - - #1 621 
By Balance of Quick Stock in favor of hag Company at # Fort St. George, 
made up to S0th April1792—- + Pagodas 44,90,515 
Dedu@, , 
Cargoes arrived in England included in Quick Stock, 
Manthip - - -+ 1,89,749 
. Dutton - + - 73,570 
Ded ley drawn by th Raj ah “of Tras ? asad 
ills receivahle, drawn e ol ravancore 
not jueluded = eae > f 1,26,986 
——— 1,296,835 & 
- Pagodas 43,64,182 at 8s. 
Add, 4. St. 1,745,673 
‘Bills of Exchange drawn en England fi fince the date of ie Quick eek 58,614 
Stock, and charged as a Debt in England + Cote apt ts 1,799,287 
2 
By Be Balanceof Quick Stock in favor of the Company at Bencoo- 
len, made up to 30th April 1792. - © -  - Span. Doll? 6,95,197° 
Dedua, 
The Cargo of the Afia, difpatched to Europe fince the  slote 61,684 
of the he Quick Stock - —_—_—_ 
ne $.D. 683,513 a.5s, £.158,378 
"Bills of Exchange, drawn fince the-clofe of the Quick Stock, charged as a 
Debton England : -"t 20,000 ; 
178,378 
By Balance of laft Books at St. Helena in favor, dated 30th Sept. 1792 = £40,826 
dd, : 
‘Bills of Exchange drawn fince the elofe of Quick Stock, charged as a Debt in England 4,624 Pc 
_——— ASS 
By Balance of Quick Stock in favor of the Company at China, ina i up 
No the oth Jenuary 1792 2 ss Tales 2063718 ar br 84 § ~*~ £.687,906 
Add, 
"The Amount of Bills drawn on England se fince doting the Quick Stock, and A 
charged asa Debt in England ~~ : _ 81785 : 
5 719,641 
By Cargoes from England, not arrived in India and China at the dates. of the feveral Quick 
Stocks “50h ¢ on Soe, ftpety oak cPaaueis See et Mee nee TE SS 1,505,517 
By Exports paid for, exclufive of Bullion - - - = - = = © = 497,719. 
By Silver exported and remaining in the Treafury, paid for - - = -* = = 13,018 
By the Value of Ships, Sloops, and Veffels, exclufive of thofe ftationed abroad = - ~ 37,050 
By what the Company paid for their Dead Stock in India - + a 400,000 
By the Value of the Eaft India Houfe and Warehoufes - - - °° = «© «= 355,780 
By Expenfes defrayed for the Subfiftence of French Prifoners in India + - .- «- 260,687 
By what remains due for Expenfes incurred in Expedition to Manilla - + . . 139,877 
By Hofpital Expenfes incurred for His Majefty’s Troops in Madras, Bengal, and Bombay 21,447 
By Imprefs paid Owners of Ships not arrived in England == Sd tar Ec vad 110,489 
L 16,319,658 


(Errors-excepted.) - Chat Cartwright, 
‘Acct. Gent. 


482 Appendix o IV" REPORT from the Scle& Committee on 


Appendix, No.16. = = + = . 
STOCK PER COMPUTATION ON THE 1" MARCH 
The Indian Stock Accounts calculated to the goth April 1809, at the Rates of 2s. for the 


< L 
To Bonds bearing Interet = - 9 - ~ = = * = © # © = = * 4,900,000 
To 1D? not bearing Interet - - - - - - - oa - - - 15,417 
Yo Bills of Exchange unpaid fromChina -  - =) - = + = te 362,469 
To - - @ o- India - + 5 = 2 = 2 2 2,241,044 
To Cuftoms and Excife on Goods fold, and Cuftoms on Goods unfold - - + 753,697 
To the Bank, for a Loan on Mortgage of the Annuities that may be fold per A& of 1788 - 700,000 
+ To D® for a Loan on Bond - ee eee, te ae ye ey el 100,000 
To D° for Intereft on the above Loans to 8th March = = et ee 10,666 
ToFreight and Demorage  —- - - - - - - - * - te, $36,200 
To Supra-Cargoes Commiffion on all Goods fold and unfold - 2 + 2 = « 134,660 
‘To Proprietors of Private Trade in all Goods fold - ee $22,000 
To Almshoufes at Poplar - = = 5 eH ee 7 69,545 
To what ewing for Exports of former Seafous er a - 164,090 
ToD* -~ tothe Warehoufe Contingent Fund + - - - - «= « 19,633 
To Warrants pafled the Court unpaid - - - . - - - . - - 68,000. 
‘To what owing for Teas returned by the Buyers and nefold: i ot 
To Intereft-on Bonds. - eos - ca - re vw oe © =. s 90,902 
To Dividends on Stock a ee 67,795 
To Balance of Quick Stock againt ape Company at Bengal, made up to 
30th April 1809 = = = SR 9,54,57,990 
Add, 


Lxpedition to Egypt, &c. taken credit for in Home Account 1,49,42,487 
S* Re, 11,04,00,477 


Ct. Re. 12,80,64,553 
‘The Sum given by Lord Clive for confiituting « a Military Fund. 11,50,720 


CARS, 12,92,15,275 at 20, £-12,921,597 


Dedudt, 
Military Stores not included in the Quick Stock, the Accbunts in that i 
department being made up to 3iftJanuary = r om 49,229 
Ee | 12,872,208 
To Balance of Quick plock ageint ne Company at Bombay, made up to 
SOth April 1809 + *, 1,82,80,102 
Add, 


Cargoes difpatched to England fince the clofe of the Quick Stock, $,51,280 
BY. R*. 1,86,31,382 at 26.34.£.2,096,030 


Dedud, 
7 Bills of Exchange, drawn on England fince the ‘clofe of the Quick Stock 229,459 
——_] 


1,866,571 


Eaft India Houfe, 
20th March 1812. 


the Affairs othe EASTINDIA COMPANY. 4st 


ere — = 
= = 


- + = = Appendix, No. 16. 


1810 (EXCLUSIVE OF THEIR CAPITAL STOCK); 
Current Rupee, 2s. 3d, for the Bombay Rupee, 8s. for the Pagoda, and 6s. 8d. for the China Tale. 


L 
By what due from Government totheCompany = = = = = = + = 1,207,560 
By Cath, its Balance on 1ft March 1810 - = © © + = # 2 @ 654,167 
By the Amount of Goods fold, not paidfor - = - es - oe 580,351 
By the Honorable Board of Ordnance, for Salt Petre delivered - ee ee 41,250 
By the Value of Goodsin England unfold = - = © = ©. 2 = © 6,365,000 
By Balance of Quick Stock made up in favor of the Company at Fort St. George 
to30th April1809 = == == = ~~ =~ Pagodas 54,839,033 at 88, £.2,173,214 
Add, . 
Bare Exchange aaa on n England sauce the slo of the } LAMA 
Military Stores from England, not included in Quick Stock - ~ 44,746 
2,229,401 
By Balance of Quick Stock in favor of the Company at Bencoolen, made up to 
30th April 1809 . - - - + += = Span. Ds. 919,229 at5s. © + 229,807, 
By Balance of Quick Stock in favor of the Company at Prince of Weles Ifand, 
made up to 30th April 1809 Se eee - - Span. Ds. 863,146 at 5s. + - 215,786 
By Balance of laft Books in favor of the Company at St. Helena,dated Sept. 1809  - £. 147,629 
Add, 
Bills of Exchange drawn fince the clofe of the Quick Stock, ene cnet t - = = 1,000 
asa DebtinEngland - - 2 « 148,629 
By Balance of Quick Stock in favor of the Company at Canton, made up to 
QdMarch 1809 - - - - += = = Tales 3,919,819 
Add, 
Confignments to the Cape of Good Hope, not received there at the clofe 
cftheir Books = 2 -© = += = = © = 68,582 
3,983,401 at 6s. 8d. - 1,827,800 
By Balance of Quick Stock in favor of the Company at Cape of Good Hope, ads “p to fe} 14,085 
31 Auguft 1809, Rix Dollars 84,512 at 4s. & 20 percent. Premium -~ i 
By Cargoes from England not arrived in India arid China at the dates of the feveral Quick Stocks, 1,836,330 
By Exports paid for, exclufive of Bullion, 1809-10 a 1,196,005 
By Imprefs and War Allowances, paid Owners of Ships not arrived in England= - = - 436,679 
By the Value of Ships, Sloops, and Veffels, exclufive of thofe ftationed abroad = - 7 79,140 
By the Value of the Eaft India Houfeand Wareboufts = + 5 = .= - - 1,129,000 
By what the Company paid for their Dead Stock in India = ee tee 400,000 
By what due from Government, for Storesand Supplies to His Majefty’s Troops - = - 960,C00 
By what owing from fundry Perfons returned from India, and in India, to be repaid in England 19,372 
£ 19,070,452 
Balance againt - 6,025,505 


£ 25,095,957 
——— 
(Errors excepted.) : 
Cha’ Cartwright, 
Acct Gen!, 


6H 


484 Appendix to lV REPORT from the Sele& Committee ov 


Appendix, No. 17. 


An ACCOUNT of the REVENUES and. CHARGES of the IMand of St. Hztena, 
from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclufive, 


CHARGES, REVENUES. 


Military. 


L: 
9,208 


L 
23,725 


30,839 
30,650 
36,940 
32,729 


179-3 = - - 
1798-4 - - + 


34,314 
9,224 40,529 
42,077 
50,637 


44,150 


1794-5 - - = 9,870 
11,590 


* 9,961 


1795-6 - = - 
1796-7 - + = 


1797-3 - = -]|> 9,930 | 40,637 59,191 

1798-9 - - -| 12,283 |, 41,807 60,167 59,438 
1799-1800 - -| 13,311 | 39,656 57,161 56,337 
1800-1 - - -| 13,197 | 49,045 59,106 58,334 
1801-2 - + -| 20,617 43,451 66,226 65,454 
1802-3 - - -| 14,589 | 37,044 56,995 56,159 
1803-4 - - -| 18,947 | 46,164 72,328 71,553 
1804-5 - - -| 14,830 | 59,138 80,359 79,525 
3805-6 - - -{ 20,321 | 60,344 6,699 87,364 86,576 
1806-7 - - =| 20,546 54,178 8,176 82,900 82,115 
1807-8 - - - 16,303 $2,647 4,336 103,286 102,437 
1808-9 - = -}| 11,712 69,246 $3,150 


1,066,658 


Eaft India Houfe, 
toch March 1812. (Errors excepted.) Wo Wright, 
Auditor of India Accounts. 


the Alairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


; oe 


EE ———————————————— = 


Appendix, No. 18. 


Aw ACCOUNT of the PROFIT or LOSS incurred at the Ifland of St. Hetena 
exclufive of Rents and Revenues, and of Charges General, from the year 1792-3 to the 
year 1808-9 inclufive. 


Eaft India Houfe, 
- 10th March 1812. 


8,354 
12,138 


12,924 


10,455 


7,229 4 
10,709 


13,270 


180,132 


(Errors excepted.) 


7,458 


3,343 — 
8,751 as 
5,887 - 
8,065 - 
7,532 _ 
7,034 _ 

12,819 - 

15,610 6,609 

18,453 10,099 

17,056 4,918 

14,227 1,808 

21,683 11,228 

24,725 17,496 

23,233 12,524 


29,300 


228,672 


Wa Wright, 
Auditor of India Accounts. 


485 Arpendix fo IV REPORT from the Sele&t Committee on 


ay a, 
Appendix, No. 19. 
Ax ACCOUNT, fuewing the Amount of all Supplies received from England, the 


feveral Prefidencies and Scttlements in India, and China, at the [fland of St. Helena, 
from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclutive. 


Received for Bills on the Court of Dire@ors = - = £.917,768 
Supplies from England -. - - - = = = 865,137 
i fomBergl = ttt OL ate 

a TS gee ac” Gy, UE 30389 
St tf sbeb9 
Se gene ont 
Doioi ot ges 
ee Sees 22,303 
Tol - - 
Est India Houte, Errors excepted. 
roth March 1812. Pree > ym Wright 


Anéitor of India Accounts, 


Appendix, No. 20. 


Ax, ACCOUNT, thewing the Amount of all Supplies, made to, England, the feveral 
Prefidencies and Settlements in India, and China, from the Ifland of St. Helena, 
from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclufive. . 


lies to Com, ’s Shij - 
Seri Sos Ships ald Troops 
De to Poriga Ships 
De to Prifoners of War - 
Payments on account of Freight 
Supplies to Bengal - -- = 
De toMadras - - = 


peut eterag 
cee beetnnee 


De toBencoolkn - = - - ye 

De to the Cape of Good Hope - = 26,455 

toChin ~ - = iS = 29,039 

Sundries= = = = - + 16,024 

Tol -  -. £.219,749 

— 
Enft India Houfe, Errors excepted.) : 
oth March 1810. Wo Wri 


Auditor of india Accounts, 


Appendix, No. 21. 
As ACCOUNT, thewing the Value of the Affets remaining at the Ifland of St. Helena 
‘on the goth September 1792, and on the goth September 1809, refpettively ; diftinguith- 
ing thofe Articles ufually termed Dead Stock, as Buildings, Plantations, Stores, &e. 


‘S0th September | $0th September 


1909, 
Ci, SeeeW a tes A te PR Se, shee 
Furopean Goods = = = = = 79,931 
Indian Goods - - rei al = 31,138 
fiores - - oe - - - - 2,698 
L | 147,629 

DEAD STOCK; Viz. 

Buildis nd Fortificatic - % ‘* 7 36,538 43,856 
Panter ee Dll. I] ansis | 2eaga 
Houfe Furniture - - - - . w: 1,514 2,432 
Pins Sue ke eee ee 397 408 
Slaves 2 6 5 5 2 et ee 8,487 1,237 
Bos - - - i - . ee pI 496 
and other Stores - - - - 66,476 
7 139,818 


287,447 


Yaft India Houfe, {Exrors escepted.) 7 
10th March 1812. We Wright, 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 487 


Appendix, No, 22. 


* bY a] 
So en Comin the fT EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


| (an Ss aT EES BETIS 2 1 : 
is MEER ces act cmc cb Seo eect ean cea mr gn ti oebtndetinin Set aia oeier nine meh RE 


pei 


reap senen datas 


7 IVS REPORT fiom the Sec Commitee 


Ayenig Noes 5 = os 
{ceaens of Conon wal Mancnanaiee 9 he Kane Tye Conean ia Gazer Banas, 


Bees ya 
(hee Commas es Recep, Charge sod Poynter nde the vr Heads ter fr «7 Vs oa 1705-6 ts hn 2 nae. 


ios. | 106 Bees 


Ger lce 


sea) enajunes| ows tna fae] worse won| mon | vs | noe) ant. [vera] wma msi Wee 
Ac 


ele| ele 


| fee Ea ed ea Bs 
abe fore ere er arc 
sae 
pe 

es ame 

shea 


css} sas aie Pate 


‘oe 
pers 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 
ir, 


Appendix, No. 23. 


6K 


—- . "”U.lUeee fs t 
| ‘Appendix-to EV RE POR T from the Seleét Committee on * 
490 = a — 
: Appendix, No.23, 0 = = = = te 
. : 5 z s e Sites; 
GENERAL STATEMENT of the BOND DEBTS and SIMPLE CONTRACT DEBTS of The East Inia Company, the State of CASH taining 
$ azgs. | 1799. | 1800. | 1801. | 1802. 
pens. - 
_— & & 
atten Sia eee = = es 
ook ing Inte =~ Sci Shaman 
Beck ct tig Lene) ~*~ 307 
Hike actnge Chim == sept 
2 ae aaa sens sensor 
Dito - = = tadin pete =| sages | srs | zeman | water | senbzSs | nepinss rd 
Catt he on Goats un] sezass | Ssaafe| resoas | otqsez| Senses | rams 35073 
‘Bank, Loon on Anoniticn = | bone eepecs |, 700,000 | Teoye00 | 7oe;ceo. Tee sce 
Diss frelon Die ke= gas] ssss| 955 | abs resis 
pie Dano <= ish | sansa | ‘seease | 927 | ax6e00 sexe 
Siccaeioatiin sok eres | seer] come | apes os 
Prive Take Gin fed shispi} senses | gsuaeo|| rene | staz0 675000 
Aimivate ae Pope == rae | rua | se | rmats| 7607 bh 
Ingst oMity Fand mee | tang | ge | anor | nase 20036] ator ha 
subi 
Diss on Cnkings Pont =| spss | gall tase] aie] rer Grae sas] sa] wre] oe ei Soa | 
Wee Sype EY) wesaer| sirale | eusae | ya6oo] ysstoo | sonacs spteo| sence} samece | aggos0] gnooo] masse} sascm| anol — | | a... 
“ 
it oe Eo omer Sin - waif tats | te] tose | ante = | sete] 7648 | s6rt0] aneso] asize | anart | sarsars | she 
Dito foy Teas ern ad fd soe] nase] nao] sexe] © ope am] ol > | oe] ort ore | os ore | oan 
Ditto Con for indign meme] comm | — | | pe cool bata be 8 Na reno I 9 Pi Ue 
frenfien Annie - = S| (hae (RR Pete || NE pee ee eR Ge i bce | a ae 
Page at 2 a SS |e sert9 | atoms 46560) Sheng susrg) sesat| 56585 | _sts36 | 763872 rae] 95335) gor) | 
Date tn eS Sete] rome] seat le 65756] eaae since | susts| seta} Goya} Gostss 65865 | 68860] 6rr93) |” 
wi path tree sete | aston] nace] ante | gaygco eeaco| 388%] s5200| 6yoc0] ghitoe gore |. sry20|  éeymo} | Du 6 
Govenmest;Yeood Halt Year -!~ = | aoe) — uf SS ati a a re 5 es a ss & a 
Binsro tee cretion (ft) sseage amass | gee abe | 7 ee |S eee [oe 
(RPO Pie a beta br Sas Bera 5 
me = 7 = he oat 109,000 - oS Too,ees | t0Gj00 | 1o0;500 | 100000 | 100,000 | 160,009 | 
Ducnvotta == [Ste LT LL aouene | ssnast | ceases Fs Sh i eee ee fe arena ere |) 2h 
Bake Conmnb oti” =f |e eae 
scree 1 el on a ees ee moheal cc daucses net. 
"et bees ans FE fag Fast Geel heroes Cones pera Se Pe Be wR TS eae baa OL Te 
Wearvne Coming Pont ehh [eo CP ; 
oe REE aS sie = = =] vs] mrs} coer | 7766] nose] suze | asete | anes 
pata se Se Bias cohen | 21 ele 23 ep Be mee a eset 
1 
oral peers - - 5 lrostssit} recasel's aoa 3 =} gues ; — 
Sais Hite ie: Savas) aa6ts| 4275806] 47BBAls| Gexmgs| rolitsr | Gstthagé | seeeser| Sysna7s|sossrotl 
Basher over ~~ -| sapsate| 2tts,s6] sa6nes1| asagier| ast . 
ae “pes autor | 32656797 | 8793873) say4g0n463) 188159052 |124665,960 | 99610651 | 7996778 | gcessts 
& |rsaboce) osenage essa. | macengte| ssarbee f E 
» a aesnare e719. |s6.5950 pee poe ITAA | 10/168 756 |sc,4424659| sos8rgntBo | r9:252465 |ss.c8sia7— | v6ehes3 |asgpats| | T° 


a 


= is wf 


; the Afairs The EAST INDE OR ee 
= A 2 eae 


SURG ess ane 2) 2, eA pond Novag, ; 


ining In their Treafury, and other EFFECTS, appertaining to them in Great Britaic’ and Afloat, ou the xf of March in ech Yeur, frou 1703 to 1810 inélufive. 


“4 1798. 79. 1795. | 1796. 97. | 3798. | 1799. 1800, 1801. 13807. 1808, 
CREDITS. be i: 

f _ fe | & ‘£ & & L Fe “ b Pe re ra “ 

~ ff] 920 from Government - = — = | 4rancjco0 | 107,560 | 11807,360.| 1,207,560 | rston 560 | syneT,S6 | 1,207,960 | asseTURe | W207,560 1,207)560 | 4,307,560 | 1,207,360 | 1,207,560 
Cay Batace = ===) 7as.ttg | tyme | araety | armse | varie] sessr8 | tesaa8 | strags | onsen srug79 | rep698 | Ssso7 | 654067 

HD] Diao rtrd wey Rendantreiet | “anus | Sn] 2 sag. |snatr | wpe | state} — oly | boty rex) ni =| — 
Rew gick = - = + =| ahwwof ssmef =p | S| ep ae a ey MS is 
Goo folds not pid for = =| 836400 | agzeyso> | 18834500 | 850.000 | nfgroce | s14i6c0| pga.gal | sarBaw | 166r\bo0 abrgvo | 6rrpss | saunas |) sfora5e 
Dito in Eogland wnfold ~ = | aotsdna7s | srtatssa7 | artsiays | soSapans | reisacer | Svonaens | Sakedas | saRgre | y.726000 6875058 | pisia05 | 746499 | 6,365,000 
Rares coamepadattet | ih oe dC Bed, A ie AL WS ad bt | =. ia i: 
argon vot ariel i Ini 0 4) sessur | ngarys | nariag | iastign | mmnests | narrate | aeonate | NR | x4r6ats | astita | asr5e957 | gansios | nated] itrrose | AMtnzes | sore | sbras8 | rts659 
anor pid for (except Ballon) - | agririg| sessre | ax6arsn | grass | gphter | sprays state | asses | arsaen | anassta | srocts rsenas | sa6sgny | sartar7 | as118 814 L nagb.095 
iver exported and remining =| ret} gangas | taas | ortag | 6has4] stots sasees | anaeiy | arsciag| gb8iaKy | 68550 yt] - - - 
Iprely e pid Owners - =| rtoyty |. argase | 20nést] sBraak | assaiy | ator | sosoys | senate] sstert | sosasn| arssse | srrery ss] arasse} Grama | 4n6istd | doors] 436679 
Value of ladia Houle, ke. = =| s5a%0| arhrto | gore | songen | songar | StaeBe | - 75749 | Mere | sestr9) g7o079] grar9 | goma6e} g9mt6 | ryoot0e | 1x rez.00d | ayragic00 
Value of Sloopy kes at home - =| $7052], agago | steps] aagpse] anise | 4pa4ne} Gone | Swe} rane) 75.710] rst] Snate 648 | a7saco sea7il] © a940 
Sebatesta Franch Pilooers = [alain | fr ef ee P| Pe ee ae ee Pee fe a 
Danco Marin Sxpeiilen Soon | Mae NN fees be a ay | eae | dS: «em ert. Bic 
ir, tate Bepences iow} sayr | = - - = si = i) = = g = > = — - Bee 
Cargoos active, nad unlaten «= }= = =} s = =| ato] gto] e a ‘= - = ur} - - ~ = = ist 
Due from Goverment frStoreyke |» - fo = =[- = + srs | ssraa | 4ortiooo | gabongn | yatoyoe | aatocco | atoweee |. yhovooo | yin 


15,168,736 |2oggas6sy | 2es79 089 


\gotgars!16138,05;) 


ToraL cnepits - - £.| 576904] o888,896 |acyensssa|esentss 


Appendices, 


No, 24.—No, 25,—-& No, 26. 


61 


é ; Appendix, No. 24. = 3 


AMOUNT of the SALES of the Company’s, the Private Traps, and the Neurpa, 
in refpect to the firft, and according to the Acruan Accounts, 


anatd 1794-5. |-1795-6. | 1796-7. 


1797-8. | 1798-9. | 1799-800, 


Ls Lae £- £ L 


2,550,058 |2,460,868| 3,368,603| 3,665,391 
523,594} 651,925] 1,228,208! 1,056,840 


|" .COMPANY’s GOODS. 


‘Tragic ne, "ses + 


Bengal Piece'Gnods 


ips 


3239, 
~Couti aid Surat ditto - | 648,900} 4{ 399,885 1 572,029 | 715,777 13,031,109} 459,548] 1,773,577! 871,0y7 
Coati, Surat,& Bengal | : ) 
damaged: Picce - ad Ste =, - Pe - & 
Goods = 2 = 
China’ oupts Silke 54 hs an 9,094) - . 
Maw Silk 2 390,404 i 505,408} 446,2684 
Org: ami 29,954) 25,875) - - 14,985) 
‘chin 4 fare 7,332 4032) - 
20,525 5 58,557 | J 
254,104} 235,115 200,909 
127,081] 120,191 407,911 


ae] se |: 370,695 
392,925| 783,885] 189,134 
18,507 17,688] 26,630 


a. 


8,897.066 


PRIVATE TRADE, GOODS. 


“Meas - - 2 = 
Piece Goods 
PRaw Silk - 
China. Ware 


he , 

27+ geet sta.t89 6241 304,124} 165,088 
a 261,863 j 197.602| 249,837 |» 340,567 
34,038 ue 5,058) 3,515 3,684 +» 910 1,034 
2,087) 3,940}. 


11.024 3,613]° <1,370) 3,089 2.796 


Nankeens = - = -.- = -|- -} 16,281 8,041] 7,084 278 14,540 
Pepper “= = - = =)- = Jin. 3) baie Rag (it 26,106 
Suit Petre - "= - - --- e+ “32,706 93,527) 18,168 5,000 
la a A Aah aoe 5.105 
Drugs, Sugar, anng7 312, 83 719,016] 1,064,553) 1,769,776 
Coffee - - - - = - - apie ‘- 

“Total Private Trade Goods .- - £. 2,330,960 


“NEUTRAL end PRIZE GOODS; 


» Raw. Silk == 
ae Sea Ss 


169,089 
5244 


455,008 


10,160, 0 | 


“India Board Office, Whitehall, t 
10th March 1812, 


A Pies) No. 24. 


and Prize Goons, as eftimated by the Count of Directors in February 1793 
in each Year, from 1793-4 to 1S09-10 inclufive. 


1809-10. 


Toran 


Fen L 


8,479,218|3,958,284 '3485,210 13,148,547 ]3,620,904 
1,406,879 1,131,554 672,079|, 444,114] 621,862 
1,169,153) 701,131] 700,477] 516,998 1] 614,317 


116,894} 2 ee Oe 

a + hae 497} = = 
350,452] 450,770] 359,516) 335,692 
28,876| 45,855) 41,455 196,998 


55,480] 76,632] 54,485 “43,828 55,203] y f 153,476). 


317,137] 269,246) 172,058| 224,526) 141,38 noe 38 3 240] S0,ATL 
224,944] 96,880 156,598 239,170) 13 Ep: 804)" 223,793 


241,573| 993,442] 194,127] 210, 90]: ‘osaut 15,402 153,884 
276,053! 149,883 i 12,651) 3,395) 2 1236, - 145,588) 357,787 
42,264) ; hadi, ] ; fis tte 


pe aes a Ae, 
7,602,041)6, 5 


182,926] 211,865} 389,463] 200,439] 912.710} 
285,813| 431,783]1 ae es 853,904 
99,624] | 37,040 ; 125,431 
1,555| 3,297 ; = Ms 
1,845} $3,190) 
44,419]. 82,284, 
12,483} 62,423 
34,209) _ 3,165 
1,693,223|1,265,741 
25,095) 153,032 


if 39,495) 
bre 24,754) 


76,325,46210,155,987 0,625,151 885,268 sl 215,924,005 505° 89 6,009,218 3,287,085 


55,460,5 
At90,373 
11,908,923 


11624 


1 
701 
295,797 
“82,001. 
838.495 
3,322,835, 
3,000,051 


1 974.099 
5,031,516 
113,617 


alt 


108,093,600 


EY 


4,2 bags 
980,505". 
sh! 1,081 


Pig » 


435, “s 
BOTT 


I 140: 823,437 


_ Thomas, Peicie Witie ery 


Accountant, 


7 Ve z . 
eon No. 25. 


Prime Cot fo : ie Sef Amount Profit 


of od] | Sule of on the 
| tovetement | Teed 
rade. 


1,336,739, | 


611,522 | 33t,145] | 1,595,493. 


3,543,236 | 218, 1,108,087 
1,285,765 


1,830,569 

1,783,254 

|| 1,669,103 

: 1,741,007 

| 2:236,596 | » ] am m9 
41,953,026 1,559,086 
2,254,899 | 1,706,225 
4,873,078 | * 78560) | 1,677,652" 
887.119) | 36,038) 542,13 at ! 1,510,215 5570 |'|1)688,4704 
J} io19780,|  s7std0h stg.070) 87, 10 | Lrsei73s |. 180,868] |-1:722,000 
4809-10. = =] 1,240,815 


» Total 


a) 


yHiarslonoodt expo fed oF or uel 

Of the Duty paid by the mapa ‘was ineluded i the ale-Value. 
Datyis payaule on Goods exporied, and the Iidme Confumption Duties are paid) 
ae Das ns Sule Value, previous to 0 th year 1799, was miso by 


is flipaleted bysthe Charter-party to-go, free: aly, When a Ship tas ‘been empl 
eward Wee e/to tho extent of the Chittte: si nage: in the firtt cafe, af 


the Affairs. of ‘The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 
Fos saci . 


a a 4 - Appendix, No. 25. 


year 1793-4 tw the year 1809-10 inclufive; diftinguithing Inpra from Caixa, and {ecifying the Invoice PriceyCuftoms, 
| of 2s. the Current Rupee, 8s. the Pagoda, 2s. 3d. the Bombay Rupee, 55. the Spagith Dollar, aud 6s, 8d. thdPale. 


CHINA, " GRAND TOTAL 


[Charges of 
ber TOTAL Amount fi Prime Coft 
calculated | of and | Sale of id 
Ae pet Cant Tnveftment 
on Sule or Goods. 
Amounts 
erat 


Charges, Goods. 


ve 4 Te eh : f 
1255729} 1,921,780. ] 2,514,594 | 592, 2,536,845 | 626,076] 707,591 |’ 4,133,498 726,247 


149,072} 2,198,233 | 9,861,422 | 2,883,582 | 598,395] 663,019 | 278,643] 4,418,610 1,054,394 
148,636] 8,055,012 2,072,664 | 652 | | 3;229,599 | 770,371] 1,053,701 8 5,379471 | -{ 0} 1,136,429 
133,417} 1,960,597 } 2,668,336 | 707,749 | | 2,994,144 | 876,545] 1,077,743 53251626 oj: 812,284 © 
128,895] 2,041,700 } 2,577,890 | 536,190 2,318,007 | 403 403,031, 1,024,057 5 3,978,803 5 5 © 696,495 
182,614} 2,591,351 } 3,652,283"] 1,060,952 | | 3,620,871 198,60 15541,307, 783] 6,776,564 373] 1,989,109 
189,749} 2,814,264 3,794,982 | 980,718 | | 3,496,958 96751 ‘sia ed 5. 72 | - j 176} 1,621,004 
180,819} 2,668,881 | 3,616,981 |. 947,500 | | 3,797,229 |. 209,151) 1,594,897 | 979,759} 5,921,036 | 7,595,181] 1,674,145 
176,970] 2,579,546 | 3,539,404 | 959,858 | | 3,094,971 } a5 5} syt75as0 : 31 4,751,380 6,626,347 | 1,874,967 
187,663} 2,655,152 | 3,753,252 | 1j098,100 }.| 2,874,593 | - 79)15¢ 1,219,560 u Hf 4,474,378 | 571,595,258 


181,488] 2,691,527 | 3,629,677 | 938,150 | | 2,959,654 | 1gst4ss “293;3031 4017,890° 3] 1,254,188 
165,375] 2,351,343 | 3,907,495] 956,152 | | 2,647,686 | 76, a}! 90,078 7 21} 4 285)504 
187,035] 2,545,447 | 3,740,699 | 1,195,252 | | 9,042,085 3} 13176,881 | 9096 .918'| 5,995,508) 1,398,680 
185,452} 2,530,085 | 3,709,046 | 1,178,961 2,663,962 953 . 2 4,080,728 181 | 1,100,392 
192,538] 2,603,634 | 9,846,756 1,249,192) 25 7407} 1,269,554 |" 207,848] 4,194,498 | 71} 1,022,543 
199,414 | 9,675,987 9,988,267 1,812,280 | ; 98 | 4,052,873" jai} 1,493,148 
186,154] 2,878,883 | 3,723,116" 4,544,293, qj 82 28 nas | 8,802) 4,304,010. 7 "1,672,670 


12,894,815 141,203,422 157,896,274 [16,692,352 7 


‘home, was paid by the Company, andi: greater part of the, isp ease ovat ‘exported was drawn a by the 
the year 1790, an Act was paffed allowing Baft India Goods to. be warehouleds fubjeétto the payment of ‘comparatively . 
the Buyers; the Sale Value, therefore, fince 1799, includes only the amount of the Miapehauete Duties. By this 
whole amount of the high Duties then payable by the Compaby on Eaft India Goods. 


agaount of the Outward and the Homeward Voyage, excepting, 1ft Under the circumftances of a Ship having been laden , 
on any Political Service; or, Sdly, When hy. reafon of her Tonbage having been occupied by Troops, Goods have not 
payment is made for Freight Outward, and in the) 2d)and 3d caies, part of the Freight and Demorage is calculated as - 
Charter-party to go free, is 4-5ths of the whole Tonnage. a oy 


(Errors excepted.) 


Chat Cartwright, ~ | 
a Acct. Gen!, 
6M 


sopra, No. 26, - 


. 


* ‘An. ACCOUNT, fhewing the Amount -6f all BILLS of EXCHANGE: drawn upon the 


refpe@tively; from the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-9 inclufive; converting the Indian 
Rupee, and 5s. the Spanith Dollar, contrafted with the Amount of the Payments of the faid Bills 


1792-3 - 
1793-4 
1791-5 + 
1795-6 - 
1796-7. - 
1797-8 = 


1798-9 = © 


1799-1800 
1800-1 - 
1801-2 - 
1802-3. - 
1803-4 = 
1804.5 - 
1805-6 - 
1806-7, 3 
1807-8. - 


1808-9 - 


Current 


Rupees. 


2,627,679 
4,022,559 


[udszor| | 


Wah rast: 


63,089,785 6,308,978 672444 | 240,864 
aS ke at 


eM 
ee 


FORT 
| pata | ena so 
Filia at od secession Pogodas. | £- Sterling, | £-Sterling 

Curr’. Rupee. actually paid, 
£- L £ L 
2,730 308,222 | 193,288 | 123,288, 
Lee ~ 4! 10,967 1,537,657 | 615,063 | 613,672 
a7, 94,730 292,196 | 116,878 | 114,612 
“i2,se8 384027 | 153,971 | 150,697 
18,869 970,545 | $88,218 | 396,427 
7174 283,745 | 113,898'] 109,152 
mE re 660,889 | 264,356 | 260,823 
1,566,009 | 626,404 | 630,298 
266,106 | 106,440} 107,697 
327,201 | 130,881 | 133,791 
185,409 74,164) 75,110 
407,541 | 163,017 | 171,035 
629,889 | 251,956 | 267,617 
7,082,161 | 492,864'| 448,388 
1,386,697 | 554,679 | 600,805 
1,281,087 | $12,495 | 542,818 
1,238,065 | 495,226 | 510,800 
77,98 | |12,809,946 | 5,123,738 | 5,236970| 


‘Afem.—All the Bills drawn irom Bencoolen haying been paid at 5s. pot 


Eaft India Houfe, 


the 10th March 1812. 
‘ 


} 


the’ Affairs of The EAST-INDIA COMPANY! + 497 


ae 


- 25 =) = = Appendix, No: 262% 


Court of Directors of the Eatt India Company, from the feveral Prefidencies and Settlements in India 
Currencies into Sterling Money, at 2s, the Current Rupee, $s. the Pagoda, 2s. gd. the Bombay 
aually made in Sterling Money. 


ST. GEORGE. BOMBAY. TOTAL 
ee Rasen) Seeing & Sting | &:Stelng 
paid more. | pa Jace ta Bombay ‘ yj paid more [paid more than paid lefs thaw 
thay at 8 | ats per anges &Sterlings |. wae the 
per Pagoda. | Pngoda, aétually paid, foregoing 
Rates. 
ZB i “ Hee 
my ee 91,153 | 10,255 * 2,892 
= 9es, 253,620 | 28,533 y 12,358 
y Paes 2,158,244 | 242,803 29,600 
- + 1,339,453 | 150,688 17,024 
8,209 936,465 | 37,852 8,209 | 19,478 
Sea 161,317 | 18,148 ames =) satay 
ane 20,928 2,355 12,185 $4593 
3,894 67,833 | 7,631 ‘7835 | ue. 
1,257 500,756] 56,335 F 62,111 Pg 32,505; 
2,910 657,046 | 73,940.) 81,651 | ; 35,081 ee, 
946} - 2 = 1,741,720 195,944 Q17,715 43,279 pit 
8,018 |= = © 743,560 $3,650 | 92,945 9,295 : 27,738 wit 
15,661] = + -} | 1,572,312] 176,885 | 196,539 | 19,654 46,213) — 
15524 ]- - | |asi6gae') 159,406 W7AIS | 17,712 : 46,50 | — 
46,26}- - - 1,492,328 136,541 18,654 ( 77,019 Sey 
30383 |- = -| |.3,034,160 379,070 | « azo |- ¥ sors} — 
[ w5Th) = = =| 1 7,195,992 R 89.950 191,625 


a fee est 
148,502 | 15,270 | }22,784,037 | 2,563,204 | 2,787,305 | 229,196 


=== 


618,562 
97,763 


Amount paid more than at the foregoing Rates - ~ - £, 520,799 


Dollar, that Refidency is excluded in this Account, 


(Errors excepted.) Cha Cartwright, 
Acct, Gent, © %. 


‘498 Appendix fo" IVs REP ORT fromehe Select’ Committee on 


Appendix, .No; 27. < 
STATEMENT delivered in by Cuanizs Grant, Efq.. a Pebiter of the. Committee 
ny 16th March 1812. x 
ee the greater part of thofe Gk, arife from the’ maintenance of various fubordingte 
Fadtories and Aurungs, which have been eftablithed for the provifion of the Company's Indian 
Inveftment, itis not to be difputed that they moft naturally fall upon the Commercial branch of ‘the 
Company's Affairs, and fiould be deduded from the Profits of the Trade. Butas it may be alleged 
that the Charges are needlefsly great, and that whatever is exceffive in them is to be attributed to 
_ the improvident management of a p Conary. it ras be fair to fute fome Confiderations which bear 
eee this point. : . - 
Thofe fubordinate FaGtories, with their. Dependencies werey: generally fpeaking, ereéted by the 
Company in the early period of their efteblifhment in India, when the coft of fuch Buildings was 
~ @liaper than they have fince become, and the Profits on the In ‘Trade greater. They were made 
_ fufficiently fabftantial and fpacious to bea fecurity for the Property contuined in them, and a com- 
~ fortable refidence for the European Servants of the Company. “Thefe places became the firft feats of 
the Manufactures of the Country, for the Company, in confequence of being a permanent body, 
gave employment to the Manufacturers all the year round, and from year to year; by which means 
Workmen continued attached to them from Father to Son, and from this contivuity, as well as from > 
the tafte of Europe for finer’ fabrics than were in general v by the Natives, the beft fandard of 
qualities was eftablithed’ und upheld by thofe Fa€tories. fn confequence alfo. of this fyfteim of per- 
manency, the Gompatiy did not, upon every change of in Europe, immediately difcontinue 
employing the Workmen of & particular article ey len a Jittle out of fathion, becaufe thefe 
Workmen could not turn themfelyes eafily, other lines and ince the Company have poffefied 
Territory, it has alfo been generally found € ppt 10 uphold ws much as pottible the provifion of 
the Company's Inveftment, -becaufé a failure in’ the wfual Advances for it was found to affect the 
abt moft of the Manofaéturers being alfc ° iecupiers of Land, 


she fealeMof tote Edabliliinents, aud” the” expenfe of keeping them in repair and properly 
guarded, may certainly be rather Seer than'would be deemed neceffiry if they were to be formed 
anew at the prefent day, when the Couvtry i is fo much under the power of our fuperior fyftem c of Go- 
‘vernment, “but fill: that feale is preferable to an entire reduction of them for fomething more ti mple 
_and diminutive, even if it were not ‘always expedient to have places of fume fecurity for yeluable 
property againft fudden convullion and diforder, from the danger of which no Country can be fuid 
to be abfolutely free: And it may alfo be obferved, that 4 local’ Britiih influence is thus extended 
“to different parts of the Country. ina manner moft conciliating to the Natives, that is by laying out 
Money in promoting their ufeful apultty. . 


Theamountof thefe Cliarges, ‘Meleding the Salaries ‘of the Enfopean “Agents at the fubordinate 
Fadtories, has been reckoned in Bengul,about 7 or 8 per Cent. on the Homeward Inveftment, ex- 
clufive ot what is already charged in the Invoices, and upon any more reduced {ele of Efablih- 
ment could probably be not lefs than “Sper Ceut.; a faving for which it would not be advilable to 
deftroy ancient Eftablithments which sola their purpoles i ina fuperior manner. 


It is however always to be remembered, that the Boards of Trade, and the Officers immediately 
under them at the different Prefidencies, whofe Eftablitliments are includedin thé'Charges in quettion, 
tranfad other affairs befides thofe of the Homeward Invefiment, and a part of the Expenfe incurred 
by them ought to be deduéted on this acconnt. The Invefiment from Karope, which thofe Boards 
a}fo manage, is undoubtedly a bufinefs purely Commercial, but part of it confifis of Britith Staples 
fent by the Company on national principles, without deriving any Profit from them. But bifides 
this, the Bengal Board of “Trade manages, as has becn.obferved in the Third Report, the great 
i ae of Salt and Opium, which are articles of Revenue, as alfo faperintends the Depurtiments 
of Marine and Cuftoms ; and therefore a large part of the fum of £. 25,000, which is the average 
of the Annual Efiablithment of that Board, thould be thrown upon their different branches; and 
the Commercial Board of’ Madras in like manner fuperintends the Department of Cuftoms. 


foi 


_ the Aits of The EAST ANDIA.COMPANY, 495 


ie Appendix, No. 28. 
Aw ACCOUNT of CHARGES GENERAL paid in Exciann from 1793-4 to 
* 1809-10, distinguished under the several Heads thereof. 


| aRticLes 


ARTICLES 
$* " ufually chadied wid ~ 
Politics! — | Comercial for which « | Cimeger Generh | po man 
CHARGES.|CHARGES. ne atraat + bed 
niece s Value revaina, | PrMHY talons 


1793-4 eS resent aon 

1794-5 - - 135,811 54,131 

3795-6 - 4 136,470 100,514 

W96-7 =e fi 231707 

197-8 = - 114,668 

1798-9 = 352.017 81,065 0 

1799-1800 ~~ 386,056 145.123 40,470 745,711 

1800-L 153 883 i 763,050 

1801-9 =~ 80,374 | 730,537 

1802-3 - 776.211 

1803-4 ves E 45,126 752.912 

1804-5 = = 69,o14 804,020 

4805-6 e 250,492 51 SIT 700,299 

W067 -  s 172131 63,308 623,053 

1807-8 =e 205,026 84,218 501,428" 

1808-9 = 200,574 9 O97.774 
la a 233,019 627,433 ~ 


1809-10 


3,178,212 1,519,341 932,158 | * 11,593,497 


) 

Memo.—The Amount ftated in the above Account as paid fur Charges General in the year 
1796-7, is £.10,000 lefs than in the Annual Account for that year laid before Parliament. The 
difference arifes from a fun to that ameunt, paid for raifing Seamen for Government, having been 
included in that Account with the other fams paid for Charges General, which has been fubfequently 
carried to a feparate Head. bi - i 

Alfo the Amount of Charges General for the year 1801-2, as per above Account, is £. 1,000. more 
than was fiated in the Annual Account returned to Parliament that year. This arifes from a fum 
to that Amount, paid for Charges General, having been added in the former Account to the Amount 
of Goods and Stores Exported, which has been tubfequently deducted from it, and carried to ite 
proper Head. 

The amount of the Political Charges General, for the year 1806-7, is ftated in Appendix No. 46 
to the Sdeport of the Seleét Committee on the Affairs of ‘The Katt India Company, at £.226,732; 
in this Account it is taken at £.172,131: the difference arifes from the infertion in this Accouut 
‘of the fum of £.54,601 as a Receipt on account of the Chinfurab Caufe, which was omitted in the 
meres No. 46, the view then tuken of this item of Receipt caufing it to be uted us u diftind 
article, 4 

Eaft India Houfe,  -° (Errors excepte:l.) Chat Cartwright, t 
0th March 1812 Acct. Gen!, 
2 i 
, Appendix, No. 29. + 
ESTIMATE of COST, CUSTOMS, FREIGHT, CHARGES, and PROFIT’. 
in ENGLanb, on one Year's Sale of The Ealt india Company's Goods; made up upon the 

principle adopted by the Court of Directors in their ate af 15th February 1793, 

excepting in the calculation of the Foreign Currencies, and the Rate per Cent, for Charges 

Merchandize in England. 


CHINA. | INDta } TOTAL 


| Sh aaa a £- 
Gok E's wage + — ST SP ays86,5352 1,121,800 | 2,509,831 
Cuftoms - - - hy 32,880" |» ' 600,970" 633,850 
Freight aay ra - > 481,400 209,270 690,670 
Charges of Merchandize at 5perCent.| | 193,670 |, 115,745» 249,415 
Total - - £1} 2,036,581 2,047,285 | 4,085,766 
Sale Amount ~ *-'} | 2:673,400 "|| 2,314,900 4,988,300 


‘Profit - - £ 


In the Eftimate of the Court of Dire@ors of February 1793, the Rates qdopted for the converfio 
‘vf the Foreign Currencies into Sterling were 2s. the Cutrent’ Rupee, 8%. the Pagoda, and 2s. 6d. 
the Bombay Rupee, and 7s. 244d. the China Tale; and the Rate on the Sule Value for Charges of 
Merchandize in England was 6 per Cent. In the prefent Eftimate, the Foreign Currencies are cal! 
culated at 2s, the Current Rupee, 8s. the Pagoda, 2s. 3d. the Bombay Rupee, and Gs. 8d. the Chine 
‘Tale, and the Rate for Charges Merchandize 5 per Cerit, 

Eaft India Houfe, (Errors excepted.) Chat Cartwright, 

10th March 1g12. ‘Acct, Gen! 
SSeS 

oN 


a 


5 


Appendix to IV" REPORT fromthe Select Committee on 


*maQ Vv 
“ysumDD wy t { ‘BIST yt 

(pardaoxa stozirg) ‘OpnOHT PIPUT yeoy 

noIOY 9aoqe oni ut papnfout st yUIUOD BP ay jo anadijeg di) jo jae Lov jom faoy, sod 69°F Jo aes ary qu SHOT, 0095S Jo AjUUENb 

SpKTutny aga yA soukUpIO Jo preog ax Ajddny 04 paasSe Aueduioy amp orgy sad aqau1 par ‘vo,@od 


Sdduy v sop quamasaaog ayy yim popnauos sea quamaosSe UR Sost Srenigay tu. t7 1g) Ok BEL JOFSe avy se ‘MnUAB sad SUO], OOF Jo pueMap quausAOD, 


P peg doy AMY GaTYys 7B “34:9 Jad ‘sop JO ares aq} 1F “SOsT 03 E6ZT awed ary) wos “py pauizu-aaoqn ayy Jo suoyraorg ayy 

asty Auvdwoy ayy, cava quauno aq) Suunp sajvg oyqng sraqnae anadyeg dn ind pur pasejsap ary pinoy Augdwog ping 

i Ae atti ‘onadyrg jo suoy p0g saioig s Agate yy supz out s9atjap pure oasayaz 03 Kwak poztnbar 4oyiinj az9a Soy) pur f2ma Jo aun : 
UE “4 Jad “soy pute ‘oved jo am ur "WO tod “SEE Jo aoud ay ye apey 0} a4}. hits sioyy da qnd 0} pannbas o1am Aaudwiog oy “BH “do “HY 989 1g wy ay) Kg—owa, 


Goer |-F sop wy Gsy'9cy 


006'eSo'r 


st9'L | | yOIgsaNpaq 


S| 


Leeson SPOT 00d*Sf0'T 6se'ole Tr qaD 
6H5'Gs oa OOVGIT oro'lp tee eee Sn Got 
OGG LL Ge) 000*00L G00'0L Taek => sae eee G-R08T 
Tilly Py 00988 opsiy |- - = = =  gyogr 
OL8'9% i BeG'etL 926529. es > > = * 2-908T 
988'65 Co O69'Se1 SH919 [m= = = fh ocoRt 
Soin = OSES SOvIT is Ee Pee es ee S-F08T 
See't az gis't 88'S 5 oe ee 

= = = "eS eens net 
6oa'1r me Sre'tt = TES Ce USO 
Agi‘ = 0696S Sains So prtlehaws se: L-008T 
gr'og eh SPS'SS Fons aE eee sera OUSL-GONr 
eris = SEONG a eee is Yt ae? 6-8621 
F60'CT ry: SPL‘or Saink oy aed 8-261 
LV = NRE teecC ee ee MLO E 
L885 ag: 460°0¢ Te ee ee 9-S62ZE 

ie Stott St9'06 vos'sT Po Coe etal 2 SOLE 
rs6's ime, OdS'ET 099°9 3 * i sy F021 

ae Ts ¥ 449 
@S50T ‘Llgoud Pandey R 

Aypreng 
> 
- Palo Sao oS 
“Os Gogr oy F-OLE SouEMpIG Jo pwog ajeinouogy ayy paydday AUYLAALTVS todn ssOT Pue LITOUd Jo TLV WILSA 
*of “oN, ‘xtpuaddy 1 ie 


~~ “the Affirs “of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


_ Appendix, No. 31. 


An ACCOUNT of all Duties poftponed by virtue of any Warrant or Order from the 
Lords Commifiioners of His Majetty’s Treafury to the Committioners of Excife, from the 
Jaft Renewal of the Charter of the Eaft {India Company to the 5th January 1811, aud 
the Dates when the fame refpectively were difcharged. 


If October 1805. 

4th July 1806. | 
13th February 1807, 
2d July 1897. 

2d October 1807. 
2th December 1807. 
Ist April 1808. 

1ft July 1808. 

7th February 1810, 
2d July 1810, 


pe tudliis 
AMOUNTS 
Of Excite Duties on Tea Date of Warrant. When dae. When difcharged. 
postponed. 
a ee heh ‘ : 
62,088 9 — | 10th April 1795 - | It April 1795. - 28th May 1795, 
194,704 17 7 | 10th April1797 — - | If April 1797 - Itt June 1797. 
241,308 17 1 | 11th July 1804 - =| 100 July 1804 - 21f Auguft 1805. 


231,515 6 9 | 11th July 1804 - 10uh July 1804 - 
500, Sift March 1806 2d April 1806. = 
29th December 1806 | 31% December 1806 
17th March 1807 - | 2d April 1807 - 
30th June 1807 - =| 3d July 1807 = 
19ih September. #807 | 9th October 1807 
28th December 1807 | 4th January 1808 
20th March 1808 - | 5th April 1808. - 
2d January 1810 - | 2d January 1810 
30th March 1310 - | 4th April 1810 - 


400,000 -— — 
485,208 16 6 


Excife Office, London, 
14th February 1812. J. Kemp, 
Be Accompt, Gent, 


Appendix, ‘No. 32. 


Ax AGCOUNT of the Daties ‘of Cufloms colledted on Goods imported into Great 
Britain from the Eaft Indies and China refpeétively, in the Eighteen Years ending the 5th 
January 1811, diftinguifhing each year. : 


; 


Bh ke 


Years ending - % 
i Net Duties after 


a 4 Net Doties after 
Grofs Receipt of payment of — | Grofs Recript of 
Dities. Daties. 


ment.of 
t =e ‘hint Drawbacks ou Guods| Paatects bn Goods 

E exported. exported. 

; 

es} ; Jes 

vid aut iby ¢ py Be: Lele d. Le ln de 
= — =} sgagoris'— | 593,089 16 3} 1829664" 3 159,115 4 6» 
- =|, 692,452 8 4 | 182,547 7 51 171,198 5 8] 145,044 39 11 
= =f 81665701949 -/310,2EL 15 101° 198,890" 2 4) 173,398 12 9 
~ = {1,232,192 18 9 | 573,396 5 S| 203,844 19 G6) 173,882 19> 7 
= =|: 997,11 G 4 {198,839 16 7| 166,837 11 6} 143,792 19 1 
~~] 748,102 13 9 | 150,128 19 —] 182,815 17 —-] 156,385 4 2 
- = [1,020,164 10 11 | 428,189 15 9] 252403 13 9] 216,571 18 7 
- +} 593,564 14 1 | 416,519 9 8| 200,639 2 1) 175,721 5 2 
-  -| 476,677 2 5 | 401,084 6 S| 224,797 14 1) 202,870 4 — 
- -|]| 410,600 5 10 | 332,605 16 10} 192,322 18 —} 184,310 10 1 
- - | 364,874 17 4 | 333,663 18 —] 221,244 15 10] 218,077 10 4 
-  -| 508,730 7 5 | 492,198 12 3| 138,343 13 4] 135,10 — 6 
- =] 516,774 4 9 | 505,211 12 5] 211,478°19 5] 207,618 13 10 
- -| 536,812 5 5 | 526,384 10 2| 222,589-'2 9] 219,495 15 1 
- =| 464,786 9 11 | 460,428 6 5| 252,991 7 7} 228,774 12 9 
~ --| 565,210 14 6 | 564,385 16 9] 271,067 13 4| 267,691 — 11 
‘DL a6z107 9 7 | 466,509 16 5 245,360 16 6] 237,664 14 9 
- =| 449,269 211 | 448,593 17 7 | 276,125 12 4) 209,629 6 6 


Luftom Houfe, London, 


asth May 181}, William Irving, 


Infpector General of Imports and Export 


Appeniixto 1V" REPORT from the Select Committe on 
——==— 


= 


Appendix, No. 33. 


Ay ACCOUNT of all Daties of Excife collected on Goods imported into Great Britalu from 
the Eaft Indies and China, in the Eighteen Years ending 5th January 1811, diftinguifhing™each 


+ year, (fo far as relates to England.) 


TEA, 
YEARS 
coded EXCISE eae , is aes 
Sule. 24 Geo, UL. ch. 38. 
Po ae aso Lo a GE Li * cae £1 ., fa 
1794 - 0 ¢ 201,087 12 10 | 314,176 1 G3) 516,163 14 _ 
1795 - -} 219,043 13 9 | 292,807 4 10] 511,850 18 7 
1796 - =| 415,460 9 5 |313,556 10 63) 729,016 19 114} - 
1797 - -| 469,740 1 3 (343,460 7 G3 813,200 8 9 _ 
1798 - -| 695,180 14 10 |$28,095 16 8 | 1,023,976 11 6 - 
1799 - -| 911,180 9 10 }250,082 16 5] 1,161,263 6 3 - 
1800 - - | 1,179,272 10 9 - 1,179,272 10 9 oy 
1801 - «| 1,152,816 18 5 = 1,152,816 18 5 —_ 
1so2 - - | 1,493,352 5 11 - 1,425,352 5 11 = 
1803 - -| 1,392,072 8 9 - 1,392,072 8 9 — 
1804 - - 2,067,120 18 5 — 2,067,120 18 5 | 9,419 12 
1805 - -| 2,359,633 5 9 — 2,359,633 5 917,240 2 
1806. -| 2,910,165 5 2 — 2910165 5 2417171 — 
1807 - =| 2,994,634 12 2 = 2,994,634 12 2 125,743 12 
1808 - -} 3,018,550 9 7 _ 3,018,550 9 7 | 29,616 11 
1809 - - | 3,290,687 1 4 - 3,290,687 1 4118,562 9 
1810 - - | 2,766,365 8 11 -_ 2,766,365 8 11} 75521 10 — 
3811 - - | 3,433,436 16 10 |. - | 3,433,436 16 10} 8,569 5 
Excife Office, London, 
36th May 1811, 
J. Kemp, 


the Affairs pf The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 503 


nae Appendix, No. 34. Hi 
‘Aw ACCOUNT of Monies advanced the Owners of Ships in India and China, and 
brought to their Debit in their Account in England from 1793-4 to 1809-105 allo of 
Monies fo advanced not adjufted with the Owners. 


6 L- ’ 

1793-4 . - - rt = = 38,558 
A7945 - . ey * e - 17,667 
1795-6 a 5 = = 5 - 18,413 
1796-7 - - - - - ~ 31,248 
1797-8 : 3 : - - = 99,514 
1798-9 Fs - - - - + 12,350 
1799-1800 ~ - - - - = 13,875 
1800-1 Ss e = - = 51,614 
1801-2 = - Ke, - - ~ 125,545 
1802-3 > - - 2 - - 75,058 
1803-4 - - - - - - 70,519 
1804-5 - - - - : ~ 69,030 
1805-6 - - - : > = 66,654" 
1806-7 - - - - - - sco.ghs 
1807-8 = 2 - = - = 69,693 
1808-9 5 < ¢ : 3 ~ 59,543 
1809-10 - - - - - -. 67,180 

£- 890,639 

=— 


3 Nonfuch - - - - - = £.5,207 
General Meadows = . . = = 4,225 
Ganges - . - - - = 9,529 
Chichefter = & he = ta sanget - 5,079 
Berwick - : - > - = 9,200 
arriet - - - -“ - - — 5,A97 
Britannia - - - - “) A 166 
Eliga Ann x aes fe “ = 7,956 
Abercrombie - - “ - = 10,068 
Anna - - 4 - - - - 9,890 
Amelia. - > - - - = 15,641 
Favourite : * a ad i - 11,949 
Hercules - Bs eae Fa ES 207. 
Montrofe : - - . = = 6891 © 
£110,595 
———_ 
Eat India Houle, “(Errors excepted.) 
10th March 1812, Chas Cartwright, . 


Acc', Gen. 


Appendix, No. 34. (a.) 
AMOUNT debited Ownets in their Accounts of Freight and Demorage from 1793-4 


to 1809-10, for Goods damaged and wanting, Outward and Homeward. 


1793-4 = E ; e 3 ¥ £17,083 
1794-5 - 4 2 ts: 4 € > 10,492 

1795-6 - = “ - - = 10,187 

1796-1 2 - - - - + 9,632 

17 97- 3 - * - - = 9,120 

1798-9 ~ 3 s = 2 4 = 11,323 

3799-1800 = 2 ~ 2 = = 17,621 

1800-1 = - - - - - = 25,247 

1801-2 = - - y - - = 34,039 

1802-3 - - - - - - =) 56,581 

1803-4 - - - z - - - 45,087 

1804-5 < 4 - - - = - 62,304 ¥s 

1805-6 - - = - - - - 25,368 

1806-7 + = - - - - + 45.409 

1807-8 - - - - - - = 24,590 

1808-9 - - - - . < ~ 53,584 

1809-10 e = a of © = 39,889 

£499,621 

Eat India Houfe, ' {Errors excepted.) 
7th April 1811, Cha’ Cartwright, 
Acct. Gen’. 


60 


gq. Appendis #0 1" REPORT ran the Sle& Comnilitce on ¥ 


Appendix, No. 35. : 

Ax ACCOUNT, thewing the Invoice Amount of all Stores exported by the Eaft India 
Company ‘to their feveral Prefidencies and Settlements in India refpectively, and to their 
Hactory ut Canton, from the Seat 1791-2 to the Seafon 1809-10 inclufive, diflinguifhiog 
each Seaton. 


Helena. 


'Senfou £: £ , 
179-2 oe 22,211} =" - 217,749 
1792.3 - - | 63,887 | ~ 30,829 16,457 | -. - 209,488 
1793-4 64,149 60,669 32,544 | > = Ga 
17945. 5,43 8,03 30,3091 -  - ae 

= 2: 31775 | - - 260,064 

4 38,806 | - - 237,170 

“4 - - 270,237 

- - 7-4 308,060 

» - 502,702 

+ 7,966 407,522 

eee aK - - 410,033 

- J. 86,613 - - 403,045 

“4 = - | * 85,215 73,110 = 301,124 

"1304-5 - - 109,508 60,037 351,272 
1805-6 - ~| 137,570’) 108,660 554,212 
1806-7 - -| 184,767 | ~ 124,607 638,504 
4807-8 - -] 135,244} 6 150489 + 436,638 
1808-9 - - | 181,595 _ 399,024 
4809-10 - - 179,861 © 426,005 


98,349 | 6,708,358 


Meinoraniym.—The above Account includes ull the Exports, except Woollens, Metals, ‘and Madeira 
Wine, which are confidered us Goods for Sule. ~ ne f 


Fatt India Houfe, " fy (Errors excepted.) 


the 10th March 1812. Chas Cartwright, 
; . Acct. Geri, 
a aE Sok Be Se 


. : “Appendix, No. 36. 
PROFIT and. LOSS on EXPORTS to India and China, from 1792-3 to 1808-9 (India) 
~ ~~ calenlated upon the Prime Cott. 


ae ee Cy 


374,018 


107,614 
L) 266408) @ 


Mem.—The'Profit above fiated comprehends only the Profit upon the Goods fent to India and China; 
‘fome further Profit has réfulted to the Company from the iffue of Stores fent to India; thefe Stores ure 
iifued at their Invoice Coft, which being 10 per cent. above the Prime Coft, it neceffarilyfollows that to.the 
extent of the Ifues, a Profit of 10 per eent. has arifen; but the'Indian Books do not feparate the Stores.pur~ 
chafed in India, from thofe configned ‘to the refpective Governments from Europe, ant it has not bees 
found practicable to Rate the Profit with any accuracy, 


Eaft India Houfe, . Gators excepted.) 
the 10th of March 1812. - Chat Cartwright, 
Acé®, Gea. 


lee Ta * Sea elt eg ‘ i \ 


‘the Affairs of The EAST INDIA*COMPANY. 


Appendix, No. 37. 


395 


kx ACCOUNT of the Duties of Cuftoms colle&ed on Goods exported from Great 
Britain to the Eaft Indies and China refpeStively, in the Eighteen’ Years ended 5th 


January 1811 (as far as the fame can be made up) diftinguifhiag cack Year. 


Note —No “Aiftindion cau 
ibe given at the Cuftom Houfe, 
of the Duties on the Eaft 
India from the China Trade, 


‘the Entries Outwards being ) 


aaade without fpecification of 
‘the particular deftination of 
the Goods, 


‘Cuftom Houfe, London, 
29th January 1812. 


£ ad 
5,580, 7 11 


9,259 — 1 


"7,927 19 10 
5,951.12. 8 
"8,037 — 10 
$193 9 6 


WAB1 TO, 4 | 


16,215 14 6 
17,693 88 
26,484 11 10 
21,619 19 6 
28,003 6 1 
123,116 1 10 
96,068 16 7 
60,749 11 11 
74,420. 2 10 


65,188 "4 4° 


54,753 17 9 


—— 


625,394 16. 7 


From the 5th July 1798, the Tonnage Dutiés on Eaft India Shipping Outwards are 
ineluded in this Account:' the Average Amount ftom 1798 to 1803 was £.7,000 per 


ennum, and from 1803 te 1809 £14,300 per annum, 


William Iroing, 


_ Inipector General. 


& 


+ 


opti ial BER Pree ae Sele&: Committee on 
Appendix, No. 38 iy erate TA 


received by The Eaft India Company on BILLS of EXCHANGE 
ar 1793-4 to the year 1809-10 inclufive; diftinguhing each year, ant 


An ACCOUNT of all SUMS 
refpectively, from the ye 


FORT ST. GEORGE. | _ BOMBAY. 


Severs! 
Owners of | Torar, 
Company's 
Ships, &e.. 
— 


£ 


3793-4 
9794-5 
9795-6 
3796-7 


9797-8 


2798-9 vid Comm". 4,028 


36,830 


* 2799-1800 2 13,797 


3800-1 ~ pes | 30489 


aBora $779) $779 3074 | 265589 


802-3 ict’, 124,901 | 135685 | 2860) 35328 17,188 


3803-4 + 44376 | #9376 | L"*. Treat. - soit 39374 | 639315 


1804-5 LAY Trea? ~ 2,450 349] 79799 r 87,160 1,806 }| 88,960 


3805-6 =, Based Ordnancd 807 | 706 | 7833.1 vit. come ?98g 3041639 


ee ‘ 
3806-7 - abs |} pes aya. sate 1833176 


1 Weare) ice 
3807-8 - Pay’, Gen! 40,000 $9,799 
prs. . Be. Ord" - 4035 
43 14138 


SASSI I s,780 | 880 


B8CB-g «= 


3809-10 - — ~ |ViAE. Comm”, 15,572 


Soshpe- £85851 


1793-% | 1794-5. 
7 £: Pa 
R¥waan ~~ - - -| 46°] 250 
Vox St.Gronor- - 
Bombay 


BenerandaIA 3793-4 there is a difference between this and ‘the Annual Account of £.156 cee Bills amounting to £.110 
on Bills of Exchange, not included in this Account. 
1797-8 a difference of £.159 which arifes from Difcount on Bills of Exchange being included as 2 Receit 
7798-9 - ditto - - 9,057 - - ditto - ~ that Sum being carried to Government for Stores*and Supplies 
1799-1800 sito - ~ 6,682 - - ditto from £.7,712 being carried to Charges Bxraandinniyy inftead of — 
BSco-r - dito’ - - 469 = ~ ditto from Difeount on Bills of Exchange. 4 
Eatt India Honfe, 
i toth March way 


© bets of The EAST INDTA COMPANY. 


=— 


2 Appendix, No. 38. 


yemitted to them from their feveral Prefidencies. and Settlements in Inpta and their Fadétory at Canton 
fpecifying the Department of Goverament, or the Parties generally, on which the fame were drawn. 


SAINT HELENA. 


TOTAL INDMA, 


TOTAL 


CHINA. 


TOTAL INDIA & CHINA, 


(mat 3 
Of 
Government. 


Several 
Owners of 
Company" 
Ships, &@.] 


~ 


Severat 
Owners of 
Company's 
Ships) é&c. 


OF 
Govern- Torat. 


ment. 


— 
of 
Goverment, 


Several 
Owners of 


{ Company's 
Ships, &, 


~ 


=< 


of Several 


Dwnie 


Torat | Goyern- e 
' ment. 


"ot 


\Torats 


ve 
Vide. Comm’, - 230 
Via. Comm’, 2,910 

196 


* . . 396 

Sick s Sturt bie 
Comm". 

Pay’, Gen’, 


Viat*, Comm”. 

Bd, Ordnce, 

Sick & Hurt 
Comm'*. ~ 


Vict®. Comm". 


23 
Pay’. Gent, i? 


= 1,520 


154 
Via, Comm”. “159 
Tranfport Board 167 


Mac Comm', 1,113 

ay". Gent. - 5,400 

Sick & Hort : 8 
Comm". = 


Via®. Comm™. 1,620 
Pay’, Gen’. - 8,606 


Via. Comm’s. 


153 
Pay?, Gen!, 


- 8,000 


Via, Comm"... 159 


49896 


38,461 


45939 


110,014 


159525 


49S 


10,206 | 40,377 


29978 


32,870 | 142,647 | 165,527 


91326 | 750420 


99385 | 99t45 
157354 | 120,519 


26,588 119,497 
6,666 | 975186 
14,222 


3905 


he 


24545 | 


- | 29,972 


. 
5174 | 26,544 | 


20,057 | 68)094 


= =} 85760 
105,165 
184,909 
99,520 


53 


2395 


451340 


15/525, 


9495, 


10,206 


3449147 
271384 

9n385 
154354 | 


26,588 


6,666 


14169, 


6,510 


ange 


4yoor 


491946 


AATF 


179,698 


ISATT, 


99745 © 


126,519 
199497 
97,186 


14,222 


901995, 


28,513 |607,661 | 315,091 |0121792 


being carried to Freight ad Destiorage, and Charges Extraordinary in that Account, and £,a66. Amount returned for Over-payments. 


in the Annual Account. 


in + ditto, 


Bills of Exchange, in the Annual Account, and £. 450, being included for Difcouat and Interest on Bills. 


148, 


(Errors-excepted.) 


6P 


Chat Cartaright, 


cc. Gen!, 


™ 


508 Appendix fo IV REPORT from the Select Committee on 


Appendix, No. 39- 


An ACCOUNT, diftinguithing the various Heads contained under the Head of 
Charges General in the year 1809-10. 


Pa hyd 
Baildings’ <7 | seemed? 2,197 a0. 
Commiffion for Supra-Cargocs  - oe ie ee 2s. 5,498 3 10 
Raifing Recruits and Cadets Soh oar es | eee 862 7 4 
Fees paid to King’s Officers-. - - - - - ~{| 2400 8 2 
Difburfements of Warehoufe-keepers - = ~ - - - | 135,083 6 7 
Ditburfements of Officers of the Houfe-  - - - ~-| 74,247 17 6 
Tradefmen’s Bills for the: Houfe aud Warehoufes - - -| 51,959 4 5 
LawCharges  - = - = = = = = = 1,688 16 8 
Rents, Wharfage, and landing Goods Pe, ec Nees $464 — 2. 
Stores at Deal, &e. = = = =  - me ee 5917 6 
Charges of Packets overland = = = + - -| 4,493 14 6 
Military Fond <9) 5-6 20 - | 2 SS ed a4,051 3 — 
Prefents and Gratuities (exclufive of Poplar) co eed 3,601 17 —~ : 
Direétors’ Gratuities = - - - © = 5 = 7,600 — —~— 
Salaries to Officers of the Houfe and Warehoufes - - -} 60,949 15 11 
Commiffioners for the Affairs of India - - = ~ ~ -| 16,000 — — 
Charges Extraordinary - - - + - - --| T1126 8 4 
Cadets at Woolwich, &&. - - + = = = - 6,721.14 9 
Royal Eft India Volunteer Regiments- = - - -| 28,552 6 10 
Organsine Silk) - Se a.o. Sedona oe. or ehS9i7 8 = 
Charges on examining Goods previoustoSale - - = 1,148 7 6 
Annuitants and Penfioners - - ey = - - - | 40,406 6 10 
Bimmpe = A a) Se esp ay 
; EaftIndia Dock Company - - - = - = = 6,682 1 — 
Eaft India College - - - - - - - -}] 23,791 9 10 
Eaft India Military Seminary - - - - -  -| 21,601 3 9 
Sundry Charges- = + = - 2 = © = 1,108 12 — 
[\. Clerk to the Committee of Sud - - - - = - 2,700 — — | 
i i z D - eh Gs Government Troops and Stores - 900 
; 633,473 5 3 
he Le ed 
ee ee hh son 4 ¥ 
Intereft on Loans more received than paid - 1,003 16 3 S0Sb as 


£| 627,438 33 


Eaft India Houfe, (Errors excepted.) zZ 
10th March 1812. Chat Cartwright, 
; es Maat: 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY: 509 


Appendix, No, 40. 


An ACCOUNT, thewing the Amount actually paid by the Eaft India Company, for 
Tntereft on Annuities, Dividends on their Capital Stock, and Intereft on the Bonded Debt 
refpectively, from the year 1793-4 to the year 1809-10, ditiinguithing each year. 


Tntereft on Anuuities, | Dividends on Stock. | Tutereft on Bonds. TOTAL 
£ pe | Ls mA 

1793 62,036 565,518 | 122,346 750,500 
1794-5 > - 69 619,643 * $5,013 702,725 
1795-6 + - int er 643,707 78,466 722,173 
pity le, el ORNS ales 621,485 — 53,793 675,278 
1797-8 - ah Sats! = 629,791 49,234 679,025 
17989. = = fn | ye se 640,892 69,701 710,593 
1799-1800 - - ap int, 634,593 78,655 713,158 
1800-1 9- -| - - - 9 -| 626,531 86,958 715,489 
1801-2 - - <a tec 628,149 76,255 704,404 
SOLS 7) = |) enone 682,786 72,524 705,310 
1osh - -| - - -.- 626,697 80,885 707,512 
1904-5 - -| - = = - 624,807 80,655 705,462 
1805-6 - -| - - - - 629,397 126,458 755,785 
106-7 - -| - - = = 627,682 142,748 770,430 
1807-8 - -| - - = - 627,308 146,003 773,311 
1808-9 - -{6 = = - = 627,006 - 216,497 843,433 
1809-10 = |S =. 2 =" 631,063 7 248,633 879,696 
g 62,705 | 10,636,845 1,812,734 12,512,284 


Mem.—The feyeral Rates of Intereft paid on the Bond Debt in the above period have been 
as under:—Viz. 
At £.4 per Cent. per Ann. from 1793-4 to 30th June 1796. 
4 - @ = ~ from 30th June 1796 to 30th June 1804. 
344. per Cent. per Diem, from 30th June 1804 to 30th September 1806; 
and has continued without further variation at £.5 per Cent. per Ann, from 30th 
September 1806. 


Bid IndiasHioniehecs (Errors excepted.) ; 
the 10th of March 1812. Chas Cartwright, 
; \ Acct. Gen'. 


Appendix, No, 41. 
EXTRACT of Minutes of Court of DireGors, dated 20th January 1705. 


‘THE Solicitor reported to the Court, that the Appeal in the Chinfurah Cause was heard on 
‘Saturday laft, before the Lords of Council for Prize Caufes; when, after full argument, their 
Lordfhips were pleafed to affirm the order-of the Judge of the: Admirelty, as to his opinion that 
the Goods contratted for at the time of the capture of Chinfurah, for the Dutch Inveftment to 
Europe, remaining in the hands of the Manufacturers or at the Fadories diftant from Chinfurah, 
were to be confidered as a part of the Goods feized and taken at the furrender of the Town and 
Fort of Chinfurah, and to be-accounted for to the Captors of Chinfurah; ‘but that the Company is 
entitled to be allowed all their Advances and Charges on fuch Goods;—and referred the caule 
‘back to the Court below to fettle the Account, 


fie. Appendix fo IV® REPORT from the Select Committee on 


Appendix, No. 42. 


An ACCOUNT of the Rate of Freight at which Ships were engaged for India and 
China, Outward Seafons 1796 and 1810. 


—Seafon 1796.— 


Ships of 800 Tons, for India. 


Rete per Ton, 
Pats. ile 4 
aoa Peace Freight, for Ghitetsrsc eoaisers ON eRe ats 22 13 10 
War de + Sys 7 alain 
alerts of Stamév’acWege Mica) aaemnene me 
+c: 
Expense of Lafcars, borne by the Company - - = nd Sis PE ha 
< bs 


Mem.—The Premium of Insurance on the Sums the Company agreed to pay, whether the Ships 
arrived in fafety or not, amounts to 18s. 4d. per Ton, and is not included in the 
above Account, § 


‘Ships of 1,200 Tons, for China. 


Average Peace Freight, for the Chartered ‘Tonnage, mevaule. to ane ovate 19 < 
3 inet differenc rence of Seam’ 's Wages, ee ton ra ae eae 

‘ i9 8 

Expenfe of Lafcars, borné by the Company = = = - = = 6 2 
‘ 5 0 


Mem,—Vhe Premium of Infurance on the Sums the Company agreed:to pay, whether the Ships 
arrived'in fafety or not, amounts to 18s. 5d. per Ton, and.is not included in the 
above Account, 


An ACCOUNT of the Rate of Freight at which Ships were engaged for India and 
China, Outward’ Seafon 1810, 


Ships of 800 Tons, for India. 


ah Voyage. 


ee de 

Average Peace ea for eS ae ffonnage; pemtle to oo Owners | - ae 18 °7 
D° War ae ad Sf 19 14 7 
Extra Expenfe of Building Site Eh ehh & ie 10 — 
Difference of Seamen’s Wages Se has) Sdylim. ) a — 


Expenfe of Lafears, borne by Sepa Shee 
Tonnage and Dock Duties, d@ - = peeing 5," 4 


512 Appendix fo 1V" REPORT from the Scle& Committee on 


2d, 3d, Sth, 6th, Sth, and 9th Voyages. 


Rate per Ton. 

Ley ted. 

Average Peace Freight for the Chatters ears payable e the Owners -| 17°35 —: 
D® War Buy Pee ge ane. 4 


Difterepoe of Seamen's Wages Seis ss y= | ee ° 


Expenfe of Lafcars, borne by the Company c ie - 
Tonnage and Dock Duties - d®& = os = = 


4th Voyage. 


Average Peace Freight for the Charters thine Povehle isi the Owners oy ay ge = 
D° War a= - = 


Difference of Seamen’s Wages Ser)  ~ e $ 
. 
Expente of Lafcars, borne by the Oman, = aes. 
‘Tonnage and Dock Duties - a, p= a 
7th Voyage. 
~ ad 
Average Peace Freight py the Sarees 9 sEQuDBES paveble to ae Owners 71 — 
D° War a a? : 19 10° 
ExpenfeofDoubling = - © 2© - = @ - «= Sten 
Ditference of Seamen’s Wages st eee ce com eaa, 00 A" we Neth 112 — 
fe of Laf Co “a 
Expentfe of cars, borne by the frat y oe - 
‘Tonnage and Dock Duties a es yr Leith 
‘ 2 13. 2 
£[ 6 = — 


Average of all the Voyages. 


Average Peace Freight for the peers z AnBB, Paypbis to ne anes, 
D° War 
Difference of Seamen’ 's Wages = Baie Uo ° SLT, wate > 


Expense of Lafcars, borne by the Senna eee Ste we) ak te. Es 
ei and Dock Duties - Sy a ate sis 2 


Hem.—The Difference of Seamen’s Wages payable to the Owners, and the Expenfe of Lafcars 
and Tonnage and Dock Duties borne by the Company, for Ships engaged for India 
and China, Outward Seafon 1810, have been taken by Eftimate. 


Fat Tadie Houle,  - | - ; 
‘Sth March 1812. Wy. Banco, Sithek 


the - Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 513 
Appendix, No. 43. 


An ACCOUNT of the Coft and Outfit of a New Ship of $00 Tons and 1,200 Tons 
refpeétively, in the year 1796, for China aud for India. 


Ship of 800 Tons | Ship of 1,200 Tons. 
\ 


Amount for building the Hull, with Interef 
upon Money advayced to Builders - 

= Coppering = 

- Mafimuker - 

- Ropemaker - 

- Suilmaker ~ 

- Blockmaker - 

- Boatbuilder - 

= Cooper - 

= Kintledge © - 

= Guns, Gunpowder 

> Anchors - 

D° - - Provifions - 

De - - Boatfwain’s, Carpenter's, Gunner's, 
Steward’s, Cook's aud Surgeon's Stores - 
jo - - Owner's, Commander's, and Over- 

» feer’s Difburfements - Aeeel e 


‘ 
’ 


hot 


2 fren ky 1 Twa ee ao, 
CBr wreree 


onl 
- 3.912 15 -— - 


1018 8— 
1,253 7 — 


Eaft India Hovfe, 4 
22d February 1812. 


Jofeph Boulderfon, 
1 a 


Appendix, No. 44. 


An ACCOUNT of the Coft and Outfit of a New Ship of 800 Tons and 1,300 Tons 
refpectively, in the year 1810, for China and for India. 


Ship of 800 Tons. | Ship of 1,200 Tons. 


Amount for building the Mull, with Intereit 
upon Money advanced to Builders - 
Amount for Coppering 


D° - = Mafmaker - - - - 
D° - - Ropemaker - cy - - 
D° - - Sailmaker - . : - 
De - = Blockmaker - = = - 
D° - - Boatbuilder  ~ 3 sik = 
De = = Cooper y= y= as = 
D° - - Kintledge- = - =) - 7 
De - - Guns, Gunporedenand Shot = 7” 
D° - - Anchors - - Se 
D° -  - Provitions - 3 4,234 14 — 
De | 2 “Boakvain’s Carpenters Gunners, 
Steward’s, Cook’s and Surgeon's Stores -| 3,474 5—]| 1,641 17 — » 
De? - - Owner's, Commander's, and hin t 
feer’s Difburfements paren, -} 1,586 2—] 1917 io — 
£.| 45,700 15 —]} 64,184 19 — 
————=| 
Eaft India Houfe, r 
42d February 1812. Tofi feph Bouldesfon, 


Mafter Attendant. 


1 enflix to TV" ee! f oh ¥ 
m4 Appendix to IV" RE PORT from Fhe Sclcct Commnittes ont . 
so 
Appendix, No. 45. 
SALE AMOUNT of Privilege and Private Trade Goods, fold at the Eaft India ~ 
5 Company's Sales, 1793-4 to 1809-10; difiinguifhing India and China, 
PRIVILEGE TRADE. PRIVATE TRADE, ' TOTAL. 
india. India, China. India: China. 
£ £ L Ve oa 
1793-4-] “181,710 | - 441.929, 258,081 623,639 258,981 
1794 469,879 | - 373,868 209,715 843,747 209,715 
1795-6 Z 458,041 321,107 |. 868,328 321,107 
1796-7 "= - 274,812 220,504 953,501 220,594 
1797-8 = = 293,160 | 264,094 939,907 264,004 
1798-9 - - 448,061 » 300,236 Bette 300,236 
1799-1800] = $70,808 | 219,083 | 2117,947" 219,033 
5 : 346,419 | 268,701 | 2:113,391 | . 268,701 
1,724,217- | = 268,427 | 312,081 1,992,644 312,081 
1802-3.- | 2,586,581 - 450,052 Ee 8,042,053 409,731 
1,860,734 | = 315,303 | 360,208’ | 2,176,037 366,208 
1,853,050 | - 570,986 | "352,778 Scenes 352,778 
1,724972 | = 728,110, 931,070 | 451,082 |  .351,070 
1,098,762 |= 424,846 267,507 | 1,493,608 | ** 267,507 
1,951,085 | = 617,876 238,122 2,549,501 238,122 
797,229 - 520,603 476,621 1,317,832 476,621 
1809-10 | 1,129,408 | = 433,275 353,418 | 1,562,683 353,418 
Total - £.} 21,217,283 7,543,076 |. 5,230,897 | 28,760,359 5,230,897 


The amount under the head of Privilege Trade comprehends the Trade granted to Individuals 
hy the Stipulations of the Aé of 1793; the amount ftated as Private Trade, is the Indulgence 
granted by the Company to the Commanders and Oflicers of each Ship, The amount of which 
‘Tonuage is as under: 


INDIA SHIPS. CHINA SHIPS. 
Tons, Feet. - Tons. 

/Commatder -  -2 30 32 Leal P te} oS 

Chief Mate - - G 16) - - oo es 8 

Second Mate - ~~ 47 82 Pe es Sa iets 6 

‘Third Mate - - 216 - 2 - - 3 

Purfer  - = 2 2°16) ees ht - 3 i 

Surgeon = =") = 99" 92\ 58Ts.39Ft. ' ye - 6 473 Tons. 

Surgeon’s Mate - 2 16 5 i, nS, 5 3 

Fourth Mate = = 1 24 ~ ee - 2 

Fifth Mate. - - —* 32 orem 3 r 1 

Boutfwain - - os — 32 ary. 5 ee 1 

Gonner> =) 5 = = «32 Ee i Oo 1] 

Carpenter)-  - =) => 32. ee oh toe line 


Refides which, it is cuftomary to allow the Commanders and Officers an additional ‘quantity “of 
50 Tons as Extra Indulgence, to ‘be ftowed in parts of the Ship wherein the Company's Cargo is not 
permitted to be ftowed, and provided the Commander hasnot refufed any part of the Goods intended 
to be thipped on the Company's accoant. sf 


Extra Ships are alldwed'at the rate of 5 per Cent, on the Chartered ‘Tonnage. 


‘Phe Commanders and Oe ‘of the Company's Ships have on many occations difpofed of the 
‘Tonnage allotted them by the Company, to Private Merchants of India: to whatever extent this may 
have taken place, it has afforded the Private Trader an opportunity of remittances in addition to the 
amount fpecifically fiated under Privilege Trade. . u 


s site 
The Company’s Char. i the Imports from Iidia is £.3 per Cent. on the Sale Value; the 
Company's Duty on al Private Goeds, imported from soaks excepting Te Chee Ware, and 
juered Ware, is 7 per Cent. China Ware and Lacquered Wares 9 per Cent.; in regard to the 

~_ article of Tea, a {mali quantity is allowed to be imported, charge awit the Duty of 7 per Cent. 
"but if this quantity isexceeded, the Duty is augmented to £.17 and in fome cafes to £.37 per Cent. 


Eaft India Houfe, 
10th Murch 1812. 


«Errors excepted.) _ 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 
la 


Appendix, No. 46, 
ACCOUNT of the Tonnage of Privilege Goods exported and imported to and from India, in pur- 


faance of the Act of Parliament of 1793, to 1810 inclafive ;:the Freight which has been charged Indi- 
viduals ; the Freight paid by the Company for the fame; and the Lols they have fuitaiged thereon, 


Tons 


| Oceward. 


Tons 


Homeward, 


1,994 
15503 
3719 
3582 
2,783 
24306 
4508 
1,789 


395430 
1951552 

73,880 
: 7242 
“67,608 
158573 
131,576 
105,038 
319378 
3749235 
150,620 


© 174872 


Tons 


Outward, |Homeward,| 


L994! 
44593, 
H719 
2,582 
2,783 
2,306 


4508 


15789 | 


Tons : 
OTAL. 


39505 
9847 
40952 
8,268 
7954 
sori 
235526 
7 
83799 
71536 


Freight 


ceived by} t0 the 


the 
‘Company. 


£: 
58,676 


82,633 
99377 
93,630 
35639 
186,829 
7$49 
48,015 
430973 
109,738 
91,263, 
78,660 
214,291 
1371393 
40)507 
147,108 


Lofts 


Tonnage 
occupied by 


Profit the 


tothe four 


Campan; 
wardiar 


Company, {Company which no 


thereon, 


vA 


~ gyare 
2774 
19,379 
3798 
“snes 
3,330 
25087 
235635 
48,775 
49373 
26,378 
1059087 
36,742 


20,113 


271764 


2743 


2,023,994 


21743 - 


925187 


1,611,281 


414237 


Profit. - 
‘Total Lofs 


2524 


414713 


thereon. 


Fieight 
was pal, 
ibe 
53 atig 
2778 
2797 
S227 
« eat 
9938 
S207 
4g3t 
4660 
6,000 
6339 
5298 
13,508 
9896 
8,229 
8119 
5241 103432 


) sten—the Ships which arrived Seafon 1795, wore the firft which imported Privilege Goods under the Act of Parliament of 1793. 
‘The Expense incurred by the Company on account of Lafcars, is not included in the above ; it may be taken, per Eftimate, at about 91. 3% 


M per Ton, or £. 32,580. 


| The Tonnage of Privilege Goods imported on India-built Ships, and on which no Freightwas either 
“having been laden by the Merchants ou their own account, may be taken, per Eftimate, at about 56,780 


‘Eaft India Houle, 
sacth March 3832. 


WW. Rain 


or received by the Compatiy 


‘ons ; viz. 


cock, 
Freight A 


[526 J 


Appendix, No. 47. 
EURTHER DOCUMENTS RESPECTING THE PRIVATE TRADE. 
[Tais is a SUPPLEMENT to the Appendix, and forms a separate Paper.] , 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


Appendix, No. 48. 


Ax ACCOUNT of tw 81 
fe eet Oe Eg 


a 
the Mins Te EAST. 


1A: COMPANY. 


te Gps Dae hata coher 
re Te enn gal oe 


on 


ae [ae i 
— 


he Gear, ee 


the Affairs of Tre EAST INDIA COMPANY. 519 


Appendix, No. 49. 
STATEMENT, fhewing the Deficiens of Funds to make the Payment into His 
Majefty’s Exchequer, direéted by the Aé psd George IIf. cap. 52. Section 111. from 


the year 1793-4 to the year 1809-10 incl lufive; calculated fom the Account of Net 
Proceeds ordered to be printed 29th March 1811. 


1793-4 - - Deficiency, March 1794 = - - + + £,557,393 
1794-5 - -SurplusPayment- - - - - + , 396,158 
Deficiency, a 1798 = + £883,551 
1795-6 - - Surplus Receipt - ~ - = = | 229,865 
Deficiency, March 2 1796 - = £053, 

3796-7 - - Surplus Payment - ie - = 874,514 

Deficiency, March 1797 =~ £+1,028,200 : 
1797-8 - - Surplus Payment - = = 224,108 
Deficiency, March 4798 = + £.1,252,308 
1798-9 ~ - Surplus Receipt - = =) 1,158,832 
Deficiency, Merch 1799 > +L. 93,477 
1799-1800 + Surplus Payment - — - - = 414,726 
Deficiency, be 1s09 - + £. 508,203 
1800-1 - -SurplusReceipt -  - - = 410,271 
“ Deficiency, March 280: - +L. 97,932 
1801-2 - - Surplus Payment- = - ~ = £98,369 
Deficiency, March ais: - + £. 596,901 
1802-3  ~ Surplus Receipt - —- - = 350,994 
: ‘ Deficiency, March. 1808, - =. 245,307 
1803-4 - ~ SurplusPayment ~~ - - 839,670 
Deficiency, March isos = -£. 1,084,977 
1894-5 - - Surplus Payment-. - - = 1,818,036 
Deficiency, March 1805 + + £.2,403,013 
1805-6 ~ - Surplus Receipt - " - - - 131,606 
Deficienc: re 1806 - +h 2,971,407 
1806-7 - - Surplus Payment - Pe - = 841,753 
Deficiency, Marel h 1807 - > £.2,613,160 
1807-8 - - Surplus Payment oo 2 + 1,584,254 
Deficiency, March ie + + L4,197 414 
1808-9 - - Surplus Receipt - - = - - | 154,805 
Deficiency, oe 1809 - = £.4,042,609 
1809-10 - - Surplus Payment - ——- ri $24,435 
Deficiency, March 1810 .- - £. 4,367,044 

—— 


Appendix, No. 50. 
An ACCOUNT of the PROFIT eftimated to arife on the Goods in Warehoufe in England, 
‘on the 1f of March 1793 and on the 1ft March 1810, 


Coft - - - 8 
Cuftoms - - - 
Freight - - 
Charges of Merchandize 


Le 
1,930,000 - 
46,000 
655,000 
175,000 


2,806,000 
3,506,000 | - 


700,000 


Sale Amount = + 
Proit - 


1810, 


Coft- = = s 


1,134,000 


Cuftoms  - - - c § 5 “ $3,000 
Freight ef ae © 498,000 
Charges of] Merchandize ee las Ate! Be 87,000 
£-] 2,793,000 1,772,000 

Sale Amount - “=| 4,612,000 1,753,000 


Prot - =J£. 


Eaft India Houfe, 
10th March 1812. 


a 
Q 
° 


Appendix 0 IV" REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


Appendix, No. 51. 


STATEMENT accounting’ for the Balance of the Concerns of the Eaft India Company, between 179243 
and 1808-9 Abroad, and between 1793-4 and 1809-10 at Home, computed at the Sum of £. 11,020,566, 


TERRITORIAL or POLITICAL, 


a Reports Appt x 11. { Surplus Charge in India - 5,078,015 
- - N&1z7.} Expentes of Ceylon and Eaftern Tans, not included i in 6 
Charges 1,661,345 


Ibid. - - N18, Payment to Creditors of Nabob of Arcot, i in ‘India - | 1,058,953 
Ibid. + - Ne1g. D®° - to - D° ~ of Rajah of Tanjore, D° - -| 64,044 
Appendix .- N° 29, De - to - D° - of Nabob of “Arcot at Home - 10,960 
Ibid, - - - - e D° - to - D° + of Rajah of Tanjore, -D° - -| 225,056 


8,098,373 
Dedu@, ~ 
2¢ Report - -. p. 63.) Supplies to Bencoolen, Prince of Wales Ifand, St. Heese | 


&e.ftatedbelow = - =  e 2,817,146 


5,281,227 


Add, 

3¢ Report, App* N°46. Territorial Charges paid at Home, | included 
in Charges ~ - 

Appendix - N°52.{ De - - - De - - - not included 
in Charges: + - 

1** Report, App* N° 4.| Net Difburfement of His Majetty’s Pay- i 


L 
6,482,125 


$54,729 


matters General for Troops ferving in 
India, with Intereft, after deduding the 
Amount fufpended - = - 


2,818,149 
9,655,003 
14,936,230 


Dedua, 
3¢Report, App* N° 17.| Amount repaid by His Majefty’s Covert 
| — mentin England 8,212,372 
Appendix - N°52.] De = - - De - - - ~ | 1,831,963 
é 9,544,335 
Dedud, 
1" Report, App® N° 4.| Intereft allowed on the Repayments in 
Cah -  - - £841,900 


Ibid. - - © + -| ProfitonSpices" = + - 131,136 


Toran TerritontaL on Poxirican - = = 


DOUBTFUL as to part TERRITORIAL or COMMERCIAL, 
3¢ Report, App* N° 22. | Loffes on Confignments from Port to Port in 


> India ie 873,403 
Ibid. - - 23.1 Loffts atthe feveral Prefidencies, not ‘included 
inthe Charges - + ~ = §|_ 4011828 
|—_———} 1,334,831 
Appendix - N° 29.| Paid on Participation of the Public - - | 500,000 
Tbid,- - -| Seamen raifed for Government - = - 47,000 
Lofs on Loyalty Loan -  - = = =| 107,878 
8* Report, App* N° 10. | Intereft on poftponed Bills - = - -] 120,063 
Appendix - N° 34.| Paid Owners of Rice Ships - - += -| . 110,595 
Supplies to Bi len, Pri f St seas, 
mpl, fo evel, Prine of We 3) ars 
Dedué, : 
Appendix - 253. | Supply to St. Helena, Incladed fi in Bet Ar 131,406 
tide - = = - - op 
2,685,740 
Report - + page453.} Charges aud Loffes at St. Helena adjufted = - 1,046,653 


Tora, Dovnstrun - - + + £.] 5,983,660 


3? Report, App® N° 25. | Increafe of Deap Srock in  Tadia, by Purchafes there or Confign- 
ments from England - - - ee Re 
Appendix, = Neg] Dy =~ + + atStHelems © 52 St 


Carried forward - - 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 531° 


Brought forward - -| - 
COMMERCIAL—Chiefty computed. 


Appendix - N*22.} Amount received on Sales of Company's Goods, &c.+ - |103,353,633 


es 
Report - + 


Appendix - 


he es 


700,097 
Prorit on Sates of Goons. 
Appendix - N° 25.j India, as computed - - - - - 
Dedué, 
De - - - Ne26.| Difference of Rate of Exchange on Bills, 
although doubtful if not in Part charge 
able to the Territories - . TAL 
De - - - N°25.| China, ascomputed - - - -  - {16,692,852 
edua, 
De - - - N°10.] Difference of Rate of Exchange on Bills -| 996,434 
F 15,696,418 
: 20,438,159 
pe - - - N°22.{ Charges and Profit on Private Trade - - | 2,440,937 
Ibid. - - - - -| Interefton Annuities - - - ete 629,225 . 
8,070,162 
Report - - p.422.| NetProfitat China - ‘ 454,524 
Appendix Ke a6. Profit on Sule of Export Goods i in India - 837,940 
Dedu@, 24,800,785 
1 Report, Apt N° 4. | Profit on Spices, paid to Government - — - 
Appeudix Ne 30, | Lofs on Saltpetre delivered to Board of cet 
nance, aseftimated - = + « 860,084 
at Report, Appt N22. Comercial Charpsin Indinoot ded othe} polar 
ss 
Tnvaiegs «> : —| 21,024,492 
Cuftoms : 
Appendix - N°22.] Amount paid- = | 6,239,008 
pe - - - NOS. Proportion charged ‘on Goods, £.5,819,478 
pe - - - N30. - - + D-onSaltpetre — 10,252 
£- 5,829,730 
Appendix - N° 23. Left due in 1810 (exclufive off 
pen ‘Tea Duties) ~~ § 1273890 
——-——} 5,701,840 : 
537,168 
Freight : 
pe - - - Nea2.{ Amount paid in England = - = | 29,648,283 
pe - - = Ness. paidin Indian - + ~ | (890,639 
pe - - -N°S84(a)! Debited to Owners for thort Deliveries, &e. 499,621 
Dedud, 
pe - = - N°2s. Valoe remaining in Increafe of Imprefs, 
&c, paid to Owners - = = -f{_ 322190) 
24,709,353 
pe - - - N°. Proportionchargedon Goods, £-19,610.27 5 
ele = NP30, - - = onSaltpetre 1,086,049 
yt Report, App* N Ne 46. recipe in Political Charges 1,854,153 
Appendix ~ NOt Paid Owuers of loft Ships =. 508,961 
£.23,059,418 
pe? - - + N°.) Dueini8i0 : = -  - 336,200 
———-| 22,723,218 
1,986,185 
| 


Dedua, 


N°25.] Amount of the Sales ethan, the perid = [102,737,954 


p. 425. Left due in 1810 + - 
N° 56.| Sale of Rice and Wheat, the Amount Leing 


N° 55. | Sale of damaged and refufe Salipetreand =a 


fettled with Government, and included iu 123,818) 
Appendix, No.24.- 


kali faved at Shadwell, the Net Lofs from 
the Fire being fiated feparately below ~ 


50,113 


102,653,536} 


Carried forward “= <= = £. | 2,523,303 121,724,519 | 15,240,281 


Brought forward .- .- = =| 2,598,308] 2,724,519 | 13,240,981 
Appendix = N° 22.| Remuneration to Captains of Ships wornout .-  - 
Ibid.- - - ~ = +} Payments to Almshoufes at Poplar in Excefs of Receipts - 


Charges General, L 
Ibid, .- + - - -| Amountpaids -. + © = =| 11,602, 
Dedua, 7 


1,513,341 
10,089,159 


‘Appendix. - Negs.| ‘Value remaining - - + + - 


D° - - ~ N°25.} - Proportion charged on Goods £.5,135,409 
pe - - - N°30. De - - D* onSaltpetre 96,576 
De - ~ = Ne54.| Salvage paid to Owners .- = + 28,265 
8¢ Report, App* N°46.| Included in Political Charges - 3,232,813 


Loffes. 
8¢ Report, App* N°7.| On Outward-bound Cargoes - = = - 


Ibid. - ~-N°47.|  On-Homeward-bound D° ef wer ye 


559,675 
2,871,788 
508,962 
28,265" 
74,804 


Appendix -° N° 54, Freight paid to Owners of loft Ships-“- 
Ibid. - + + + =| Salvage paidto Owners = - = - 


Appendix + N°55.| FireatShadwell -  - - = - 


2 Neg2.} Dividends on Stock aad Intereft on Bonds 


. 


Appendix 


Remeining Surplus Commercial Prorits- - -| 2 164,888 


C ° _ Difference- = - 11,075,758 


Amount to be accounted for - = - - © £.11,020,566 
Difference above fhewn - s; = : - 11,075,758 


Exceeds the Sum to be accounted for, by - £. 55,192 


the Atairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 593, 


: : Appendix, No. 52. ° 
ACCOUNT, fhewing the Amount of the Claims of the Eait Indis Company upon the- 
Public, on account of Advances and Supplies furnithed in England, which were liquidated, 
in the year 1797-; allo thofe adwitecd by the Séle& Commnittee of the Houle of Common 
in 1808 ; diftinguithing the part thereof included in the Charges of the (aid Compavy in 
England, from the part not fo included. ‘ 2 


tuded in] Not inctaded in Charges 
General or Freight 


ob pei | Tntereft. 
Jf 


CLAIMS admitted. 


ACCOUNT, 1797. 


Rice and Wheat, Freight, ke. - =| 184709 & 
Expedition to Cape of Good Hope, . ; 
Pagage, Freight, Supplies, rad 110,672 197,588 G08 
s+ Mauritius -  < + 48,723 6.928 


Paffage of Troops to Weft Indies - 
Demorage, Britannia - = + 
Board of Ordnance, for Small Arms 
St. Helena, Bils- =e 


‘otal Account, 1797 - £1 5 


ACCOUNT, 1808. 


Mauritius, Demorage 
Mape- ~ + D®- 
Manilla, Freight, &e. 
Egypt, Bills, &c. + 
Ceylon, Freight i 
Paffage of c, to Cape, &c, 
Cargo, &c. of Britannias -. - 
Bills, Regiment de Meuron - - 
D° from Canton, for Eaftern Ifands 


eens 
sees 


wane 


59,595 
35,880 


Total Account, 1808 + -£. 
DeduG Repayment, Menilla - “- 


Net Torat, 1808 - £. 


481,776 }1 


— 


Grawp Toran. -. £. 58,412 354,729 | 218,822 
3 = é saa SS 
Eaft India Houle, (Errors excepted) 0, 
the 10th March 1812. : , Chat Cartwright, 
. 7 ; : Acct. Gent, 


Appendix, No: 536 : 
Ax ACCOUNT of Supplies: from Bengal; Madras and Bombay, to the Iflund of 
St. Helena, from:the year 1792-3 to the year 1808-g inclufive. 


ne L 
1792-3 = > i 7 2 id > 81706 received, 
1793-4 %, ial = la ‘ - - 2,266 
1794-5 = = ae Se z - - 3,602 
1795-6 ~ - “ * a as - 3,439 
1796-¥ - - - re a fe = 9,923 
1797-8 = ~ s, = - ° - 750% 
1798-9 7 - - - - - > 6,081 
1799-1800 ~ - - Ae a - 9012 
1800-1 = - . A : - +. 4263 
1801-2> ce - - - -. ~ 13.537 
1802-3 Sao ae - - - - ~ 11,597 
1303-4 = Es - - = - 15,679 
1804-5 - “toe « - x - 5278 
1805 6 - - - 7 3 i =. 10,034 
1806-7 wos _ < = ne 727 
1807-8 c= - - “ z < 210/239 
2808-9" 4 0 ee - eS 20,565 

7 Total Net Supply “-  £. 131,406 
Eaft India Houfe, (Errors excepted.) 
7th April 1812. . Wa Wright, 


Auditor of India Accounts, 


6U 


524 Appendix to IV" REPORT ‘from the. Selc& Committee on 


Appendix, No. 54. 


AN CA CCOU NT of the Sums paid by the Eat India Company, for Freight and Salvage 
to the Owners of loft Ships, from the year 1793-4 tothe year 1809-10 inclulive , dif 
* tinguifhing each year. 


FREIGHT | SALVAGE. 


paid Owners. 

; L 
1793-4 -  -| PrincefsRoyal- + + = 
Pigs = = se = 
4795-6 - -| Triton) -  - = = = 
Boyd - - id a 
Neptone = - - - _ 
Ocean = - - _ 
Prince F: rederick se — 
Indian’ Trader = - - = 
Thomas - - - - — 
Royal Charlotte Sat — 
1797-8 -. .-| Fdmundand George = - pam 
Zephyr = oe ee cS 
Ligh, Wm. ees ee OS = 
Martha - - - - - feat 
A Aufpicious - oe ee — 
1798-9 ~  -|'Princefs Amelia - ~~ ae 
Raymond- - = - = pair 
Waodcot- © - = = = = 

|Crefeent - - 9 - = = ATI 

Syitanuia - - - - - 4,16% 

ee ee 481 
Ear! Fitzwilliam - ee = 
Henry Addington + = = _ 
3799-1800 -|Queen += + - © © nal 
Kea sc Pe ge oe os ae 
Earl Fatbot ) = = © = — 
1802-3 - -|Hindotan ‘+ - '- es 
= Comet - §~ 9s © = —_ 
Collands Grove woes _ 

f -| Gord Nelfon = =) = - 18,908 

Aduiral Aplin see 

1803-4° 2 | =| Princefs Charlotte soe ‘as 
+ | Princé-of Wales - - in 
1804-5 - ~ | Earl Abergavenny coos _ 
: Branfwick = - - - _ 
1805-6 - - | Lady Burges - - es, 
Warten Hatings =e ae 
Fame - - + © «¢ a 
Ganges ~ 2 - = = = 
SkeltonCaftle - - - - _ 
1807-8 - - | Travers - - - - - = 
Walpole - = - = = me 
1808-9 - - | Britannia =: : 2 = _ 
Admiral Gardner - = os ae 
Lord Nelfon’ - - = = a 
Experiment . - - - - Le, 
Gbiy - - - +e = 
Calcutta - ss = + _ 
Bengal + - - - = oo 
Jane Duchefs Gordon - - ~ 
LadyJ. Danger’ - ee . 
Europe - ce oe pes 
Streatham - se - _~ 
Afia i _ 

fh 28,265 

a] 
Eaft India Honfe, (Errors excepted.) 

10th March 1812. 7 Chas Cartaright, 


Acc, Geni. , 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA C SOMPANY. 525 


Appendix, No. 55. 


ACCOUNT of LOSS fuftained ‘by the Company on SALT PETRE 
confumed by Fire at Shadwell in 1795. 


Total Coft and Charges of Salt Petre confumed and sdaimaged at et 
Fire, including the Cott of the Building f £124,919 
Dedud, 
Received for the Sale of the damaged “and refufe Salt Petre and £0, 115 
Alkali 5 - ee eee eee 
NetLo - - - ={£. 74,804 
Faft India Houfe, (Errors excepted.) 
the 7th April 1812, z 7 Chas Cartright, | Mai 
en!, 


Appendix, No. 56. 
SALE Amount of RICE and WHEAT, im pred by the Company, the Lofs 


upon.which was made gi yy Government. 

1796-7 e - - - S -  £.83,078 
1797-8 - - - - - - 35,970 
1798-9 - - - - - - 3,905 
1799-1800 = - : 2 - - 865 

£-123,818 

Eaft India Houfe, (Errors excepted.) 
the 7th April 1812. . Chas Cartoright, 


Acct, Gen!, 


73 Appendix, No. 47.—SUPPLEMENT (0 the FOURTH REPORT 


Law. Notwithftanding this Order, and entry in confequence of it, the veffel might be feized, 
proteented in the Courtof Exchequer, and fo the queftion might have been brought toa 
judicial decifion, as in the Cafe of Scot qui tam y. Schurtz, Comyn's Rep. 677, and which 
aas cited in-the argument. 

By the way I do not fee that the Cafe of Butler can be diftinguifhed from that of Collet, 
Unlels they were difebarged from their allegiance by an Act of Parliament, they were both 
natural-born fubjeéts of Great Britain: they were both adopted fabjetis of the Cnitel 
States. Nemo Patriam, in qua natus eft, exnere, nec legiantie ejurare pollit, Twas} ‘ 

un 


sobferved by Lord Hale, that natural-born fubjects of this country entangled themfelves 
confliding duties, when they became naturalized fubjedts of another State. Yet it is clear 
‘that we, andail thecivilized nations of Europe, do adopt the natural-born fubjects of other 
countries. (See Vatell on the Law of Nations.) Our Law gives certain privileges, and 
sithholds certain privileges from our adopted fubjects; andfowe may couceive that fimiler 
regulations take place among all other nations. But our adopted citizens are entitled to all 
forts of Commercial privileges with ovr own natural-born fubjects. We fhould consider 

- them as Englith, in the language of the Navigation AG. The United States, acting on the 
fame principles with us, fhould confider their adopted fubjeéts as within their Laws; 
they thould confider the natural-born fubjects of the King of Great Britain, which 
thave been adopted by them, as entitled to all the Commercial. privileges with the 
natural born {ubjects of the United States; as we fhould confider the natural-bora fubjects 
of the United States, if adopted by us, to be within our Navigation Laws. The Cale feems 
to work itfelf clear, and comes to this queftion, What difference does the circumftance of 
adopted fabjects of the United States, being natural-bora fubjects of Great Britain, make? 
Is there any general principle in the Law.of Nations out of which this adoption fprings? 
Let-us come to our own Municipal Laws. Lord Hale fays, we may involve ourfelves in 
confliGing duties. This is very vaguely faid; there is no precifion in it. What are thefe 
duties w may be conflicting? “By our Law, perfons muft not arm themfelves againit 
the Pareat State. Perhaps, if they return to this country, they may be prevented from 
returning to the State that has adopted them. They may be bound to receive the King’s com- 
mands, Whether the proclamation which has been introduced into this Caufe ‘has the fame 
effect, is. a queftion not necellary to be here difcufled; it cannot havea greater effect, nor 
of adifferent nature, and therefore it may be left out of this cafe. : 


Our Municipal Laws may attach on fuch natural-born fab et in fome other cafes, but 
I conceive in no inftance of fait analogy, which can govern the prefent cafe; and we have 
had no fuch argument from analogy ithe courte of this preceeding shall it be allowed 
to be faid, that a natural-born fubject fhall not trade to the Ea ies, though he is an 
adopted fubject of another country, whofe fubjeéts in general are allowed to trade to the 
Fatt Indies? Shall any man’be permitted to fay the reit of the King’s fubjetts are not 
allowed, and you being a ead fubje¢t are not? This anfwer may be made: 1 have 
privileges which the reft of the King’s fubjeéts have not. [am the ing’s fubject, but I 
am alto a fubject of the United States of “America as well as of Great Britain. “You, as a 
Britith fubjedt, ought not to trade to the lofs and injury of the Eaft India Company. ‘This 
le may and ought to be carried on by the the United States, under the 
authority “of the Laws of this Country; under the of the fame Laws 
ahat give the Eatt India Company  themfelves their Mon They may fuffer 
a JofS, but it is damnum fine injuria. It being once granted that’ the fubjecis 
of Great Britain may become fubj of the United States of America, there is no 
breach of moral or legal duties, no conflict of duties, in claimi and exercifing the pri- 
yileges that belong to that charaéter. On the fame principles of reafoning, is it not fuf- 
ficietitly effablifedl to be now taken for clear Law, on the grounds on which we ought to 
declare this conttraétion with refpect to a natural-born fubjot naturalized, and afterwards 
become an adopted fubject of a foreign State, that he is to be confidered under our Na- 
vVigation Laws as a fubjeét of that foreign State, when aéting in the character of Majter 
of a veflel, and acting in the fervice of that foreign State. Such aman is to many purpofes 
a fabject of that country ; he is fo within the words of the Navigation AG ; he is Efibjedt 
of the United States by the 37th of the King. In point of title to this charaéter of fubject, 
he is fufliviently fo even within our Navigation Laws; I mean he is fufficiently adopted, 
according to the Cafe in ae to be confidered as a fubjecét of that country within the 
Navigation Laws: Suppofe aman to be a natural-born fabjeét of His Majetty; I am not 
pee ‘to fay that circumftance will control or fufpend the legal operation of his being 
=a aject of the United States. It appears to me that there is no conflict of duties. Both 
characters may ftand together: and if fome eagles inconveniences, fuch as thofe fuggefied 
He us in the argument (though thele I confefs appear very remote) if fuch inconveniences 
hould follow ; if thefe BE oe are not of confequence enough to prevent the prac- 
tice of adopting the fabjeGs of Great Britain by every other State in Europe, I cannot fay 
they ought to contro! the legal confequence. . " 
pi mt ae eae we are all of opinion that there is no Erroz in this Judgment, and that it 


India Board, Whiteial, 
18th June, 1801. W. BRODRICK. | 


Jvpoment ArrimMep. 


(No. 2.) “i 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. rey 


(No. 2.) 


MINUTES OF EVIDENCE. 


Committee on the East India Company’s Affairs. 


Sabbati, © die Maii 1809. 
Sir JOHN ANSTRUTHER, Baronct, in the Chair. 
Mr. John Innes, called in, and examined. > 


© you carry on a considerable trade between India and England ?—A very con- 
siderable trade as Agent. 7 

Will you state to the Committee, to what extent the regulations of the Act of 
1793 have answered the PEEP ORe of the PrivateMerchants, in facilitating their trade between 
India and England ; and if they have not, what are the impediments of which the Private 
Merchants complain?—I did not get the information to attend this Committee till a 
Tate hour last night, and am not sufliciently prepared to answer that question in such 
detail as 1 should wish, but I will be ae upon another day to give that intor- 
mation to the Committee; but, in a general way, am prepared to answer it now. The 
principal impediment is the difficulty that the Merchants in India have in obtainin; 
freight for their sopdes when ready to ship for this country, and the ignorance in uabick 
they are kept’of the names of the ships in which the goods are to be sent; by their want 
of ‘such freight the Agents here are brought under advance for the Bills drawn against the 
prone, consigned to them, because it seldom happens that that property can be disposed of 
here in time to meet their payment, and by not knowing the names of the ships they 
are prevented from giving orders for the Insurance upon the particular ship by name, 
the Insurance being obtained at a better rate, than when it is made on ship or aos it 
is therefore for some time past customary for the ts in India to have their Insurances 
effected in India rather than in this country, by which means they are subjected to ahigher 
premium, and the Agents here to the hazard of having the payment of their Policies refused, 
in the event of loss, ay the Houses where they are made payable in this country. 

“ Do you think it possible the Private Merchant if at liberty to send the 
their own way, could always anticipate the Insurance here upon pasticular ships >—Cert 
not, if they are rerentoh as they have frequently been, from having any intercourse with 
their domespontes in this country for several months; but if we have the Continent 
open, and could write oyer-land as fener then we should be kept regularly advised of the 
quantity of goods to be consigned, and the ships in which they would be sent. 

Whether, when you insure upon ship or ships from India, instead of insuring upon a 
particular ship, and the goods are afterwards found to have been Jaden on any of the 
regular Ships of the Company, you do not get a return of Premium of the difference or 
nearly the whole difference of the rate of Insurance on ship or ships, and oa such par- 
ticular ship?—Yes, we do; but then the additional freight charged by the Company 
for goods sent by the regular Ships, is more than equal to the whole Premium. 

What is the difference iu the rate of Insurance, between the Company's regular 
Ships, and the private Indian Ships ?—If they sail with SOnyOys only 2 per cent. .. 

You have mentioned that the Merchants in India are obliged to imsure their goods 
there on account of the uncertainty of transmitting timely advice to Engiand; are they not 
induced to insare in India, on account of receiving the premiums of this great branch of 
business among themselves?—That may be one reason why part of their Insurances 
are done in India, but the Merchants never would run the risk of having their Bills 
returned with protests for non-payment in the eyent of the Joss of their Tropeny, by cap- 
ture or otherwise, for the advantages they would derive by eifecting such Insurances in 
India. pays Listes 

Have the Insurance Offices in India agents and funds to pay the losses in England? 
—They have agents, but very frequently those agents are without any funds belonging 
to the Office. Bh Sts 

‘Are the losses, upon any Policies made in India, payable-in England?—They are; 
but the agents in Logland would not pay such losses i they were without funds be- 
longing to the Offices. 5 : , . 

Do not the Offices in India, when they stipulate for such payment, provide funds or 
credit in England for that purpose ?—The only tunds they provide are the Bilis drawn by 
the Shippers of goods upon their agents in England for the premium. — 

Do you know of any instances of demands for such losses haying been refused by 
agents in England —Yes, I do. 

351 & 162, x Is 


Mr. Innes, 


sere 


Bo Appendis, No. 47-—SUPPLEMENT 0 the FOURTH REPORT 
; uent occurrence?—No, I believe not; but I apprebend it will soon 


i tter of fre be ‘ 

. ekaaats a a eoasiderable amount, when the Policies effected for the shipments by the 
Waipole become duc. tes * 3 ‘ 3 

i a the delay in dispatching ships from India, Bills drawn upon 

You mention that, from the delay pe i Aenminnte the ee te sige ; 


ds become payable before the goods are realized. cord f 
Sean 4s the Shas state of the Continent, do you think it would be possible to prevent 


i whatever time the ships might sail from India?—It would certainly be prevented, 
‘called acne, if the ships eae to sail when the goods were ready. The Bills are 
drawn the moment the goods reach Calcutta, and it frequently pln that these goods 
cannot be shipped for want of freight for several inonths afterwards. : 

Do not goods come to Caleutta when no ship can sail for England ?—Then the Bills 
cannot be transmitted to this country for acceptance, as we have had no communication 
over-land for several years. * 4 i . 4 

Are not Bills Namenies Tangential by neutral Ships?—It is some time since any 

tral Ships have arrived from India. : 
mWith reagent to the great article of Indigo, is not the crop of 1807 still unsold here, 
‘on account of the state of the times?—It is certainly unsold; but the sale commences 
‘on Monday next. 4 

Would the inconvenience, which yon have described, be Fepedicd by, eriods being 
fixed for the sailing of ships, and those periods being strictly adhered to ?—1 think it would, 
in a great measure. , ! ' 

Is not the time, at which the Bills are made payable, adapted to the period that 
generally elapses before the sale, and is not that time fixed on the presumption of the goods 
-sailing when ready ?—The Bills fer all goods shipped in private trade are drawn at three 
and six months sight; but it happens sometimes that those drawn for oes shipped 
in the privilege of the Company's Officers, are made peraile go days afier the prompt 
(the day on which the payment for the goods sold at the India House becomes due) of 
ithe goods so shipped. 


(No. 3.) 


Martis, 9° die Maii 1809. 
Sir JOHN ANSTRUTHER, Baronet, in the Chair. 
Mr. John Innes, again called in, and examined. 


“YOU said the other day that you would give us a distinct Statement of the difference 
of Insurance between ship and ships, and Insurance upon the extra and regular Ships of the 
India Company ; can you now state what it is?—The Insurance for £.100 effected on 
-a regular Ship, at £. 7 per cent. will require, with commission and duty, £. 108. 108, 
‘to cover the Insurance ; and upon an India-built ship at 10 Guineas per cent. will require, 
£.112. 15. to cover the Insurance for £.100. for the homeward Voyage; an Insurance, 
upon ship or ships at 15 Guineas will require £.119. 15s. to cover the £. 100 so insured ; 
by which Statement, in the event of a loss happening, the Merchant would lose £.11. 5 s- 
by having the Insurance made upon ship or ships, instead of being made upon a regular 
Ship; and £.4. 58. upon its being ade upon an India-built Ship by name, instead of its, 
being made upon a regular Ship. 

You stated yesterday that one of the grievances complained of, was the loss that, the 
Merchants suflered from being obliged to insure upon ship or ships, instead of insurin; 
-upon an individual ship by name; is this the extent of that loss?—It is in the event 
-capiure or loss happening to the property so insured. 

4s there any and what difference in the event if the ship arrives safe?—There is the 
Joss of the commission upon the difference between the sum insured upon the ship by. 
name and upon ship or ships, but no other. sf 

‘ou stated on Saturday another grievance, which was, that Merchants did not get 
freights at the times they wished for it; have you ever applied for any freight to India at 
any time lately?—We frequently have occasion to apply for freight to India; the last. 
freight we applied for which we had any difficulty in obtaining, was in November last, 
the 7th I think; it is only within a fortnight that that freight has been granted to us. 

And when is it to be given to you?—It is probable that the ship on which it is 
granted may suilin the course of the next month, or the beginning of July. 

Is not such delay in procuring a seeiate 2s you have mentioned a considerable incon- 
venience to your principal in India?—Unquestionably the inconvenience must be. very: 
oe and, in this instance, an inconvenience may very probably be suffered by the 

iovernment in India. 

Why i—Because it was to supply a contract with Government that the order was, 
es to us. 7 ry : 

fo you know the times at which the ds of the private Merchants are ordered by 
the Government of India to be brought thio theke rareliode I speak now particularly of 
Bengal?—t believe in the month of October, or the begiuning of November H but I 

annderstand 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. pei 


| 


‘understand it is intimated by the Board of Trade to the Merchants that they must apply Ur. Poe | 


for their freight in the month of September. 

Is not the month of September in the very middle of the season for growing and 
manufacturing Indigo?—I am not prepared to answer that question correctly; but [ 
believe it is impossible for the manufacturers of Indigo to ascertain what’ quantity 
they can grow at so early a period in the year. 

en by what means is the Agent or Merchant enabled to ascertain what quantity 
of tonnage he shall require for Indigo?—Ie must ask for such a quantity of tonnage as he 
‘thinks his Indigo will amout to. 

But supposing either that the crop should turn out very productive or yery deficient; 
sin those two cases, what is he to do?—IfF productive, he would have considerable 
difficulty I apprehend in getting a tonnage for the different quantity, but if deficient 
he must either pay the freight, or fill up the tonnage with other articles. 

Then these must have been articles that he had not been prepared beforehand to ex- 
port, otherwise he would have asked for tonnage for them too ?—I have frequently known 
articles come home in tonnage of that description which would not have been otherwise 
sent, and those articles have not uncommonly scold for less than the freight and the 


charges, 
The foods you say are ordered to'be in the Company’s warchouses about the month 
of Octaber eve or the beginning of November. 

Have the extra Ships usually sailed at or about that period ?—I believe they seldom 
or ever have sailed before the montlis of May or June afterwards. 

goods are to lie in the Company’s warehouses from the month of November 
till the month of May or June?—Yes, unless the Merchants agree to ship them on board 
the regular Ships at an increased rate of freight, and the Company agree to allow it. 

Do you happen to know whether the Company charge any warehouse rent? —I 
really cannot say. k 

At what time are the Bills usually drawn for those goods?—When the goods are 
deposited in the Company’s warehouses. 

_Are those Bills generally drawn after date, or after sight?—Almost always after 
sight. 

PD hetieve it rarely or never happens, that there is not an opportunity of conveyance 
from Bengal to England between the months of November and May?— The Com- 
pany’s requlae Fleet constantly sail between those two periods. 

Does that cireumstance occasion any loss either to the Merchant there, or any ad- 
vance to the Agent -here?—It occasions the loss of interest of course to the Merchant 
there, and the inconvenience of advance to the Agent here. i 

Do you know any thing of the times of the sailing of the extra Ships from England? 
—That entirely depends upon the pleasure of the Court of Directors. 

Do they sail in cata the periods of the year, and at the times that are most 
convenient for the shippers of goods here, or do they arrive in India at the time that would 
be most convenient for the shippers of goods there?—-It is a convenience for people 
here to ship their goods at any season, but it is evident that these extra Ships.are not dis- 
patched from here at proper scasons, otherwise they would arrive in India at the time 
proper for their being dispatched to this country. 

Do you_know of any extra Ships that have been taken up by the Company for one 
voyage?—They have latcly teken up three extra Ships for one voyage. r 

jo you know at how much per ton?—One of them belongs to the House in 
which I am a partner; the freight we have for her is £.39. 15s. per toa, payable on 
her return. 2 

Does that £. 99. 15s. include war contingencies and extra allowances ?—It does. 

Is it upon one of those ships that you ere to have the freight you mentioned ?—E under 
stand itis. 

What freight are you to pay Nine Pounds per ton for the outward foyaee. 

Is’ it your opinion that in time of Peace, with the facilities that might be granted to 
do away ‘these objections that you have stated, that the Private Merchant, either in England 
or in India, could import his goods at such a rate as to be able to meet the Americans and 
cother foreigners in the market of Europe?—I apprehend that other objections than 
those I have stated’ must be removed before that could happen; the Merchant in India 
must not only be allowed’ to ship his goods when they ate ready, but he must be permitted 
to assort them in whatever manner he thought most likely to be advantageous to himseli 
vand the Owners of the ship. ‘ . 

You do not mean by that that you must be allowed to trade in those articles that are 
exclusively confined to the Company?—No, I do not; 1 mean that before that can be done 
the ship must ‘be the Merchant's, and he must be permitted to load that ship, and dispateh 
her as he thought most proper. : ¢ ‘ 

‘Then, independent of the question of expense, one of the inconveniences the Private 
Merchants complain of is, their not being allowed to Joad and assort their cargoes at their 
own pleasure ?—It certainly is an inconvenience which they frequently complain of. 

Are there any other inconveniences which you think should be removed, in order to 


obtain that object ?—It cannot be obtained in my opiuion unless the Merchants are allowed | 
ae 


to load their goods in their own ships, India-built Ships. 3 
“Yaa aeigenican by that, any acti privilege to India-built Ships?—No, I do ules 
2 


151 & 282. 


820 


Mr. Innes. 


Vv 


nf 


Appendis, No. 47-—SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


that you could meet the Americans and other foreigners 


inion is the 
Alina at ka seneare if these facilities were afforded you?—I have not 


in the market of Europe in time of Peace, 

i ubt of it. 8 ‘ F 

Mita eines ese afforded you, from your knowledge of the mode in which trade 

would be carried on, are you of opinion that it would tend to increase the export of British 
i ?—T am firmly of that opinion. i ” 

sia ere if nanietacede do For conceiye would be increased by it?—All sorts of 


factures usually sent to India. ‘ 
eeWhat ne of freight was paid by Private Traders to the Company on the outward yoyage 


for theseason 1807 4,i-=f8. 108. Bet (0 
What as the he of freight homeward for the same season from Bengal?—We do not 


know. a : . 
What was the rate for the season of 1806-7 ?—TI do not at present recollect ; et the freight 
Pelt) 


charged for the preceding season was £-44 per to i ips. 
supnoting Es had not been restrict ships in the service o! the Company, could 


have exporied and imported your goods in those seasons at lower rates of freight?—Un- 


ay coubtedly ; if allowed to ship goods on cou is ~built ships. ; 
Can you form any calculation at what rates you cou! y fave imported or exported your 


N 


goods on country-built ships ?—At a freight not exceeding £.22. 105, per ton home; and 
£.7. 105. out. & 

iby did it happen that all the Indigo of the season you haye mentioned came home in 
regular Ships re eranse there were no extra Ships at that time in India to receive it, 

Do you know whether a great part of the Indigo of last season did not come home also 
in regular Ships for the same reasons?—I_am unfortunately 100, well acquainted with that 
fact, having a large quantity oa board the Walpole, which was wrecked off Margate. 

Do you know any thing of any offer that was made by the Merchants in Calcutta, 

to pay whatever freight the ships might cost the Company in the last or the preceding 
season ?—I do not. E * 
“When you insure en a ship or ships, is it not always with a condition that if the 
goods are shipped on a regular or an extra Ship of the Companys the rate of Insurance is 
to be regulated accordingly ;- that is, as if the particular ship had been at first specified and 
whether jn case of loss the premium is not settled accordin; ly?—If 1 am to insure 
upon a particular regular Ship by name £.100 ata premium of £.7 percent. 1 shall in 
the event of a loss have £.93 to recover. {If I insure £.100 upon an India-built ship 
by name, at a premium of 10 Guineas, I shall in the event of a loss haye £. 80. 108. to 
‘recover; butif I insure £,100 upon ship or ships, I shall in the event of a loss have only 
£-84. 5s. to recover) Perel 

1s this all that you would recover if you had specified in the Poliey, that if the 
aoe aie laden on regular Ships, the premium would be. only £.7 per cent?— 

ertainly. i 

Do ior not allow it to be necessary, that some particular period of the year should 
be fixed, in which freight should be applied for to the Company, that they may have an 
opportunity of preparing freight accordingly ?—It is no doubt necessary that the Com- 
pany should have time to prepare freight; what I complain that we cannot obtain 

freight when we require it. z "i Msg wanes 4 

1 you were left entirely to your own private ships, both from India and from Eug- 
Jand, ‘you could obtain precisely the times of dispatch that you want, and the certainty 
of the freight that you require?—As to the freight, we would willingly take our 
chance of that; as to the dispatch, that’ must depend upon the Government's allowing us 
convoy. 

* Do you not know, that the period in India for giving notice of wanting freight for 
goods is extended to the end of October ?--I have stated ail that I kaow of that subject. 

Are not the crops of Indigo perfectly ascertainable as to quantity by the end of Sep- 
tember ?—Certainly I understand not. me 

__ in the uncertainty of the produce of Indigo which you state, would not the inconyenience 
likewise result if the Indigo were to be ladea on private ships?—No, certainly not; because 
the Owners of the private ships would have their cargoes assorted, and would send indigo ot 
not, as they thougiit proper. 

Whether private goods have not frequently heen received by the Company, to be 
laden after the months of October and November ?—There is no doubt of it, 

1s not Indigo frequently laden in the Company’s regular Ships ?—Yes, at the enormous rate, 


» asThavealready stated, of £.44 per ton. 


_Is that the usual freight 2—It is the feet for the scason I_ mentioned, of 1805-6. 
aa any other season ?—I believe as high a freight as £.52 has been charged by the 
mpany. en ae i 
What do you conceive the general rate of the charge to be on the Company’s regular 
Ships for Indigo ?—Invariably too high for the Merchanta in ladies a ia Ras 
tageous trade'With this country. ‘ ae 
_ Can you specify the general rate of freight for that article on the regular Ships?—— 
No; it Varies according (o the directions given by the Court of Directors, 
id at rate per cent. do you suppose the difference would be of the freight on Indigo 
on the Company’s ships and Private ships on the value of the Indigo?—That isa Se 
; ; whiel 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 83 


which requires too much calculation for me now to answer; but as I have stated the private 
ships could be advantageously sent to this Country at a freight of £.22. 105, per ton, the 
difference jn the rate of freight would be between that sum and the £. 44 charged by the 
Company, £. 21. ag per ten. : 

What do you understand the general average of the freight of the Company’s e: 
Ships out and home to be?—The freight Rete I andere, varied freak the aoe 
1802 very considerably; in that ee the rate was £.5 per ton out, in the present year it 
‘ £-93 in 1801-2, the rate of freight home was £.14 per ton, and it is now, I believe) 

22, 158. 

Was not 1802 a year of peace ?—It was. 

Has not the price of stores and all sorts of equipment for ships generally increased 
since in the country ?—Yes, very considerably. 

‘You mentioned three extra Ships taken up for one voyage at £.39. 15s. do you mean 
to say, itis only on those extra Ships that the Private Merchants ate to have freight?—~ 
Certainly not; there ave other ships upon which freight has been granted to Private Mer- 
chants besides the three I mentioned. 

How much has the freight arisen upon private Indian Ships since the year 1802, whether 
in India or to Europe ?—I do not know te extent of the rise in India upon ships tradin; 
from port to port; but I am informed by. our friends there, that they could afford to a 
home their ships ata freight of £..22. 203. as I have already stated, 

Is it not one of the great objects of the Indian Merchants to haye Indian Ships employed 
in the commerce of Europe, independent of all facilities in the transport of their goods j— 
It is an object for a Merchantat all times to make his capital, whether employed in shipping 
or otherwise, as advantageous to him as possible. 

Do you think that in the time of Peace, when we are not loaded with the charges and in- 
conveniences of war, and the Americans have no advantage over us from their neutral cha- 
racter, they could compete with the India Company or British Individuals in the trade from 
India to Europe ?—Certainly, if the present restrictions imposed by the Company upon pri- 
yate trade are to bee! ste of eee apy. a oy 

Do those restriétions, ly, the irregular time iling, waiti convoys, i 
freight, arise out of a time of war ?—Not always; they arise ioe the impolide wae 
tions of the East India Company. ; 4 

State which of them arise from impolitic regulations —The mode of loading their ships, 
the great expense of their equipment, and a saueey of other matters. 

In the advantages which you conceive to be able from the employment of private 
ships, do you include British as well as India xe and British Merchants resident ia Eng- 
land as well as in India ?—I haye generally alluded to India-built Ships, and Mechants re- 
sident in India; but I am persuaded it would be greatly to the advantage of the East India 
Company, and to the interest of this country, to allow British Ships as well as India-built 
Ships, and British Merchants as well as Merchants resident in India, ‘to trade frecly to and 
from India, ure. y, r 

When you speak of the increase in the export of British manufactures thereby to be 
produced, do you mean to say that the Spon of Britisl: manofactures might be 
greatly increased among the Natives of India?—I should think so; because where the Na- 
tives of any country can purchase an article at a cheap rate, they will consume a greater quau- 
tity of that article than if they paid a high price for it. . 

Do you conceive that any difference in the rate of freight would alter the taste of the 
Natives, with respect to the articles of consumption ?—I should suppose not. 


151 & 182. 28 


p95 pBbr sags ee: “6 giscar cient gt oe a= 
28 ete ey 2 MUA ~ seaming org - diyg apnq-mpuyuesaed = - = 2 
Sp Bp ~~ 7 aneus “Sind poe worseyaciog “amjimasg yates wos aod £7 ye pasosos Tdygaweseas w sed spot wi ost -F ad 
‘ “ONOp Yaad JAvy saduLINsHy OW yng ‘soy Siq uaa E : 
SARY PINOAL a1 ayy] JO $199 sad svaNiND £ usaq suq Weopaey UV] —*paiiuss sey aourysur zoyio ou amy apis suite quoa sod £-F seas “togy ut eymayea ye “eooMy of vIpuy moay Tuareg OUT, 


= sdtysz0 diyg aod 


€ "aA0qR SEyHaa aad & *augyaq sv *yAd sad 

3 4, |e aa : pur € josuanaar yaa ‘seauine ot *payusasen 40 T pay F yo suanjaa yin 
quaosad or -F quao sed °F | gogr “odoyaq SB stanjos qe “U9 sad pelea et. yu99 tod aeaney 6 =-ynaa aod L°F | goge 

. spury 

Sug sop aotteqy wos 

: == E Soanoa 10}-u29.19d 1.40 

Lf . ‘wuao ted & pur £ yo sumyar 92 ‘adegary to wua}a}q 38 

Ih “euslaHt 1S areas tad seauing o1 ‘onogmre Porueaseaa eg arty oy epuy mossy Lo\u09 

a Os Ae Suit ea Bae sv uso dad Fz puv ‘Es pur "Wao aad S uaa Joy quoo sad 1 usnjos 

‘AL 0} "yUaD 194 inch = sya Ante Logi |i aad g yo suinjar yy sgtios sod svoutng St 0} quad Jad seaunry 6 > ‘ynaa tod LF 
mt 3 ‘ ear 

“IG wry Koauod soy] yg tory AOsuo0d soy “eua}fy-ag mous Aoauod yam Surins : 
squaa dad 10 fadedua | ytaa aad & 40 fofeSoa sdiyjs wayxa ur ju “quao aod & 30. “anton a yu 
94) soy Koation soy -yuao | 9443 103 Koauios 105 3ua9 4u99 dod & Winjo, 07 “uad Jad svauing of sdiys 
dad % aanjos 0) ua |.t9d ¥ anjas oF Quad UNXa Lo4vinFag s Auvdwogparucssem 10 fox aq 
dad Gt so ‘susmas no | aad of 20 ‘saamias yno Se “ua sod F% pur quas tad Fn yuan sad ¢ 
-yptm quaa sod or °F | -yiim “ynaa sad g-F “quad Jad g yosuangas qq u99 tod stoumy $1 


T tothe FOURTH REPORT 


“quao sad oF > waa gad £7 


. “a1Ojaq st 
“nao sod FG pue uaa sad ¥ % ynorsed $ quaa 
squao aod oF. = aased g-F 4od g yo suamps yjias “uaa sed. seaumy Sr 
*stlany 
OL ynop “waa sod : - i< 
sarojaq | seuajoyy ag woyy 404 | ot pov ‘eunprgy-1g Moay +a10}9q, sv “34199 
ge quno‘aad + any “W09 105 499 sad BILIMT Koaund soy “uaa gad & aod §% pow yuoo sod $s pav quae aad S -qna9 
rot oy ytioa tod Fr°F | -a4 0} quad sod t1-F FuanjatoyyuoasodorF | fogr | sad g yo suamas quam uaa sad seauing rt 
= “purpuyT soy wuaaEyysao adey aq) tiosy AOAMOD 
any 40 Prout yUD9 aad fz pue ‘euazazy “1g 10 ode, 
svunjozy ig uoay Soa senaparig mory Soanoa | “etafay] Ig toss Lon ay 0 Koauod 205 “yuao.40d Fe sdiys ypina-wpay | ~vM9[9}4°7G w0yy LoAUoD 
-n09 10) juaa4ad # WAM | Foy uaa aod -noo Jog waa.dead & wany far aqui OF JL pur sediys viaxa ur yr uaa aod § ‘sdins | s0y-yuaasad € asnio4 0} 
-240} ua sod °F | -a1 oy quoa aad oi-F |-ot oryuoouad-or-F | Coge } aw[nB9x ur ji uaoa0dg uinyas puesvauing $ | uaa sod seaung tr | - “yap sod g pue “7 
u “Ogt Youryy oF aaye Suypi 
5 . sdiyssaqio ut jt quad aad -sor so ‘sd 1s AB[Nas 
4 = nao aad oF = uaa dad 6-7 = "yuaa sed S-F | zogr |} ut yt yao ada wanjas 07 yua9 19d svauins ~ 4ugo sad °F 
@ | Ud ,aLT AS. j sual? TLS 
tuory Koatios 30} +yUa9 4o aded ayy wor Aoauos doy quad sod § ‘sdiyjs 
dodd wimar oy juacsed ying-eipuy Avs ‘sdiys zoo ui gr pur ‘sdrys yyetus | -euayazyag wos oanoa 
Ft ao susNjaI ~nowis adoiney ur yt qua aad 10 ‘sdiys avjnSax toy 1099 Jad & uMIAI OF 
*yuao aod ot pue 6°F = uaa sad g°F | 1ogr |] yt uaa sod g wanjas 0} qua9 sad stauiny £t | yaa sod seourns o4 - quoo sod LF © noo aod Le 


“quad aod o1-F = "yaa aod L447 


> uaa aad g °F = uaa sad £7 


= quae god L-7 


- waa sad HF - yuao sod + -F 


A 
tet 
o 
cal 
=i 
=) 
4 
% 
4 
nS 
+ 
6 
a 
ry 
# 
§ 
Es 
< 


s8dig ymy-knunoD ssditig wag sfuvduiog | -sdiyg aynay soudwoo | uray ssdiyg 10 drug *sdiyg yytaq-fyun0g sadiyg naieg sSavduiog | vsding arjn3ay s,(uedwog 


VIGQNI NI SWOAIWGUG ‘adOUNA NI SWOAINAUd 


on the Affairs of The LAST INDIA COMPANY. 83 


(No. 4.) 
Foris, 11° die Maii 1809. 
Sir JOHN ANSTRUTHER, Baronet, in the Chair. 
Mr. Richard Campbell Bazett, called in, and examined. 
WHEN did you last return from India?—In 1802. 


I belies you were concerned in a very considerable house in Calcutta ?—I was, from the 
year 1788. s . 

T believe you are now concerned in an Agency-house here?—I am. 

' Was you in India muci engaged in the export of goods from India to Earope?—Very 
largely. 

Tsuppose you are aware of the regulations that took place in the year 1 id the new 
modification of those regulations that took place in the years 1891 8 Lg 

State whether you think those regulations have afforded the ‘fae to the private trade, 
which it requires to carry it on with advantage ?—I certainly do not think that they have, 

> Can you state any of the impediments that have becn thrown in the way of the private 
trader in consequence of these regulations ?—The inconveniences or impediments that have 
occurred, originated principally in regard to the tonnage, both as to the cost of it, as well 
as to the manner in which we are called upon to supply the freight for that tonnage. 

Can you detail those inconveniences ?—One of the principal inconveniences is, that the 
periods at which we ere forced to apply for the tonnage, are such as will not admit our 
calculating with any degree of nicety what tonnage we shall require in the course of that 
season; the month of September was that in which our applications for tonnage were de- 
manded from us inIndia, and at that period of the year the principal article of exportation, I 
allude to Indigo, from our port of Calcutta was not then manufactured in such a degree as 
to enable us to say how much we should require tonnage for ; the price of the freight demanded 
by the Hondarable Company completely prevents us from shipping many gruff goods, and 
even comes too heavy upon such as Indigo and other goods of greater value; we have been 
charged as high in the year 1806 as £. zi 
ship on regular Ships, because theré“Were no extra Ships, none of that'sort of ‘tonnage 
which the Ret of Parliament intended us to be supplied with, in India. 

The inconvenience arising from the being obliged to ask the quantity of tonnage before. 
you can ascertain your quantity of , Must it not be attended with either making you 

juire too much or too little? Assu ly. ‘ . 
“ir you happen to demand too much, does the Company make you bay the freight upon 
all you demand ?—Those are the terms advertised always, to avoid which we frequently have 
shipped Boose which we were well aware could not answer to us to ship, rather than forfeit 
the freight. : - 

"Supposing you demanded too little, could you at all times with facility procure the 
additional freight that you might require?—If there was 3] freight, Ido presume the 
Board of Trade at Calcatta would have allowed individual to fillit; but I have known 
many instances in which there was not spare freight, and our goods have laid over till the 
next year. 

Have the extra Ships with the private trade sailed at fixed periods ?~On the contrary ; 
the extra Ships have very frequently been dispatched at a season of the year the most 
unfavourable tor a voyage to England, and the consequence in several cases have been, that 
the goods were damaged in their passage down the Bay. of Bengal, particularly in a receut 
one to a very great extent. If the ship is dispatched from Bengal at an unfavourable 
season, the voyage is unfavourable throughout. 

At what time are the Bills usually drawn from Calcutta upon the proceeds of the goods?— 
They are given about the period of the goods being delivered to the Company's export 
warehouse, for the purpose of being ship; 

Are those goods always dispatched within a short period after they are put into the Com- 
pany’s go-downs?—Not always ; I have known them sometimes lay there a great length of 
time before they were. 

When that circumstance happens, is it not attended with a considerable inconvenience to 
the Drawers of the Bills?—No doubt, because the Bills are payable at a fixed period, and 
unless the goods arrive to meet those Bills, they must lead hitn, the correspondent in Lon= 
don, into an advance of cash to meet those Biils without their possessing the security even 
of _a bill of lading. 

For which of course he charges you Interest and Commission ?—Always. 

It is stated to us, that some inconvenience arose from the not being at liberty to “assort 
your cargoes 2s you please ; have you found such an inconvenience ?—Undoubtedly. 

Js that an inconvenience to a Merchant situated as your House at Calcutta was, of 
any considerable extent ?—It may be of extreme importance, because a Jarge quantity of 
one kind of goods may come in one ship, and be too much for the market ; whereas if it 
were divided in the different periods of the season, they would all arrive in a small pro- 
portion to more favourable sales; a large importation of any one article of course occasions 
a glut in the market; an assorted cargo would be more valuable. 

How do gr make your Insurances here upon ship and ships ?—Our House has 

152 & 182, just 


Mr. Bazett, | 
cate Pacnsiatal 


4 per ton, upon goods that we were compelled to © 


86 Appendix, No. 47—SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


Mr. Bazett. just made an Insurance of £.200,000 for a single correspondent upon ship or ships, from 
‘ , hot knowing upon what ship the goods are likely to come. 

Does that make any difference in the Insurance ?—Certainly ; an additional premium is 

required. 
“Ww hen your goods arrive here, or when you export from this country to India, are there 
any inconveniences arise ?—As to the arrival of goods, I do not think there are any of 
magnitude enough to be noticed; they are usually brought to sale in the way that as @ 
Merchant 1 should wish. With regard to the exports, I certainly have felt very great incon- 
venience, irom being disappointed of the freight for which Ehad applied, “I will if you 
please state a specific case, a recent one; in April 1805 I applied for tonnage in order to 
export goods that were commissioned from a House of business in Calcutta: these 
were directed about three months afterwards to be shippéd-on the Northumberland ; part of 
these goods were left out for want of tonnage. Those were the last ships'sailing ; it being in 
the month of June, the ships Northumberland and Euphrates had both a circuitous Voyage 
to muke ; that is to say, they were to go toSt. Helena before proceeding to India, which was a 
disadvantage. Some of the goods I have mentioned were left out, for want of tonnage, although: 
the freight fur the whole had been paid in to the Company's proper Offices: these goods, so left 
out, I naturally expected would be shipped by the first ships of the following season ; they 
were not, nor upon the second Fleet of that next season ; they were shipped in May 1806, 
being above twelve months after the application for freight was made, in the Tottenham. In 
consequence of this delay of twelve months in the shipment, the House who commissioned 
those goods from India refused to receive them, and they were sold for our account, who 
were the Shippers, to a very considerable loss; conceiving myself entitled to look to the 
Honse who ordered these goods, for a loss that derived itself from no fault of mine, but 
solely from the tonnage not being allotted upon earlier ships, I am at this moment engaged 
in a controversy with the House who ordered the goods, in order to recover this loss, which 
he disputes, upon the ground that he did not receive his goods in due time. Another incon- 
yenience which I have experienced is, that when the application is made for freight to the 
_ Honourable the Court of Directors, not knowing when it will be granted, I dare not orderto 
be packed a variety of. ls that are of a perishable nature, until I am told shat tonnage 
is ready to receive it, This is frequently done at a fortnight’s notice ; that is to say, I am told 
that op such a day in about a fortnight you must have the goods ready for shipping: during 
that pruot it is impossible to purchase, pack, and prepare for shipping, goods, some of 
which may come from distant manufacturing towns, and some by water, of which the’ 
passage is uncertain; provided the goods are not ready upon the day that is notified, there 
js a fine chargeable upon every package, which 1 myself have never paid, but I have known 
it to be paid by others. : 

Do you pay your export freight here in advance ?—Yes; always. ; 

Ts that usual in other exports ’—The freight in other trades is paid when you get your bill 
of lading when the goods are on board; but in the case that I have just stated, with regard to 
the Tottenham, that freight was paid above twelve months before the goods left England. 

Whether those inconveniences that you have stated either from India ur from Euroy 
would arise if you were af liberty to export and import in ships of your own 7Cereainly 
nots we have had experience of that under Lord Wellestey’s permission to send ships to 
this country; when I came to this country, T brought a considerable property belonging 
to the House. was there concerned with, and others, in one of the country Ships, and came 
passenger with my goods myself; the cargo was assorted for the demand of this market, 
and came to a profitable sale on a freight proportionably low; the freight on the regular 
ships would have been too heavy for some of those articles ; the article of Cotton is one 
that is the least capable of bearing a heavy freight from its ‘bulk. 

Are you of opinion, from-your knowledge of the trade to and from India, that if the re- 
atrictions and inconveniences which you have stated were removed, that the trade either 

\Z from India or from Europe would admit of considerable extension ?-€I am decidedly of opi- 
nion, that were the Merchants residing in India allowed to export their goods on the Indiae 
built bottoms, and to load those goods without the interference of the Government there, that 
the trade“ of India to this country would be. very greatly extended. Much of that which 
now goes into foreign ships would not be sent to foreigners, but sent home on our own ac- 
counts,; The impediment of the high tonnage payable on the Company’s Ships frequently 
compels a.sale on the spot, in preference to sending them to this market, more particularly 
since the recent disappointment that was experienced by the Merchants in India in regard 
to the charge made for the tonnuge allotted to them on certain regular Ships of the Com- 
pany, which were tendered to them in consequence of there being no extra Ships in India to, 
receive the private goods ; those goods so shipped upon the Lord Duncan, Walpole, Surrey, 
and Castlereagh, were charged £. 44 per.ton. This was in 1806, when no extra Ships were 
arrived in lodia,” ee : 

The following season an advertisement of Government in the Calcutta Gazette, of the 
goth July 1807, which [now deliver in, states that £.32. 5s. per ton would be charged for 
goods laden on regular Ships for the season 1805, and £.30. 10 s. for 1805; these ships in that 
season went home, and to the astonishment of the Shippers, they found the freight-account 
made up at £.44 per ton, . Representations of the apparent injustice of this charge, aud its 
inconsisiency with the advertisement alluded to, were made by the agents resident in Lon- 
don on the part of their principals in India, to-which no answer to this hour has been offi- 


cially given. 
78 When 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. ; 87 
‘When were those representations made t—I think st is near 12 months since; itwasinthe Ay, Bazett. 
Se 


Jast summer. 

In the mean time you have paid the freight?—The fircight was deducted. Ihave no 
doubt it has been all paid long since. - : 

Would the trade from Europe to India, if the restrictions were removed, admit of any 
extension ?—Certainly, of very great extension. We should export largely, that the ships 
might not return without cargo; which exports would not take place under the present 
system. 
vin time of peace, are you of opinion that if the restrictions that have becn stated were 
removed, you could be able to meet the Americans in the markct of Europe to advantage. 
—I think, if permission of the nature I have before described of sending bome our own ves~ 
sels without being subject to restrictions that impede the lading of them at such period of 
the year, and in such manner as the Merchants would wish, that we certainly might meet 
ee foreign traders whomsoever. 

n time of war, supposing that there was a certain rate of increase of duty upon foreign 
trade in India, over and above what was paid by the British Merchant, do you think you 
could meet the American in the markets of Europe ?-—Under the regulations and permis 
sions to ship, of which I have spoken, I think we should. 

Are you concerned at all in India Shipping?—Not at all at the presenttime, 

« Have your Partners in India any concern in India Shipping ?--None. 

Do you believe that during war private traders, if left perfectly to their own way, 

could carry on their trade quite free of the inconveniences now complaincd of ~The Mer~ 


Tt erage rate of what you now pay on the Company’s extra Ships?—- 
£22. 15s. forthe home ireight, and | think £.9 for the outward freight. 

Have the Merchants ever paid freight on goods they did not ship in the Company's 
Ships?—I do not know whether they have not invariably filled the tonnage with articles 
that they did not consider desirable rather than forfeit the freight ; I have done so myself. 

You do not know any instancé of their having so paid it?—-L do not recollect any. 

If you employed only ships of your own, could you always conform your goods to your 
tonnage, or your tonnage tu your goods ?—I have no doubt I always could. 

What is the difference between the rate of Insurance on the Company's Ships, and 
private India Ships @—During war, the premium of Jasurance has greatly varied, accordin 
to the protection’ afforded to the trade in the India Seas. I have paid £.19—£.15 an 
as high as £.18 per cent. On the Company’s extra Ships at the sainc period I have paid 
£12 and £.15 per cent. 

Do you mean with or without convoy ?—With returns for convoy in both cascs. 

What are the returns ?—Usually at the rate of from one and a half to two per cent. for the 
voyage from India to St. Heleva, and one and a half or two per cent. for the remainder 
of the voyage from St. Helena to England. 

What proportion of the extra Ships do you suppose to have sailed from India at un- 
seasonable periods ?—It is impossible for me to state from recollection how many of them 
may have so sailed. ; 

Do you suppose that the generality or the half of them have so sailed ?—Speaking from 
recollection, without reference to any document, I think more than an_half have sailed at 
a Reriod which I do not consider desirable, subsequent to the end of Mareh. 

‘ou have mentioned the inconvenience of having Bills drawn payable before the goods 
are realized ;is not that an unavoidable consequence of the present state of the trade in 
Europe ?—No doubt if | wished to support the value of goods by taking them in at the 

uiblic sales for disposal at a more favourable opportunity, 1 incur that inconvenience, but 
it is not forced upon me as in the other case, it is merely optional. 

But with respect to the time of bringing your goods to sale, has it not been from your 
own choice that you havé delayed the sale of them, and consequently the realizing the 
produce ?—We have sometimes wished them to be brought to as early a sale as possible; 
sometimes to postpone, according to the demand in the market. 

In the last two or three years, have not the sales of the private goods been put off 
repeatedly at the desire of the Merchant ?—They have repeatedly. 

In comparing the advantage of lading your goods from India on the ships of your owa 
and on the Company’s Ships, have you not the advantage of being exempted from the 
Joss attaching on goods put on board as dead weight, which commonly yield no profit — 
There is no doubt that during a war, when the article of Saltpetre is not allowed to be ex- 
ported by individuals, it is difficult to substitute dead weight that will carry a profit, or 
even be a saving from loss; and by shipping in the Company’s Ships, this is certainly re- 
medied in some degree in time of war. 

You have mentioned, that in the way in which the Merchants are obliged to ship their 
goods from India in the Company’s Ships, they oceusionally clash with each other at 
this market; do not ail the goods shipped in the same scason from India come to sale 
here together ?—All ihe goods shipped in the same season do not come to sale together 
assuredly, because there are two sales in the year. 

151 & 182. Z Do 


Mr, Bazelt. 
x y 


88 Appendix, No. 47--SUPPLEMENT (0 the FOURTIT REPORT 


_ Do they come regularly to the market at the same time at stated periods ?—They are sold 
at periods not fixed, 

You have mentioned a case of applying for tonnage at home, and not getting part of it 
till the scason following; do you know any other instance of this kind?—Yes, I do; it 
is in regard to freight for Bombay applied for by our House also, the name of the ship [ 
do not remember ; but a gentleman now summoned to attend, Mr. Fawcett, who conducts 
that department of our business, must have a competent knowledge o: 

What was the amount of the sum you paid in advance upon the freight?—I do not recollect 
what the freight at that time was. 

Was it £.100?—I really do not know what the sum was; I do not conceive it was an 
object of great importance; it was not a large amount, because it was only such goods 
as the Company had not room to ship. ° 

.You mentioned that part of the goods were shipped in the month of June ?—They 
were. 

Do you recollect at what time you applied for that freight?—In April. 

You mentioned paying the freight on the outward export in advance ; is it not common 
with all exports from this country, that the freight is paid upon the shipment of the 
goods?—It is usual to pay the freight on the delivery of the goods at the destined Port; 
im some cases I have known freight paid at the period of shipping. 

Is not the homeward freight on the Company’s Ships from India always paid after the 
sale of the goods here ?—I believe always ; ] know nothing to the contrary. 

When private ships are freighted from India, are they. not paid a large proportion of 
the freight homeward in advance?—That depends entirely upon the: special arrangement 
between the Shipper and the Ship-owner; it is sometimes leas with a view to accom- 
modate the Ship-owner, but the rates of freight are in such cases very considerabiy 
decreased. 

What do you stippose the difference per cent. to be on the Company’s and privat 
from India, ‘on the value of the article of Indigo?—I{ conceive that in answeriag this 
squesiion, it is necessary to state that the East India Ships that have hitherto been adowed 
to come home, were not built expressly for this kind of trade; if they, were of viat size 
which would be most advantageous for a voyage to Europe, I conceive that the irei 
would be considerably lower than it ever has been upon the ships taken up by necessi 
Supposing. the freight to ke £.22. 158. which is intended to be charged in this cas 
conceive that the difference would be very trifling between the freight on the ex! 
aud on the India-built Ship on that article, 

State your reasons for thinking that if the ships of Private Merchants were allow 
navigatiug between Europe and India, the consumption of British produce in Lud 
the Natives would be much increased, and the consumption of Indian produce ia 
likewise much increased ?—I never have stated that I supposed the Natives would c 
more; what I stated was, that if the facilities which have been in question were giv 
the Private British Merchants, that a considerable extension of the exporis and impo: 
* India would be the consequence. 

Do you mean that the consumption would increase as regarding the Europeans « 
Natives >—I do not know how they would be consumed; I ik they would be imporu 
at a cheaper rate, and be consequently saleable at a lower price. 

Wither you conceive that that free Navigation would increase mu:h in Europe the 
scuisumption of India commodities ?—Many commodities [ think it would. 


Calcutta Gazette, goth July 1807. 


‘Ye following EXTRACTS from a General Letter, dated the 18th of February i807, 
addressed by the Honourable the Court of Directors to the Honourable the Governor 
General in Council, are published for geacral information. 


« We have resolved, that the following Sums shall be charged to Individuals for the 
“ freight of goods laden by them homewards, on the regular aud cxtra Ships of the Sea- 
“ sons under mentioned; viz. . 

Season 1804. 
£-30. 108. per ton, for goods laden on regu!*i Ships. 


Season 1805. 
£- 3%. 58. perton, for goods laden on lar Ships. 
£- 22. 158, per ton, for goods Jader: a extra Ships. 


Season 1 
£. 22. 158. perton, for goods iaden on extra Ships: 
4% 30. 103. per ton, fer goods laden on regular Ships, 


* You have been acquainted with the rate of freight to be charge to Individuals for all 
goods laden on the regular Ships, for Season 1807-8.” 


Published by order of the Boa: 
Fort Wiliam, 28th July 1807. 


2 of Trade. 


ed) J. Thornhill, Sec. 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. &g 
CXo. 5.) 
Sabbati, 19° die BMaii 1800. 
Sir JOHN ANSTRUTHER, Bart. in the Chair. 
Mr. Richard Campbell Bazett, again called ia, and examined. 

DO you think that whiist this country is engaged in war, it can carry onthe Indian gz, Bazett 
trede to cqual advantage with Neutra!s?—-Under the imposition of double daties upon fo- , ahi 
reigners in India, and having permission to scnd home our country-built ships in the manner 
that has been alluded to before, I think we might. 

Do you mean this answer to apply to such a state of things as the present, when our 
ships have no access to the ports of foreign Europe ?—Certaialy not, but in ordinary times 
that we have seen for some years back. | mean, that if Neutral Vessels were allowed to 
import the produce of {ndia to the Continent, and the intercourse from this country com- 
pletely cut off, then that we could not trade with such advantage as Neutrals, the ove having 
a market, the other not. F 

Do you mean to include in your answer, not only Neutral Ships coming directly from 
India to foreign Europe, but coming from America to foreign Europe?—I mean, coming 
from America to foreign Europe, which is the oaly channel that [am aware -is open. 

What do you think would be the effect if a trade were permitted between Great Britain 
and the ports of the Continent in Neutral Ships, although British Ships were excluded ?— 
The effect upon the trade from India would operate most favourably, compared with the 
‘present situation of things. 

Under these circumstances, do you think you could enter into competition with the Ame- 
rican trade?—I do, under the reservations that { made before of the doubie duties, and 


gation at_a cheaper rate 
than it is possibie fer any class of British subjects, whether resideut in: India or in Europe, 
to do?—No doubtithe ficight of American ships is lower than what we could provide our- 


fiom America to the Continent, could be performed at less expense than, on our owa 


were engaged in war, and tho I 

Jn the case of an American’ si ng directly fron: India to foreign Europe, how do 
you conceive it would then be !—J should consider that an illegs trade, and therefore not 
insurable at all, meaning by ia from British ports in India, 

Are you not aware that American ships have imported a great deal of the produce of 
the Dutch and of the French Islands, and of other parts of India, net British possessions, 
directly to forcign Europe?—I am not acquainted with the fact. 

Are you acquainted with the facilities and advantages derived by the Americans in the 
trace by connecting it with the trade between China and America‘—I am not acquainted 
with the subject of the American intercourse with China. ° 

You have mentioned the very high rate of freight for the Company’s Ships for onc or 
two years ; do you think that circumstance weighs much in the contemplation of the 
general question of the Indian trade ?—I do think it to heve very great weight. 

(IF free permission were given for the importation of Indian ships here, would not the 
Merchants of that country concerned in the trade to Europe naturally become Ship- 
owners In answering this question, 1 can speak of myself'as a Merchant in India, and 
say, that it would not influence me to become a Ship-owner; how it might influence others, 
it 1s impossible for me to say. 

Were you a considerable Ship-owner while you remained in India?—I have been a Ship 
owner, but to no great extent; 1 have had two or three ships at a time whilst I was in India. 

You were asked by Mr.Grant what difference it would make between the high freightthat 
you paid upon the regular Ships and the £.22 or £.23 per ton which you paid pon the extra 
Ships,—how much per cent. upon the supposed value of the commodity upon the India Ships; 
you were at that time not prepared to answer that question; have you sincé made any cal~ 
culation, and how it wouldapply to your articles ?—I did answer the question ; understanding 
that it applied to the difference between extra and the Indian Ships on the specific article of 
Indigo ; I said that I conceived that per centage would be but inconsiderable on that article. 

Did you understand yourself then to be speaking of the difference between India-built 
shipping and extra-built shipping ?—Yes. 

ave you since been able to form any calculation of the difference per cent. of the rate of 
freight upon the average value of the different articles between even extra shipping and 
India shipping,—how much fer cent. it wculd Le upon the different articles >—Having been 
asked the question J alluded to, I did upon returning home calculate how it would apply, for [ 
observed at the time that it was a question of calculation, and could not be answered off-hand. 

Have you such calculation? —[ have it here (producing it). 

Do you assume that you could procure tounage in India homeward bound at the rate of 
{20 per ton?—In the present time 1 think I could, and in time of peace lower. 

At. what rate, supposing you could get freight for £.20 home, would you caiculate upon the 
outward voyage ?—Sometlung under that which the Company demand, abont £. 8 per ton. 

Then this is a calculation of the difference that the £.3 per ton would make upon the 
average value of the erticles that are stated in this calculation ?—-[t is. 

151 & 182. From 


Mr, Baxett. 


go Appendix, No. 47—-SUPPLEMENT ¢o the FOURTH REPORT 


From what did you take the average value upon the articles here stated —I took it prin- 
cipally from the account of sales of the articles from our own books of account. 

You stated yesterday that the demand of the high freight of tonnage upon the regular 
Ships, £.44 per ton, was an unexpected demand?—I did. . 

Do you know whether the Board of Trade at Calcutta ever notified that high rate of 
freight to the shippers of the goods, or whether they ever notified any other rate of freight 
than you sta‘ed in the Advertisement you delivered in yesterday /—I{ am positive that that 
rate of freight was not notified to the Public, because upon its becoming known the Govern- 
ment was memorialized by the Merchants upon the subject. ‘ 

Were many or any of the pocds that were imported that year provided either upon a sup- 
position of a rate of freight of £. ge. 5s. upon the regular Ships, or upon the supposition of 
the freight stated in that Advertisement for the cxtra Ships 2 Phey were no doubt provided 
upon the expectation of extra Ships being there to receive them, which not being the case 
they were under the necessity to ship them on those four regular Ships that were allotted to 
the Publi¢, or thé goods must have remained on hand. 

Would those goods or many of them have been provided at all if the Metchant had been 
aware at an carly period that there would be no extra Ships to carry his goods that year, and 
that the freight upon regular Ships should be £.44 per ton?—TI am perfectly satisfied that 
hey would not have provided a variety of goods, because it would have been to their certain 

Joss. 

Did you ever see an Advertisement respecting extra shipping, which was issued in the 
moith of August 1805 by the Board of Trade in Bengal ?—I know there was such an Ad- 
vertisement. 

Have you a Copy of it?—I have not. 

Do yon"know the rate of freight which the Government of Bengal advertised in India 
tipoa extra shipping for that year ?—The tenor of the Adversisement 1 can give you from a 
document that was fhia before the Government of India, and I believe referred by them to 
to the Court of Directors. The Advertisement of the 29th of August 1805 in the Calcutta 
Gazette, the 5th paragraph, is as follows: 

“ Information of the rates of freight to. be paid by Individuals for goods laden on 
~ © extra Ships of the Season of 1805-6, is contained in the subscquent Extract of a 
“ Letter from the Secretary to the Governor General in Council, and the terms and 
“ conditions to which it refers; the Extract of the Secretary’s Letter above alluded to 
« js us follows, {I am further dirceted to xequaint you that the Court have resolved that 
“ the same rates of freight be charged to Individuals, and that the same terms and 
* conditions do continue in force fer ‘oods laden on the extra Ships for this season, 
“ outand home, as was settled by the Court the 24th of Jane 1803. 
“ These Resolutions state as follows: 
“ The 4th article. The peave-rate of freight homeward shall not excced £. 11 per 
“ ton, and than an additional freight of £. 3 per ton, be paid on Goods inden in India 
“ on extra Ships, whose voyages trom England shall have commenced in the ensuing 
“ twelve months, if the War shall continue so long.” 
‘oe freight did you actually pay for the goods that you imported upon that year?— 
22. 108, 3 

Did the same thing happen inthe season of 1806?—Yes, the same, excepting that the 
advertisement was syccifically for 1805; and, from undergoing no alteration, implied as 
anuch for the year 1806. 

Of course, in the first year at least, these goods were provided, upon the idea that the 
freight was to be £.14 per ton home ?—Surely. 

You have said that you think thet the trade from India to Europe, and from Europe to 
India, might be considerably extended (speaking of ordinary times,) if you had that liberty 
you bave been contending for?—I have no doubt of it. 

Do you think that any new articles might be introduced into the commerce between India 
and Europe that are not now imported, or imported in but small quantities, if those facilities 
we have been now pointing at were given—I have uo doubt that a variety might: the 
produce of the territories lately ceded in the north-west-of India might, I conceive, farnisi: 
many new articles, and that even some would be tricd, the produce of Bengal, of the Coin- 
pany former provinces. 


place w "y ships 
that there would be any 
soine profit. 

Have you any reason to believe that the supply at present falls short very considerably of | 
the censum ptioi *—In some articles, and at some periods, there is no doubt that the 
supply docs iall short ; for instance, the article of Copper has lately been seliing in Calcutta 
at £.100 per cent, above the extraordinary high price that it bore when f left India. 

From your knowledge of India, do you conceive that the consumption of Exropean 
articles is likely to be much increased ?—I am of opinion that ap increase would take place 


Upon 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. gu 


upon these inds, because they will be much cheaper, from the competition of several im- fr. Bazett. 
porters; and thereby many persons of lower condition would be able to purchase, who at 
present are not. 
Do you suppose that, if the trade was facilitated in a greater degree, any new markets 
would be:opencd beyond the dominions of the East India Company ?—I think probably 
they would. . 
Do the facilities which are wished for by the Private Merchants, extend to require the 
liberty of trading from England to every port in India, or only to the ports occupied by the 
East India Company ?—Only to the Company’s ports. 
For what rate of freight do you conceive Indian Ships could have been sent home in the 
year 1805 ?—I think about £. 20 per ton. 
Can you state what those productions of the north-west of India are, that you think might 
oad to the exportations from India to this country ?—Principally dyeing drugs, exclusive of 
indigo. . e 
When you mention your belief that the exports from England could be increased accord- 
ing as the trade should be made more free, do you mean to.apply your answer to the existing 
state of the trade, or suppose that the export would go on to increase progressively according 
as more ships came into the trade?—I do not mean to say that more ships might be neces- 
sary, but, if India-built ships were substituted for the tonnage at present allotted to the 
British Merchants resident in India, unshackled by some restrictions which are felt to be 
vexatious and embarrassing, that an increase of the exportation to India would be the 
consequence. : 
‘Would that increase be progressive as more ships came into the trade ?—Under the system 
that the Merchants have in view, I think it woul 
Do you not know that, in Bengal, Copper has very often been an unsaleable article, partly 
on account of the new importations of that article from Diarbakia?—I never knew of any 
importations from Diarbakia, until very recently by the Georgiana packet for the first time. 
Eas the artisle of Copper been generally a profitable one in Bengal ?—Speaking from my 
own experience as a consignee of that article, I do not recollect an instance in which it was 
not profitable; the latest shipments we have made have been uncommonly profitable. 

‘ave you ever considered of any regulation of the present system, that would remove, in 
some or in a great degree, the inconveniences which you have stated, short of leaving the 
trade open to Indian Ships, or ships the property of the Merchants concerned in the trade, 
instead of those chartered by the Company tt never has-been the expectation of the 
Merchants, that the trade should be so far thrown open as that their ships should not be 
subject so far to the vontroul of the Government of India as may be necessary to prevent 
the exportation of articles either monopolized by the Company, or in any other degree cone 
traband 3 our object is to be allowed to ship upon Indian bottoms the produce of India, 
without being subject to those restrictions as to the period of departure, thé mode of loading, 
and a variety of other restrictions, which we feel to be a great clog upon the present state 
of our trade with Europe, and expose us to a considerable degree of which might be 
avoided : I know of no other mode by which the same encouragement to the trade from 
India can be given, under the regulation of the present system, that is, supplying the ton- 
nage from this country as at present practised. 


CALCU LATION, shewing theincreased rate per centat which the following Articlesof East * 
India produce would be charged Freight, if shipped on board the Honourable Com- 
e assumed rate of £.20 per ton 


any’s extra and regular Ships, compared with 
en Endia-built Ships. jeg 


Goove Average Value On Extra Ships On Regular Ships 
2 " per Ton. at £.22. 45s. per Ton, | at £. 90 10s. per Ton. 


Shells - - 
Pepper - - 
Sugar - - - 
N.B. -.- pa on which the shore Calculate poor 

ate ‘reight per extra Ships - - {.22. 155. ton, 

5 be i bas on Be ae aaa 

- of - D* per Com ’s regula § = = £.30. 108. ton, 

being the Rate changed sines 1807. : Pry 


D-of - D- - - -D ---D---£ ton, 
being the Rate charged in 1806, aaa 
York Place, Value per ton of goods, according to average prices from actual Sales. 
1 
May the 15th, 1809, m : Rt. C. Bazett. 
a 


Mr. Trail. 


g2 Appendix, No. 47—SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


(No. 6.) 
Luna, 15° die Mait 1809. 
SirJOHN ANSTRUTHER, Baronet, in the Chair. 
Mr. Henry Trail, called in, and examined. 


IT has been stated to us, that there is a considerable difficulty arises to the Private Mer- 
chants from their being obliged to insure on ship or ships, instead of being able to insure upon 
individual ships, from the mode in which the trade is now carried on; is that so?—It is. 

Is there any considerable difference between the rates of Insurance upon ship or ships, 
and upon an individual ship ?—Yes, generally a difference of two or three per cent. 

Can you with the same facility obtain an Insurance upon ship or ships to a large extent, 
as you could upon individual sheer no means. 

hat isthe reason of that ?—The dislike the Underwriters have to insure generally arises 
from the fear of having their interest all upon one bottom, instead of being divided into 
several risks. 

Has it ever happened to you to meet with that difficulty ?—It has. 

Have you any objection to state the case ?—There has not been any recent instance ; but 
three or four years ago we had a very large sum to get covered upon ship or ships, which we 
effected with a good deal of difficulty. 

Did youeffect it all at once?—The first sum we effected in the course of a few days; a 
fresh order-came for a larger sum to be covered in the same manner : we were advised by 
our broker at Lloyd’s to postpone effecting the second insurance until we could advise the 
Underwriters of the ships’ names upon which the goods composing the first insurance were 
shipped, from the fear of having their former risks increased.” 

id you follow that advice ?—We did. “ 

How long was it between the period of the one and the other ?—About three months. 

Then during that three months was the second sum uncovered ?—It was waiting for the 
advice of the ships’ names on which the goods were laden. 

You effected the Insurance upon the second sum three months after ?—Not so soon; ac- 
counts arrived of the capture of the Althea, which occasioned an immediate rise in the pre- 
mium of from 15 to 25 percent. 

Did you effect the insurance at 25 per cent. ?—We were obliged todo it; we waited two 
months, in hopes that the premium would fall to its former rate, but it did not, and we ef- 
fected the Insurance at 25 Guineas. 

The former Insurance I think you said was effected at 15?—It was. The same ship 
that brought the account of the capture of the Althea, brought the account of the ship- 
ment of the goods contained in the first Policy, or about the same time. 

At the time you first received the order for the second Insurance, if you had been able to 
have specified the names of the particular ships upon which the goods were to be laden, 
could you have effected the Insurance at Lloyd’s?—I have no doubt of it, 

With regard to the times at which goods are shipped in Bengal, I believe the Merchants 
in Bengal are under the necessity of informing the Board of Trade at a given period of the 
year, in August or September, I think ?—We are called upon to specify the quantity of 
tonnage we shall want in the ensuing shipping season. 

Does any inconvenience result from that ?—It sometimes happens that the Merchant has 
not the means of ascertaining what quantity of goods he will have to ship, and therefore he 
sends in his application at a Fazard of having too much or too little. 

Did it ever happen to 0 your House to pay any forfeit for having asked for more tonnage 
than you found you should have occasion for ?—On one occasion it has. 

Did you pay forfeit ?@—Yes, 

‘What was the amount of it?—About 5,000 Rupees. 

Are there any inconveniences experienced by* the Merchants from the circumstance of 
the uncertainty of the time of sailing of the ships, or the uncertainty of loading their 

?—There is an inconvenience in not being able to give orders about our Insurances ; 
we must do it generally, instead of upon ‘Poroeular ships. 

I believe you are not a Ship-owner?—I am not 3 

Are you of opinion that if the Merchants were allowed to load their own ships at their 
own times, and in their own way, that the trade between Europe and India, and India and 
Europe, would be considerably increased or not ?—I am strongly of opinion that it would 
considerably increase. 

In both ways?—Not so mych out as from India. 

Are you or not of opinion that in time of peace you could meet the Americans and other 
foreigners in the market of Europe, if the restrictions that are now imposed upon the 
private trade were removed ?—I should suppose nearly so. 

In time of war, supposing a double duty laid upon foreigners in India, and the Americans 
obliged to make a circuitous Voyage by Ameriea, do you think if the restrictions were 
removed, that you could meet the Americans in time of war ?—It would be more y 
- equality; I think we could supply the Europe market as cheap as they could in time 
of war. 

I believe your House in India never were Ship-owners ?—They never were. 

I believe your's was one of the largest Agency-houses in Calcutta ?—It was reckoned so. 

‘Will you'explain more in detail how the increase in the exports to and from India pe 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. | 93 


take place upon the change of system ?—I think it would only apply to the raw materials, 
and not to the manufactured goods from India. 

With regard to the exports from this Country, how do you conceive they would be 
enlorged ?—1 am not aware that they would be materially affected by the indulgence pre- 
sumed, only that they would go out at a lower rate of freight, and be therefore supplied 
cheaper than they now are. I do not suppose the consumption could be increased. 

Upon the supposition of the proposed enlargement, would it be practicable always to 
insure from India upon specific ships ?~That would depend upon having opportunities to 
me home for insurance, and upon a certainty of getting those goods shipped upon par- 
ticular vessels. 


(No. 7.) 
Mr. Henry Fawcett, called in, and examined. 


YOU were for a long time resident at Bombay I believe :—I was; I was in the Com- 
pany’s Service, and also a Merchant there. : 

A very considerable Merchant there /—Yes. 

You are now concerned I believe in a House of Agency in this country ?—I am. 

The Committee have been inquiring whether the facilities given to the private trade have 
answered the purposes of the Private Merchant, and if they have not, ‘what are the impe- 
diments that stand in the way of the private Merchants ?—We have experienced considerable 
impediments in delays in the furnishing of tonnage in England and in India, but prin- 
cipally in India. 

Does any inconvenience arise from the mode of shipping your goods in India, not 
xnowing the ships that your goods are to go upon?—At Bombay, in the act of shipping, 
a aos Bet know of any = culties of rp co! ence. is Raid : 

en you say you have met wi in furnishing the in India, do you mean 
that there was re sufficient tonnage ready ?—Instances of “that kind may have fa ed, 
but we did not make application, because we knew it could not be complied with, without a 
reference to Bengal, and that would be such a delay that it was not an object. 

Then you would have applied for the tonnage if you had not known that the Company 
could not supply you with it ?—Several times we might have done it; in the year 1805 the 
three principal Houses in Bombay had occasion for about 2,000 tons, and applied to Govern- 


Mr, Traii. 
~ 


Mr. Fawcett, 
ee 


ment then for the extra ship Devaynes that was tying in the harbour to take a part of it; - 


she was refused to them, upon the plea that she was bound to Bombay and Madras. The 
Merchants replied, that they had information from Madras, that so far from wanting tonnage 
there, that they were offering what tonnage they had at areduced freight, in order to induce 
the Merchants to load their ships 3 notwitl standing, that the Bombay Government positively 
refused to suffer the Bombay Merchants to load there ; this was about the month of April 
or May 1805; the tonnage was not supplied to the Merchants until the 13th Se bese 
when ‘they gave us the Retreat extra Ship, and afterwards took up two county Ships, the 
Milford and Hercules; the Milford arrived in April 1806, the Devaynes did not reach 
England till the oth of June 1806.” y 

‘hen in April or May 1805, if there had been tonnage, your three Houses would have 
shipped 2,000 tons for Europe ?—Yes, certainly. 

‘ere there any inconveniences attended your speculation in trade from the circumstance 
of the shipment being postponed, from the cause that has been mentioned, from May till 
September ?—It must have been attended with great inconvenience and great loss, for if 
loaded in May it would have saved all the warehousing, which is very high during the 
Monsoon Season; the cargo would have arrived in England almost as soon as it was 
actually shipped afterwards: there was certainly @ loss of interest for six months, and there 
might or might not have been a differencein the market. 

hat was that cargo ?—Chiefly-Cotton ; the application was for Cotton. On the 8th 
May 1806 the same Merchants applied to load the extra ship Sir William Fraltengy, then 
lying in the harbour, and were refused on the plea of her being destined for Bengal. 
? apprehend there was no other tonnage came in that way till the 19th of October 1806, 
when they were called upon by the Government to know if they still had the goods ready to 
ship, and in that case offering them the Experiment, which they accepted, stating to 
Government that they concluded that the rate of freight would be the same as they 
would have been charged for the Sir William Palen : this matter was referred to the 
Governor General and Council at Bengal; but as they were desirois to dispatch the 
ship, and indeed called upon to load her immediately, they did load her, and when she was 
completely loaded, the answer received from Ben; ve it as their opinion, that it must 
be charged £.20 per ton instead of £.14, which the Sir William Pulteney had been 
charged ; the ship in consequence came home and arrived in the same Fleet with the 
Sir-Wilham Pulteney; the freight was charged upon the Experiment at £.20 per ton, 
and upon the Pulteney at £. 14 per ton. i 

Supposing the Merchants had the liberty of using any ships they please, whether built in 
India or in England, and had the liberty of loading their ships at their own time and in 
their own way, whether Cotton could, under those circumstances, be profitably brought to 
Europe ?—I think it might. 

By profitable, I mean a fair market profit ?—I think it might ; and I think with proper 
encouragement we might supplant the Americans in the supply of it. 

151 & 182. Do 


Mr, Fawcett, 
Ra etd 


94 Appendix, No. 47—SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


Do you mean that if proper encouragement was given, you could beat the American 
Cotton out of the market by Tndian Cotton ?—We could undersell them I believe. + 

Is the quantity of Cotton that may be exported from Bombay or Surat very considerable? 
—I think the export is about 90,000 bales of three hundred weight and a half each 
a year. 

“Might great of that be brought to Europe ?—J_ think it might. 

Are’ hae anglimpediments to the purchase ‘of Cotton in India ?—There were not formerly, 
but latterly I understand, but I do not know the circumstance sufficiently to speak to it, 
that there are some impediments in the Company's Districts, giving a preference to the 
Company’s own purchases, 

Could any means be adopted to suit the Surat Cotton more to the market of 
England i—I think there might, by proper regulations to prevent adulteration. 

jupposing the Merchants had t e facilities given them which have been spoken of, do 
ou think ‘haat the freight from India to England, particularly in Cotton, and the trade 
from England to India, could be considerably increased or increased at all ?—I think it 
might be considerably increased, particularly the trade from India to England. 

Could the cultivation of Cotton in the Company’s Territories be inc?eased so as to supply 
any additional demand for Cotton that might arise ?—I have not any local knowledge of 
the Company's Territories lately acquired ; I have generally understood that the produce 
might be increased in Guzarat and Malva. i 

ill you state what you mean by further encouragement ?—If the difficulties were re- 
moved with regard to freight principally, and the attention I have mentioned be paid to 
prevent adulteration. : * 

‘Were you in India in the year 1805 ?—I was not. 

Were the 2,000 tons of Cotton which you stated that the Merchants wished to send at 
that time to Europe provided purposely for the Europe market ?—I cannot say for others, 
but the proportion or a great part that Messrs, Bruce, Fawcett and Co. shipped, they 
vised us of having provided on purpose for the market. « 

How much was the quantity ?—I do not know the precise quantity ; it was some they 
had taken great pains to collect, and the finest picked out of all the purchases for the 
season. 


In the year 1806, when you expected the Sir William Pulteney at the rate of £. 14 
per ton freight, could you have hired an Indian Ship at that rate to Europe ?—No, I do 
not think we could. 3 

What might have been the freight of an Indian Ship to Europe in that season?—I do 
not know that any came. 

If you had been allowed to send a ship of your own that year, what would have been 
the rate of freight?—The Milford and Hercules sailed the latter end of 1805, and they 
were at £. 20 per ton, 

Were they not Indian Ships ?-—They were. 

You have mentioned, that Cotton might be brought to this Country so as to supplant the 
supply from America; do you think this could be done at a time when we are at war, 
and the Americans at peace, supposin the-Merchants to have the facilities they wish for ? 
—It is difficult to say in time of war what might be the case ; there are many circumstances 
which increase the expense of the ship and the rate of Insurances, but in general I think they 


might. 

fhe export of 90,000 bales of Cotton from Bombay which you mentioned, does it not 
now go chiefly to China ?—It does. 

Ts not that trade profitable to the Company’s Settlements and Territories ?#—It used for- 
merly to be, but I think it has considerably declined. 

‘ould it be continued if it were not profitable ?—Sometimes to employ our ships, we 
send them on voyages where there is no profit ; if we can save ourselves, we are very glad 
of taking the chance of a retuming cargo. 

Is the selling price of Cotton in China reduced of late?—I believe not ; but the first price 
of it has increased considerably at Bombay. 

Is not that a sign of the increase of the trade ?=It is principally occasioned by the Com- 
pany’s purchasing largely. 

Is not the balance of trade between India and China now greatly inst China, and 
chiefly arising’ from the article of Cotton; or does not China pay a ce to India in 
specie every year ?—Frequently the returns are made in specie, on account of the high 
price of China articles there. ‘ 

Do you conceive that if the China articles were ever so low there, that India could con- 
sume what would suffice for the returns of the Cotton importations into China?—Yes, in- 
cluding what is generally supplied to the Company for Bills of Exchange on England; my 
answers apply to Bombay only. 

Whether, if the cotton sent from Surat to China now were to be diverted to Europe, it 
would not occasion a great derangement and detriment to the profitable trade carried on 
from India to China?—I do not think it would affect it at all, but be rather beneficial, 
as I think a smaller supply to China would increase the price there. 

Were you or your House Ship-owners in India?—The House in which I was a Partner 
were Ship-owners. i 

Was it not a great object of the Merchants of India who were likewise Ship-ewners to 
obtain an introduction of their Indian Ships into the navigation between India and Europe? 
——It is an object to all Ship-owners to increase the employment of their shipping. wis 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 95 


Whether, upon the same principle you have already mentioned, that you sometimes send -. Fawee: 
ships to China, the Merchant of India might not be induced to send ships to Europe ?—They Mr. Fe i 
might certainly, but being a longer voyage it is a greater risk. ‘ 

's the Cotton, of India or the Cotton of America preferred in the markets of Europe?—The j va 
Surat Cotton, if we can get it clean and fine, as we do sometimes, is preferred to the. Bowd \ 
Georgias, as it takes the dye better; in general the Bowd Georgias are much cleaner than 
the Surats. j i 

Are the Bowd Georgias the best Cottons that come from America?—No, it is an inferior 
Cotton, but it comes immediately in competition with the Surats. : 

Does the Bowd Georgias come to this country in large quantities?—Yes, in very large 

juantities, 
: Is there much of the Surat Cotton of a fine fibre ?—Not much. 

How is the best of the Surat Cotton compared with the Brazil and the the West India 
Cotton ?—It does not come at all in competition with them, it is inferior in quality, and em- 
Ployed in different manufactories, 

re you aware of any other article besides Cotton, the export of which would be materially 
increased, by the facilities which have been mentioned ?—Yes ; Fossil Alkali, or Barilla might 
be imported in very large quantities. . . 

Are there any other articies?—There are a number of drugs froin Arabia, and some from 
the different Provinces in India. i . 

From the knowledge you have of India, cat you say whether the consumption of Euro- 
pean articles would admit of much increase there ?—I have not been resident, in the interior 
of India, but Bombay is in that situation, that it in fact forms the Commercial Capital of 
the West of India; goods from all the coasts from Mosambique to Cape Comorin are brought 
to Bombay principally in country craft, and exported from thence to distant countries ; 
these couatry craft carry back foreign articles imported into Bombay from Europe, from. 
China, and from ail parts of tue world from whence they come, in large ships ; if those articles 
from Europe can be afforded to them cheaper than at present, I have little doubt but what 
the exports might be increased. 

What is thg description of articles to which you principally allude ?—The princi 
articles which are imported, are iron, copper, lead, woollens, and many other articles which 
1 cannot immediately enumerate. 

By furnishing the articles cheaper, do you mean buying them cheaper in England, or con- 
veying them at less charge?—By carrying them at less price we could afford to sell them 
cheaper. . 

In a general way, have you formed any opinion of the rate per cent. on the value of the 

ds that the freight could be reduced by paving the Merchants the conveyance of goods 
in their own ships ?—I have not formed an idea of it; the per centage must depend entirely 
upon the value of the articles, 


STATEMENT of the quantity of Cotton annually imported into Great Britain, of the 
quality which comes in competition with that produced in Guzzerat; taken on the average 
of 1805, 1806, and 1807. 


North America, Fast India, 
_ Bales. 

In 180, - - - 1200078 - +5 2,039 
1806 - 124,092 .- - - 7,963 
1807 - - - 171,267 - - ~ 11,409 
In three years - 417,437 > ~ * 21,411 

AVERAGE ~ 199,146 - - - 7,137. per anrium. 
— —_ 
The average quantity of Cotton annually imported from North America, as above, 
is - + - oe gs 139,146 


“ Bet tok, een ee Nar ie dees ea a, 

Of the Cotton produced in North America, two-thirds is of the quality called 
Bowed Georgias, which is used for the same purposes as Guzzerat Cotton; 

therefore deduct one-third - - -- - = - «+ = = = 46,388 


Remains annual import of Georgias - ~ - - - Bags 92,764 


Which, at 23 ewt. per bag, is- = 9 - + 6 - + Cwt. 231,970 


Average quantity of East India Cotton annually imported as above, is 7,137 bales, 
which, at 3 cwt.each, is - a . 7 a ie we 


21,413 


Average annual consumption - - = =. = ~~ Cwt, 253,381 
— 
ual Bombay bales of 33 cwt. — - ~ = 92, : 
va, atis.perlbis - + - + = : 1895 £.-1,418,933 
— 


151 & 182, Bb 


Mr, Bebb, 
ET 7 


6 Appendix, No. 47--SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 
2 (No. &). ; 
Jovis, 18° die Maii 1809. - : 
Sir JOHN ANSTR UTHER, Baronet, in the Chair. 
Mr. John Bebb, one of the Directors of the East India Company called in, and examined. 


HOW long did you serve the East India Company in Bengal?—In India, from 1771 till 
1800 in the Civil Service. : 

“You were I believe on the Board of Trade in Bengal for a good number of years ?—Yes, 
from the beginning of the year 1790 to 1890, when I left India. 

Haye you a recollection of the manner in’ which the business of the private traders in 
shipping their goods to Europe, through the medium of the Company, used to be transacted ? 
—Yes, generally. y ig 
Cen you state how the rate of freight used to be settled by the buvae traders for goods 
to be shipped to Europe ?-—After the Act of 1793, according to the terms of that Act, and 
sometimes in certain cases by special agreement with the parties concerned. 

We find complaints, that when the freight was settled at £. 32 per ton for the season, they 
were charged as high as £. 44 per ton; can you state how this happened ?—From the in- 
stanee being mentioned to me, I probably might be able to give some information upon 

subject.” j 
vill you explain what you know of this matter, either from your own knowledge or the 
Company’s Records ?—From the Company’s Records in my situation asa Director ofthe East 
India Company. ‘In the latter ead of 1805 there was some vacant space in some of the Com- 
pany’s fe; Ships; it was by the Board of Trade, under the authority of the Government, 


* Offered to Merchants in Calcutta who had obtained statutable tonnage, that they might ship 


ods upon the regular Ships, for which they had obtained statutable tonnage, on condition 
that they should pay to the ‘Company the same freight as the Company paid upon the ships 
in-question. There were four ships. T have Extracts of the case from the Records. 

2 (They were. read). . 

Mr. Bebb. Inthe £. 44 per ton, there was no charge for demurrage. 

“Did any instance of this nature occur whilst you where at the Board of Frade?—Ido not 
recollect any complaint on the subject, but I forget in what year the Merchants of Calcutta 
were desirous of chipping their statutable tonnage upon the regular ships at the rate fixed 
by law, by which they would have had the advantage of low freight and low insurance. The 
Boas of ‘Trade were willing to meet their wishes, by offering to them tonnage on the 
regular Ships at the same rate the Company paid for the tonnage of the ships; I do not 
recollect whether the offer was accepted. : 

Is it usual 16 set apart room for 3,000 tons whether it is called for or not 2—Certainly not, 
unless required ; therefore notice is given at the proper season, I think in the month of Sep- 
tember, for certain individuals to state what tonnage they require. 

“Were not the extra Ships for the purpose of carrying home the. private trade sent out 
annually to the extent ‘of 3,000 tons 1 Generally, especially in later years. 

Do you know at what rate of freight private Indian Ships could sail from India to Eng- 
land in time of war?—Never having been concerned in shipping, I cannot speak from my 
own experience as a Ship-owner ; bat the Merchants of Calcutta stated to the Government 
originally, that they could sail their ships at £. 12 per ton in time of peace, and £. 16 per 
ton iti time of war. ‘ 

In what year was that ?—It must have heen aboit the year 1796, and ships were hired 
from them to bring home chiefly rice or ponderous goods at the rate of £.16.-per ton, and 
& 20. ton. for fine or bulky goods; the benefit of the voyage out they had wholly to 

ves. I believe they. found that their rates were too low, and it was owing to the 
desire of getting into the trade that they made such low offers. 
~ State the way in which the Private Merchants delivered their goods in order to be shipped ~ 
for England on the Company’s Ships: were they required to send them into the Company’s 
warehouses, till an opportunity for shipping should offer ?—When the ships were ready to 
receive the goods, notice was given to the Merchauts, and they. were required to send their 
geods to sloops laying at the wharf ready: to receive them, and the goods were.put by 
em on board the boats and carried to the sloops ; they were never received: into the ware- 
houses after the operation of that Act. 
hether there was any specified time which, limited the delivery. of the goods to the 
ships ?—When the Merchants gave their notice what tonnage they would want, they were 
required to state, as nearly as they could, when the goods, would: be ready, and the goods 
were called, for as the ships. were ready. to receive them, as nearly ag possible to the time, 
and adverting also to.the sort of goods which it was fit for the ship to receive. I do not re- 
: Heer srhetber. there was any date fixed in the Advertisement beyond which goods would not 
e received, : 

Did. not the Company always put in.what is called the dead weight on the ships on which 
private goods were laden?-—Since the war of 1793. there was no Saltpetre exported, on ac« 
count of individuals, it was prohibited for political reasons.} but some years ago, when it 
was thought profit in Calcutta to send Sugar from India.to this country, the Sugar of in- 
dividuals was put in the bottom of the ship in common with the Company's Sugar as ben 

r weight ; 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. - rd 


weight ; of late years individuals have not sent Sugar to this country, «ind then the Compan, 
have been under the necessity of putting a due proportion of dead weight, chiefly _ Mr, Bebb, 
or Saltpetre, upon the ships. 

Howsanany cubical feet to the tondo.the Company pay for, and charge tothe privatetraders? 
-~—Where the tonnage is. settled by, measurement, 50 feet outside measurement, and indi- 
viduals are rated in the same manner ; the general sage of the Port of London I understand, 
in measured goods is to reckon 40 cubical feet to the ton; the Company’s compiftation of 
tonnage on many articles which in the Port of London would be taken by measurcment, is 
taken in some articles by tale, in others by short weights ; for instance, piece goods are com- 
pute so many pieces to the ton, according to the scale of some old date; those piece goods 

yy experiments I have had made, will in some instances weigh 21 or 22 cwt. to the ton, and 
measure above 60 feet to the ton; in other instances they will weigh about 13, 14, or 15 
ewt. to the ton, and measure about 50 feet: Raw-silk is taken at ten. hundred weight to 
the ton, Pepper at sixteen hundred weight to the ton: I mention the two latter as instances 
in which the tonnage is computed by short weight ; 1 mean by short weight, short of twenty 
hundred weight to the ton, but not as goods measured. In reference to the statement of 
individuals as to the price at which they can let ships to carry goods, it’ should be neces- 
sary for them to explain what computations of tonnage they refer to, whether the Com- 
pany’s computation of tonnage, or the usual rate of 4o feet for ineasured goods, according to 
the custom of London. : 

Is it advantageous or otherwise for the Private Traders to have their goods received at the 
Company’s computation of tonnage ?—=-Certainly, very advantageous. . 

Explain why ?—Because articles which sevonding to the usage of the Port of London 
would be paid for at 40 cubical feet to the ton, are by the Company's computation of ton- 
nage more favourable to the Owners of goods. e 

is it advantageous to the Company or otherwise to furnish the dead weight to the extra 
Ships when the Owners of the goods do not?—-Of late years, from the great glut of Sugar in 
the London market, it has been very disadvan us to the Company, and operated as @ 
considerable bonus to the Private. Merchant; if he had filled his ship bimself, he must have 
borne the loss ypon the dead weight, which the Company now bear; ox if he had carried 
no dead weight in merchandize, he must have earried kentlidge or ballast, and thet would 
have enhanced the freight on the light articles. 3 

Can you state the season of the year at which the-produce of Indigo for the year is ascer- 
tainable ?—I have never myself been concerned in Indigo. works, but have frequently seen 
them, and from observation and frequent enquiries of Indigo manufacturers, I understand 
that by about the middle of the month of September the produce of the crop may be ascer- 
tained with tolerable accuracy. 

Do you know at what time the Merchants draw Bills of Exchange for goods which they 
consign to Europe ?—Generally atthe time that the goods areshipped especially. those ns - 
who look to the proceeds of particular consignments of goods to anwser particular Bills. 

Up to the time when you left India, when were the ships with private goods generally 
dispatched to England ?—Generally during the seasonable time of dis , which is from 
October to the end of March, and of that period the time chiefly from January to March ; in 
‘one or two years I believe they fell into May or June, owing to the late arrival of ships, or 
political circumstances. : 

Since your departure from India, have you been acquainted with the period at which the. 
extra Ships have usually been dispatched from thence ?~Only by teference to the documents 
at the India House. ; 

Can you assign the reason for the lateness of the dispatch of the extra Ships, when they 
have been dispatched beyond the seasonable period of the year?—I think, and in whiel 
I differ in opinion from several of my colleagues, that the manner in which the extra Ships 
are taken up, that is to be fitted out again for India as soon as possible after their arrival 
in this country, will often occasion their falling into unseasonable time of dispatch from. 
India, and I have understood the reason why this system has been followed, was to ac- 
commodate the views of Private Merchants, who wished to send goods at various times of 

year. 

Supposing the period of dispatch to be properly regulated, and the rate of freight to be’ 
reasonable, lo you conceive thet it is materially detrimental to Merchants not to be allowed 
to convey goods in ships of their own?—Generally, I cannot conceive there is detriment, 
to them 3 at the same time the fondness of men for speculation, and their idea of individual 
profit, and the desire of the Ship-owners in India to get theix.ships introduced into the 
trade between India and Europe, will often induce: representations that they suffer conside- 
rably : another reason is, that the Indian Agency-houses in this country, for the purpose of 
increasing their individual concerns by Indian Ships being put under their management 
when in this country, will produce representations to the same effect. 

Do you understand that Americans and other Neutrals, have at present an advant 
over the Traders of this country from India in the sale of Indian goods in. foreign Europe 
and America ?—Considerably. 

To what causes do you ascribe this ?—The lower rates of freight and of insurance arising 
from their neutral character, and their access to different countries in hostility with Great 
Britain ; they have also an advantage in certain articles from the operation of the duties of 
this country, more especially in piece goods and nankeen cloths, who can afford to sell at 
different ports, and particularly in the West Indies, for a profit which would be about 
equal to the duties retained in this country. 5 ? ‘ 

151 & 182. De 


_ Mr. Bebb. 


aoaary Az 


“next, wou! 


98 Appendix, No. 47—SUPPLEMENT ‘to the FOURTH REPORT 


Do you conceive that the Americans-navigate cheaper than the English do?—I under- 
staad that they build their hulls cheaper, and provision them cheaper, but that many 
articles of equipment an sallorsweges, especially of the middle and southern States, are 
higher than in this couutry-in time of peace> ‘ 

f the trade between this country and India were now thrown open, do you conceive that 
it could be cartied on on terms equally advantageous as Neutral nations have carried it on, 
whilst tifis country was engaged in war ?—Certainly not. 

‘What is your opinion upon the same points, supposing ‘this country to be at peace ?—If 
the duties on Indian articles exported from this country were not higher than on the same 
articles imported into and exported from America, and that they can enter into any in- 
different country on ‘the same terms as to duties or other charges, I apprehend that the 
contiguity of this country to the Continent of Europe, would give this country a very con- 
sidérable advantage over the Americans. I give this answer on the presumption that the 
Americas Ship is to.deliver her Indian cargo in America, and re-ship it from thence 
to Europe. . 

How do you suppose the comparison would stand between this country and the nations of 
Europe, supposing a atate of general peace?—I apprehend we could carry it on more ad- 
vantageously than other European nations. . 
. Then these answers suppose the trade to be thrown open; state your opinion what the result 
would be in time of peace, supposing the Indian trade to remain under its present system and 
regulations ?—The same; for 1 conceive the Company, from their greater capital and generally 
speaking better intelligence and skill of their servants, able to carry cn the trade with India 
to more advantage to themselves and the country than individuals. I presume always that the 
illicit practices of individuals are out of the question,—that the trade is to be fairly carried on. 

Under any system of regulation for the Indian trade, what’ is your opinion of the prac- 
ticability of extending the sale of British manufactures in India tao not think it can beex- 
tended among the Natives of India. The great article of national manufacture,woollen cloths, 

the Comipaiy already sell to a loss and have for many years, consequently individuals could 
not sell then on better terms ; the next. t articles of national manufactures, silk and cot- 
ton, are out of the question, as they are the produce of India; and with regard to the lesser 
articles, India is already supplied through the privileged trade of the Captainsand Otficers of 
ships, which being ‘wholly free of freight, go into the market on more favourable terms than 
any individyals can, who are obliged to pay for freight; and the usages and habits of the na- 
tives of India render them little solicitous about the use of articles not the produce of their 
own country. 


LETTER from the Board of Trade of Bengal to the Vice President in Council ; dated 
20th December 1805 ; received by Lady Castlereagh 19th July 1806. 


IT appearing by a Statement, laid before us by the Export Warehouse Keeper, of the 
s, in store at the Export Warehouse, and expected to. arrive by the 2oth January, that 
regular Ships appointed to sail from this Port with cargo for Europe, could not be com- 
pletely laden without the addition of private goods, for the allotment of which to those 
ships one application had only been received by us, namcly, from Messrs. Trail, Paimer & 
Co. for 100 tons, we considered it to’be expedient to ascertain, as far as might be practicable, 
the farther quantity of such goods for which regular tonnage might be required; and with 
this view, a Notice to the following Purport ‘was on the 13th instant circulated by our 
orders to all the individuals by whom application had been made to us under the Adver- 
tisement of the 2d of August last, for statutable tonnage in the extra Ships of the present 
season. 
That persons desiring that any part of the statutable tonnage already allotted to them 
should be granted on.the regular Ships which may be dispatched froin this Port in February 
make applications to us for that purpose, the goods for which tonnage might 
be desired on the regular Ships to be delivered at the Export Warehouse by the goth Ja-’ 
nuary, beyond which period no goods would be received, and freights to be paid oa the 
gor at the same rate as may be paid by the Honourable Company for the ships on which 
e goods may be allotted. eS : 
In consequence of the Circular Notice above stated, we received the under-mentioned 
applications for tonnage on the regular Ships of the present season. 


Tons. 
+ Messrs. Trail, Palmer & Co. including the 100 tons before applied 

for, asalready noticed - = = 5 2 = © 300 
- + Fairlie, Gilmore&Co. -- = = > te 100 
= -=Sarkies&Co- 9 - = = 2 ee et 
- + Alexander& Co. + - - “ es ms a - 200 
- © Colvins, Bazett& Co.-  - - - ‘= = - 200 
- + D® onaccountof Mr.Thos. Brown - - - - - 40 
- = Scott, Wilson & Co: - oe - = = = 15 
Mr.W.B.Smith- - - - = - = - = = 2% 
- B. Mason - oe - rs - = = «+ 100 
-W.R.Munro- - - -- + - += - = 96 

~ Thos. Barnet, on account of Mr. Henry Barnet: - - + 18° 


Total Tons - - 1069 °° 
— 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 99 


At a Committce of Private Trade, on Friday the 234 January 1807. 


° 

IT appearing by the Bengal Board of Trade letter, and their consultations of the zoth 
December 1805, that individuals were permitted to lade private goodson the Walpole, Surrey, 
Lord Duncan and Lady Castlereagh, arrived 1806, on their agrceing to pay the same rate 
‘of freight in England as may be paid by the Company for goods laden’ on the regular 
India ships; and an Estimate of the average rateof freight per ton, calculated in the chartered 
tonnages of the above ships, including a proportion of the charges for war, contingencies 
and kentlidge, being laid before the Committee; Agreed, that the private goods imported by 
the said ships under the Resolution of the Board of Trade of the 2oth December 1805, be 
charged at the rate of £. 44 per ton. 


At a Committee of Private Trade, on Wednesday the 20th July 1808. 


PURSUANT toa reference of Court of the 15th ultimo, the Committee took into conside~ 
‘ration a Letter from Messrs. Bruce, de Ponthicu, Bazett & Co. Porcher, Redhead & Co. 
David Scott & Co. Paxton, Cockerill, Trail & Co. and Lambert, Gillett, Edwards & Co. 
‘transmitting on behalf of their respective constituents in Bengal, a Statement of their claims 
for the difference between the amount of freight charged by the Company on the privilege 
goods shipped on the regular ships Walpole, Surrey, Lady Castlercagh, and Lord Duncan, 
in the season 1805-6, and the amount which they conceive should have been charged ‘on 
those goods; and expressing their hope, that the Court on examining the justness of theit 
claims will be pleased to give orders for the payment of the difference of freig’t to.them on 
behalf of their respective constituents ; and the Committee having had reference to the fol- 
owing particulars ; viz. : 


Advertisement published by order of the Board of Trade in the Calcutta Gazette of the 
goth July last, respecting the rate of freight on privilege goods ; 

Letter from the Board of Trade to the Governor General in Council, dated 24th November 
°1807—last, transmitting copy of a Letter addressed to them relative to the rate of freight 
charged on the private good laden on the above ships ; 

And, the Committees’ Minutes of the 2gd January 1807; ~ 

The Committee agreed to abide by their decision of that date respecting the rate of freight 
to be charged on the privilege goods imported on the Walpole, Surrey, Lady Castlereagh and 
Lord Donean, and that the above request for the reduction thereof be not complied with. 


(No. 9.) 
Sabbati, 20 die Maii 1809. 
“Sir JOHN ANSTRUTHER, Baronet, in the Chair. 
Mr. John Bebb, again called in, and examined. 


Mr. Bebb. I beg leave to offer some explanations of some of the evidence I gave on 
“Thursday last. I stated that when the Company’s Ships were taken up, they were taken up. 
at £.16 per ton for heavy goods, and £.20 a ton for piece goods ; that freight was paid in 
Bengal three fourths in advance, and of course it assisted the owners with capital, and 
saved them interest and risk. I think I stated that.from the skill of their servants and their 
capital, the Company could carry on trade with more advantage than individuals. I would add, 
that the Company’s goods have a character for exccllence, which the goods of private per- 
‘sons do not attain; this gives the Company a considerable advantage in the Europe market, 
A foreign Merchant can give bis correspondent in London an order to purchase Company's 
goods, with confidence that the goods wiil prove of the quality he desires; in respect of the 
goods of individuals, he is at an uncertainty; he must trust to the judgment and attention 
of his correspondent, and is liable to disappointment in the quality of the goods. The 
Company's goods sell at a higher price than the goods of private persons, even though 
such goods may happen to be equal in quality to the Company's. When engaged on my 
own account in correspondence to this countty from Bengal, I conceived the difference to 
be equal to fifteen per cent. on piece goods, though my goods were provided by myself with 
great care and attention. The commission which falls upon the goods of Private Merchants 
at the different places of purchase, shipment and sale, except where the owner himself may 
reside, in their transit from the place of produce in Bengal, through Calcutta and London, 
to the place of consumption abroad, by its repetition acts with a pressing weight upon the 
produce of goods, and abates the profit, or eventually creates a loss or tends to it; some of 
the rates of commission were 10 per cent. for procuring gaods at the place of manufacture, 
te and a half per cent. for shipping, and two and a half per cent. on gross sales in 
ndon. $ 

1 wish to add to my answer to another point where a foreign State in Europe ‘may 
determine to support its own.commerce by high duties, or where prohibited altogether the 
introduction of fodian articles, except in its own ships, it will supply itself with Indian 
goods directly from India as far as its credit or the proceeds of its native productions or its 
151 & 182. , Ce acquired 


Mr. Bebb. 


» dr. Bebb. 
| ell 


100 Appendix, No. 47-—-SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


acquired articles which it may send to India, may enable it to procure in India, and so far 
will it share in the commerce to and from India, and so, fr counteract. the notion of 
rendering London the emporium for the trade of the East Indies. 7 : 

How far do you think aay regulation on our‘part might be made to operate against the 
foreign trade as you describe ?—I apprehend it will be checked in some degree by higher 
dutics and higher port charges ; but the former must be laid ow with judgment, or else the 
goods will be smuggled om board of foreign ships, and evade the duties altogether. 

Would not it follow from that mode of reasoning, that the Company, in a commercial 
point of view, have nothing whatever to fear from the trade being thrown open to the com- 
petition of Private Merchants, whether in India or in Europe ?—I have often reflected uj 
the subject, and I have been of the same opinion for twenty years, that they would have 
nothing to fear in a point of view merely commercial, : 

Then supposing the Company’s exclusive privilege to cease, and that they were in future 
to carry on their trade as a Chartered Company, which they would remain in common with 
the other Merchants of this country or India, do you think that the Company could carry. 
on their trade under these circumstances to greater advantage than tite Private Merchants?— 
Certainly ; but in such case it could not be expected that they should export articles of 
national manufacture to a loss as they now do, or import from India articles for the benefit 
of Government on the terms they often now import them. 

What articles do the Company import into this country for the use of Government ex- 
cept Saltpctre ?—At present they bring Sunn-hemp for the service of Government, without 
any profit whatever. é 

his is the first year I believe that they have brought any ?— Yes, on Government account; 
but they are under a disadvantage in bringing it in proportion as they may lose by the dead 
weight necessary to be put on the ship ; and some years ago, on the occasion of the first 
rupture with Russia, they brought it on their own account, at the wishes or at the instances 
of His Majesty’s ministers, for the purpose of answering the national exigencies, and they. 
Jost greatly by it. 

Did they bring a large quantity ?—A considerable quantity. 

Do you apprehend that under the present circumstances of the East India ‘Company, they 
navigate their regular ships as cheaply as the Private Merchants could navigate their own 
ships ?—Not having experience in shipping on my own account, I cannot answer the question 
decidedly ; but the ships are taken up by open competition, and they have an advantage 
in being at a considerable less insurance than the private ships. 

When you state the commission that is paid upon providing private goods in India, do 
you on the other hand state the charges of all the Commercial Extablishinenes that the Com- 
pany have been at in India ?—The regular Establishment is not added to the invoice. 

Is there any warehouse rent added to the invoice ?—No, 

Have the expenses of the building and purchasing the warehouses in India been added 
at any time to the invoice of goods?—No. 

Then when you are to state a comparison in a mercantile point of view between the Com- 
pany and a Private Merchant carrying on his trade, would it not be fair and reasonable to 
add those articles ?—They should be put on the same footing in that respect; if they are 

charged in one they should be charged. in the other. 

Have the extra Ships always sailed from India at fixed periods, and always during the fair 
weather season ?—During the time I was in India they generally have sailed in the fair 
weather season, or at least the major part have. 

Do not you know that in point of fact extra Ships have very often sailed in June?—I 
know they have in April and May; I speak only to the end of 1799. 

When do you say the fair weather scason ought to end?—If I could perfectly command 
the circumstances of the commerce, I would wish every ship should sail from Bengal be- 
tween the beginning of November and the 2oth of February; but I have known ships 
frequently sail in March and make very good voyages. 

fo not you reckon April, May, and June; as very unfavourable times of dispatch ?— 
Certainly, they are unscasonable times of dispatch. 
Might not the sailing of the ships at the most convenient-seasons, for the purposcs of 


- :trade, be fixed on so as to preclude the disappointment which has been complained of by 


Private Merchants?—I apprehend that the detentions for convoy frequently occasion them 
to go at unscasonable times which would not ogcur; and the Convoy Act, in its operation in 
this country, occasions great delays and loss to the Company. 

“Do not the regular Ships almost always sail in fair scasons?—They endeavour to make 
them sail in fair seasons. 

Do they not, generally speaking, succeed in those endeavours ?—They generally sail in 
fair seasons, certainly; but then it must be explained: that the regular Ships are taken up 
to sil from England in fair times, whereas the extra are taken up to return as soon as they 
can, to meet.the wishes of the Merchants. 

Do you mean that the Merchants wish them-to sail from this country at such a period as 
would necessarily throw them in to return in the foul weather season ?—F was not in the 
In:lia Direction at the time the.present system was adopted, and, as I before stated, I differ 
in opinion with my Colleagues on the subject, but have understood the system was adopted 
to meet the wishes of the Merchants, . 

Do you then understand the wishes of the Merchants to be, that their ships should.re- 
turn in a bad season ?—As an abstract question, no man would answer in the afirmatiee, 

. eannot 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 3101 


T cannot speak to their wishes, I am not in their confidence ; but I believe they have often ar. popp, 
made unfounded representations in order to perplex and embarrass the case. i x 
Is there not every year an Advertisemgnt issued at Bengal, stating the rate at which ine aunt 
«tonnage is to be paid upon extra Ships, and upon regular Ships ?—Wben' I was in Bengal 
regular notice was given of the’ rate of the statutable tonnage, but there was no regular 
notice given of the regular Ships, though it has occasionally been done at the discretion of 
the Board of Trade ; nor is it required to bé given. 

‘Do you know whether, in the season of 1805-6, a fair season, there were any extra Ships 
at Bengal at all?—I cannot speak to it without referring to the Records at the India House, 

Did you ever see a Letter from the Court of Directors, directing the freight upon regular 
Ships, for the season.1805-6, to be £.30. odd per Ton?—There is a Letter of the 18th of 
February 1807, which conveyed the Orders of the Board to India for three seasons, two 
xetrospectively, and one prospectively, The four ships, which I mentioncd the other day, 
shad arrived in England before that Letter was written. : 

Did not that Letter convey the Orders of the Court of Directors, respecting the rate of 
freight that. was to be charged for that season retrospectively @—{ think they were for 

-1804-5, 1805-6, and 1806-7. i 

You said that those four ships were offered to the Merchants upon the conditions that 
they should pay the freight that the Company actually paid ?—Yes. 

Were not the Merchants under the necessity of accepting that rate of freight, because 
there were no extia Ships at Bengal at the time, and because the Company would not give 
them freight upon the regular Ships at any lower rate ?—Not being in Bengal at the time 1 
cannot speak to the subject; nor having seen any official document which states the cir- 
cumstances the question presumes, I cannot reply to it. 

Do you think that if the Merchants had extra Ships properly fitted and ready to sail in 
the inonth_ of November, December or Janucry, at the rate of £.23 per ton, that they 
would, under those circumstances, have consented to pay that which eventually turned out 
to be £.44 a ton?—On fine goods it might answer to them, considering the difference 
of Insurance tq, send it on regular Ships, more especially if the ships proceeded from India 
without convoy. 7 

Would it have answered upon any but the very finest goods, the difference in these twe 
rates of freight?-—Of. course it must depend upon the value of the goods. 

Supposing a Merchant had provided a quantity of goods in the expectation of shipping 
them upon an extra Ship, at the rate of about £.23 per ton, and when the season came, 
he found that he could only export them at the rate which he paid upon those four ships, 
must he not upon some goods at least have run the risk of exporting them to a con- 
siderable loss, or been obliged to dispose of them in Calcutta, at the loss of his specu- 
Jation ?—Without knowing what the case is exactly, I cannot answer to it. 

Is not the loading of the goods, and the uncertainty that the Merchant is under what 
ships those goods will be placed in, an inconvenience to the private dealers ?—Certainly 
there is some inconvenience attends it ; but formerly, when there was a regular intercourse 
by land from India to England, that inconvenience as to Insurance did not exist in the 
manner that it now does: when your goods were shipped, you could write in time to effect 
an Insurance in London. . 3 

‘That was during the continuance of the over-land dispatch ?—Yes. — - 

1 believe that the regular over-land expresses were not received with any peculiar favour 
by the Court of Directors ?@—I was not at that time in the Direction. 

What are the articles that the Company export from this country at a considerable 
Joss?——Woollens. . 

Do they always lose by Woollens?—I cannot say always, but generally it is a losing 


trade. 

3 course you mean ‘jt is a losing trade at the rate and the expense at which it is now 
carried on?—~At the costs and chargés which fall on the Woollens, undoubtedly it is. 

Would not the uncertainty of convoy attach to ships of Private Merchants as well as 
to those taken up by the Company ?—Certainly. a 

Do you not conceive that if the trade between India and England were thrown open, 
the great increase of buyers abroad and sellers at home would enhance the cost of goods 
in India, and lower the selling prices of them in England, to the general disadvantage of 
all persons engaged in the trade ?—From the eagerness of speculation I believe it would at 
first, but the heavy losses that would arise would check that spirit. 

Do you conceive that in the case of an open trade, individaals could be prevented from 
sending ships and goods from the British Settlements in India, to various other parts of 
the world besides Great Britain ?—If they conceived it to be their interest so to do, they 
certainly. woald find the Laeroe dy it. Fo olep te Fl dh fue 

hat do you suppose to be the aggregate rate per cent. of all the commercial ch 
in Bengal upon the Company’s investment out and Bon e I am not prepared at present 
to answer that question. s - ear aye 

Taking the whole of. the costs and charges of the Company’s Commerce in Bengal and 
the costs and charges of the trade pf individuals there, together with the quality of the 
goods purchased, which trade do you suppose to be done upon the midst advantageous 
terms ?—Most assuredly the Company's ; because 1 found that the advatttages of my own 
trade were not equal to those of the Company’s, and 1-believe I catried on my own 
trade fully as economically and advantageously as any Private Merchant, 

151 & 182. Do 


102 Appendix, No. 47.~-SUPPLEMENT ¢o0 the FOURTH REPORT 


. Bebb. Do you recollect the periods settled in the Charter Parties of the Company’s 
Mee Be , Ships, 3s a favourable seuaon for commencing and ending the dispatch of those Ships ? 
zZ —For the regular Ships the commencement is varied a little; it has’ sometimes I 
believe teen as early asthe ist, and sometimes as late as the 15th of November, but 
generally about the 10th, and the end of the time has been from the 1st to, { think, the 
Joth or 15th of March, generally the 10th of March. * 
Do not the inconveniences suffered in the manner of loading and dispatching the extra 
_ Ships relate almost entirely to a time of war ?—Certainly they are greatly aggravated by a 
tine of war, and if the extra Ships were taken up so as to sail from this country at the 
most favourable times of the year, they would return, under common circumstances, at the 
most favourable time of the year from India in time of peace. 
Do you know any instances in which Merchants have paid forfeit for the ton! 
which they had engaged irom the Company and had not occupied @—Whilst 1 was in 
Bengal there was one instance, and I believe only one, in which the forfeit was éxacted, 
from the House of Cockerill, Trail & Co. and a degree of strictness was used towards 
them, because it was believed by the Members of the d of Trade that they had acted 
incorrectly or improperly, by diverting tosome other channel the goods for which they had 
required tonnage. 
{What is your opinion of the effects and the expediency of navigating ships from India 
to England by Lascars ?—The ships are less equal-to defence against an enemy, and the 
Lascars are less capabic of enduring severe weather in cold climates; and a shocking mor: 
tality has eccurred in the country ships, L believe m: ly. ateribut le. to.the "want of proper 
‘ ig and proper lodging and a hearteniiigd the Lascars : on this subject there 
ssay” Written by Dr. Hunter ‘of “Bengal, 


(AS 

is jf was published in 1804, which is 
deserving of attention. I ynderstand the Lascars on their arrival in this country are 
extremely licentious and dissolute, and I have understood very frequently quit their ships to 
beg about the streets without being under any necessity. 


Se ee 
(No. 10.) | 


LETTER from John Bebb, Esquire, to the Chairman of the Committee, dated 26th May, 
& 1809; in explanation of his Evidence of the zoth. - 
Sir, : in 
ON the question being asked me on Saturday last, whether there were any extra Ships in 
Bengal in Deceinber 1805, I replied I could not then say, but that I could easily state by 
reference to the Records at the India House ;_ I have since referred to the Records, and 
find that the Carmarthen, laden with 632 tons of. goods, and General Stuart 642 tons, 
sailed from Bengal for England the 2d December 1805. . 
I find also the under-mentioned ships were taken up to sail from Gravesend, in the year 


1805; viz. x 
= + + 13th March. 


Northampton 
Sarah Christiana 
Union- - - - 


Sir W" Palteney 


The Comet was in the first instance put under the orders of Admiral Troubridge, on the 
2oth April, but not arriving at Portsmouth in time to proceed with the Admiral, was after- 
wards detained there until the 17th July, and, with the other above-named ships, wasy'at 
the instance of His Majesty’s Ministers, employed to carry His Majesty's troops to the Cape, 
for the reduction of that Colony ; and had it not been for this circumstance, these ships 
would in the usual course of the voyage have beca in Bengal before the month of 
December. 

The further under-mentioned. extra Ships were also sent to India in 1805, and ordered to 
sail from Gravesend, as follows: 


Retreat * 


- 13th May. 


peveue 
penuns 
preee 


Tee 2 112 Tf + sseh March, 
Ann - - - - + = = goth May. 
Diana + - _ - 13th De 


Euphrates - - - -2. 
Redthambertand oe } . 28th June. 


and arrived at their respective destinations as follows ; viz. 


Retreat - - = - Bombay - -.- - 11th August 1805. 
- ‘Tigris- -.- - - Madras .- - + - 2d March i806. 
Ann - = - - - De - - - -.-,- 2d March. 
Diana- - = - - Te - - = = - © 11th February. 
Euphrates - - - P.W.Island- - - 4st-June. 

d - D® . - = = - = 2gth May. 


Northumberlan 


on the Allsirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, 103, 


The Tigris was in 


cf 


st instance pxt under the ordevs of Admiral Trowbridge on the 
goth April, but not it Portsmouth ‘in time to proceed with the Adiniral, was sub- 
sequently detained there until the 17th July, on which day she sailed trom theace with the 
Ann for Falmouth and Cork, and proceeddd with the Expedition against the Cape to Ma- 
deira, their port of destination, where they remained 18 days. 

‘The Diana was put under the orders of His Majesty’s Ship Belliqueux on the Sth July at 
Portsmouth, and proceeded with that ship to Falmouth and Cork, from the latter of which 
she was to have sailed with the Expedi sinst the Cape on the gist August, but mecting 
with an accident was under the u of returning to Portsmouth for repairs, from 
whence she again sailed for India on 27th September following. 

The Euphrates and Northumberland procceded from Portsmouth to Cork, and from 
thence with the Expedition to Madeira, and afterwards to St. Helena, their port of destina- 
tion, 

E request you will have the gcodness to lay this Letter before the Committee, as my 
answer to the question I was.unprepared to reply to on Saturday. 


5 T have the honor to be, Sir, 
East India House, Your most obedient servant, 
26th May, 1809. John Bebb. 


Right Honourable Sir J. Anstrather, Bart. 
Chairman of the East India Committee. 


(No. 11.) 
Jovis, 25° cis Maii 1809. 
Sir JOHN ANSTRUTHER, Baronet, in the Chair. 
Mr. John Woolmore, called in, and examined. 


DID you formerly command one of the Company’s regular Ships?—Yes. 
Did you likewise ommand a ship in the country Yade fh India Yes. Afr. Woolmore. 
From your experience in the navigation of shipsin Europe and ships in India, state your ~~ 
opinion of the comparative cheapness of Indian Ships navigated from India, and British 
Snips carrying on the commerce from India to Europe ?—In answering that question gene= 
rally, I must couple it with the particular practice at the time when I was more Paction 
jarly acquainted with it, from the year 1800 to 1803. I am satisfied that the British Ship- 
owner could have sailed cheaper under the same circumstance than a Country Ship-owner. 

Do you mean to speak of British Ships generally, or to distinguish between the Com-- 
pany’s regular Ships and other class of British Ships?—I mean to speak of kind 
of ship under equal circumstances with each other. I mean to state that if 1 took 
a regular Company’s Ship, built aad fitted out in. India or in England, that I would, under 
the ‘same circumstances at that time, have built-a British Ship and navigated her 
cheaper than I could bave done an Indian Ship: the same observation applies to the two 
other distinct services ; the regular 800 ton ship and the regular 550 ton ship. The first 
regular Ship I spoke of was a 1,200 ton ship. 

‘hen { understand you to say that if yoa had had a house in India and a house in Europe, 
and had been offered by the East India Company to fit out an India Ship under precisely 
the same circumstances and regulations, either in India or in England, as you might 
snk Bt, that you would have preferred fitting her out from England as the cheapest? 
—Exactly so. | 

Do you mean to say that it follows from thence that English-built Ships may be 
freighted at a lower rate in the India trade. than India-built Ships ?—It occurred to mé 
at that time, from the calculations that I then made, that I could sail a British Ship 
cheaper in general than a Country Ship. 

State your opinion of the expediency and the effect of employing Lascars, in navigation * 
bétween India and Europe, in substitution for European Seamen?—I very much doubt 
whether,. ina geen system, as employed in onr ships, they are an actual saving os 
not. I am satisfied that ‘the Insurance upon a ship and cargo under such circumstances 
would be grexter than with the Europeans. Taking the expenses attached to Lascars and 
the expenses attached to Europeans, I very much doubt whether any saving can be made 
by the employment of Lascars, compared with Europeans, in the navigation from India 
to Iturope. 

What is your opinion with respect to the efficiency of those two classes of Sailors ?—I 
think that a ship which could be navigated with 50 Europeans, ought to have in proportion 
from 80 to go Lascars : the superior class of Indian Lascars will not come. to Europe, and 
in times of danger, and when particular exertion is requisite, T think 80 or 90 Lascars would 
not be equal to 50 Europeans, 


151 & 182. Dd : In 


104 Appendix, No. 47—SUP PLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


Mr, Woolmere. In very perilous circumstances in the European Seas, can you get Lascars at all to exert 
te et themselves as the occasion requires /—ertainly not. 
What do you think as to the efect of navigating to Europe upon the constitutions of 
Lasears, and the proportioa of mortality produced by it among them ?—1 have no exact 
calculation to answer that question, but, generally speaking, [ lave always understood from 
the Commanders of mine who have bad the Lasears, that the moment they have come into 
cold weather that they have, generally speaking, been very useless and sickly, and required 
very great attention in themselves to keep them to do their duty. T have been particularly 
desirous to afford them every comfort, by clothing and nourishing them in every way to make 
them useful. 
Can you speak to the condition of the Lasears whilst they remain in this country 2 
have found thein ranging about the strects apparently in very distressed situations, arising 
very much from their conzection with the lower érder of women at the eastera part of the 
town. I have found them to have all the same propensities the British sailors have, exceptitig 
iéi¥ Insolence ; but they appear to have much more of that now from their intercourse wit 
England than they formerly had, which [ believe to arise from their connection with our 
women. 

Tron. your acquaintance with Indian manners, do you suppose that this intimacy of 

‘ Lascars with European women derogates from the respect that those natives of India are 
otherwise accustomed to pay to Europeans ?—I certainly thiuk it has. 

From your acquaintance with the trade of India, what is your opinion of the practicability 
of greatly extending the sale of British.manufactures there ?—. [ have not been in India these 
Jast 16 or 17 years to be capable of judging of that question in its extended view ; but if [ 
nay judge from the state of the markets in ‘Todia for European goods at the present time, it 
is so over-stocked, that taking the average prices of all the European goods, they will hardly 
bear at present any profit beyond the freight, insurance, and expenses attached to them :— 
I mean in short to say, that the exportation is at present cqual to the demand. 

Do you ‘think that if the price of European goods could by any means be considerably 
reduced in India, the demand would increase in proportion ?—I should rather think not, as 
far as my judgment gocs; at the same time I aw not acquainted with the interior of the 
country so as to be able to form a correct judgment how far the sale of any particular 
articles might be extended, from being at a low price. 

From your degree of acquaintance with the people and manners in India, do you think 
it probable that the consumption of our manufactures, and the use of articles fashionable 
among us, could be carried to any great extent ?—I should think not. i 

Of these Europcan articles that are_now carried. from England to India, is not a large 
proportion sent in the privilege of the Commanders and Officers of the ships employed by 
the Company ?—I should think they are; but J do’ not know what trade has been to Europe 
independent of the Company’s ships. E 

How far, in your judgment, is it practicable for this country to maintain a competition 
with America, and the nations of foreign Europe, in the trade from India to Europe and 
America ?—As far as the shipping department goes, namely, as-to freight, I am in very 

reat doubt even in time of peace whether we could sail so cheap as they do, even under 
the same circumstances as to regulation ; in war certainly not, because their wages, insurance 
and out-fits ; generally must-be cheaper than ours, artis 

What is your opinion of the class of ships fittest to be used between Europe and 
India, in carrying on the Indian trade?—I should think the class of ships from 509 to 550 tons 
would be the cheapest navigated, upon the principle of the superior West India ships. I am 
now speaking particularly as to the trade to Bengal. : x 

Do you include, in this answer, security as well as cheapness -and expedition ?—I do in- 
clude security, as far as it respects every thing but war. 

In what situation were you in India?—A Captain and part Owner of a ship of about 
700 tons, or from 650 to 700 tons, trading from port to port in India and China. 

Were you concemed, to any considerable degree, in the commerce of exporting from 
India to Europe, ‘or importing from Europe to India?—During the time I commanded that 
ship, not at all. : 

Did you continue ‘to command that ship till you left India?—I did ; and I left India in 
1787. a Te ‘. 
Bs re that time, there was no commerce, T believe, open to the Merchants, either of India or 
of this country, between India and England ?—I believe not. °f oo 

Did you reside at all in the interior of India?—Not at all, * 

Have you mucli acquaintance with the manners.or habits of the people in the interior of 
India ?—Certainly not in the interior, only upon the coast. Cahaee 5 

Then from your own knowledge of the habits of the people in the interior of that Country, 
you cannot speak about the practicability of extending the sale of European exports, sup- 
posing the price considerably reduced ?—Certainly not, aan 

Are you suiticiently acquainted with the products of the interior of India, to be able to 
give an opinion respecting the possibility of increasing the import of raw commodities into 
this country, supposing they could be brought at a lower rate of freight than they now are? 
—I am certainly not acquainted, from local information, of any of the raw materials that 
may be produced in the interior of India ; but from some observation in this country of the 
raw material of Hemp that has been brought here, I should think that that might, upon low 
freight, be brought bere with advantage. z i 

. fave 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. : 105 


Have you ever used any of the Sunn-hemp?—Yes. 

Are you acquainted with the nature of the material >—Yes, 

Do-you think it could be made use of asa substitute for Hemp ?—Yes, decidedly. 

Have you had occasion to make auy comparisons between it and Hemp?—I have. - 

Do yeu recollect the result of those comparisous?—I think that the Sunn-hemp wilt 
generally bear the proportion of from 70 to 85 or go. 

Does not some of the Sunn-hemp bear a much nearer proportion to Hemp ?—It varies 
very much, and I think bas latterly been improving; some of it has borne more or equal to 
the best Hemp. 

I believe you either are now -or have been a considerable Owner of India shipping I 

” bave been, but I am now a very small Owner of India shipping; 1 have only one left. 

Supposing you wére at liberty to build and navigate your ship in your own way as a 
Merchant, cither in India cr in Europe, could you not sail that ship cheaper than you can do 
ander the regulations-of the East India Company ?—TI should think so. 

You once, I believe, were a considerable Owner of extra shipping >I had between 34 
and £.35,000 in them, 

In the year 1801 the East India Company entered into an understanding with the 
‘Owners, Merchants, and Traders, to provide them with shipping at a moderate rate, to sail 
at fixed periods, and to leave India during the fair-weather scason: Heve those agree- 
anents or understandings been complied with by the East India Compary?—L should 
think not. é 

Were the regulations of the East India Company, and the mode in which they em= 
ployed those ships an inconvenience to the Owners of those ships?—In the manner in 
which they were cartied into exccution, they certainly were; as far as respects myself, 

certainly, 

What were the inconveniences that yon say the Ship-owners felt, from the mode in which. 
the Company employed the ships ?—The inconveniences were their being. employed in 
some caves to political purposes, when I expected, as a SI wner, that they would have 
been simply, except in cases of extreme necessity, applied to bringing the trade only. 
‘There was another inconvenience which I suffered, that the cargo in India was not kept 
within its dimensions. 

From the mode in which those ships were employed, were you able, in the course of a 
pres number of years, to make the same number of voyages, out and home, as you would 
have been if the ships had been entirely at your own disposal?—Certainly not. 

Did not that ncessarily cither diminish your profit, if you had hired your ship for a 
given number of years, or increase your demand for freight, supposing ee to have been 
about to make an agreement for hiring your ship for a given time ?—It certainly would 
have been the means of my increasing my freight, if I had had to teader ships for the 
same employ again. 

Did not the detention of the sbip in India on her ontward voyage increase the expense 
to you the Ship-owner ?—The detention in India being paid by the East India Company, 
did not injure me as a Ship-owner for a certain period ; but beyond a certain period, the 
allowance that the Company made me would not have answered the expenses; at the 
sane time, these increased the freight generally. 

Did those ships gencrally eail either from’ India or Europe at the proper season ?—I 
believe, generally, they have sailed at ull times of the year. 

‘When the ships sail either from India or England ‘at what is called out of season, does 
not that necessarily incresse the expense of tear aud wear, and the risk to the Ship- 
owners ?—No doubt it docs. 

Tf you had been to employ your own ship, would not yqu have avoided that expense?— 
Certainly, without I had seen any profit that might arise which would have more than 

walled it. : 

“a Supposing you to tender extra Ships to the Company now, would you not take.all those 
etpeumutances into your consideration in the freight you would demand ?—No doubt 
of it. . 

Those circumstances which you have mentioned as inconveniencts to the Ship-owners, 
are they not also inconveniences to the Merchant Exporter from England to India, or 
from India to Europe?—I should think both ‘these circumstances, with respect to the 
Merchant, must depend upon the price of the articles atthe time they want to import 
orto export them; no doubt that the unceitainty of the sailing must be an injury to the 
Merchant. 

Supposing you were a Merchant carrying on a trade of export and of import to and 
from India, would it not be a considerable convenience to your trade to be allowed to 
Joad your sbip in you own way, and sail her at your own time, and under your own 
controul ?—I should certainly think so. , 

. Imean it as compared with the uncertainty of sailing of the ships under the controul 
ofthe East India Company, and the regulations which they have established ?—Of course. 

\Would it be impossible to form any regulation or any system for the care and protection 
of Lascars while they remain in this country ?—I should very much doubt if it was possible 
to take better care of them than they are now taken caré of by the East India Company. 

Is there not a great mortality of European seamen in thé Bengal River during: certain 
periods of, the year ?—Certainly, there is. . “ 

151 & 182, _ Whether 


Mr, Woolmore, 
Ve 


a5 Appendix, No. 47.—SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 
Hr. Weolmore.t “Whether do you think the European character mest likely to suffer from the dissoluteness 
‘Jef a Lascar returning to India, or the dissoluteness of au English Sailor in the streets of 
aa India I think in these two extreme cases that they are very much in the same state ; but 

{I think we keep our Europeans more on board ship in India than the Lascars are kept here, 

{ and therefore the circumstaaces do not apply exactly} « 

You said you reckoned ships for the Indian trade the best fitted ep in the style of the 
superior West tndiamen ?—I think so. I meant as to cheapness of freight as well as to 
general security that such ships are fully cqual tv give security in every respect, except 
fighting. 

SW hether the Company's extra shipping is now fitted out in the manner the superior 
class of West India shipping is?—Yes, tar beyond them. i 

In what respect ?--I mean in their equipments as to stores generally; 1 mean, generally, 
that she is fitted out at more expense than a West Indiaman. 

Does not that extra fitting enhance the freight very considerably ?—Certainly; there isa 
general security considered in consequence of that. 

Supposing yeu, as a Meschant, or as a Ship-owner, looking to your own interest and 
our own profit only, and trading to and from India, woul you employ a ship which you 
ave described as superior, a West Indiaman, or would yeu build and employ ships like the 

extra ships of the East India Company /=-The superior class of West Indiamen, and the East 
Tadia Company’s extra ship, L consider tobe the same as to the ship; but the extravagant 
out-fit attached to those ships, their being docked when they come home, frequently un- 
necessarily, in my opinion, is’one of the great causeés of the expense of their freight; indeed it 
is the principal cause of it, and I consider that the expense of freight of those ships is 
occasioned first by the foregoing causes; secondly, by the attachment to regulation ; and 
thirdly, by the cargoes in India not being properly compressed, so as that they can bring 
a sntficieacy of tonnage home. 

. _ ‘The Merchants have stated that the Company have not afforded them the facilities which 
they had expected for themselves from the regulations of 1801; do you know any thing 
how far the Merchants’ complaints upon that head are well or ill founded }—I think they 
may have had reason to complain of the ships being applied to political purposes; and 1 
think that last.year it struck me_particularly, that the extra Ships did not go out so early as 
they ought to have done, if the Merchants applied for shipments in proper time. 

You said, I think, that zs far as you knew, the British commodities were not now exported 
to any considerable profit ?—Not with any considerable profit beyond the price of freight, 
insurance, and interest of money. - 

Of course you mean the present rate of freight 7—I mean merely the outward freight. 

Do you think it is possible, with any facility that could be given to the shipping, that the 
Enropean commodities could be supplied to India so much at an under rate as to very 
much increase their consumption ?—From my limited intercourse with India, I very much 
doubt their being increased. % 


(No. 12.) 
Sabbati, 27° die Maii 1809. 


Sir JOHN ANSTRUTHER, Baronet, in the Chair. 
Mr. John Woolmore, again called in, 


Mr. Woolmore. I beg to state that I am properly called a Ship-owner, and not a 
“Merchant. ; ; 
You have stated the iaconveniences experienced with tespect to the Company’s extra 
Ships as to times of sailing, detention, &c. Do you not think that if the trade was left entirely 
free, that those inconveniences would be experienced in a certain de; by individuais 
during such a war as we are now engaged in?—Thev might in a small degree, but 1 shouid . 
not think in any serious degree, that a Merchant might always have it in his power to con- 
nect the time oF sailing of the ship very much agreeable to his own wishes, except in cases 
of extreme accident, . : 
Would they not_be obliged. to wait for convoys, as the Company’s Ships are ?—They 
might sometimes ; but I conceive that I could sail without a convoy. 
re you not aware that the law now prohibits that ?—I understand that you may go 
without convey or with convoy by a license of Government: as the convoys are generally 
appointed at a particular period of the year, between the months of. Jenanty, the latter end of 
December, and the monthsof March, April and May, that I could. in the month of Sep- 
tember previous to that or even in December, Prepare my ship under my own management, 
so.as to get away either with the January, March, or May convoy. 
With respect to convoys from India, would you not be subject to the ‘same regulations 
as the Company’s Ships If I was obliged to take them, certainly. : 
: With 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 167 


With respect to the departure of ships either from England or India, must it not depend 
upon their completing their cargoes; which is always lixble to uncertrinty when a ship puts 
up for freigat?—Certainly, I conceive. under such cireunistances, that the Merchants pro- 
vide their freight agreeable to the time that,the ship is ineaced to sail; that is the case 
with West India Merchants. The season of ships for Jamaica, the individeals provide their 
cargoes at a certain period of the year, and they are ready for the ships when they arr 
and suppose that would be the case here ; the Private Merchant, if he was aware of 
ships coming, he would provide his cargo ready. 

tn point of fact, do you not know that West India Ships have to wait both at ports in 
England and. ports inthe West Indies, for the completion of their cargoss, after the time 
fixed for their sailing ?—Generally speaking, in the seasons of the year vie ships do not 
yeait: the ships that [ am most acquainted with in the West Ludia service, they ere full 
feeighted as fast as they arrive and can take it in. 

You have spoken of the practicability of making the number of voyages of a ship in the 
Indian trade more than they are at present under the Company's regulations, and the navi 

guion to aud from India being regulated by seasons which: are fixed in their own nature ; 
Now far does this appear to be practicable ?—[ see no impracticability in it, provided the 
ship sets out at first in her proper season, and is dispatched comparatively {rom India in the 
same manner ; that is, if I set out in January 1809, 1 shall without diversion upon political 
service in all probability arrive in Bengal, allowing a full passage, at the end of May or the 
middle of June, allowing 50 days, which the Company do, for otr detention in loading there, 
which I think is full suificient ; and I sail again even in the middle of October, shall be at 
home again in all March; 1 could then with great ease get my ship away in June, and 1 
should be at Bengal again in November, and be able again to sail in all Febroary and be home 
again in July or August ; then I should dock my ship, and allow myself to be cleared in Au- 
gust and September ; I should have October, November, and December to dock my ship, 
fit her, and go out again, that is makiag two complete voyages with great ease in the three 
years, and my ship is completely prepared to goout ona third. The idea underwhich I tendered 
the three first extra Ships to the East India Company at the low priced freight of from £.13 
to£.13 108. per ton, was under the impression that I should completely perform what I 
have stated. 

You reckon on your first voyage to sail from Bengal in October ; are you not aware that 
goods from the interior for exportation cannot.be received in Caicutta so as to be loaded at 
that early season of the year, and that if a shipis loaded in October, it must be with goods 
which have lain a season in Calcutta, at an expense and loss of interest, &c.?—I ain not ac- 
quainted with that circumstance ; but | was going to add, that the impression upon my mind 
when the Bensley first went out from England in the latter end of May, that the same restle 
would have arisen to my performing the two voyages and being ready for the third at tie 
end of the three years, which might obviate, and 1 believe would obviate the difticulty arising 
from loading in Bengal so as to come away early in October, 

in what space of time have_your extra Ships performed two voyages, 2s they have been 
managed by the Company ?—From the beginning of the first voyage to their going cut 
again upon the third voyage, I think four years; but [ will send to the Committee tne stated 
times. 

You have spoken of the delay and loss occasioned to the ships hired by the Company by 
detaining thei for political purposes ; is there not an allowance made for those detentioas in 
the terms of freight ; and if ships were to go without any restriction of this sort would not 
the rate of freight be cheaper?—The rate of freight, in the particular instance that [at 
speaking of, would not have been cheaper than it was, but it would have been dearer if [ 
had not had an impression that these ships would not but in extreme cases have been divert- 
ed to any political purpose. The demurrage allowed by the Company does not apply in many 
cases to cover expense to the Owners, and in very few circumstances are they a complete 
compensation, and in other circumstances very far from adequate, The first point of elucida- 
tion’ [ mean to apply to, is that I conceive in the particular case I am alluding to, that the 
East India Company paid me I suppose about six days demurrage, which cost me a loss it 
the first instance of fourteen days, and in the second instance a loss of at least a month, [ 
will state the case: the Sir William Bensley that was to have sailed in May, sailed in June, 
she was ordered to call at the Cape either with Soldiers or to take away Soldiers, or both; 
she was there according to thé best of my recollection 10 or 12 days or a fortnight; the con- 
sequence of going into the Cape I consic'er as a loss of three days, the coming out again to 
the same situation a loss of two days; the Company would pay for the intermediate nine days” 
demurrage of the fourteen, but I consider the consequence of her going to the Cape. threw 
me backward in my arrival in the Bay of Bengul, so late as to have lost the south-west mon- 
soon and to occasion me to Jengthen my passage between England and Bengal, at least trom 
twenty-five days to a mouth, for which demurrage is not allowed. 

In your computation of the time in which you could perform two or three voyages be- 
tween India and England, do you make allowance for the casualties which are unavoidable 


1 


Afr. Woolmore. 
a 


in any given space of time in that navigation ?—Certainly I do, because I could I think, by - 


the sailing at any of these pertuils of the year, almost deteriaine, from my practice in naviga~ 
tion, what those casualties would be. _ 
Are not the Company's extra ships taken up by contract, by open competition ?—They 
are. : 

151 & 182, Ee Is 


Mr. Woolnore. 
SSE Canna 


108 Appendix, No. 47-—-SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


Is it not optional for every Owner to tender at such rate of freight as he thinks fit ?—Cer~ 
tainly, but in the instance that I allude to when I first began, the regulations of the out-fit 
of those ships I think was not promulgated. I oaly think so because I was disappointed in 
the impression which I had entertained of the intention of those ships, that they would not 
have been stored exactly and fitted as they were, nor diverted to political purposes, except in 
extreme necessity, which was the occasion of the low rate of freight at which I tendered, and 
which, was the lowest rate of freight at which that class of ships was taken. 

Whether in the terms and conditions published by the Court of Directors as the ground 
on which tenders were to be made, the manner of storing those Ships was not expressly de- 
elared?—I think in that instance that though the terms’ and conditions where the schedule 
containing the quantity of stores was not applied to them, and though the terms { believeex- 
pressed that the Company might divert them to political purposes, yet the impression I re- 
ceived from my general conversation with some of the Directors and parts of the Committee 
of Shipping, was that those ships would not be diverted to political purposes but in the most 
extreme necessity. 

Did not the Charter Party contain an express stipulation that the ship should be liable to 
be employed on political services ?—Certainly. 

You complained of the out-fit of the extra ships employed by the Company as expensive, 
was not that known at the time of your tendering the rate of freight?—No, it was not. [ 
have stated that the Schedule applying to the out-fit was not arranged at the time; if it had 
been arranged, I could not have been disappointed. 3 : 

But generall speaking, is not the manner of fitting out the ships of the Company known 
before the tenders of freight are made ?—In every instance that has come within my recol- 
lection since, it is; but this was anew thing. . 

Does not the expensive mode of fitting out the Company’s ships, add to the security of 
the cargo from damage and capture ?--Not in all cases; an unnecessary out-ft, [ cannot 
conceive, can add to the security of the cargo; as to the fitting and anning, there is no-doubt 
that it reduces the price of insurance, and gives a public confidence in its security. 

Is it your opinion that the ships hired by the Company, regular and extra, are sufficiently 
paid in point of freight?— When I first entered into it, yes, perfectly; naw certainly not; 
they are, [ may say, soiled by the patronage that is attached to them. 

Sapleia what you mean by patronage-—I mean that the individuals who have been 
brought up in the service, engage their friends to hold shares of the ships, for which they 
realy do not receive interest for their money, with a view of employing them in the com- 
mands. 

From your acquaintance with the trade of India from port. to port, is it your opinion that 
the different marts in the Indian seas have been thoroughly explored by the British Navi- 
gators in India?—{ should really think they have;_1 know i explored a great many myself, 
and naturally suppose that the same has been applied by other people as well as myself. 


REMARKS. 


Sir William Bensley’s first Voyage 


This ship was originally ordered afloat in 
May 1802, bound to Bengal direct, and to 
be in the Downs 2d June 1802. 


I requested to be permitted to bring the 
ship afloat with some ships that were to be 
in the Downs fourteen days before that 
time, which was granted, on my agreeing to 
stay 14 days longer than usual in India be- 
tore I claimed demurrage. 


The cause for this request was, to save 
the south-west monsoon up the Bay of Bengal. 


A few days before my time for sailing from 
Gravesend, I was ordered to the Cape, and 
on the 18th May (in writing) to prepare 
water and provisions, &e. for the conveying 
90 troops irom the Cape to India. 


The water, &c. was sent from London, 
and the ship sailed on the 26th for the 
Downs, with a foul wind at N. E. (although 
fair from thence for India,) and actually 
passed through on the goth May at the tail 
ofa N. E, wind, which had been blowing 
rom the 2oth May, thé time I should have 
been there, if not detained for political neni 
: yn 


The expense I incurred by getting the shi 
ready, wll shew my idea of the value or 
time at that period, but which the subsequent 
act of the Court rendered nugatory ; on set- 
tling the freight account of that voyage, three 
days demurrage was deducted from my ac- 
counts, in consequence of this agreement, the 
ship having through the Downs three 
days before the 2d June. 


The Committee will here perceive, by my 
exertions in getting the water, X&c. &c. on 
board, the continued idea of the value of 
time at that period. 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


Sir William Rensley’s 1st Voyage—continued. 


On the 27th August, the ship was in with 


109 
REMARKS. 


The honourable Committee will please to 


the Cape’Land, and was prevented getting » compare this with my statement, relating to 


into the Bay, by a hard gale of fair wind for 
India, until the 2d September. 


She sailed again on the :4th September, 
Dut did not get clear to sea until the 17th, 
the difference in time being twenty-one days. 


She arrived at Bengal oh the 25th Novem- 
ber, having been six months, wanting five 
days, on her passage from the Downs; a 
ship which sailed from the Downs the 18th 
May, arrived at Madras the 25th Sep- 
tember; and had not my ship been detained 
on that political service, [ will venture to as- 
sert the Bensley would have been in Bengal 
the first week in October. 


the inadequacy of deinurrage. 


The honourable Company paid me twelve 
days demurrage for detention by calling at 
the Cape. 


I therefore have no hesitation ia saying I 
lost fifty days wages, provisions, and ex- 
penses, from’ the ship being crdered on that 
political service, for which 1 was paid tele 


days, 


Sir William Bensley’s second Voyage. 


This ship arrived at Portsmouth 8th Fe- 
bruary 1804; on the 13th the first convoy 
sailed, and this ship was not permitted, but 
‘on the 2oth sailed for Plymouth to joia some 
other convoy, from which place she sailed on 
the 26th February at the tail of a fair wind, 
and arrived at Madeira on the goth March. 


Arrived at Madras outward in July, and at 
Bengal goth August 1804; sailed from Ben- 
gal on her homeward voyage 28th January 
1805, artived at Madras 12th February, 
sailed again the gth March, and arrived in 
England in September 1805. When the 
cargo was cleared, I inclosed my concern in 
this ship, but 1 find she sailed again on her 
third voyage the 4th March 2806, arrived 
dack in July 1807, and sailed again on her 
fourth voyage 15th April 1808, 


REMARKS. 
The Fleet that sailed the 13th February 
posed Madeira 22d February, { therefore 
lost thirty six-days in my passage to Madeira 
in consequence of this detention, and was 
aid tern days demurrage for detention at 
ortsmouth and Piymouth. The honourable 
Committee will please.to compare this with 
my statement respecting the inadequacy of 
demurrage. 


This ship, from the commencement of her 
first to the commencement of her fourth 
voyage, was five years ten months and a half. 
If the honourable Committee will please to 
compare this with my statement, they will 
find the average to be as | stated, nearly two 
years a voyage, instead of two voyages in 
three years, 


(No. 13.) 


Tovis, 1° die Junii 1809. 
Six JOHN ANSTRUTHER, Baronet, in the Chair. 
Mr. Grant Allen, called in, and examined. 


STATE, in as particular a manner as you can, the rate of premium of insurance paid on 
single ships from India, ship or ships, Company's regular ships, Company's extra ships, and 
Indian ships @—Understanding that these questions would be put to me, L:have put down on 
paper an answer to them as clearly as [ possibly could. £ deliver ia this paper. 


The Paper put in. 
RATES OF INSURANCE FROM BENGAL TO ENGLAND. 


On a Company’s regular ship - - On. goods £.7, per cent. on the ship, 7 guineas per cent, 

On “ship or ships,” Cumpany’s regular ships - D° - = © D- + 

On the ship, 9 Guineas per cent. to return £.1 per cent. for 
convoy to St. Helena, and £.1 per ceut. more for convoy 
from St. Helena to England. 

On goods, £.9. per cent, tu return 19s. and 19s. per cent. for 
convoy as above. 


Ds -  - 


On a Company’s extra ship - - 


po. - 
Ona 


On Company’s extra “ ship or ships,” - = 
151 & 182. 


Mr. Woolmore. 
aaa 


Mr, Allen, 
Kee 


Mp. Allen, 


A Ey 


Mr, Bell, 
os 


410 Appendix, No, 47 ~SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


Rates of Insurance from Bengal to England —continued. 


15 Guineas per cent. to return £.2} per cent. for convoy to 
Onan Indian ship - = = St. Helega, and £.24 per cent. more for D* from thence to 
England. * 


On Indian “ship or ships,”- - - - D- - - De ee De 


15 Guineas per cent. to return £.8 per cent. for regular ships, 

+ . or £.6 per cent. for extra ships, and £.1, 2 i 
On “ship or ships” generally — - cent, more for convoy. as above, or £.u4 per c 
£-24 per cent, for Indian ships, if with couvey as avove. 


By insaving ‘on “ship or ships” 
generally, and afterwards getting a . . 
cari forthe, goods being in re- A less is sustained of 15 per cent, 
gular Ships, 
Should there be a short interest on the sum insured, a further loss is sustained of 10 per cent, on the 
amount of the short interest. 


N. B. In case of capture or total loss, there are no Returns made, consequently the difference be- 
tween the premium of 15 guineas per cent, on * ship or ships’4generaily, and £.7 per cent. the 
premium op-regular ships, would be a loss of £.8. 158. per cent. ‘ 


As it appears that by insuring on ship or ships generally, the premium is much higher 
han by insuring on specific supe, and the return, in case of loss, proportionably less, what 
is the method the Merchants take to cover themselves from this excess of Joss in such cases? 
—If I have £.100 to insure from India, and the premium is fi percent. I value my 
goods in the Policy at £.100. In that case, if the ship is totally lost or captured, I recover 
net £.03.- If I am obliged to give fifteen guineas per cent. I must value my goods higher, 
in order to save myself in case of Joss, a3 I have no return of the fifteen guineas; ‘t therefore 
value my goods, say at £.125 and then in case of loss I recover net £.105. 68, 3d. The 
result of this is, that in case of loss I save myself; but if the goods arrive, | have paid more 
premium than otherwise I should have done upon a single ship. 


Wo. 14.) 


Mr. William Bell, called in, and examined. 


YOU are I believe a Merchant and Underwriter ?-—Yes. 

The Committee wish to receive from you information respeeting the rates of premium on 
insurances from India to England, in all the different modes in which it is'done by parti- 
cular ships of the Company, regular ships, extra ships, on specific ships, on ship or ships, 
and on Indian ships ?—From India to Europe, we give seven per cent, 

Mr. Bell was shewn the paper which had been put in this morning by Mr. Allen, and 
said those were the premiums that had been given for this season, and {for the two or three 
seasons last past. 


412 Appéndix, No. 47.—-SUPPLEMENT ¢o the FOU RTH REPORT 


Ni * 
nee TONNAGE NOT AFFORDED WHEN REQUIRED. 


‘Obfervations 
on Evidence _ : v ae ee 5 
lating | IN reply to the reprefestation, that the Company, in fome infiances, have not been prepare 

i Private” ade to afford Tonna 2 lg the period ‘when it was required, we are ready to admit that the Com- 
with India. aint may not be altogether unfounded ; but if the Merchants mean to infer that this has 
ey the elult of premeditation or defign oii the part of the Company, we moft decidedly 

dlittlaim the imputation. : . < 
. We are not difpofed to convey our fentiments in the language of afperity, but it is impof- 
fible to avoid remarking, that, from the very uroment of patiing the Charter Ac of 1793 
to the prefent period, the Merchants have never been fatislied either with the indulgences 
us originally gianted them by the Act, of with thuie that have been gratuitouily extended to 


them in various fublequent periods, 


By the terms of the AQ, they were to be furnifhed with Tonnage at fpecific rates of freight, 
whetber the Company were able toobtain it at thofe rates or not. , After a feries.of the moft 
indefatigable exertions, with a view to eftablifh a permanent rate of freight upon the loweft 
pottible fcale; we were unable to prevail on the Owners to accept of lower terms than 
£21. 105. per ton for Bombay, and £.25. 10s. per ton for Coatt and Bay, as a Peace 
freight, to which was to be added in time,of War, of preparation, for War, fach additional 
“expenfes as fhould be aétually incurred. 


The terms upon Which we were obligated to fupply the Merchants was limited to.€. 5. 
per ton outward, and £.15. per ton homeward, in ume of Peace, which in War was to be 
encreaféd in proportion to the additional rates paid by the Company. \ 


© Under this arrangement the Company were fubject to a lols in each year of £41. 10, per 
ton from Bombay, and £.3.10. per ton from Bengal in time of Peace, with a further pro- 
ortionate lols in tine of War, exclufive of the charges arifing from the ron Kentlidgeand 

“ ora 


ae 1 
Bennsrse) s 


With this advantage in their favours the Merchants were not fatisfied. - It was urged, that 
the Company's thips, under prefling exigencies, were {abet to be diverted to political pur- 
te whereby the Merchants were liable to fuffer nveniences and dilappointments. ° 

_ To obviate this objection, the Company undertook. to charter extra (hips, for the purpofe of 

their being more immediately premepsated to the ufe of the Private Traders. The Merchants 

were ftill dilcontented. They looked to oiher-objecs. They complained that the rate of 

_ freight was a check to their exertions; and it was hinted, that if the Company would further 

revile their Naval Syftem, and enterinto apermanent engagement to charter’ fhipsfor agiven 
“number of voyages, fuy tbr eight inflead of four, as had been the former. prattice; and alfo. 

» condition that thefe vellels thould be kept sonfanilgemplored in pafling and repailing be- 

. tween the two Countries without avy intermiffion, the erchants of this Country, as wellas of 

Tndis; would build fhips, and tender them upon reduced terms.. The Company liftened to this 

. faggcition, and Advertifements were iflued both here and in India, inviting tenders accord- 

ingly. In this Conntry fome offets wero made and accepted; but in India (notwithfanding 

, all that has been faid about Indian flipping) not a fingle propofal was receiv Fora 

detailed account of the principles and views by whieh theCompany were governed in'form- 

ing thele arrangements, we take leave to reter to the paragraphs that were fabmitted to the 

- confideration of the Board of Commifiioners for the ‘Affairs ot India, under date the 15th Fe- 

broary 1802, which are already before the Committee *. From this document it will -be 

feen, that no effort has been wanting on the part of the Company to afford the Private 

i Traders everyaccommodation that was in their power to bellow, of that the Merchants could 

; owith reafon of propriety expec. 4) ax) ‘ 

That the Company have not at all times and under all circumftances been able to effect 


the objedt, not lets of their. own’ than the Merchants withes, will not, when confidered in’ 

* “combination | the fingular etents that have occurred during the laft ten. or twelve years, 
be thou; : ry. War hagalways an-unfavovrable influence upon the opérations 
of sae and during its continuation the be concerted plans are liuble to be deranged 
by exigencie as little to be forefeen as'avoided. = a atl s 


enhanced rate of freight, sere iebtereey that in ftating the fact, the Merchants ought 


rs from 21 May i801 to 30 March 
ETS. i 


ae 
ee 


page G4 pri 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 133° 


Piece Goods to any confiderable extent beyond the Company’s rewular and aceufiomed Im- 
ports, fay, 800,000 pieces per annum ; fince it is fen, thet un addition of 400,000 Pieces 
per annum in three years, brought this deteription of goods duwn near 4o percent: Butir 
is neceffary to obferve, that the evil of this rivailhip has not merely been coulined to the 
markets athome. The Company have equally fuffered fiom the couipetition that hus been 
excited againft them in the Aurtings and manufadturing difiriGs abroad, where eayernels of 
demand has unavoidably led to encreale of price; and wliat is no lefs to be regretted, the 
fabricks have in fome infiances been fo fhametully debafed, that, as one of the Company's 
Agents has jufily obferved, the original ftandaids are no longer to be fen?” The Com- 
pauy’s Records both at Bengal and the Coaft’are full of complaints on this heads they are tou 
voluminous to be introduced in this place; we fhall therefare infert only the follewing: 


“ The indulgence of Trade on Piece Goods was originally granted to individuals under the 
exprefs ftipulation, that they fhould not interfere with the Company's lnveftment; but 
we lament to add, and experience has eltablifhed it to bean undeniable fact, that the 
forbearance with which the Agents of the Private Traders have Leen permitted to fettle 
themfelyes in different parts of the Country lias not failed of being productive of ferious 
prejudice to the Company’s manufactures; for their object pee qian tothe purchate 
of goodsof any defcription, it becomes @ matter of uneoncern whether the gusdity or 
dimentions are deficient; and the natural cunfequence of fach an evil tends to cromeait 
“ indifference on the part of the Weaver, who, being certain on thefe occafions of obtaining 
a Bet price for his Cloth, adopts without remorle the fraudaient praGice of making ule 
“ of bad materials; and we have reafon further to believe, that the confiituents to whom 

fuch goods are ultimately configned, are liable to fultain a Jofs from their imperfections.” “ 


“The fecond prominent evil-of which we had caufe to complain, was the great diff- 
“ culties occafioned by the interference of the Private Traders in the provifion or the Com- 
“ pany’s Inveliments, and the ruinous debafement of the fabricks, both proceeding from 4 
“ competition of a particular junture, that admits of no delay, and confeqnently obliges 
“them to purchafe whatever they can procure, however inferior in ils quality ; of which 
“ urgent neceflity the Manufaéturer is perfectly aware, and {eruples not to avail bitnlell’ to 
“ the utmoft, by vending a debafed manufacture made up with the advances he has received 
“ from the Treafure of the Factory.” ‘ 


No. 


Obfervanions’ 


on Lvidence. 
relating to” 


Plivare Trate 
with’ Lndiay © 


h April 
Taos. 


We cannot clofe our obfervations on this ftaple article of | the Company's Indian Trade, ‘ 


without adverting to a circumftauce which is too important to be overlooked. x 


In a letter from the Governor General Marquis Wellefley, to the Secret Committee, 
7th April 1801, his Lordthip fiates the neceffity for colar amount gt the {nvel- 
ment for 1801-2; and obferves, that in order to guard againft the evils which might atteud 
afudden and confiderable reduction of the Indian Inveftment, the advances for which, ifued 
throughout every part of the Country, furnifh ultimately a refource for the payment of 
the land revenues, and by withholding of which difficulties might occur in realizing them, 
ithad been found neceffary to efford the Public an aflurance that “ the arrangement adopted 
“in the laft year by the Order in Council, 19th Sep tenia ay for allowing the Export 
“ to England in private fhips, would be continued in the enfuing feafon.” ‘ 


Of the propriety of admitting individuals to fupply any deficiency that. may arife in the 
provifion Pe ee for the ee market, doh tbe Ghipant are enabled to afford the 
needful funds for that purpofe, there can be ee ee an The Board of Coutroul, ina 
letter from Mr. Broderick, their Secretary, dated 25th March 1802, fuggeli, “ that his 
« Lordfhip be informed, in reply to his letter, that the jompany periectly agree in the fen- 
“ timents expreffed by his Lordibip in regard to the evil cor Dace that are likely to 
« enfue when the Company's Iuvettment is much curtailed, ifthe Publie were not allowed 
“to fill the chafm. The clals of Manufacturers, as therein remarked, is entitled 2 
« conftant protection and encouragement of the State, otherwife that ufeful and. ible 
“body of men might experience diftrels, the fabricks be debafed, valuable branches of 
“ manufadture, now fupported by the Company, be wholly abandoned or materially injured, 
«and the Country fuffer from the diminution, of that fupply of fpecie, which is now regu- 
“larly furnifhed through the chatinel of the Company’s advances. ~ oe 


“ We were glad to find that the Governor in Council had taken care to prevent the she 


“ ration of thofe evils, or to alleviate their effeéts; and that with this view, it was deem: 

« necelfary to afford every pollible encouragement to the Private Merchant, in order that he 
« might be enabled to fapply the place of the Company in the market, and to fimnifh that 
« fupport to the Manafaéturers which could not proceed from the Company’s funds.” 


Of the correctnefs of this principle there cannot reft the fhadow of adoubt, Tt conftitutes 
the only true and fabfantial around upon which every portion of this valutble branch of the 
Company’s Commerce ought ever to have been conceded. But what was the fact?) Thi: 
Merchants of India, mindful only of what they thought to be their own immediate interett, 
inftead of affording relief to the Manufuéiurers in the vatious Vactories and Auraugs febor- 
dinate to the Company’s more immediate, government 5 inttead of making up deficiencies 
in the ufaal and well known fabricks of which the Company’s Invefiment haye long been 


compofed, and which were about to be curtailed 5 intiead of filling up that chafin which the 


semporary embarraflinent of the Company hud created, and thereby fupplying the eae: 
“. we 


: ‘on the Affaics of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, » 193 


= —== 


+ The following Fifteen Numbers, are APPENDICES to the foregoing 
. © OnsERvaTions.” 
as 


No. 1. 


East India House, 12th November 1806. 
Terns and Coxprtioys under which the East India Company are willing to furnish Tonnage, 
exclusive of that to be provided by the Act of the ggd of His present Majesty, cap. 52. 
1.—TIAT the applications for tonnage be received on the first Wednesday in the months of 
September, December, and March in each year, and that such applications be indorsed, 
“ Private Application for ‘Tonnage ;” and that any application made in the intermediate months, 
unléss Fequired by advertisement, will be considered only in the ensuing quarter. 


2.—That all applications be made by the persons who actually ship the goods, and not by any 
agent or clerk, and specify that the said goods are bona fide intended to be sent to India on 
account of the persons making the application, or on commission received from persons in India, 
whose names must be inserted in the applications; and the person making application must 
engage to verify the same by affidavit, if so required by the Couft of Directors. 


3.—That every application do specify the tonnage of measurable and heavy goods respectively, 
the particular articles of which each species of tonnage con the Presidencies to which they 
are to be consigned, and the periods when the same will be ready to be shipped. , 

4-—Thag no material deviation be permitted in the articles of tonnage specified in any request, 
after such request shall have been granted. ' 

5<—That no application for a less quantity than’ one ton be granted, 

6.—That the Court of Directors, in order to encourage the export of a sufficient supply of 
necessary articles for consumption in India, do not intend to restrain the exportation wholly to the 
letter of the Act, which limits the articles to such as are of the growth, produce, or manufacture 
of Great Britain, but the Court reserve to themselves the power of limiting the exportation of 
articles which are not of the growth, produce, or manofacture of Great Britain, or the exportation 
of which by individuals is not permitted by the Act, to such quantities as the Court may judge 
proper, And they farther reserve to themselves a power to reduce the quantities of any particular 
description of goods applied for by any individual, which may appear to them to operate to the 
exclusion of others. ¢ 

7.—That not more than fifty chests of wine, or fifty hogsheads of beer belonging to one person, 
be laden on any ship. 

8.—That the tonnage of wines or chests of liquors on freight, be calculated at two chests, 
containing twelve dozen quart bottles each to the ton, and not at three chests to the tou, ws has! 
occasionally been the practice heretofore, 


” : { 
9:—That the Tonnage of Carriages on freight be caleulated as follows, vis. 


A Coach or Barouche = - - = = __, 10 tons 
Chariot - Ft = ptoulabe= coe 8 
Phaeton + * 4 = e, 6 
Curricle - ,- 5 = - é ah 
two-wheel Chnidorte ice ite uae. Pee 


10.—That not more than two four-wheel carriages, or four two-wheel carriages, be laden on 
any ship, nor any oné house be permitted to ship more than one carriage on each ship. 

11.—That if quicksilver be allowed to he shipped oa freight, no expense or risk thereby 
be incurred by the Company or owners of the ship. 

12,—That the peace rate of freight for goods shipped in England on extra ships for India, 
be at a rate not exceeding £.5. per ton; and that such additional freight be paid for goods 
shipped in England in war, as the circumstances of the time may render necessary. 

13.—That the peace rate of freight homeward shall not exceed {.11. per ton; and that 
such additional freight be paid on goods laden in India on extra ships, in war, as the circun- 
stances of the time may render necessary. 

14.—That wine freighted from Madeira to India, on the Company’s extra ships, be at the rate 
of £.5. per pipe of 110 gallons. i 

15.—That the same rate of (reight be paid for wine sent from Madeira to any partof India, both 
in peace and war. 


151 & 182. Mim " 16. That 


250 Appendix, No. 47S UP PLEMENT ¢o the FOURTH REPORT ~ 


16.—That the freight of wine brought from India to England be £.8 per pipe in time of 
peace, and £.12 per pipe in time of war, and that this freight be paid previous to the delivery 
of the wine in England, and charged at the above. rates respectively, whether the pipes contain 


the full quantity or not. ‘ & 

17.—That persons requiring tonnage for wine from Madeira to be landed in India, or to be 
carried to India and from thence to England, be permitted to lade in articles for Madeira, freight 
free, to the amount of the tonnage they may be dllowed in wine, and that two pipes be cal- 


culated equal to one ton. 

18.—That the ships be allowed to remain at Madeira two working days for every twenty 
tons of goods they may have been permitted cither to carry to or receive on board at that 
island (the days of arrival and sailing not included), and thatif the agents of the shippers shouli 
not complete their lading within that period, the ships do preceed on their voyage, and the 
freight paid in England do thereby become forfeited. 

19.—That all persons do make a deposit in the Company’s treasury, within fifteen days after 
their requests to ship goods or wine shall have been granted by the Court of Directors, of the 
amount of freight chargeable on such goods or wine at the rates above mentioned, under the 
regulations of the Act. 

20.—That the Court of Directors do reserve to themselves the right of allotting to any of the 
sbips in their service, bound to the respective places of consignment, the goods or wine in such 
proportions as they may think proper; at the same time, the Court will endeavour to comply, as 
far as circumstances will admit, with the particular wishes of the proprietors, respecting the ship- 
ping of their goods or wine. 

* 

21,—That if the goods allotted as, above-mentioned be not sent on board the ships, previous’ to 
the day appointed by the Court for the ships clearing out at the Custom House, the freight paid on 
such goods shall be forfeited. 

22:—That should the produce of such goods or wine be paid into the Company's Treasury at 
either of the three Presidencies, or Bencoolen, bills will be granted on the Court of Directors, on 
the terms of the season allowed to other individuals, _ 

29-—That the proprietors of goods shall be exactly on a similar footing with the Company, in 
respect to short delivery, as is contained in the terms and conditions under which the ships shall 
have been engaged, 

24.—That each shipper of goods, jointly with the Company, shall be entitled to all allowance for 
ship damages and short delivery, not exeeeding £.4. per ton on their respective tounage; that is 
to say, £.4. per ton to such persons who occupy the like proportion of tonnage out and home, 
whether the damage be on the outward or homeward goods, and £.2. per ton on the outward 
goods, and the like sum on the homeward goods, when they belong to different proprictors, 
averaging on the whole at the rate of £.5. per ton on the builder’s measurement, agreeably to the 
terms under which the ships sball have been engaged. _ ‘ 

25.—That in all other cases the owners of goods will be subject to the same decisions and 
determinations only, as the Company themselyes are liable to. 

26.—That the tonnage of all goods (except the articles before mentioned) be calculated accord- 

_ ing to the computation of tonnage used by the Company. 

27.—That three days at least shall be appointed by the Court for shipping goods on board of each 
ship appointed to carry out the same, and that public notice shall be given, at least three days 
before such day of shipping, by the officer for private trade outwards. 

28.—That not any order will be given by the officer in the private trade department outwards, 
for goods allowed to be shipped on freight, until the several petsons who are permitted to export 
‘the same shall have delivered into the office an exact account of the tonnage of each article which 
they have been allowed to ship. 

29.—That before any goods shall be shipped, the same shall be registered with the officer for 
private trade outwards, in books to be kept by him for that purpose, which registry shall describe 
the marks and numbers of each bale or package of goods to be shipped, and the amount of the whole 
tonnage allowed to the person so shipping, and all guods which shall be shipped without being so 
registered, will be considered as goods illicitly shipped, and the goods will be subject to such seizure 
and forfeitures, and the owners, shippers, and agents concerned therein, to such forfeitures and 
Penalties, as any person shall be subject to by law, for carrying on trade toand from the East Indies 
without the Company’s licence. 

30.—Thit the said officer for private trade outwards, upon such registry as aforesaid, shall give an 
order or licence, under his hand, for the shipping of such goods, whieh licence, together with the 
goods, shall be carried to the East India Wharf to the proper officers there, whe shall examine the 


same, to see that the packages containonly the sorts of goods of which notice shall have been given, 
} and 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 137 


and that tLey do not exceed in tonnage the quantity of goods allowed to such shipper; and all goods 
‘exceeding the allowed tonnage shull be returned and taken back, unless the Committee of Shipping 
of the said Company, upon special application, shall see fit to allow the shipping thereof, which it 
shall be competent for them to do, upon previous payment of double freight for the additional quan- 
tity of goods shipped, exceeding the quantily appertaining to-such sbipper as aforesaid, if the same 
shall amount to one ton or upwards, or single freight if under one ton. 

31.—That after the goods shall have been examined as aforesaid, the same shall be sent from the 
‘East India Wharf on board of hoys to be employed by the Company, the water-side charges and 
hoyage being previously paid by the owner of the said goods, in deftult of which payment, the 
goods may be stopped. 

32.—Thaton the goods being shipped, bills of lading shall be signed for the same, in triplicate, 
by the commander or purser, which shall be delivered to the shipper of the goods, or his agent, 
the persons who sign such bills of lading being allowed, if they think proper, to add the following 
memorandum, in regard to the delivery of the goods at their consigned port, viz. “‘ To bedeli- 
« vered at the consigned port, provided the destination of the ship shall not be changed by the 
« East India Company, or their agents abroad, or by the act of any of His Majesty's officers.” 


No. 2. 


ACCOUNT of the Number of Tons of Privilege Goods laden on the Regular and Extra Ships, 
and the Ships taken up in India respectively ; arrived Seasons 1804, 5, 6, 7, and 8; distinguishing 
the quantity of Tonnage and the rates of Freight charged thereon, 


‘Season 1804: per Ton, 
Privilege Goods - + perRegularShips ~ = - 8 Toms - = at £LAj7 10 — 
os, Dee on - - — - - - 138 — - = at 23 12 — 
Privilege Goods - - perExtraShips - - 3985 — = at ae 
“97 a Peete 8 Ee nt ts gol — = = at 5, 
a - D-- - = Se ee a ae a2 — - = at 16 — — 
Privilege Goods -  ~- per Ships taken up in India, 2,398 — - = at 2110 — 
eh i Aoi) te hee eT $— -' = at 4 

Season 1805: 

Privilege Goods + + per RegularShips - == 18 — = + at 4 
=) = (eer - - _— - - - 3968 — = - at 29 10 — 
Privilege etn - - per Extra Ships ~ - 278 — = - at u—— 
oe Si aa ee Puen) 4 
wo POS ere b) Bree eeee Ean a0) co mal 4—— 

Season 1806: 

Privilege-Goods - - perRegularShips - ~ 22 jhe = at 4 — — 
-_« | DP = ss - os - - - a - > at 39 — — 
-~- - - -_—_— - - - ao— - - at go 10 — 
oa Soe i Pe TR be eS } eee ie 
nee Bed) re- 

duced to £. 33. 

Privilege Goods - + perExtraShips - + 1,386 — = at 4 — 
Bilge ope "=~ | pat et Rp be RA OEE Be 

Season 1807: 

Privilege Goods - - per RegularShips - - 640 — - - at go —- — 
mow Dee Ree GES ote ht a= et wy — se at 32 5— 
-- oO le hha) ee OP an Gls SEARS = 2 ae at 47 — — 

iat? afterwards redu- 

s ced to £35. 5- 
Privilege Goods - - perExtraShips - - $405 — - - at “4—— 
-- be =) Kon - ees =) *, Sa) BOT2 4 Oe - at 20— — 
= = Digs tea bi Fy — - i = 9436. — = - at 2 15 — 
es ee 94 — 7 at 24 — 

Season 1808: 

Privilege Goods - - per RegularShips - — - 56 - = at go — — 
oF Den = ch l-) ace eect GU ee Dai at go 10 — 
Privilege Goods -* - perExtraShips - - 2,822 — -  - at 22:15 — 
es ie een Sega ES 9 See wat Pree 


Total Tons - - 27,378 
- ——— | (continued) 


Appendix, No.47-——SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


138 
General ABSTRACT and Average rate per Ton, for the five Seasons. 
per Ton. 
Total Privilege Sends Pe Regular Shins et 8 Tonsat- -£1710—]| £140 —— 
EE Ee - - 138 — at- 25 12 —| °3,956 16 — 
sora. = eee ee Ae Shes wits el at- - 24 480 — — 
Stee bese he Rokr: dette - 306 ~— at- ~ 29 10 —| 11,682 — + 
‘eee eels So. ele Seeman feta - - 718) — at= = 30 —.—)] 21,540 — — 
Bem alae tm SOP elim iperiale ar pie = 2,334 — at-‘- 30 10 — | 71,187 — — 
Stes =) ine eee sete lint ete. ate dak Saha de 9.8 ea 675 10 — 
wa diet) sive tS DY gee Ste Oa 099 = tat a after= J eg 
wards reduced $¢ : 
= he eiges os) DP quiere oe oe yn titee trla 189. com, AEI> Se [p47 ditto 3.854 — — 
Total Privilege Goods per Extra Ships - > 4,263 — at- - 11 ——] 46,893 —— 
ee ee ee DP nee ee he ey 208, eatin 2 2 — 412 
- ieee ie 3 — at~ - 14 — — | 116,312 — — 
=) pute a av Sa So ih 3 —at- - 6—— 352 —— 
. aye Sere SSeS —at-'- 20 — — | 59,440 —— 
~ -- ers peel eet — at - 22:15 — | 96,89 10 — 
~ 2s - stam) pole eee — at- - 4 ——} 3,216 —— 
Total Privilege anal npanshipataker upin India 2,308 — at- - 21 10— | 49,622 — — 
~ ee eee - se eo tee 3 — ae = ae R—— 
Total Tons - - - + 27,378 5395300 16 —~ 
Deduct tonnage and freight of Wine- - 275 7188 — — 
27,103 532,172 16 — 
= ———- in ; 

Deduct freight returned Season 1806 - - = - £.11,086 1 4 

ee ee we ee BOF > o41 2 8 
— 12,927 4 — 
£1 519,945 12 — 


Average rate of freight per i on ao qeemene Jaden (exclusive of Wine) for the 

above five Seasons - 

The average rate of freight er ip on the tonnage dae (exclusive of Wine,) for: 
the above five Seasons, pus ta the above sum ok. 19,927: 4: had not been 
remitted, would have been - 

Ayerage rate of freight per ton angie. tonnage Iaden (exclusive of Wine) 
_on.the Regular Ships for the above five Seasons ~ 

Average rate of freight per ton on the tonnage laden (exclusive of Wine on 
the Extra Ships, for the above five Seasons =~ ( 

vor Ws of freight per ton on ue ai ae up in Tada, ean exclusive 
of Wine - = = *- - ‘Seoul hha 


Fast India House, 
18th January 1810. 


No. 4. 


W, Raincock. 


AMOUNT and FREIGHT of the Company’s Indian Investment in five years, from March 


Sale 1804, to September Sale 1808, inclusive. 


: "SY Sate‘Amount. |. = Rreight. 
yer 
Fine Goods: . Roe Sao 
Bengal Raw Silk! - = ~~ | £. 1,603,663 £-59.411 
py - Piece Goods = me 2,190,075, 200,364 
Coat- - D? = = =| 3,617,607 255,805 
Surat- - De =! alge 264,045 46,291 
Spice |= = 5 =) eV ar 185,279 83,326 
Cinnamon - - Gestuge 381,822 69,893, 
Groff Goods: 
Drugs, xc. - = = 665,877 315913 
Sugar - - Bey yan 937,648 669,123 
Saltpetres = 900,092 650,607 - 
£-8:747,968 | £. 2,306,823 : 


ABSTRACT, 
‘Bengal Raw Silk and Piece Goods | £. 3,704,638 


Proportion of 
Freight 
o Sale Ament 


Cent, 


eT 


£- 2655775 al 


Coast and Surat Pi Gi 16; 
Spice, pil Cincacaca «os 24495713 bse) he 
Gruff Goods:! 
* Drugs, Sugar, and Saltpetre © - | 2,509,617 1,635,733 - 


£- 8,747,968 


£.2,306,823 


‘on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 139 


. » No. 3. 


AMOUNT and FREIGHT on Privilege Goods, from September Sale 1804 to September 
Sale 1808, inclusive. 


Proportion of 
Sale Amount. Fright | to gud kant 
per Cent, 
Indigo - = = = > | £-3:942,723 £: 176,580 4:47 
Piece Goods ~ - - - 1,131,410. 54203 79 
RawSilk = - + = 498,274 12,197 44 
Gruff Goods; as 5:572:407 242,980 4,36 
Cotton Drugs, &c. ~ - - 821,537 203,456 24,50 
£.6,393:044 | £446,496 6.98 a 


‘Of the above, there were imported in the oun Regular Ships of the Season 1806, and sold 


in March Sale 1807, 
’ 
Indigo - = - + =| £-504,043 £- 43,803 DS 
Piece Goods - - - - 11,607 © 1,249 10,78 
Raw Silk - SoM - 47,869 2,887 592 
£653,519 |  £+47.939 733 


‘Phe remainder was laden upon ships of various descriptions, Company’s and Extra Ships 
chartered in England and in India; viz. 


Indigo - - - - =[£-3,348,680 £.132,777 3:97 
Piece Goods - - - -]| 1,119,803 52,054 4:73 
Raw Silk : - - = 450,405, 9,310 2,07 

£- 4,918,883 | £+ 195,041 397 


No. 5. 

A Catcutation, shewing at what time a ship must sail from England, and arrive in and depart 
from India, so as to perform Eight successive Voyages, without intermission, in the shortest 
possible time, 

THE data assumed for the Calculation are these = 

‘That three weeks be allowed for the receipt of the cargo outward. 

That if the ship sails from England in the favourable season of the year, her passage shall be 
considered to consume from four to five months, say, the mediuin of four months and a half; and 
in the unfavourable season, five months. 

‘That six:weeks be allowed for the landing of the Europe, and the receipt of the Indian cargo. 

That if she is dispatched home inthe unfavourable season of the year, her passaze be con- 
sidered the same as in the voyage outward, at five months; or in the favourable season, four 
months and a half, 

That three weeks be allowed for the delivery of the cargo homeward ; and, 

That one week be allowed for surveying, and making sny trifling repairs she may be found to 
stand in need of, previous to her departing upon an ensuing voyage. 


151 & 182, Na The 


140 Appendix, No. 4; SUPPLEMENT 0 the FOURTH REPORT 


The favonrable seasons may be considered at nearly the same period of the year, either from 
England or from India ; viz. from the middle of November to the middle of March. 


In this mode, the ship will perform her voyages in the following manner ; 
Foal 


In the First In the Second Jn the Third Tn the Fourth 

Voyage. Voyage. Voyage. 4 Voyage. 

On the On the On the On the 
She will begin to take in goods| 24 Oct. 1810.] 9 Nov. 1811. | 25 Nov. 1812. | 13 Dec, 1813. 
Sail from England - -]15 Nov. - —| 1Dec. — |17 Dec. — 4 Jan. 1814. 
ArriveinIndia -  ~-  -]|29 March1811.] 15 April 1812.] 2 May 1813. | 19 May — 
Sail from India - - -{a1 May —|28May — |14June — | iJuly — 
Arrive in England =  =}11 Oct.  —} a8 October— | 14 Nove — | 1 Dec. — 
And be cleared - - -| aNov. —]aBNov. — 5 Dec. — |22Dec. — 


She will then have performed four voyages, sailing from England in season, and uniformly return- 
ing out of season ; allowing her then a month for her repairs. 


. 
In the Fifth In the Sixth In the Seventh | In the Eighth 

Voynge. Voyage, Voyage. Voyage, 

On the On the On the On the 


Shewillbe ready totakeingoods, 23 Jan. 1815. | 9 Feb. 1816. | 28 Feb. 1817. | 18 March 1818, 
Sail from England - = =| ag'Feb. — | g March— | 22 March~ | g April — 
Arrive in India + -  -)29June — | 18July — 6 Aug. — | 24 August — 
Sail from India + == =| a1 August — | go August— | i8Sept. — | 6Oc, — 
Arrive in England ~  =/ a1 Jan. 3816. | go Jan. 1817. | 18 Feb. 1818. | 6 March 1819. 
Andbecleared - - +/ 1 Feb, — | 20Feb, — | 11 March — | 27 March — 


But say that ov account of the cargo homeward being more yaluable than it is in general 
outward, the preference is given to her sailing from India, rather than this country, in the 
favourable season, the operations will then stand as follows: 


In the First In the Second Ta the Third Tn the Fourth 
Voyage. Voyage. Voyage. Voyage. 
On the On the On the On the 
She will begin to take in goods | 12 March1810.} 28 April 1811. | 17 May 1812, | 4 June 1814. 
Sail from England - -|3May — |20May — 8June — | 26June — 
Arrive in India - - -} 30cth — | 20 0ct. — 8 Nov. — | 26 Nor, — 
Sail from India - - ~-|15 Nov, — 2Dec. — | 2: Dec. — 8 Jan. 1815. 


17 April18i9. | 6 May 1813. | 23 May — 
gMay — | 27May — | 13 June — 


30 March 1811. 
20 April — 


Arrive in England =~ 
And becleared - = = 


She will then have performed four voyages, sailing from England out of season, and returning in 
season ; allowing a month for her.repairs. 


In the Fifth Th the Sith In the Seventh In the Eighth 

Voyage. Voyage. Voyzge. Voyage. 

On the On the On the On the 
Shewillbe ready totake in goods| 14 July 1814. } go July 1925. | 17 Aug. 1816. | 5 Sept. 1817. 
Sail from England = |g Aug. — | 2vAug — | Sept. — | a7Sept. — 
Ariveintudia -  - — -! 5 Jan. 181g. | 21 Jan. 1836. 8 Feb. 1817. | 27 Feb. 1818. 
Sail from India = = 2/45 Feb, = fg March — | 25 Mar. | 31 April — 


Arrive in England - -| aJuly — | 19 July — 7 Avg. — | 11 Sept. 
2g July — | gAug. — | 28Aug, — | 2Qct. — 


Acdbecleared - 


14t 


on the Affiixs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


tidy un 


syouryy ot 


+hawnigay oz 


Lronap ptt 213 uo puooas 241 pun ‘i2qoyyg.yr¥ ay) uo painp sum 
epoyyna 08 09 fire Kays fi uoinpy wi aE, *83 9572 249 Sv ‘poniaadas so papciad vayen powvp 240 sisvq 9881/,] 


“ONL 


“ond 


“oma 


“yady S 


“sqounyy & 


“Srenuep 1s 
*orgt 
spitasaanigy 
woy |WY8 OL, 


*yoaeyl S 


*havniqag & 


*Kumnvee on 


sqoueyy $ 


“Saeneqag § 
*olgt 


‘saquuaaagy 1% 
“Gogt 


Saenigag 6t 


ro OF 


sfanung $ 


Keqruog 


- = Aequiog pur enapeyy 


2 - — weSuag pur 


Avg pue yseoD 


Avg pure aseoa, 


Aeg, pur ysvog, 


Kequiog 


"Ss 


Aequog 


jeSuag 
uophag 


a --- 


- = = ssoy sawer 
Bunox creyji ay uyor 
youdy merit Ay 
sedooyy 382035) 
oss py samnee 

Teysreyy yor 

= = napa, 252099 
Haqdwxy sapaexay 


= = waquogy dry 
TeSnopoeyy pietng 
d 


uyyouery vosuiqoy uyor 
TLQSON WEYL AL 
~ Avy sauey 


LHS VuLx 


woqwapy Aidayy 
uoswies yooig uyor 

= wosianeg are)! A\ 
sanqao[saqdossuy 3 uyor 
+ Horsasg uoysy sapeyo 
= = “unt ‘ayao7] aor 
> wosaqoy Japuvxayy 
payeyy Aruazy 
uapsumy ayor 


ee ae pene od are : > ypouunyg Aauayy 
¢ = = weYtig sopieqD 
cong te | coma of | cong 1s f-toquinonq 4] = = - keg paw aceon | canta 
- = = Keppataqoy 
. a one 7 ‘ Pee = = unuEpy some 
Sad OIG oF jf rssqmarag £4} ‘oniq 8B Pury pur yseog Ve SS peanlaAN Epica 
18 BULYD 2 NApootag ‘eaepoT] > AQ Uyor somee 
‘ond gt sont of ‘og B6 | *aoquiaaoy £ & SAS RAP ea eae : = Bretg wy 
ol 

= = Gopury januteg 
saaqmianag Sz} s{eq ob | -uaquison LZ} saqnag fo} - = vuryg pue Auquog |4¢- uwosumg asioyy Andy 
“Gogt | tGogt *6ogt aye[D Arpueyg wey Ay 
z Br SdIHS UVINOD 

ou wn a4 oy, souoyy Seis 0, near woUY 99 94, ssiuamnzisnog, -stopurarmog, 


= cso ‘serenyty soraee 
eperog, UWOspaeyanyy 
bso aauan yf, “EY s9]e 

“hea ‘amoung 1.040% 
= sbsa ‘wossagy (EYE AN 
= ‘bso tow dg wey Ay 
bso plepeatog, wey, 
= tbsa ‘ayao7 uyjor 
shsa “orgy y, aoapuy 
thea otarry woqoyy 
= “bea ‘aosse]y weiyys Ay 

*bsa ‘sa mouang, H19G0Y, 
= tbsa ‘s0anpy uyor 
= = bso ‘Anj9 xyag 


*bsa 


“bso ‘qyarquayy, aaspuy 
shso ‘suryaery pease Ugor 
= (digg s,Aardatog) 

= *bsa soapy uyor 

= tbsa aydury ugog 

= = *bsa ‘sonny uyor 
sbea fenanyy Souyig stouesg 
sbso *sureupt Ay w9qoy, 
= anshiy auee ssipy 

= “baa “wequog, Sapy 

= “bso (qutag pana y, 

= -bsa ‘wuyuog £auag 
“bea aravayay Magy AMID 
yang ‘umsBiQy Waqoy 1g 
sbsa ‘jjaaquary, soipuy 
sqanq “AsPALy WELL AA 
*bsa ‘ajieptsiog wospieyory 
= “bso Seyory west Ay 

= ‘bso ‘uospnyy waqoy 
sbso fsurysery |Teosvg Uyor 
-qreq fut AA Waqoy 1g 


sssoung Seseuryy 


‘Gogt uoseag ayy soy do 


nayey sdiyg Sumoyjy ayy soy payurodde ga WIL 


“9 oN 


-afeunoy, 
posonmiig, 


6ogt 320 wh 


uaqueuneg 
Lop ploy 
<5 = dete 
- — Adjsuag wen Ay as, 

- auy 
vaeiq, 
sapuy 
uSias9a0g 
soytaydueg 
su, 
pileptaquinqyoN 
= ee yteppayy 
~ uoySurysery uaqdayg sg 
= - > sepurxayy 


AaqaXq 
= = quavulA ag Jo pte 
iat SBUOITF, 

= nour 
apse) yousuyy 
HOS Planch 
QTISRD WANg 
darsaoualy, 
= xi@my gd 

+ v0ysaig 
Md WEEN 
hese. =) = uo fog 
nBuy ysoqy 


PAQ}PO AY 
*SReS Saray 

ueI9 
auorsuiydyy 
vas[ayour Ay 
voistury 
uapurey jar 
prgyxa gy, 


Peek alae 


( 


“SdIHs 


toner terete 


HERE H ME BAH Y MOMENI NONE Hoe 


safieSop | 


142 Appendix, No. 47—SUP PLEMENT 4 the FOURTH REPORT 


No.7. 


Goods in Private Trade, and Goods on Treigitt, by tue following Ships, are to be sent to the 
East India Wharf on the uader-mentioned Days; viz. 


Ships boarded, 

snd consequently oe eg 4a 
mend peers her Shipping-day. Shipping-day. Shipping-day. 

. 1809. 1809. 1810. 1810, 
December 21 -| Euphrates - - | Friday, 29 Dec. | Friday, 5 Jan.) Thursday, 18Jan. 
~~ D* - — -| Huddart- - +] De - - D® De’ - - D* | Wednesday,17 D* 

1810. 
-- dD? - — -| Alexander -  -| Tuesday, 2 Jan. | Thursday, 11 D° | Friday, 19 = D° 
<2 D 9g -| Tigri Thursday, 4 D° Daton 2 oe, Tracey reg p 
BoD «a7 - Monday, § D® | Monday, 15 D° | ‘Tuesday, 93- De 
-- D® ~ 28 - pb - - D D®° = - b*! Wednesday,24'D 
“No. 8. 


Mr. Gilmour, 
PLEASE to receive from Mr, A. B. the sam of Ninety Pounds, being Freight for Ten Tons of 
Goods to be shipped for India. 
Bast India House, 
the 1gth January 1810. (Signed) J. Morice, 


Accountant’s Office, Treasury. F 


No, 9. 
THIS is to certify, That Mr. A. B. has paid into the Company's Treasury Ninety Pounds, 
being Freight for ‘en Tons of Goods to be shipped for India. 


East-India House, 
the 1gth January 1810. (Signed) J. A. Gilmour. 


John Morice, Esq. 


No. 10. d 
Mr, Warren, 
Mr. A. B. has been permitted to ship Ten Tons of Goods on board the Huddart, for Bengal, 


and has paid Freight for the same into the Company’s Treasury. 
East-India House, } 


the 13th January 1810, (Signed) J. Morice. 
No. 11. 
Mr. Milburn, East-India House, the 12th January 1810. 
U send to the East India Wharf, on 17th instant, the following Goods on account of 


iam Milbura, to be shipped on the Ship Huddart, for which Freight has been paid. 
Consigned to his Order at Madras: 


Mark. No. Length. Breadth, Depth, Cubical Contents. 
Feet. Inches. Feet. Inches. Feet. Inches. Feet, 


Fifty Hhds. Beer. 
Messrs. Gear and Foster, 


YOU may receive the above Goods, on the Bearei’s paying you the Water-side Charges; and ship 
the same, after they have been examined and sealed ty the proper Officer, if the measurement 
shall appear to you to be agrecable to the aboye Dimensions, of which you are fo return me, at 
your convenicnce, the necessary Certificate. 
x Iam, Gentlemen, 
Freight duly paid. Your most humble Servant, 
Accountant's Office, the 180 (Signed) Aug! Warren. 


The above being agreeable to Order, have been received. 


: on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. , 143 


— No, 12. — 
Gentlemen, > East Indi ia House, 12 January 1810. 


“Mark No. > Please to Weigh and Seal from 
Mr. Milburn, Sixty Boxes, Tin Plates, Weight three Tons. 


‘And ship the same on board the Euphrates, on Account of Mr, Will™ Milburn, for which Freight 


has been paid. 
Iam, Gentlemen, 
Freight daly paid, Your inost humble Servant, 
Accountant's ia (Signed) — Aug! Warren. 
sthe 180 


Messrs. Lloyd and Gear, 


— No. 13.— 

A VIEW of the TRADE carried on with the British Settlements in India, from and te 
London, Foreign Wurope, America, and the various Ports and Places in Asia, exclusive of that 
‘of the English Fast India Company. 

) 


LONDON. 


Imports into London from the British 


Exports from London tothe British Settlements 
Settlements in India, 


in India, 


Mreh andize. ‘Treasure. Toran Merchandize. 


Sa. Rs. + Sa, Rs. Sa. Rs, Sa. Rs, Sa, Rs. Sa, Rs, 
1802) 64,44,531 | 21435503 | 85,80,034 1,33,99.443 992 } 1,33,91.435 
1803) 51,50,230 | 23,76,847 | 75,2707 1,42,35,030 |= == | 142,335,030" 
1804] —51,80,623 18,79,372 70,68,005 1,05,20,722 {- = = | 1,05,20,722 
2805] —62,45,919 | 23,88,731 86,34,650 73:75:756 | - =. = | 735755786 
1806] 9 1,35,966 14,901,236 | 1,06,27,202 5} 1;01,92,598 | - = >| 1,01,92,598 
3,21,66,269 | 102,731,689 | 3,24,37,038 59579145559 992 | 5557-15551 


=i 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Average per annum $+ 804,157 


Wiich consisted, in 1805; of 


Malt Liquors, Wines, and Spirits = 15,04,077 | Piece Goods - - 482,433, 

Apparel,as Boots, Shoes, Hosiery, Mngige 8), ab oeee ecacitea 45,28,420 
Millinery,llaberdashery,Piece 758,008 | Raw Silk - - - - 7:87,106 
Good Cotton - - 7:435:487 

Metals - - - - 360,628 ieee: tones - - *1,79,101 

Cutlery - = = - - 237,050 - = - 54478 

Tronmongery == = - a 122,952 Siehants Teeth = - < - a $3,078 

Perfamery lis cae 96,493 | Drugs 89.558 

ks <HA = - = 1,15,311 Guin Ginger, Shellac, & Sandee 1,19,411 

Carriages: (<= y= se i 1,224434 

Glass Ware aS 5 t = = 4:99,383. Imports re-exported: 

Jewellery and Plated Ware - = 1,42, 664 a , EB Nea Sa 

Oilman’ Stores =, - =. =. a) gaa panera pedi seat Sues ios 

Broritions - © = §+ =  3419,260 Spice, BS cre RT aaiay 

Sadle - = ee 8,03,992 ‘ 

avd Set case ee ae Provision, Bo Books, Piece Goods, ees 

Saran a) Cae eo outa igs, & 

Woollens - = = 1s = 1,481 Teese as 

ochineal = = = = = 82,075 Sa. Rs. 73,75,766 

Coral - - - - = - 64,029 SaRpeR 

Cordage - - - = - 43,883 

Quicksilver ee 48,335 

Sundries + - = . = 10,90,185 


Sa. Rs. 62,45,919 
=e. 


a51 & 182. Oo 


Appendix, No. 47—-SUPPLEMENF tothe FOURTH REPORT 


DEN MA RE. 
Esports from Denmark to the British Imports into Denmark from the British 
Settlements in India. Settlements in India, 
© . 
Merchandiaes | "Tresare. Tovar. Merchaudite. | ‘Treasure, Toran, 
Sa Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs, 
1802 $130,225 6,300 $42,525 
1805 50519) - = = 5304519 
1804 43:01,149 | - a & 13,01,149 
1805 SH238y—r | = FOS. 6,54)233 
1800 H7BASB |= 7s 478,153 
17,89,075 | 3.245,248 | —_30,35,283 32,7479 | 6,300 | 32,80,579 
Average per annum = - - £44;749 a £81,857 
——— 
Ne aes cousisted, in 1805, of i Which consisted, in 1805, of 
randy = = at is x 3,327 | Piece Goods - mp rage et 337,632 
Cordage . - - - - 235434 ndri ie - s a | 
cae 5 Ss 4 fF i TR Sundries 916,604 
Claret = - - - = bd 20,443 
cy = eer ery oseegai Ate Sa. Rs, 654,233. 
coh Walle: ae ie 2,367 
jee ~ - = - = 15306 
- - i. ~ 13,158 
ie sid Steel} atP btn ir fm 14,278 
8 ices - - - - - - 16,123 
ine.'= =) 553 WVeatoes | f= 5,31. 
sSundries - + 2 + = ae c 
Sa. Rs. 1,87,647 
3 FRANCE, 
‘Exports “rom France to the British Settlements J Imports into France with the British Settlements 
in India. . 


in India, 


‘Treasure, Toran. | Merchandize. 


Merchandize. 


Sa. Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. 
1802 145405 415545, 11,230 
180g 1,72,601 “| 1,732,601 - > 
1804. ine a Sa 
1805, ‘. & 


27050 || 1,87,09§" | 2,14,146 


- 


HAMBURGH. 


Exports from Hamburgh to the British Settle-.| Imports into Hambargh from the British Settle- 
ments in India, : ments in India, 


Merchandize, ‘Treasure, Merchandize. | ‘Treasure. Toraty 
- » Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa. Rs. - Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs, Sa. Rs, 
ie 168031 = = = 1 4,88,039 327713 |- = | =| > 3270793 
1803] - < < Zate eres * ° =|". . Ps ia 
oe 16,960. 347,775 364,735 1,90,650 |- - =| '3,90,650 
1805 |" “ys we — 1,57:9902 |= = +} 57,902 
1806} - et, eee es F bg = ete - see 
1- 4 6,76,265 
-| £16,907 
« 7 — 
Which consisted, in 1805, 0f ~ 
Piece Goods - = +) 455430 
Indigo . = - - 28,835 
Sugar - - += = = 54,804 
Ginger - - = a 2,121 
Sundries a Se TY 
Imports re-exporied - - = 15199 


“Sa, Rs. 1,57,902 
=— 


ou the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 154 
. LEGHORN., 
Exports from Leghorn to the British Settlements | Imports into Leghorn from the British Settlements 


in India. ; in India, 
| Merchandise. | Treasure.” ‘Toran. { | Merchandize. | ‘Teeasure. Yoran, 
Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs, Sa. Rs. Sa, Rs, Sa. Rs, Sa, Rs. 
2802 23,484, - - 235484 1802{ - sete - _: 
1803) - me ole e - - 1803| - és -|- - - - 
1804, R709 f, Sek Ay jog Fi80g}- 2 = ele ee et 
1805} - - “= - - _ 1805) - - we - - _ 
1806} - = -]- + = - Boi} - = -|[- = = ~ 
1. [—- furans 
| $1193 ‘and 315393, _ _ — 
LISBON. 
Exports from Lisbon to the British Settlements | Imports into Lisbon from the British Settlements 
in India, in India. 
Merchandize. _ Treasure. Toran. _Merehandize. ‘Treasure. Toran. 
Sa. Re, Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs, Sa, Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa. Rs. 
592339 | 14:56,697 | 20,49,036 [1802} 28,03,744 |- = =| 22,93:744 
457,895 | 33:89,330 | $847,225 }1803] 29,97,851 |- - =| 29,97,853 
5:29,253 | 23,18,968 | 28,48,221 $1804) 29,906,955 [- - -| 29,096,955 
6,46,979 | 26,48,736 | 32,95,735 {1805} 19:58,269 }- = -| 19,58,269 
914713 | 24185144 | 39,32,857 ]1806] 19.43,635 | - = > | 1943,635 
31,41,179 | 122,31,875 | 153,73,054 127,090,454 - 127,90,454 


a OS 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 
Lisbon Wine 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Piece Goods 16,24,663° 


Madeira j= > = s+ Indigo = + = = = 152,297 
Port © 2 2 - # Gran - 6 eee 28,000 
Goa Paper So Re ee CasiaBuls - = = = 9,050 
Sundries s+ © ~ = Drugs - - - - + 18,218 
Cotton = - - - - 1,16,c0o 

646,979 | Sundries - - - - = 7.443 

19,45,601 

Imports re-exported - - 12,668 

19,58,269 


MADEIRA and TENERIFFE. 


“Experts from Madeira and Teneriffe into the 


Imports into Madeira and Teneriffe from the 
British Settlements in India, 


British Settlements in India, 


Merchandize, | ‘Treasure, 


Sa. Rs, Sa. Rs. ‘Sa, Rs. 
3802{ — 2,96,620 2,96,620 
1803] 342,426 342,426 
1804] §,63,022 5:63,022 
3805] 414,827 4:79,827 
1806 3,660,774, 3:66,774. 
19,83,669. | 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 
Brandy- = = * 5 = 2,639 
‘Madeira Wine ~ 8 422,188 


4914,827 


. 146 


Exports from Cadiz into the British Settlements 


in India. 


Merchandize. 


Sa. Rs. 


1802 4,29,660 
1803 4:31,672 
1804{ 4145,050 


Exports from America to the British Settlements 


in India. 


‘Merchandise. 


49:36,963 


Which consisted, in 3805, of . 


Arrack and Rum - 
Brandy and Cherry Brandy 
Claret and Port - = = 
Madeira’ Wine 


3 Per and Plank, 
* Spices 
Gilman's Stores 

. Piece Goods 
Broad Cloth 

~ Sundties 


eo oe 


bared! 


Cvveertetrecrtenae 


CADIZ 


13,70,262 


in India. 


Sa. Rs. 


_ 4135286 
20,810 


Sa. Bs. Sa, Rs. 
485,265 } 50,55,453 
2,78,658 | 52,00,540 
650,497 | 42,54.049 
15,84,077 71,04,282, 
19,38,466 - | 97,893,180 


inner 


313:97:514 


AMERICA: 


Sa. Rs; 
551405798 
54:791198 

Me 49045546 ‘ 
86,88,959 

117,21,646 


303,344477 


* 15584077 
oe mmemened 


Sa. Rs. 


Appendis, No. 47-—SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


Imports into Cadiz from the British Settlements 


41351286 


493/134 


20,810 


Imports into America from the British Settle- 
ments in India. 


Sa, Rs, 
524473240 
69,201,966 
* 38,98;794 
TIS AL 
101,20,989 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 
Piece Goods  - - = + 60.43,576 
Sugar ~ oe ew & 19,69,261 
Indigo ~ = + # #  2,13,890 
Cotten - = He 418,599 
Camphire =  -. 6 s+ = 6,416 
Ginger owe -- 13,511 
Seeds Senne “as tim 1,000 
Hemp, Flax, and Twine - ° 13,051 
Canvasand Gupnies = == 22,810 
Sundries - + - - 25,037 
—— 
78,97,144 
Imports re-exported: 
Tea = 2 6 2 ow ® 7310 
Allom we tt 15755 
Drugs - 2 8 ew 3.218 
Coffee ee ae 
Oils + - - - aed 900 
Rice - - + + © * 6,598 
Pepper ee ee ee a 19,566 
Sundries ~ te + . is 18,045 
y ieee 


Sa. Rs, 


* 52,90,490 


79,10,624 
36,98,794 
77:15,914 


“401,429,057 


337:03,600 | 4554176 | ssesra7e 
SS, 


7715212 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 147 
COAST of MALABAR. 
Exports from the Coast of Malabar to the British | Imports to t=Coast of Malabar from the British 


Settlements in India. Settlements in India. 
nares 3 — 
Merchandize. ‘Treaspre, \ Torate Merchandize. | ‘Treasure. Toran. 
SuRs | So Rs | Sa. Rs, $a. Rs | fa. Rs | Sa. Rs. 

1802} 13,46,817 8,400 13,55217 41802 6,34.374 io - =} 36,84.374 
1803]  6,02,169 1,358,033 740,202 1803] 243.523 | 1,83.969 38,447,492 
1804} 7549-338 2,08,066 75571404 4,90r | B 

1805} §,75,001 1,681,474 736,475 [1805 87,56, B27 | 

1806) 667,255 4:30,278 10,97:426 5 


39:40.580 946,144 
ee 


Which consisted, ia 1805, of Which consisted, in 1805, of 
PieceGoods - = - = = 96,626 | PieceGoods- - > 14.70,9u8 
Beetle Nut + - - - + 1,353,616 | Sugar - - . - % = 12,51,44t 
Horses - = = = = = 44,800 J RawSilk - 5 = 2 + 28,38,652 
Drugs - = = = = = 12176 | Indigo eget at oe PS. atoag 
‘Tobacco - - - - = 94,154 J Grain - ste 388,990 
Frot + - = + = 33,896 J Bengal Rum - 2 2 
Coir and Coir Cables 2 = 15.214 | Cauvasand Gunnies - = + 
Liquors= = = = = = 5450 f Cardemoms - = 
Grain = = + = = = 19,787 | Long Pepper - eee 
Timber ~~ . ie = - 11,187 Se x < ch bie 
Tea ee ee - = 19,780 - - - ee 
Lamatta- + + - - - penned Nats - - eos 
Nankeen rd Ginger es 
7 ral = - - - - - 

ice ye el 38,89. 
Naval Sanghi? Vise bog ol ewe Buaahee es. Be ees SS gon 
Sundries ta a Imports re-exported : 

Woollens + = = = © 4,573 
Liquors - - - - - 95.416 
Sundries © = = = = B7443 
57,606,827 

——e 


NORTHERN PARTS of GUZZERAT. 


Imports into the Northern Parts of Guzzerat 


Exports from the Northern Parts of Guzzerat 
from the British Settlements ia India. 


to the British Settlements in India. 


Merchandize. | ‘Treasure. | Torat. Merchandize. | Treasure. 

Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs, Sa. Rs. 

1802] 70,49,517 $03,618 73)530135 43,86,623 16,91,754 

1803, 23,634 1,550 50,25,184 | 1803} 34,18,567 24456527 

1804] 67,88,323 | - = = | 67,78323 |1804| 56,80,144 | 17,38,341 
1805} 79,22,128 - ose 79,22,128 $1805} §8,43,308 17,209,582 75:72,819 


1806] 84,02,809 23,301 84,26,310 $1806] §0,40,723 $4:53.105 84,93,823 


357,76,411 3,28,669 | 361,035,080 


243,69.165, $2,58,238 | 326,27,403 


Which consisted, in 1805, of Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Cotton - - - - = 46,89,, Piece Goods - —- = > 858,817 
Piece Goods SS te aaaaeor Sugar and Jaggery rc Uy oe 
Grain - = = = = = 6,69,542 | Raw Silk + - * - RAR 
Cornelians - = = = = 62,931: | CocoaNuts-  - - + 2.04, 

Oils - - - - - = 1,35,628 | Pepper - - - - "  2,80,663 
Ghee - - 8 es * = 124,845 | Drugs - st tt 54,285 
Putchuck - - - - «© 61,547 | Elephants Teeth - 8 5 1,68,238 
Seed abn Poe: ee 81,999 | Cochineal - + = = a h78so4 
Sandal 2 2 FL 62,812 | Woollens - - + + + 1,73,675 
Jinjelly Seed = = = = = Go,6ag | Copper = = = = = 183,310. 
Shawls 7 rt ee 62,812 f Iron = = asa gg 
Drugs -  - = + = ©  aozigf Steel - = = = = Saas 
Mowa - = =  * = = 45,567] Metals. = = = = zag 
Tebacco - se ee 31,837 | Beetle Nuts- - - - = 10g a6 
Hemp - 5 = = = = 17,383 | Liquors = = = ton 45g 
Horses - ct 14950 J Dates-  - - - = = 15 4.284, 
Hides - =  - 2 = « 14,843 | Grain- = = = gag 
Sundries - - - - - 129,565 | Embroidery ES = es > 72,701 
Copra- = ee 505 

79:22,108 | Bengal Ivory =. 2 = 

Goonies = 6k - - 

Ghees - 2 2 2 

Spices 5 wt 
Sundries + = = = = goguay 

PT ne 

58:43,308 


351 & 182 Pp r — 


148 Appendix, No. 47.—-SUPPLEMENT ¢0 the FOURTH REPORT 


SURAT and VILLAGES, 


Exports from Surat and Villages to the British | Imports into Surat and Villages from the British 
Settlements in India, Settlements iu India. 


. 
Mercbandize, | Treasure. Tora. Biitendhs| Raku, | Porare 
ae. a nf 
Sa. Rs, Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa, Rs. | Sa. Rs. Sa, Rs. 
182] 13,30,614 110,216 14:40,830 }1802] 17,76,399 5574097! 23,515379 
1803 | 9,58,126 15,996 9574122 [1803] 13,87,168 3,69,239 17,586,407 
1804 | 13,24,801 26,567 13,51,368 1804] 21,92,481 12,74,059 33:66,540 
1805 | 23,295,355, 1,05,768 24431,123 $2805) 20.46,265 14,00,421 34,066,686 
31806] 92,71,152 1,83,023 24,54,172 [1806] 2¢,75,805 1,91,935 | 31,67,749 
82,10,047 441,568 86,51,615 103,78,118 $7,710,625, 140,88,743 
EE 
Which consisted, i in 1805, of Which cousisted, in 1805, of 
Coulee - - - - ~ — 10,83,893 | Raw Silk + - - - : 6,16,664 
PieeeGoods - = = - PieceGoods - + - «= 275,261 
Hemp - fe Sugar - 2 = = © — g,29,401 
Red pnd White Lead - ee Beetle Nuts - fe se 65.944 
Tin - 3. séeu, te Cochinal - - - = = 69,908 
Horses - of oe - - Quicksilver - - soe 85,722 
a Copper = 2 = = = 35,535 
21,123,384 | Tin - - - - oe 10,918 
Sundries - + - = 201,971 J [ron = 2 5 se 36,965 
—- Woollens - = - = © 12,235 
23,295,355 | Elephants Teeth at! 356354 
Liquors - + = 2 = 19,388 
Pepper - 2+ - © + 25,604 
Old Brass - = + + = * 40,370 
Sundries - - - - - 3,865,000 
20,46,265 
— 
BOMBAY, 
Exports from Bombay to the British Settlements | Imports into Bombay from the British Scttle- 
in Tartia. ments in India. 
Merchandize. | ‘Treasure, Tora. Merchandize, Treasure. Toran. 
Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. | Sa. Rs. 
7802] 14,48,007 15,057 14,63,964 27,902,116 80,083 3873099 
180g} 13,89,765 2,52,909, 1364.1,674, 16,859,435 41,691 17,28,5 
1804] 12,40,510 12,5 3,966 25,00,476 4445.44 6,826 44,5) 330 
1805| 13,36,583 31,05 :474 24,42,057 3473,275 13544 34,86,819, 
1806} 16,89,261 607,191 | 22,96,451 34,93,682 29404 | 35:23,146 


69,311,026 | 31,33,595 | 100,44,622 358,90,949 1,72,778 | 160,63.727 
——— 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Piece Goods - 2 5 =  2,36,591 | Cotten - =e + — 9,96.932 
Cotton - = + = 1,51,806 | Piece Goods - = = + 5576,716 
Sugar and Sugarcandy = > 411,065 | Pepper = - = = + 385,682 
Metals cf es - oe 67,676 | Grain - fe 8 - + 637,833 
Quicksiiver - 2 2 es 83,447 | Fruits - - + © =  3,86,869 
Cochineal ~ 2 = se 81,347 | Beetle Nuts - = =e 76,667 
Beetle Nuts se 8 69,421 | Provisions - = = = = 48,010 
Spices - - . - - 25,474 | Spice - . - - ° 41,014 
Salt - - 5 -. - + 22,252 | Naval Stores - >= = = 31,396 
Woolless - - +2 . «© 20,202 | Sandal Wood - = - = 341177 
Liquors - * = = = 49.561 | Chillies  - - - : os 39,159 
Elephants Teeth ~ - - - 55,762 | Tin - - - S oF oe 10,918 
Cocoa Nuts - - - - 25,489 | Sundries - - - - + 295,879 
sg 7 ee ee 20/494 Imports re-exported - + © 1,212,104 
ee 18,31 —_—_— 
Sundries = = - 2 -~ 39) 1683, $473,275, 
a 


13,36,583 
=! 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. ido 


COAST of COROMANDEL 


Exports from the Coast of Coromandel jo the 
. British Settlements in India, 


Imports into the Coast of Coromandel from the 
British Settlements in India. 


| Merchandize. ‘Treasure. Vora. | Merchandiz: Treasme, Torat. 
Sa, Rs. Sa. Rs, | Sa. Rs, | Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Re. 
1802) 11,09,032 |. 50,700 } — 11,595732 $1802] 25,14,705 36,62,938 
1803] 983,075, 751420 i 10,58.495 J 1803; 26,44,703 26,44,175 
1804] 10,74,558 ator | 10,75,659 {28041 27,28,197 | - 27,28,197 
1805] 10,91,123 31,789 Hl 11,22,912 9 1805, 24,66,174 | - 24,066,174 
1806, 11,66,245 $,86,130 | 155529375 48,25,428 


84:24,033 | 545.140 | — 59.69,173 


Which consisted, i in 1805, of 


Sandal Wood and oil 


Piece Goods = + - = 2,29,385 | Grain - os 
Chanks - = = =  2,00,637 | Piece Goods = = = 
Copper and Nais> 2 22 aggggo] RawSilk - = 5 ee 

pice - =: 70,708 | Sugar and Jaggery - ef 
Brandy, and Cherry Brandy - = 87,309 f Opium - - ote 
Woollens = = +) + = 46148 Seeds = eee 
Metals - = = + = = aggsa}Gingr = - - = = 
Drugs - + = = =) = «65,898 } CanvasandGunnies - - + 
Nav ‘a Storss- = - 5 31,249 | Long Pepper - = = = 
‘Timber and Plank = =) - = 54,325 


22445 


25,561 


Red Wood - 26,884] Sundries - - - = = meres 
Imports Teexported s 

941,682 | Broad Cloth = = - oe 7,522 

Sundries - - + + - 3,49.951| Metals - - + © = 45486 

10,91,033 24,66,174. 

—aae 


NORTHERN CIRCARS. 


Exports from the Northern Circars to the 
British Settlements in India, 


Imports into the Northern Circars from the 
British Settlements in India. 


Merchandize, Treasure. Tora. |, Mezchandize, | Treasure. Toran. 
Sa. Rs, Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. . Sa. Rs. 
1802] 22,65,133 91526 22,74,659 [1802] —7,07,432 13,974,037 20,81,469 
1803] 29,753,782 8,028 29,81,810 [1803] 5,590,948 2,71,487 $21,435, 
1804]  18,87,150 6,942 18,904,092 f1804) * 5,38,926 62,278 6,01,204 
1805| — 24,95,214 65,350 25,60,564 {1805} — 4,79,440 321,704, 5h 44 
1806 14,90,359 12,412 15,02,771 |1806 4,70,798. 21,281 492,099 


1,11,11,636 | 1,02,258 | 112,13,806 1 | 27456544 | 18,40,787 |  45,07.331 


Which consisted, in 1805, of Which consisted, in 1805, of 
Grins 5 2 ee 17,64,040 | Grain a - 61,698 
PieceGoods - - - «+ 559146 | Sundries - + + - 81,077 
Sundries - - + - « 1,72,028 Imports recexported: 

Liquors + ees 14678 

24,95,214 | Metals - - . Py = 93/122 
Tin Ware~ > + ee 2,677 

Hats - "se - 2,738 

Oils Bi vey ae ee ee, 9,500 

Gums Sf Stak 7,028 

Pepper - 5 = 2 « 12,968 

Sundries - + 2 2 4 93,051 

4:79,440 


so Appeadis, No. 47.—-SU PP LEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


150 


NORTHERN DIVISION of CARNATIC. 


Exports from Northern Division of Carnatic into | Imports into Northern Division of Carnatic from 
the British Settlements in Iudia. the British Settiements in India. 


Merchandize. Treasure. Toran. Merchandize. | Treasure. Toran. 

Sa, Rs. - Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. | Sa. Rs. Sa. Bs. 

1802] 6,24,853 eee 6,24,853 1802 1,24,783, - ee 1,24,783 
1803 529842 - 28 - 5,29,842 41803 14,216 - 2 14,216 
1804} 4.91,696 8,590 5,00,286 {1804 30,972 2,324 $3,116 
1805, 5,609,340 41,279 6,10,619 1805, 23,412 1,859 25,271 
3806] 4,30,058 | - = = 430,658 | 1806 15,484 | - > > 15.484 
| 26,486,589 | 49,869 | 26,96,258 2,08,687 40185 | 42,12,870 


Which consisted, in 1805, of Which consisted, in 1805, of 
Grain = = 5 = = = 265,430 - Se ta ed oe te Pe . 
Piece | Goods - = == + 102,450 Shake BER ae cat SS gare 
phacco TTT 72789 Sundries - = 7586 
‘Woollens - - - - 018 586 
Sundries - + 5 6 neues Imports re-exported = = = 2,642 
569,340 25.412 


FORT ST. GEORGE. 


Imports into Fort St. George from the British 


Esports from Fort St. George into the British 
Settlements in India. 


Settlements in India. 


‘Treasure, Merchandize. ‘Treasure, Tora. 


Sa. Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. 


Sa. Rs, 


1802] 260,326 | 13,74:037 | 16,34.363 [1802] 29,34,395 | - - -| 29134395 
3803) 426,355 277,839 704,194 1803] 3252475 |- - =| 3252475 
B04] 4:04,549 311,788 716,337 [1804] 23,48,435 66,449 24914,884 
3805} 5,38:501 | 13,29417 | 18,62,978 |1805| 29,55,137 13,976 29,69,113 
1806} — 5,63,632 455.212 10,18,843 [1806] °29,74,005 5,463 29,79,468 


144,64,447 85,888 1,455,335 
NESS 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 


37:48,292 | 59,36,715 


| 21,883,423 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 
14,06,035, 


Metals - - - - - 1,91,419 | Grain - + - - - 
Grain ~- = 8 © © 41,247 | PieceGoods - - - =  11,28,326 
Liquors 5 - 2 ee 575367 | Tobacco ae tot rer = 31,321 
Drugs = ee ee 33733 | Cotton - - + = «© 30,065, 
Spices es 23,831 [ Pepper - -© - + «= 27795 
Timber. - - © - # 28,550 | Jaggery = - + + = 27544 
NavalStoress - = - = 14,598 | Fruits) - - = =< = 255714 
Piece Goods Se Mee Ue 12,856 | Sundries - sf se 24155 
Fruits, - - - 2 e 11,535 
Sundries - - - oe 1,138,495 Imports re-exported : 
Liquors = - 2 = + 61,423 
5:33.561 Spice - oe ot ee 44/541 
Opium 2 2 2 ee 31,137 
Sundries (i a ae. 22,894 
29,52,187 


—= 
=— 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, 151 


Southern Division of CARNATIC. 


Exports from Southern Division of + Imports into Southern Division of Carnatic from 
the British Settlements in India. » i the British Sctutements in India, 
ndize, ‘Vreasure. | Turan. | | Merctandize. £ Toran 
sats | $a. Rs. | Sa, Rs, Sa, Ra, Sa. Rs. 
1802 45275843 | - = - 427,543 {1802 307,064, 307,604 
1803 9,07,082 97,528 10,04,6t0 41803 3051.26 3,97,668 
1804] 5,99,022 | 51,836 6,531,508 1,814,889 2,08,044 
1805] $457,031 150,582 i 357.140 377,140 
1806} 3,356,985 i 32.373 j 95,083 
| 
Which consisted, in 1803, of Which consisted, in 1805, of 
Pie Goods - - - = 963,192 Piece Goods - + = = 148,992 
ndigu - - - - - wall Grain + - - - - 1,83,1 
Sundries oc - - - pas Sundries - + - ee lane 
—————-—{ Imports re-exported = = 315775 
357931 = 
mare] 377,140 
od 
TANJORE. 
Exports from Tanjore into the British Settlements | Imported into Tanjore from the British Settle- 
in India. ments in India. 
‘Megehandize. Treasure. Torat. Merchaudize. Treasure, Tovar. 
Scat aes | fe 
Sa, Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. 
Soares Viet) ee |e ce ees 
4,92,03: 3.9) 96, ' 3 8:2, ol » * 15 255 
3:47,993 78,929 4,26,922 et 226,844. 1,856 928,790 
7:61,396 341205 795,501 J1805{ 1,78,451 |- = | 178,451 
31751043, 4/307 3791350 1806 | 1,70,428 f= = = | 170428 


1,856 10,98,647 
ee 


25,90,088 | 1,39,078 27,29,166 


10,96,791 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Grain - - oe - - = 5139331 Piece Gocds = = - = 1,03,019 
Liquors- = - = - - - 58,137 Indigo - - fr ee 29,824. 
Metals- - ~ - - oe 12,842 Sundries - + + - oe 16,685 
Drugs- + + - - oe 16,585 Imports re-exported - + - 25,923, 
Cotton - - - - - - 10,948 _ 
Fruit - - - - - - 31,492 1,798,451 
Spice - - - - . - 16,602 otic 
Sundries - = - = - 84459: 

761,396 


TINNEVELLY and RAMNAD. 


Imports into Tinnevelly and Ramnad from the 


Exports from Tinnevelly and Ramnad into the 
British Settlements in India, 


British Settlements in India. 


Merchaudize. | Treasure, Toran, Merchandize. | Treasare. Torar. 

|__| ies elisa 

Sa. Re | Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs, 
1802 TALL, 252 | 34,576 725,828 1,18,320 1,18,320, 
1803] 5.48430 }- = + 548,430 1,07,087 1,07,987 
1804} §,76,704 |  ° =  5,76,764 1,80,857 1,86,857 
1805] — 3,65,290 24 31056374, 335/712 1,355712 
1806 7m] 8415543 3:58)731 358,732 


907,607 9,07,607 


Which consisted, in 1805, of Which consisted, in 1805, of 


PieceGoods > - = = 917556 | Pepper, - = + = = 56,732 
Gries cece. - = 47373 PieceGoods -  - =e 12,223 
Jaggery - - - = = 25,725 Sundries -  - 2 -  f 97,031 
Cottns 2 = 2 = = 11,618 
Sundries - - = 2 = 63,018 1,05,086 
penniaee Imports re-exported - 20,726 
’ 3.65,290 
poenennetaelis 195718 
seiiansicsehsanemisy 


151 & 182. : Qq 


252 Appendix, No. 47—-SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


Province of MALABAR, with FORT ST. GEORGE. 


Exports from Province of Malabar into the | Impqrts into Province of Malabar from ‘the | 
British Settlements in India. British Settlements in India, 


Merchandise. 


Sa. Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. 
1802] - - . - - = _ ee 
1803] 18,67,395 18,647,395, 17.80,529 17,380,529 
WBoKp> - - - _ =e 
1805] - - - - - . _ Fash 


17,80 529 


Exports from Canara into the British Settlements 


Imports into Canara from the British Settlements 
in India, i 


in India. 


| Merchandize, 
Sa, Rs. Sa, Rs, Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. 
1802] 2,090,752 J- - + 420,752, 1,903,771 
1803 54,285, 1,896 56,181 7:397 79,595 
1804] — 1.25,265 51952 1,31,217 2804! 242,641 2,986 245,627 
1805, 89,721 30,095 1,19,816 }1805! — 1,52,929 24432 «1,55,364 
1806] 381,413 1,748 3,83,161 $1806, 1321,361 744 122,105, 


39,691 | 6,92,870 7,06,429 


9913,127 13559 


Which consisted, in 1805, of Which consisted, in 1805, of 


PieceGoods - - + - 23,734 f Grain - + + - 54576 
Sugar Jaggery - - - + 16,163 | PieceGools- - - = + 27,805 
Beetle Nuts - - - - = 10,660 | Tobacco . - - = 23,520 
Sundries - - os - = 39,164 | Fruits - - - - - 135390 
Sundries - . - - - 43,638 

89,721 —— 

152,929 

—= 


MALABAR and CANARA, jointly with BOMBAY. 


Exports from Malabar and Canara into the { Imports into Malabar and Canara from the 
British Settlements in India, British Settlements in India. 


‘Merchandize, 


Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. 
1802] = 11,21,650 7,45,832 752,827 
1803} 24,01,717 1:78,544 
1804]  25,88,644 7,36,742 
1805} — 17,65,631 715,263 
1806] — 25,19,268 10,72,657 
4054033 


103,96,910 


Which consisted, in 1805, of Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Copra - oe se Cotton = += += - = 94,083 
Cocoa Nuts st fe Piece Goods - - = - 63,673 
Pepper rr ‘ines S = - 6 - 67,673 
Sandal Wood - + - = Horses - = - = =° 88575 
Beetle Nuts - - - - Liquors + 2 - - - 42,468 
Piece Goods - oe - oe Tron - Paar os. . 26,788 
Gor - = = 2 2 oe Old Bras - - - - + 17,992 
Cardemoms - - - - Copper - . a fe - 41,950 
oe ee i i 4,528 
RIBS As Sie SS By ie Wooll - 8 f= ee 62 
Timber and Plank =>. oon ae ene 2. Sasgao 
Sundries - = - = - Dru; - ee + 20,583, 
Sundries - - = - -  1,80,621 

6,46,514 


—- 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 153 


MALABAR and CANARA United. 


Exports from Malabar and Canara united, into Imports into Malabar and Canary united, from 
the British Settlements in India, , the British Settlements in India. 


Merchandize, Treaure, Tora. Merchandize. Treasure, Tora. 

Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. 
1802] 13,492,402 50,483 13,092,885 [1802 849,603 6,995 8,56,598 
3803 43,23,397 7496 | 43,30,893 [1803] 25,82,198 54447 | 26,236,638 
1804 | 27,13,909 15,109 | 27,29,018 [1804] — 8,90,340 92,029 9,8:,369 
1805) 18,55,352 98,049 | 19,53,401 $1805] 7,99,443 71,181 8,70,624 
1806 | 29,00,681 43/735 29.44.4136 [1806] — 7,00,773 4,93,989 11945762 
1,31,75,741 2,14,872 | 1,33,50,613, §8,22,350 7:18,641 65,409,998 


cOCHIN, 


Exports from Cochin into the British Settlements | Imports into Cochin from the British Settlements 
in India. in India. 


Merchandize. ‘Treasure. ‘Treasure. 
Sa. Rs. 
1802 40,415 
1803 7195 


1804 46,671 
1805 211,166 
1806 11,764 


44175211 


Whi Which consisted, in 1805, of 


consisted, in 1805, of 


Pepper - - - - - 8,042 Tiere Goods - - - 
junds - - - - - 1 ine, Li - - 
Sit lcesieBus = 2 >t M90 
Gum + : - < - 
——a 
ee SESE a ee 
BENGAL 
Exports from Bengal into the British Settlements ¢ Imports into Bengal from the British Settlements 
in India. in India, 
Merchandize, | Treasure. Toran. 
| Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Re, 
1802]  €5,36,739 | 12,44,099 77,80,898 953,860 
1803} — 72,38,763 | 42535749 76,92,522 8,41,778 
1804 | 1,23,83,457 14,539 | 1,23,97,087 8,08,935 
1805 | 1,03,355414 20,185 | 1,03,55;599 8,25,503 
1806 | 1,07,38,443 826 | 1,07,39,269 14,82,860 


49542,996 


17:33;389 


4:72,32,816 4,89,66,205 


Which consisted, in 1805,.0f Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Grain- - + = = =  39,62,288] Piece Goods - - = 1,08,834 

Raw Silk - - - ¢: = 32186,043 Salt - - oe - - = 1,62,305 

Piece Goods - oe . - 1814,5¢9 | Chanks - - = - - 66,869 

Sugar-  - + = - = 430,914] Copper - - + => * 42,094 

Drogs- = = - + = a847g0fTea - = - = = = 45,836 

Liquors = - - = = =  1,40,219 | Horses - 5 = = = 46,000 

Guonies - - - = = 1,0897g{ Sundries - + - = = 213,933 

Ginger = et le 53407 

Spice - - | = = . 68,585, 6,85,871 
Ghee ~ - - oe - - 25,951 Imports re-exported : 

Sundries - = - - = — 3,10,475 Woollen i  . 21,700 

Li - ee w= 0,898 

- 5 = ee 16,250 

a 11,671 

ee ee ee 9,103 

7 5 te = 84839 

7299,838 


phi 


154 


CEYLON 


Exports from Fort St. George into the British 
Settlements in India. 


Appendix; No. 47.-SUP PLEMENT ¢o the FOURTH REPORT 


Impérts into Fort St. George from the British 
Seutements in India, 


‘Treasure. Torac. 
Sa Rs | Ba. Rs. ga. Rs. Sa. Rs. sa. Rs | $a. Re. 
1802} 7,992,166 7476 799.642 $1802] — 4,70,771 60,126 530,897 
1803} —8,37,865 25584 8,40,449 [1803] —7,30,209 345,974 8,76,183 
1804] 7,18,530 95772 728,302 f1804}  12,27,473 66,299 | 12,93,772 
1805} — 7,55,626 1,559,147 95115773 $1805] 13,16,192 13,000 13,529,192 
1806} 945,067 | 317,918 9:62,985 $1806] 14,88,196 55,000 15,443,196 
49,49,254 | 193,897 4243,151 52,32,841 3:49,399 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 


‘Naval Stores - 
Elephants Teeth 
Sundries 


Sundries 


Arrack ~ - mae - Grain - oe 
Beetle - = : - - Piece Goods - 
Coir and Coir Cables - - Metals - . 
Copper - - - oe Horses - + 
Spice - | - - - Sugar =e 

imber = - : = Salt Provisions - 


eeeene 


755,626 | Liquors ~~ 

=== Grain at te 
Woollens - - 
Metals -  - 
Sundries -  - 

ee 


SUMATRA. 


sheet ae 


tener 


Imports re-exported: 


10,66,744. 


1447:054 
29,917 
1,188 - 
20,004. 
515285 
13,16,192 
—— 


Exports from Sumatra into the British Settle Imports into Sumatra from the British Settle- 


ments in India. 


ments in India. 


Merchandize. 


Merchandize. | Treasure. Toran. ‘Treasure, Torat. 

Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa. Rs. 
1802, 2,5 1,928 2,67,862 519,790 [1802 2,06,117 141,000 3547)117 
1803! 267,860 147,903 3555763 J1803] —5,16,181 1444500. 6,60,681 
1804 94,762 54,825 1,49587 $1804] — 3,28,725 95,000 423,725, 
1805| 6,04,256 1,21,819 726,075 11805] — 4,93,401 - oe oe 493,401 
1806] — 3,26,727 1,31,513 4158240 $1806} — 3,42,878 | core 342,878 
14,85,533 7)23,922 22,09,455 18,87,302, | 3,80,500 22,67,802 


Which consisted, in 2805, of 


Pepper - = - - = $65,516 | Opium - - 
Spices es of oe - + %,05,209 | Piece Goods - 
Sundries -  - - ee 33531 | Grain - 
cme Canvas - + 
604.256 | Sundries -  - 

——o 


Imports re-exported 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 


3:20,748 
85,089 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 155 


ARABIAN and PERSIAN GULPHS, 


> In the Bengal Accounts, the Arabian and Persian Gulphs are blended. 


Imports in the Arabian and Persian Gulphs 
from the British Settlements in India. 
Merchandize, 


‘Treasare. Totan. 


Sa. Bs, i Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. 
1802 52,895 12,50,390 12,13,304. 12,13,304. 
1803) $451,233 | 7,88,334 10,68.634 1068634 
1804] 5,04,079 | 9436,431 13,04,275 13,94,275 
1805, 3,709,500 11,68,912 21,85,287 21,85,287 
1806 454,068 17:97,949 Ji 806! 34:38,520 


i 34,238,320 
21,9871 | 


5ST LG 92,09,820 


92,99,820 


Which consisted, in 1803, of Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Horses + - - - 88,209 | Piece Goods - nd 8,485,788 
Cowries - - - - 56,864 | Indigo - - - 200,806 
Copper Nails a a 50,150 | Sugar st 8987255 
Drugs-  - = = 2 = 42,651 | Raw Silk - = - + = 73,994 
Galls « ~ - - - - 17,762 | Grain - - - - - - 3:91,9%8. 
Gums - - - - - - 12,749 | Sundries - - - - - 1,211,685 
Coffee - - oe - - 15,290 — 
Dates + : - - . - 10,886 21,61,456 
Raisins . - . - - 13,265 Imports re-exported : 
I - fe Cloth a) 5,201 
302,847 ices myo te, Cae Mer i 3 
Almonds, Coral Beads, Elephants ion and Nails - = - - pe 
Teeth, Paints, Hartall, Coir and 67,6 Sundries - + - - - 8,270 
Coir Cables, Brimstone, Jewel- 1058. _——— 
lery, Sundries - - - 21,85,287 
comes 


3,70,500 


Exports from Arabian Gulph, Fort St. George, 
and Bombay, to the British Settlements in 
India, 


Imports into Arabian Gulph, Fort St. George, 
and Bombay, from the British Settlements in 
India. 


Merchandize. Treasure. Torar, Tora, 


Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa. Rs. 
1802] 270,391 | 92,55.575 | 25,258,966 20,82,531 20,82,531 
1803 2,42,637 | 15,14,287 | 17,56,924 16,17,050 16,17,650 
1804, 3558515 37:43:359 | 41,01,874 20,75,126 21,07,010 
1805 250,854 | 24,31,044 | 26,82,498 17,68,005 17,68,339 
1806] 301,453 | 21,900,552 | 24,92,005 15,73)237 15,74,452 


14,23,850 | 121,35,417 | 135,59,267 91,49,982 


Myrtr=, es OS Ae 23,287 - - 789,837 
Ofibanum - = - = = 41,245 | Grain = ee t= 6841480 
Coffee- - -~ © = = 10,787 | Sugar rr 26,380 
Grain-  - = 5 = 4,500] Pepper - - = - = 36,391 
Shark-fins -  - = - = 4,695 | Iron - + - 2 ee 41370 
Cloves - es me y208|Lead- - = 2 © = 17,286 
Tortoise Shells - = - = 6,169 ] Coloured Sik - - - + 44.358 
Horss= +» = - © © 8,427 | Drugs er a 43,843 
Sundries - + = + = 1,97,4g8| Tobacco - - = *% = 11,626 
Shawis - - - + = 20,525, 
2,50,83 
aa 16,65,008 


Sundries: 
Sandal Wood, Cotton, Ginger, 
Vermillion, China Ware, 1,02,907 


ds 2 et 


17,68,005 
Stine ase 


+151 & 182, Rr 


156 Appendix, No. 47--SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


PERSIAN GULPH. 


Exports home D° to the 
*ersian Gulph, 


Tn into Fort St. Ge 
gare aa 
Imports into the Persian Gulph from the British. 


Exports from the Persian Gulph to the British 
Settlements in India. 


Settlements in India. 


Merchandize. Toran, 


Sa. Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa. Re. Sa, Rs, Sa. Rs. 
1802 737448 12,22,919 19,60,367 22,387,153 22,37,153 
1803, 940,129 16,309,647 25.79,776 15,10,253, 15,12,253 
1804] 11,52,678 11,27,107 22,79,785 18,902,412 18,94,603, 
1805} 10,81,003 18,54,216 294355219 21,90,686 21,090,686 
1806] 11,35,385, 22,902,521 34027,906 26,98,380 26,983,380 
a! fo 

546,643 | 81,36,410 | 131,83,053 105,28,884 105,33:075 


of Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Which consisted, in 1805, 


= = = = 4,18,400 | Piece Goods - tm 14,68,155 
= + = = 1,84,540f Sugar - +  - = - +, 382,187 
= = © = 1,24,869 | Grav - =e aed = 125,472 
- + + = 91,798 | Drugs - - oe oe 72,301 
- oe - + 29,707 Pepper - - - 51,085 
is ieee a a 18,097 Tot cco 6,223 

ele - - 27,162 ices - - = 3 - 40,7 
- + 2 6 3501 Couton, Yarn and Thread + : one 
ajamii ee CO China Ware Groh eh Be 31443 
Olibanum - - - - + 11,582] Lead - - = - - = 13,212 
Almonds - - - - = 34,927 | Sapan Wood - - - - 24,699 
Rose Water - - - - - 8844 [ Iron - - = = © = 49,807 
Shark-fins - + - + = 47136[ Tin - - - - - = 31,363 
Dru; ee 9,684 | Agla Wood - eee 20,415 
Elephants Teeth = - - + 14,421] Sundries - - - - =  1,23,686 
Sundries eee - + 88,423 a 
_—_ 21,90,686 
10,81,003 — 


ARABIAN and PERSIAN GULPHS~— United. 


Imports into Arabian and Persian Gulphs united, 
from the British Settlements in India, 


Merchandize. Treasure. | Toran. 


Sa. Rs. 


Exports from Arabian and Persian Gulphs united, 
to the British Settlements in India. 


Sa. Re. Sa. Rs. 


Sa. Rs. 


Sa. Rs, 


Sa. Rs, 


1802} 15,29,730 | 42,16,993 | 57,46,723 55132,988 | 55.32,988 ad 
1803) 15,43,999 | 35,81,035 | 51,25,094 41,96,537 2,000 | 41,908,537 
1804] 20,315,272 | 53,02,818 | 73,18,090 53,613,813 34075 | 53,95,888 
1805] 17,029,257 50,84,272 67,86,629 61,43,978 334 61,44,313 
1806} 18,77,906 58,39,054 77,16,960 77:99,937 1,215, TDALNS2 
‘ee 

86,60,264 | 240,24,172 | 326,093,436 289,45,253 289,82,877 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 157 


CASHMERE 


Exports from Cashmere to the British Settlements j Imporis into Cashmere from the British Settles 
in India. ments in India. 


Merchandize. ‘Treasure. Merchandize, Treasure, 


Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs, Sa. Rs. 


Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa, Rs. 


1802} —1,54,203 154,203, 1802 56,126 - - - 56,126 
1803|  1,41.424 141,424 $2803 62,506 |- + 62,506 
1804| 1,213,852 1,313,852 ] 1804. 63,167 | - - - 63,267 
1805) 141,757, 1,41,757  |2805] 1,10,148 - - - 1,10,148 
1806| — 1,55,045 185,045 J 1806 99323 [= = = 99.323 


706,281 3.91,270 


Which consisted, in 1805, of Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Cowries - = = - - Piece Goods - = - - = 69.020 
PieceGoods - = + © = Sundries = - = - = 48,198 
Shawls = © © 2 « 


Sundries . 110,148 


141,757 


CUTCH and SCIND. 


Hmperte into Cutch and Scind from the British 


Exports from Cutch and Scind to the British 
Settlements in India. 


Settlements in India, 


‘Treasure. Toran. 


Merchandise. 


Sa. Rs, 


Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. | Sa, Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa. Rs. 


1802] 13,76,568 245733 14,01,301 12,60,957 2,28,003 | 14,88,960 

1803] 13,99,436 16,686 14916,122, 7,84.418 58,084. 8,42,502 

1804] 29,68,155 27,975 29,96,130 22,83,663 3,75,038 16,58,699 

1805| 26,46,191 }- - ~ | 26,46,291 14,837,568 2,50,372 16,385,939 

1806] 27,63,645 6,834 27,70479 16,74,495 193,405 | 18,67,900 
4511,53,995 76,228 | 1,12,30,223 


Which consisted, in 1805, of Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Cotton . - - - -  15,85,520 


Sugar and Jaggery - + = 845,999 

Ghee - - + + = = 440,709 | Piece Goods = oe = 17.917 
Grain - - - - ~ - —2,67,644 | Raw Silk = - ° = - - — 1,29,395 
OU SS ne ea eS te.. ie 45,477 | Pepper se ee 19,723, 
PieceGoods- - - - = 54798 | Tron = = - 2 + = 24,308 
Seeds - = + = = + 59,853 | Copper = > = es 82,097 
Drugs - + = : - 32,055 | Drugs ee - - - 47,431 
Sundries + - + = + 459596] Grin - - + 3 + | 549143 
“= Steel - - . = fe: ‘* 239518 

64619 | Tin = ee 199885 

: CocozNuts =  - +  - - 48,355 

Beetle Nuts -  - - + - 38.218 

Coir - - © «© = = 30,092 

Sundries - * x 5 - — 1,59,073 


1437,568 
ene 


158 Appendix, No. 47—SUP PLEMENT ¢o the FOURTH REPORT 


BASSEIN and VILLAGES. 


Imports into Bassein and Villages, from the 
British Settlements in India, ‘ 


Exports from Bassein and Villages, to the British 


Settlements in India. 
‘ 


Merchandize. | Treasure. Merchandize, | ‘Treasure. Toran. 
aoe, t 

Sa, Rs, Sa. Rs. Sa, Rs, Sa. Rs, Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs, 
263,214. 2,800 2,66,014 i802 2,47,791 goo 248,691 

4149,686 15,525 465,201 5s23,292 155734 5139025 
4,388,255, 9,100 497/355 589,362 |= + - 589,462 

i 4124,898 | - - - 4524,898 4544.61 3,931 4:45:942 
4,97,806 5,910 503,716 4573,004 1,756 4:74,760 
21,23,859 23,335 22,575194 22,78,159 19,721 22,97,880 


Which consisted, in 1805, of Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Grain - - - oe - -  1,68,028 | PieceGoods + - - - 123,563 
Ivory Ware - eof - - 78,958 | Grain - - - - - 43.316 
Ol - =~ 2 2 ee Tron : + = = 38,269 
‘Timber and Planks - - - Sugar - oe - - - 31,553 
lemp- = see - Cocoa Nuts - oe - - 39,399 
Piece Goods - - - Copia - - - - - 29,359 
Beetle Nuts ee fe Beetle Nuts - - - ¢ 11,761 
Sundries - + - - + Dates = - = = = 16,590 
Pepper - - - - - 942. 
Tivperick - - - - - B80 
Sundries - - - = -  1,04,247 


GOA and the CONCAN, 


Exports from Goa and the Concan, into the { Imports into Goa and the Concan, from the 
British Settlements in India, British Settlements in India. 


Merchandiae. Treasure. Toray. 


| Merchandize. ‘Treasure; 


Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. 
1802} 11,39,099 4:56,349 | 15,95.448 19445,040 34688 19,79/728 
1803) 964,742 388,015 | 33:52757 49,55,060 | 13,71,722 63,26,782 
1804; 7,609,643 12,18,046 19,87,689 66,47,698 | 14,76,459 81,24,157 
1805; 11,33,089 5170446 | 17,03,535 41,67,580 | 523,408 46,90;988 
1806) 16,41,943 833,600 | 24,75543 42,19,209 | 2,24,519 44043798 
| 56,48,516 | 34,605,456 | 91.14,072 219,34,587 | 36,320,796 | 255,65.383 


SSE Ie | Seana 
Which consisted, in 1805, of Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Grain - - - + 3,85,452 | Grain - - - = 10,71,707 
Piece Goods - es - - 287,352 | Piece Goods - + - -  5,98,379 
Beetle Nuts = = = + 94327 J RawSik -  - = + = 691,780 
Hew - eee 93,542 f Sugar me ee + 261,079 
Old Brass ~ aS oS - - 38,609 | Woollens - - - = 134,689 
Sandal Wood -  - ‘a - 24,581 Hiug - - oe - = 1,00,105 
Drugs . - s 7 - 37913 Ora 3 - - - - - StOKS 
er Ware = - - oe 1 eds: . - - - 78,372 
sete - - * - - 16g8 Wine eof oe - - 78,392 
Vates = = 65,388 
11,33,099 | Spices - - - : - 83,869 
a - - 10,051 
Via - - - - - - 25,831 
Liquors - - - - - 83,869 
Cochineal : - - ie 48,342 
slorses ee 559725 
Pepper = = = = 7 56.196 
Sundries - - - + + 568,855 
41,67,580 
a 


onthe Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 139 


MAHRATTA DOMINIONS. 


Imports into the Mahratta Dominions from the 


‘Experts from the Mahratta Dominions into the 
% British Scttlements in India. 


British Settlements in India. 


Treasure. ‘Toran. 

Sa, Rs, Sa, Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa. Re 
1802 76,812 1,28,171 1,28,271 
1803 12,491 T9534 118,436 118,436 
1804 75:175 3,80,834. 98,146 1,01,045, 
2805 73,946 2,00,713, 2,319,212 2,20,617 
1806 1,06,803 2,10,25% 2,58,238 248,992 


4:76,136 2,67,415 7:43:552 8,17,170 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 
Groin = 6 5 = = 170,987 
Pepper - = = = © 23,398 
Beetle - © 4 = = 12,846 
Sundries - 2 « = © 11,981 


9,19 212 
—— 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 
PieceGoods= = = = = 
Cottons - - - . - - 
Woollens — ~ - : - + 
Sundries - = ew we 


TRAVANCORE 


Imports into Travancore from the British Settle~ 


Exports from Travancore into the British Settle- 4 
ments in India. 


ments in India, 


Toran. 


Merchaudize. ‘Treasure, Tora. 


Sa, Rs, Sa. Rs, Sa. Rs. 
1802] - - ef- - - _- _ 
1803] 1,88,795 |- - ©  1,88,795 59,383 59/383 
1804 43387 Jo ot 43337 | 1804 9,854 9,854 
1805 1,26,214 | = - = 126,214 91805 51058 5958 
1806. 9,163 | + - oe 9,162 §1806 1,193 3,123 


76,318 


75,318 


3,67,508 


3:67,508 


Which consisted, in 1805, of Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Beetle- - = = = * 53,609 Piece Goods ee s+) 
Spice = = 5 = = @ 38,404 Salt = 5 = 5 se 73 
Frit - + + © © = 11,904 } Cottons - - 2 2 « 181 
Timber ¢ + © = * 6,110 ff Sundries © = = = = og 
Drogs- = 6 © = & 6,054 ereaa 
Pepper - - - - 2 2,203 pamakiss 
Grain - oo 8 et 2,180 
Chanks = - = - * 1,492 
Sundries - - - ot re 4 NES 

1,26,214 


151 & 182, Se 


160 


Appendix, No. 47—-SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


TRANQUEBAR. 


Exports from Tranquebar into the British 
Settlements in India. 


Imports into Tranquebar from the Brjtish 
{ Settlements in India. 


Merchandize, | Treasure, Toran. 

Sa. Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa, Rs. 
1802 206,242 - - 2,006,242 
1803, 1,00,678 | - - - 1,00,678 
1804 3935916 608,611 9445527 
1805 | 2,55.481 45725785, 728,266 
1806 2,097,188 2,44,923, 4o35ot11 


11,05,505, 13,26,519 | 24,391,824 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Merchandize, Treasure, Tora. 

Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. 

1802 17587 71587 
1803] — 9,91,680 3:91,680 
3804) 94545343 9154343 
1805| 9,62,606, 9,62,006 
1806} — 4,24,905 424,905 
@8,11,121 28,11,121 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Liquers - of es = 1,99,840, | Piece Goods + = - = 8,61,341 
Nava! Stores ere es 64,682 | Grain ee 8 ee 4,819 
Metals ed aijo72 | Mesiey 2 2 2 5 = 1,844 
Grain - ee te 6,503 | Sundries -  - 2 2 1,313 
Piece Goods ger met Ge 13,480 
Spicess- 2 2 2 =) © 10,529 Imports se-exported: 
Dyeas ie) oe ces me ee As 2,562 [| Opium - > = 340775 
Mother of Pearl - = s+ 3,591 | Sugar ep fe he Es 13,846 
gundrics ee ee 10,133 | Liquors - + - = = 
aa Spee = = eee 
255481 | Metals - 2 = 2 « 
oe ot Sadlety ttt (Ae Soe et 
Naval Stores + - - - 
Sundries «= 5 = + «= 
PEGU. 
Exports from Pegu to the British Settlements in » Imports into Pegu from the British Settlements 
India, in India. 
‘Merchandize, | ‘Trensure, | Toran. Merchandize. ‘Treasure. Toran. 
Sa. Rs, Sa. Rs, Sa, Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. 
1802 479,880 9,878 4289,758 [1802 $140,220 1,01,923 41520133 
1803] 7,77,944 16,590 7:93947 [#803] 3.43,523 83,114 2,26,637 
804 453,941 1,684 4,00,625 [1804 1,63,012 39,643, 202,655 
1805 | 595,738 57,870 6,53)608 $3805] — 2,25,653. 19,579 245,232 
1800, 473,070 | + - - 4:731,070 J1806 2,22,187 Jo - - 2,22,187 
27,82,986 | 86,022 | 38,69,008 24545259 13,48,844 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Timber aud Plank + - > 4,61,153 
Fatal = = = 38,788 
Horses - 5 ee = 30,867 
Pepper - = = = 38,809 
Coir and Coir Cables - = = 12,678 
Wax - Se a sen cg 39249 
Cardemoms - = = e = 1,252 
Bticlack == eee 657 
Sundries + = + = = 28,305 


5.959738 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 


PieceGoods - + + + 1,26,202 
Opium = 5 == A510 
Woolless «© » « = @ 3.176 
Wit a a ee ae Ta 
Wine Se ee oe 1,400 
Grain - - - - - 2,000 
Rum - - oe - - . 2,236. 
Canvaa = = 2 = «© 1,534 
Sundries «= - = 2 « 8,332 
Inpports re-exported : 

Tron and Nails - “4 - - - 6,528 
Wine and Liquors - = = 9,637 
Tin and plated Ware - = : 4625 
China Ware = eee 3,085 
jronmongery = 5s 2,148 
Broad Cth = = == 17,196 
Velvets 2 2 2 2 = 8314 
Sundries ~ - - - - 9.395 

2,525,653 


on the Affairs of The LAST INDIA COMPANY. ue 


PINANG and the EASTWARD. 


Exports from Pinang and Fastward, 40 the 


Imports into Pinang and Eastward, from the 
British Settlements in, India. 


Eritish Setllements in India. 


Merchandize. ‘Treasure, ToTat. Merchandize, Totar. 


Sa. Rs, Sa. Rs, Sa. Rs, 
1802] 22,91,193 7:95,766 30,86,059 
1803] 20,900,675, 10,78,503 31,609,178 
1804, 21,931,108 14,07,870 35,98,978 
1805] 23,53,164 20,54,308 4407.47 
389} 24,07.471 | 26,45,979 | 50,53,450 


Sa. Ns, | Sa Rs, 
3790732 52,02,505 
$3,490 | 35,94,819 
32,685 | 34,55,384 
- + | 46,28,399 
57,400 22,23:231 


Sa. Rs. 
48,22,773 
35511,339 
34,02,699 
46,38,399 
31.65,831 


1,13,33,611 | 79,82,426 | 1,93,16,037 1,95,41,051 5,153,307 ees 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 
Pepper = ~ = + = 9,97,262 
Beetle Nuts = == 546,059 
Benjamin - - - - = 1,61,862 
Metals yee = 1,045553 
Spices . : - - = 1,419,933 
Tutenagug = - - +2 = 92,296 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 
Opium - 5 - = 21,295,209 
Piece Goode - + > = -17,52,070 
Raw Silk - - + - = 160,318 
Grain se ee = 1,611,820 
Cotton - - - « 1,02,710 
Carpets and Blankets - - - ApS 


Agla Woods = se = 58,651 | Sundries - - - = = 1,29,65% 
Piece Goods - - - - 24,2146, _ 
Sugar - - - 33,742 440345514 


Elephants Teeth - - - = 26,216 


Cochineal - = - . oe 20,224 Imports re-exported : 


Sundriew - = + += =  1,69,052 | Wine - 8 ee 218,183, 
—————-[ Metals - + =~ - - 10,293 

23,53,164 | Hosiery = - . - - - 2,046 

- = Tron and Ironmongery - + 29,278 

Broad Cloth - - = = 9,165 

Anchors - - - - - 4854 

Sundries = - © + « 32,073 

48,38,399 
ed 


MALACCA. 


Exports from Malacca to the British Settle- 


Imports into Malacca from the British Settle- 
ments in india. 


ments in India, 


Merchandize. Tovar. Merchandize. ‘Treasate, Torat. 


Sa. Rs. 
TTS 85 


Sa, Rs, 
1,046,707 


Sa. Rs. 
6,97,558 


Sa. Rs. 
20,027 


Sa. Rs. Sa, Rs, 
YUU 


162 Appendix, No. 47—SUP PLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


BATAVIA. 


{imports into Batavia from the British 


Exports from Batavia to the British 
baat Seitiements in India, 


Settlements in India. 


Merchandize. ‘Treasure. 


Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs, Sa, Rs Sa. Rs, Sa. Rs. 
6,88,638 93,029 7,81,667 [1802] 3,397,061 3:48,312 
9,06,372° 1,07,654 10,14,026 | 1803 92,198 92,198 
19,946 a Ke 19,946 J1804)- > = _ 
66,845 66,845 J2805}- = + — 
40,950 49,950 41806} 5,04.485 51445209 


17,22,751 2,00,683 9233744 9:84,718 


PINANG and Eastward, including MALACCA and BATAVIA. 


Exports from Pinang, &c. to the British 


Imports into Pinang, &c. from the British 
Settlements in India. 


Settlements in India, 


‘Treasure. Merchandise. ‘Treasure, Torat, 


Sa, Rs, Sa, Rs, Sa. Rs, Sa. Re. Sa. Rs, ‘Sa, Rs. 

1809] 29,909,858 | 15,86,353 | 45,865,211 52,64,541 | — 3,97,390 56,621,932 
1803) — 29,97,047 11,86,357 41,83,204 36,03,527 83,490 36,87,017 
1804} —22,11.054 | 14,07,870 | 36,18,924 34,02,699 32,685 345351384 
3805} 24,20,009 | 20,54,308 } 441745317 49,38,309 |- = = | 46,38,399 
1806} — 24,48,421 | 26,45,979 | 50,94,400 36,70,316 97,194 $7,07,440 


88,80,067 


1,30,76,389 24191575056 


25051791482 | 6,10,689 


2,21,90,171 


MANILLA. 


‘Exports from Manilla to the British 


Imports into Manilla from the British. 
* Settlements in India. 


Settlements in India. 


Toran. 


Treaaure. Merchandize. ‘Treasure, Totat, 


Sa. Rs, Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs. Sa, Rs. Sa. Rs. 
1202 1,93:957 | 26,34,190 | 28,38,177 se 857,663 
2803 49.969 5539353 5394122 - - - 281,589 
1804, 6,831 423,119 427,950 see 310,407 
1805, 1,21,776 | 10,89,407 | 12,11,183 2 US “8 9,84,056 
1806 goo 1,01,832 1,02,132 - oof - 


425,207 425,207 


3,653,863 | 47,99:701 | 51,63,564 28,590,822 48.59.8229 


Which consisted, in 1805, of Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Nankeens - + = «© © PieceGoods = = = = 915.796 

Sayan Wood - - ) - pram - + - - - ae 
utenague - - - - - au - - - - - - ! 

Sandrics a Sundries - - 2 2 = 31,066 

: 1,21,776 Imports re-exported: 

= ie 7 3,646 

. - - gis 

- woe 842 

984,936 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 163 


CHINA. 

Exports from China to the British Settlements | Imports into China from the British Settiements 

. in India. in India. 

> 

Merebaadize, | ‘Treasure. Tora. | Merchaadiae, | ‘Trewsuce. Toran. 
at, Det | 

Sa. Rs, Sa Rs. Sa. Rs. | Sa. Rs. Sa. Rs, Sa. Rs. 
1802| — 59,26,809 32,88,435 92,15,244 1802 | 1008404 70,093 107454057 
1803} — 24,02,592 27352506 46,455,158 [1803 | 99037 
1804) 75413,858 $4075877 5 f1804) 10,437 
1805} 44,094,674 | 61,85,845 i805) - 7 150,59,577 
1806 58,13,961 52,998,586 180d | 3 2 61,503 129,56,492 

241,471 59,78,202 


2,66,51,894 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Sugarcandy - + 


Tutenague 
Piece Goods 
Camphor 
Nankeens 
Tea - 
Vermillion 
China Ware 
Raw silk 
Cassia and Buds 
Spices - 


Red and WI tite Lead 


Pepper = - 
Stationery , - 
Alium “- 
Furniture - 


Brandy and Liquors 
Tin - 

Dru, soe 
Sundries 7 


eee nena 


toes 


7)69.951003 | 


e 


Dye eee ee eee eee 


1,122,724 
2,191,830 
2,07,7435 
72,070 
1,10,758 
417,721 
65,839 
21,780 
87,099 
36,606 
49,313 
345434 
37,374 
3:26,730 


44,904,674 
— 


Perr err 


VARIOUS 


Exports from various Places to the British 
Scttlements in India, 


Sa. Rs. 
1802 8,068,695, 
1803) 757,752 
1804]  4,06,318 
1805} — 4,70,126 
1806]  6,76,371 


92,07,252 


Iste or Faance: 


‘Treasure, 


11,67,540 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Soto = = 
Opium - 
Piece Goods 
rhs 
i Wood 
Shark-tins 
Grain + 
Saltpetre 
Cornelians 
Putebuck 
Sundries : 


- = = 94524619 
32394570 
4,70,564 
422,987 


Oetrereea 


1,48,83,768 


Imports re-exported : 


Coral - 


Wine and. other Liquors 
Rice - - - 
Sundries - - = 


PLACES, 


: 63,495 
40,218 
29,400 


432696 


1,50,60,577 
=o 


Imports into various Places from the British 
Settlements in India. 


Torar, Merchandize. ‘Treasure. Totan 

Sa. Rs, Sa. Rs. Sa. R. Sa. Rs. 

10 60,082 | 1802 12,64,544 10 12,64,354 

13,37,068 | 1803 8,890,754 | -- - 8,809,784. 
4:96,393 | 1804 $102,472 27,874 3230546 
514.595 [1805 614,057 |= 6,14,057 
7:66,774 43806] 12,92,093 | - : 12,92,893 

43,574,902 48,62,750 73884. 43:90,634 


[ste or France: 


SS 
Which consisted, in 1805, of 


Brandy, &. - - 42,002 Piece.Goods - - 1543277 
Sundries es - 17,894 Sundries +  - - 46,928 
—— 59,896 . 1,90,205 
Matotve Istanps: Maxopive Isnanps: 
Coir and Coir Cables - 44,626 Grain - - 
Cocoa-nut Shells -  - 21,839 Piece Goods. | 
Sundries - - - 32,514 Sundries + : - 
—— 98,979 80,184 
Mosamerque and Coast of Arrica: Mosamaique and Coast of AFrica? 
Elephants Teeth - = 2,55:493 Piece Goods - oe 2,94,793 
Tortoise Shells = - 2,684. Glass Beads oo A 10,736 
Grain - - - 30,312 Sundries - - - 38,139 
‘Sundries - - - 22,089 —— 3,43,668 
———— 310,578 
Cape: 6,14,057 
Gin - - - - - - 673 == 
457,126 
151 & 182, Te 


164, Appendix, No. 47—SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


DRUGS, ku 


No. 14. 


DRUGS, &e, Imported and Gold in Privilege, Private Trade, Neutral Property, 


8 


8. 


. 1803. 


Arrungoes - + = N° 
Agate Stones, rough =~ wt. 
D? Beads - - ~ Ibs, 


Aniack- + = galls 
Alogs Epatica + - ewt. 
Assafotida - = — - ent, 
Angustura Bark - > ent. 
D° - unrated - cwl. 
‘Astringent Seeds - > ewt. 
Alkali - - = owt. 
Alum -  -  - + cwt. 
Awl - - - > ewt. 
Annatio - - ~ Ibs 
Argol = = = = ewt 
Aloes - - - ~ owt, 
Alkali, unvefiaed - > cwt, 
Arrow Root - - = ewt, 
Arsenic - - - cw. 
Anniseeds  - - = wt. 
Borax, refined - = - ewt. 
Benjamin ~~ owt. 
Borax, unrefined - - cwt. 
Bark = - - - cwh 
Baffalo Torns -  - Ne 
-Banda Soap -. - — - Ibs. 
Bees Wax - - = ewe, 
Bervies-" - =~ cwt. 
Bamboss - - - N° 
Barley-  - = 9 = ewe, 
Buffa!o Hides, dressed - cwt. 
--D°-- raw- - ewt. 
Beetle Nuts - = = cwt. 
Beef Wood - = = pt 
Buffalo Horns - - Ne 
Barilla - + + ewt. 


Camphire, unrefined = ewt. 
- De - refined+ — - cwt, 


- De - oil bottles se 


Cowries =~ 
Cardemoms - 
Coculus Indicus | 
Columbo Root 
China Root - 
Cassia Lignea 
Castor Oil - 
Cassia Buds - 
Cambogium - 
Colocynth + 
Copper - 
Chillies - 2 
Comelian Stones, rough 
- D 2 Seeds - 
- D° - Drops. - 
-- D - Beads s, 
- De = Crosses - 
> De - Hearts - 
Cummin Seed - 
Ceylon yellow wood 
Cassia Oil - = 
Chaya Root - - 
Cinnamon .- - 
China coloured Paper 


ia oa WES 


sheets 
Chinaluk - + = Ibs. 
Cinnabar or Vermillion - Ibs. 


Coculus InJie = - ewt. 
Castor Seed - = 


= cwte 


Peet nerne 


preerenee 


39,159 
3,626 
39955, 


M.S. 1804. 


4 
8 


ot Pa i 
oo peer reeenes 


st 


43 


cI 
eaWererarae 


ae 


pee en 


x 


: 
Pram 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 165 


- + = - No. 14. 


and Prize; from September 1803 to September 1868, inclusive. 


ee 
M, S. 1806. S. §, 1806. 1807. S. S. 1807. +S. S.S. 1808. 
L £. on £ Le 
- -f- +f - ed Cen Ces es cs 
- -|- -|- - - -[- -f- : 347 ds “lo 
- ete : 10 534 - - -J- ede = fhacks4o3! 4,008 
- Je i 38 125 63 318] - “le ~f- - — 
82 308 | - - a 29 103, 48 100 24 180 
eee rae aes fae SS CoB Sef PS age 98 
= Ae -]- a . -f- - - 564 - - - 
ge pe eae Me af. -{-  -]- a Sede bh SU es 
oe cae aes BAe, She (IG Ste ES, Se 
is -f- -]- - 1,530 20 89 50 15 12 25 
ete - 4} 1332 * 1,206 | 1,975 | - = t= i =f oo 
- -|- -]- - - =F 3,981 281i p> -f- =] 1,095 26 
Sn cc Mees ene 151 | 1,943 404 | 2,837 307 | 2,090 
78 245 fy 37 68f- -|- -f- -|- = 52 220 
105 908 3 1,925 5 29 379 | 55799 87 | 1,874 
- -|- - 40 422 J - ade ca -[- -|- 7 - 
- -f- -{}- - - -}- -f- - 24 iz]- - _ 
- tte t | 3645 - ty 6,817 OS.pe Sec Safe St 
= YS CEES SE eS SEY SIS ale et 
ae ane Paes EN asee | eds SPS Spee Bo 
So baa Spare se Be 38 75 Og Ps 9 aches ee Soe ee 
- -f- -|- - ari- “|? -f- -|- fe - — 
. on Pe 2 TP gos} ss ]-  -f- fe ed = 
oodles cepa be Caer) Genes aie 372 4524 3,664 | 7,126 
22,659 561 6,512 143 2,170 J - - _ 
- - 14 178 | - cot ae pag bo mi eer 
- -d- ato - a4 The - =" 
ae 443 | LOsp- ce fe tfe ey 
1,176 | 15,168 | 3,959 | 8,795 | 1040 | 7.540 | 2560 
70. pa csi ie Be eo sie: ve es ep oor 
ve 5) 64 > eje - = = 
31242 87 539 203 | 1,489 178 2,402 

174 8,200 


” eaag “60,628 7 


ver eene 


m 
3 


166 


DRUGS, &e. 
s 


Cogue de Pearl - = om 
Cane Table Mats- = - N° 
De - Window Blinds - Ne 
D°- Floor Mats - = - N° 
Canes ee rsh NG 
Clove Wool-- ~ == cwt, 
Dragons Blood - = = cwt. 
Dohl oe cw 


Dragon Canes - os 


Ebony Wood = - = ewt. 
Extract Nux Vomica - ewt. 
Elephants Teeth -.  - ewt. 
Essence of Tan - = - cwt. 
Flour - = = - —- ewt. 
Foreign Books - - Ibs. 
Fans Paper = - - N 

_| ForeignSeeds - -  - 
“Galls - + + = ewt, 
Gum Arabic > + owt. 
‘Galanga - - — - cw, 
Gram- + - owt, 
Gam Animi - + ewt, 
Gum unrated = - ew, 
Gum Seneca 7 = cwt 
Ginger - =» cwh 
D°-- Green + = - cwt; 
Gum Copal- - — = ewt. 
Grass, for Lines - - ewt, 
Green Stone - 7+ Ibs. 
Gumbdellium “+ = - cwt. 
Gum Ammoniac - = - cwt. 
‘Galbanum - + - ewt. 
Gam Aragacanth- =~ cwt, 
, Gam Sandrake + = cwt. 
Glass Beads = + wt, 
Gum Saracolla - —- wt, 
Hides>- - > - + NP 
Homan Hair - + Ibs, 
. Horse.Skins > = Ne 
Keyapootie Oil - =~ oz, 
Ivory Sticks -- += N® 
Long Pepper. .- - ewt, 
‘Leopard Skins - - Ne 
LacDye - -. = Ibs. 
Lec Lake, - - - Ibs. 
Mother-of-Pearl, ‘rough - cwt, 
Myrabolanes ary” - ewt. 
Myrrh + + ewt. 
Molasses - = cwte 
Moat Yellow Colour > cwt. 
+ Browa 7 + ewt, 
Munject “2 os + ewt, 
Mastic - s+ ewe, 
Mocha Alloes - .- cwt. 
Mother-of-Pearl Beads - cwt. 
De. - - - - Counters ~ cwt. 
Madder Boot - = = ewe. 
Mock Pearl Beads = owt. 
Musk 7 5 = on 
‘M.0’ Pearl, manufact* - lbs. 
Mock Coral Beads =~ Ibs, 
“Madeira + = galls. 
Nez Vomican = - — - ewt. 
Qlibanum - - ~~ ewt. 
Ostrich Feathers --  ~ Ibs. 


rr re ar) 


4% 
6 
qa 
23 
473 
35744 
8,132 
257 
487 
2 

36 
1,090 
645 

8 
878 
787 
261 


vpeee 


ee 


3S 
3 


a 
23 


S.S. 1804. 
ib 
48 539 
27 9 
54 362 
756 | 3,813 
go 704 
. 6 41 
nd | 264 
6,484 203 
78 19 
Si 288 
45 24 
z 3 
7” at 
aig 980 
464 5,055 
ar 232 
2 8 


ee 


4 
46 


gr 


teense 


Appendix, No, 47-~SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


| S. S. 1803. M. S. 1804. 


7 


780 
559 
95769 
18 
2,056 
- at 
205 
199 
“74 
334 
8 

3 

53 
1,075 
10 


M.S. 1805. | S. S. 1805. 


3,979 
3 
68 

3,666 

6,806 

264 
26 
2,237 
2 
37 
241 
399 
40 
3 
31 
458 
388 

11,823 

1,762 
57 

327 

“1,024 

37 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


<== see eae eee = aan 


AES, 1800. 8.5, 1806. M.S. 1807. 


, 
‘a 

« 
a 
By 


epee < gw | ‘Bosfr - | 7-2 f - - | 
ed aa 5,538 ma7q- - - - - + woe 
aah ene 60 Ge Pose Pee Le 
clea ere [er onh 2 EPCS eee Pc, Co aes 


oe - oe - 2. - oY +s - + a + 285 aspoe + ae 
? 7 2,352 291 | 8,572 56] 3,334 vg} 3127{ > - 7 369 | 3,722 

Peed Gaon came ecaehiel Germs Geeaaieg (os ice ve ae ais 
* 958 . % i 4 ‘ 5 -o- ~ - 19 af. - ee “oe - 
polber faxes) [Gariecds ease parame cme Head] jes'ao (neenae eed or are 


197 805 186 1,167 1,036 6,611 134 665, 


1,463 45282 7 146 4984 1] 12,557 1,581 9,017 
ee Je = to iwf- et. - - e+ f-- - = |e — 
2 13 123 G7 39 sie cfe - mr > = 
ie 688 131 641 8851 3,751 101 S17, ee 179 E 13 369 
oe fences Poa ee | Cees 23 65 iY Mae ne DSR Re a 
285 925 1,001 2,991 1,488 22g 58 925 2,182 1,920 8447 
a, e -& ve * Jae 402 ° > 2 ee - « ~ * ‘al 
ee es Pe ee Ss ee ce 2 sf-- - 
Er staecdl ome: cr (WG cl ena taeva emir (stare) rons artemis ee 
Sef dees eee alee cs si] amp. =) - - so| asf > s | 
ee fare Pee ep eee 5 og8f - -f- -f--]f- of - —_ 
- - oe e+ - ato 32 76 204 52 60 10 20 
Nemee: Leer 26 38] = fee eee eee eee eee 


500 wsppo- = | 2 = J 5720] 1,035 615 5) 7 Penbae eran = 
203 8 * * = eS og eo s+ - oo: - ad Paes = 
-- coe 6,942 wofi- - - oe soe ee 7 os - oe 
: - oe ~e fas 8) 1,102 agopos = - soe ~~ e ad = 
ase sare ote e.. % >A a eo 485) voz7op 7 - = 
SS ee PS eel[cat oe 47 2 es es ce cn Cea = 
- ete ede ee] ee geod ed 5820 oaf- - te - bet a 
Se Oem, Cicer) eee 845 145 | 5,269 | 2139 65 ce has 


‘ 
a 
ow 
me] 
zt 

ey 

2 


Be hae fas oe 4821 4054 | 1595 | 6323 278 { 4,384) > > 09 
ee : 7 , ” ag 4 3 : 7 ee i 267 
rd a) 18 380 56 3058} -  - - $8 
eases Wer erey es en eae eee Ee = 
. 50 10 Prehe pozp- - | 2 - mi = 3r 145 roa 
- efter 292 15, ee fe ede on ac 5 

qi. 515 es i - si 204, 683 562 1818 f - + me 


1 
' 
. 
1 
2 
a 
a 
a 
. 
, 
' 
3° 
sd 
a 
£ 
to 
a 
wR 
> 
ay 
8 
o 


rrr Dee 


261 28] 4130} 5,786] 595} 467 a 24 6 8s 
Se late] ae ele eee be Se Tp Soa lat ae 
mae - 6 8 145 189 1 - eo 103 os S = 
129 6c3 158 528 161 47h 43 z M48 . 173 : eS 


q.k. 
oe 


-- “a 33 37| 107 


151 & 182 (continued. } 


168 Appendix, No. a8 UPPLEMENT to the F BOURE H REPORT 


DRUGS, &. S. S. 1803. M. S, 1804. 


‘Gilet Naimegs = + Ibs. 


-tuns} - - 


Ou of Cloves 22 tbs. 
Origanum - + - cwt. 


pee 


snee 


Paddy - + + owt 


-- fe - 5 1 
Peruvian Bark - -cwifo- - [+ - - ete e es - 
Pureé - : te ns - ef ee - - 
Paddy Bird Feathers sowt fo - - fe + os en ee 
Palm Oi = sew. | - 2 Je - feces we aes comers 
Palma Christi Seeds -cwt.{ - 2 [- = TSE Soe 149 17 
Paper Prints ~ + Nog - - fe = ae oy ~ - fe - 
Papr- = - -ewt.f - - fe eo ef ee a 
Pickles - +  -gakf - - fe - - ef ee fe! obec ye 
Rhubarb - 
Rum- - - 
Root, unrated + 
Rattans - = 
~ De- ground - 
Red Powder =< 
Red Wood = + 
Rose Wood- = 
Sena - = - = Ibs. J 12,889 
Sago - = + sew] 1,391 
Sal-Ammonicam - > cw, 133, 
Shellack - = 9 = wt 1,640 
Sticklae - = = ew, 5 
Sea Horse Teeth + - cwt, J ~~ 
Seedlac + = = ewt, 2 
Safflower - - + cwt 309 
Silversmiths Dross sew. es 
Sugarcandy + + owt 80 
Sundries - = -cwhp- - 
Seal Skins - - - N@}- - 
Sattin Wood -  cplks J - - 
Sheeps Wool - few - 6 


Soy -  - casksand galls. | 9,873 | 954 
Skins, tanned - 2 Nog. - Je - 
Sapan Wood =~ cwt. 188 | 400 
Stones, rough - + owt 
Sandal Woed Sticks 
Tamarinds «= 
Turmeric - + 
Terra Japanica - 


‘Tutenague =  ~ 


Tin s- ss 
Tarkey: Carpets - 
Teak Wood- —- 


Vinegar - 


Ultramarine - 
Unrated Drags - 


White Pepper - 

Wine - = 
‘Wood . oe 
Wax Candles + 
Walking Canes - 
‘Wood, unrated = - 
‘Whanghee Canes - 


Yellow Stone ~ 


fowries -  - 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, 169 


rr 
——S 


M.S. 1806, S. S. 1806, 


M.S. 1808, | S.S. 1808. 


—_______ 


L 


‘ Piece (ermal Ueaage 7 L: 

18 4 65 20 z aad “+ ~ e ~ 
UE Beene (eS Se] een pean (ee 2 
Bee [aah gio se eae beeen = 
ae fe ea or] ae ia ees 27 7 os 
Eten ween) et faite a Pe cree ena ae 7 
14,122 600} 1,338 59 1 mes 
code 537 22 


pee re 


ete 5,090 923 ae 
30345 | 6,597 214 342 166 241 325 


cs) 


bit 


13 
3 


z 
a 


tl 


710 Appendix, No. 47--SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


A VIEW of the TRADE carried on by Individuals, (exclusive of the East India Company's 


Bengal, Fort St. George and its Dependencies, and Bombay 


—_—_ 
“MERCHANDIZE 


froported. Fxported. “| exceed the 
Exports, 


Inpors | 
| 


FROM AND TO WHAT PARTS, t 


LONDON - = = 2 © = 804,157 


44,749 
6 


) 


LISBON - 
MADEIRA and TENERIFFE 
CADIZ - oe 


een enane 


Toran Foreicn Evrore - £. 179,799 442,539 


AMERICA = - = + £.| 123,424 | 842,590 


meee 
Coast of MALABAR - a i! 18,51 Sh ie - 20,492 
Northern Parts of GUZZERAT = =| goqiad 28381 | - sss 
SURAT and adjacent Villages - 205,251 - me 54,202 
BOMBAY - i oe 172,776 397274 [- = =| + 224,498 
Coast of COROMANDEL - - - 135,601 379-337 [+ - - 243,756 
NORTHE MIRCARS * = - - 277,791 68,914 208,877 | = - - 
Norther Division of CARNATIC = 66,160 5217 60,943 | + - 
FORT ST.GEORGE - : - 54,710 361,611 | - - - $06,901 
Southern Division of CARNATIC - 66,236 32,825 $3412 bo - - 
TANJONE - + rs 64,752 27,420 37,332 | - - + 
TINNEVELLY and RAMNAD - - 63,582 22,690 40,3892 | - - 
MALABAR (Province of) - == abs 
CANARA ~~ = es ead 328,394 145,559 182,835 [- = - 
COCHIN - - - - fe se 2,030 1,934 |< - - 
BENGAL - - - - - - | 1,180,821 1,075,119 | = = - 
CEYLON - - ce - 101,231 - : 
Coast of SUMATRA - = ee 372189 
Torat Britisn Asta + = | £. | 3,750,298 
BIAN GULPH - Be ae 
PERSIAN GULP) SD 3} 216,732 | 723,038 506,899 
CASHMERE, &e * - ce - 17,657 9,782 7,875 7 “s 
CUTCH aad SCIND - - - - 278,850 161,628 317,822 | - - 
BASSEIN and Villages: - oe oe 53,096" 56.054 J- =e 3.858 
GOA and CONCAN - - - 141,213, 548,365 | - - - 407-152 
MAURATTA DOMINIONS - 11,903 20,055 | + - - 8,152 
'TTRAVENCORE ~ = - - 9,188 7280 |- - 
TRANQUEBAR - - - - - 97,038 70,278 | - - 42,640 
PEGU - - 69.575, 27,305, 42,410 | + - - 
PINANG and EASTWARD, - - 326,910 514,487 | + - - 187,577 
MANILLA - - : - 9,008 71,405 | - - - 62,209 
CHINA — - os 660,297 | 1,643,418 |- =  - 977,121 
MOSAMBIQEE and Coast of AFRICA-[-  - Sd ee s 2 
ISLE of FRANCE - : = ah iS ow = bal Bis s: ia feo is * 
VARIOUS PLACES +- - : - 80,181 109,068 | - - - 28,887 
Le ms ei io 
Torat Forrten Asia, Arnica, &c. £. | 1,908,336 3,057,834 | - - =] 2,049,498 


Granp Totan - £.| 6,766,014 9,849,083, \- = =] 3,083,069 


* Cashmere includes Punjab, Decan, Joipore, and Kandeish. 
¢ Under this [ead are included the Maldive and Laccadive Islands, New South Wales, Cape 
af Good Hope, and St. Helena, 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDTA COMPANY. 


‘Commeree,) from and to various parts of the World, with the 2. 


and Surat); ou a Medium of five years; fi 


Prom y8o2te 186, i 


bas 


iid Hh the Bast Indies 


TREASURE, | : | 
Tatance Net Pata 
e ae yg in favour of it. Divour of 
Tuported. Exported. e | Tati, Tadias 
L- 
5 25 as 
158 - - = = 
‘ 780 - 
5 305-767 - ee ~ 
: 1,025 47,967 ae 

2 - 32,660 - - _ 

ne 

8. 158 384.427 - see = 

784,938 3,855 781,083 aie oe me = 
— nd ns lace eso | en seen 

23,654 » 8397 15,277 | - 535,769 }- = = _ 

B17 | 206450 |- = "LL 483,420 es 

11,039 92,766 }-  -  - 81727 J- + - 27,525 = 

78,340 4319 4020 Je oe 298,519 }- = fe 

13,628 28,816 - - 15,188 228,568 | - - . _- 

24556 Hone Bee 43464 J = | 853341 - 

7 4,247 104 1,143 [| + ‘it tl St A ot 59,800 — 

93,707 2,147 91,560 {+ + - 393,461 | - - - = 

_ 8,309 1,895 6414 fr > -fe - - 26,097 _ 

35477 47 3439 Jot pr te 23,902 - 

i oa Oe ea 9655 fe a tah HR) =e 40,527 = 

5,372 17,966 J-° =" - 12,504 f- = 195,429 pe 

oe tee woke Ss ah aaa et ast? 9 tes E 1,934 = 

431335, 37,123 26012 Je. se - . =| 1,048,907 = 

4,848 B50 f- =e 3,662 25,928 {- = (+ ef 

18,098 9,513 8,585 f° = - 18,628 |- = - - 

——| a i = : 
316,192 444,059 f= - - 127,867 | - - - 664,909 _ 
=== | = (a | 
600,604 OAL - = =f 106,562 [-- - is 

Be ee ten Te SR ie aes oe 7875 - 
1,906 27,622 | = 25,716 - 143,538 _ 
833 493 cele 4198 f- = = 

86,661 90,770 | = 4,109 403,043 fo = - ~ 

6,635 374 emcee ee 145463 [-. 2 = _- 

Bo neh LS, ape ei ees ae) Core 7,280 _ 
ee Sh gee 75,798 |- o> - 

Q 6,336 | - 42066 J- + - 46,416 _ 
“15,267 a, se, 504327 frost = 
ee Jo me 182,391 | = - - 

6,037 7 HP 1,645,00 - oot ~ 
| 29,191 607 28404 J- 0 e 57981 f- = = _ 
| 148,557 | 1,629,516 [-- = -| 367014 J- + - me 

SS ahiesie - abies eee 
| 596,654 +. + 94 6006995 [- = _ 


4 


151 & 182. 


473 Appendis, No. 47-—-SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT : 


SS 


— = 


(No. 16.) 


London, 10th April 1810. 
SIR, 


Pe been favoured, by the kind indulgence of the Honourable Com- 

mittee, for the Affairs of India, with accefs to the Obfervations made by the 
Chairman, and Deputy Chairman, of the Eaft India Company, on the Evidence 
given relative to the Private Trade; we refpeGtfully folicit the permiffion of the 
Honourable Committee, through you, the Chairman, to lay before them, the 
Remarks which a perafal of the Obfervations has fuggefted to us——We fhould not 
have prefumed to trefpafs fo much on the patience of the Committee, if any other 
‘mode had occurred, in which the explanation called for, by the Obfervations of 
the Chairman and Deputy, could have been prefented to the confideration of the 
Connnittee. 


We have the honour to be,, with gréat refpe€t, 
Sir, 
Your moft obedient humble Servants, 


TJokn Innes. 
RC. Bazett. 

Right Hon Sir Joha Anftruther, Bart. Hi. Fawcett, 
.&e, Se &e. Henry Trail. 


REMARKS 


on the Affvirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY: 173 


, i > 


REMARES 


ON THE 


“ Osservartioys, of the Chairman, and Deputy Chairman, 
“ of the Eaft India Company, on the Evidence given before 
“ the Committee of the Houfe of Commons, appointed for 
“ the Confideration of India Affairs, on the Subje@ of the 
“ Private rape with India.” 


HE Chairman, and Deputy Chairman, of the Court of Directors of the Eaft India 
Company, have been pleated to communicate to your honourable Committee avery” 
elaborate and detailed Paper, intituled “ Objervations on the Evidence given before the Com- 
“ mittee: of the Houfe of Commous, appointed for the Conjideration of India Affairs, on 
“ the Suljeét of the Private Trade with India” The title of this work does not futticiently 
detpeak e extent and variety of difeuilion which it embraces; for it is addreiled rather to 
the (serie object of the enquiry, in which the honourable Committee is engaged, than 
confined to the particular branch to which the evidence it comments upon, was directed. 
The’ Authors of the following Remarks, however, do not ba the By of explaining 
or elucidating-the topics. on which they were examined. ey truft that the candour of your 
honourable Commitee will permit them, in their turn, to prefent to your confideration, a 
brief expofition of the fa¢is and principles which they humbly apprehend their evidence to 
eftablith, and which have been altailed with fo much ability and information, and by fuch 
high authority... They feel the weight which belongs to the gentlemen under whofe aulpices 
the Obfervations.are introduced to the Committee, and the credit which their talents, their 
experience, and their ftation, mutt, confer upon their opinions. In proportion to the influence 
of all thefe, however, they humbly apprehend it to be their duty to fubmit to your honourable 
Committee, their fentiments upon a view of the fubject, which extends to nothing lefs than 
a complete {upprellion of the Private Trade. 2 


Tn performing this talk, they affure themfelves, that they Miall require but a {mall portion 
of the time and attention of your honourable Committee. 1f they do not greatly err, much 
of the differtation laid before you by the Chairman and Deputy, however curious and 
interefting in fome refpests, is of little importance in the practical difcuffion of the points 
on which alone the Merchants prefume to trouble you. They hunibly conceive, that the prin- 
cipal object of the Enquiry, as far at leaft as they thould be juttified in taking a part init, 
is, what obftacles at prefent oppofe the fuecels of ithe Private Trade beeween Britifh India 


and this Country, and what facilities may with fufcty be extended to it? 


The Merchants would be inclined to proceed at once to a detailed reply to thofe parts of the 
Statements of the Chairman and Deputy, conneéied with this view a the tubjeG@, were they 
not convinced, that it would prove Thortett and moft fatisfaciory mode of attaining the 
true refults of this inveftigation, to premife a few obferyations on the nature and objects of 
the Private Trade. it is impodible that it can efeape the notice of your honourakle Com- 
mittee, that the whole feope of the ee, of tie Chairman and Deputy, is, that the, 
Private Trade is injurious to the Eaft India Company, without being adyantagcous. to the 
Public, and that it ought to have no place in any uew arrangement of the Affairs of India, 
on the renewal of the Charter. If this conclufion be well founded, the objections of mere 
detail, which attach to the prefent fyftem, muit difappear ; on the other hand, if an extention 
of the Trade with India would proye not only beneficial to Great Britain, and to the vatt 
territories it has acquired in Afia, but are not incompatible with the true interefis of the: 
Company, and the prefervation of its aBhe and privileges, as the great link of comnedtion 
with our Afiatic dominions, it would be wife, not oniy to temoye minor obtiacles, but to 


adopt a fyftem of liberality fuited to the policy of extention. 

It is not intended to trouble your honourable Committee with political fpeculations ; but 
aright underftanding of Trade cannot be feparated from a knowledge of the political cir 
cuimftances of differéat' Countries: ‘The, revolutions in India, within thefé laft 60 years, have 
given a direction to the views, aud a charadter to the purtuits of the Eaft Jadia Company, 

182. Yy ; periett.y 


Bs Afiis of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 
iy themfelves at kome, and th 


es a oe ey recent oues, declared their cae 


tat Tea ho 
» that 
ctl fier cheap, 


er ‘tape 
the renee 
ftands, fo ditfer 


Trade: ren 
better; ii 
ASQ 


fation for th 
which a 
chants traf 
soncl 


be unpardonable fe 
‘infift upon as an-evil 
With thele Obfe 


P 
thoagh it nat 
juftly murmur at 
their voyages, ha 


the commodity, 
that the Comp: 


on the Aftirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 185 


¢ fupply to the.demand, that the average annual number of 643,909 pieces, 
te sakes aha of £.1. 14. 8 Bhar isc ft certainly would have Mordechai 
feen how far this refult, counected with the ftate of markets, and ‘the operation of 
‘events, can fairly be atcribetl tq, wife and difereet management, of how far even it 
s to be confidered a fair mergantile profit in all the eiremnftances of’ the eale. 

eannot however efcape obfervation, that the period’ of 25 years here alluded to; was 
that in which the Cotton manufactures of this Country, and of all other partsct Europe, 
He ly eftablithed, and were far from being able to'vie with or imitate thofe of Briuih 
india, It would not be furprizing, if during fuch 2 period, the Trade in ‘Piece 
ly and their profit certain. But int any in ion on thi ‘the Mere 
|an average of four years, from 1802 to 1805 feledied, in order t 

confequences of exceilive importation 3 . , 

Ino complaints ela an additional proof to thofe furnithed 

i Trade of a great Company is diftur 


OW, grievoully 
and lowly it aécommodates itfelf to rapid fluctuation ofsCo 
‘necellities oceafioned by political events. © whole of this head of the 
affords a firong, but uuintentional itinftration of this important fact. 

The truth owever, that the difireffes of the Compan: 
the tual Inveftment from: ordinary fources 

to a confiderable extent, the interference af the 

calling in the aid of the P on fucl 


‘another 
a 


Pi juftalluded 
to few the danger of admit 
“underftood to be anin: 
Tagement given toany 
eerie that when 
vent it requires, 


<That at 
rife in poi c 
: , or altogether re) 
decifive fuperiority. 
ly as they can, to 1 i 
- wanton and abfurd profufion, If 
SA 3 ar 


on th is of The RAST IN DIA COMPANY. . 189 


n £.732,410. inftead of £8 765833-5 and the amount of 
smpany did nof trade, was fo oureas: “infiead of £. 933,352+ 
Re doubilefs made to other items in the Statement now under 
want of official documents: ‘precludes the invefiigation. 


fiated is, Rowever, fufficient to difplay, the inaccui of 
of abit after deductin; i snout cet foods 
did deal, and of Indigo, in which they did not deal, 


ty contend, that “it will reful that the boalied’, 
of abe which” ‘thas been in fucka de bs z 


ital could not embrace, is reduced 
earl ul whieh if meer wots e 
er, ~ What is "this Dut Hee hs 
yer annuin are excluded, and 
ed to the fum of 


its prefent fyfiem. ce 

mnpany es fo decifively, as th 
the Venegas Tine with: Pak a 
empire ‘ upon ran 
cole eg en. 
undeniable. The 


the fluctuation of! Comm m 
which it 


Sfepteten a 

Upon ‘this fubjed th 
on the Statements 
Commerce. ‘The digi 


ently 


, td of Commerce. “The nat 


| 
; 


én the Aftairs'of The EAST INDIA COMPANY: 20g , 


Tf, therefore, from this annual file amount we deduct in the firt inftance £.876,435. for _ Memoir on the 
the amount of the’ goods of the defeription of thofeowhich form the Company's regular and Trade to and from 
eftablithted foveliments;.and fecondly, £.633,£06. for the article of Indixo, which has lon: Indiz. 
been conceded to the Merchants of Indiwexclulively, making together £.1 1,930. it will at 
appear in refult, that the bozfted furplas Trade of Lndia,, whieh it was adfert ed “the Come a 
pany’s capital could not embrace,” is reduced to the eoniparatively trifling annual amount 
of £,300,846. from which, if the article of Cotton is excluded, it will be further reduced ia 


value to about £. 195,305. per annum. ats 

Itis evident therefore, that the views/and expeGations of the Private Merchants, fo far 
as regards the creating an extended Innportation of Indixn 1 red of adelcription different x 
from. thote which compolé the Compgny’s agelansene gfiablied Invefiments, as nenrly if 
not altogether failed. But itwill probably be ‘urged, valthonsh on,this head they lave 
not accomplithed their object 10 the fullefi extent, they have. neverthelets proved in 2 generat 
point’ of view, that is a furplus Trade in Indja beyond apepowsrs of the Company's 
capita’ to embrace, ch us they have imported. upon aanedinm of five years, 
amount of £.876, amum in’ Piece Goods, Raw Silk, Sultpetre, Sugar, cc. im ad- 
dition to the Imports of fimilar commodities made by the Company. ‘That fuch encreafed 
Imports have bees mude is an indifpurable fact; bat that they have been made with ad- 
vantage to the Importers, and Without “ih the Hatihes deatee diminithibg the commercial 
profil of the Company,” is a pofition to which we feel ourfelves bound. to give a direct 
negutiye. a x : 


In order the:more clearly to evince that the Company’s regular and eftublifhed Trade has 
been ferioufly injured by the interference of the Private ‘Traders, and particularly in the 
ftaple article of Piece Goods, it may be neceflary to place, in a contrated point of view, the 
prefent with the former ftate ofthis branchvof Dade at various diftingt periods. 


ss : tat 
Having obtained the neceflury official documents for accomplifhing this object, as far as 
regards the Piece Goods of Hengal and the Goalt, in which Oe ie os Lae ears 


particularly felt, we find that of the ~ ? 


3 


BENGAL PIECE GOODS, 


In the Five Years 


From 1772 to 1776 inclufive = =} 3st2zg5%4"| 5,416,871 625,903 11% 7 
1777 104781 - - = Se = | Byg75,107 | 4 400,868 | 515,025 ry 
1782 to 1786 -  - - -| 2,932,779'| 5,875,819 586,556 oS . 
1787 to 1791 =) = =) = }-75,546,128 | 6,067,044 799255 eS les 
3792 t0 1795 - = = = 31946,087 6,251,928 739,217 pit 8 : 
— 


28,012,024 


Total'in 25 Years - | 16,129,635 


About 1796, the Imports of Piece Goods in Privilege commenced on a regular fyfiem, fince 
which time the Imports of Piece Goods on account of the Company and in Privilege, appear 
to have been as follows = me Aero 7 : 


PRIVILEGE, 


COMPANY 


- ae 

¢ fi Bet, 

In 1797 - - | 350,329 3-5 
1758 = > | 723,127 | 1,219,813 18 6 

March Sale 1799 - =| 434,115 | 508584 113 6 


In looking to the fubfequent fales, with a view to comparifon, it will be neceffary to bear « 
in mind, that in 1709 an Act paffed, by which Piece Goods were allowed:to be warehouled 
on Importation, on payment of a daty of 24 per cent. on Callicoes, and 7 $ per cent. om 
Mofliys. m 


151 & 182. Hhh : This 


oh the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 221 


fo that, allowing the Portuguele, Dates, and Swedes to have contintied their Tmports as Memoir on the 
ufual, it appears that gut of the 3,700,000 Ibs. imported by the Datel! and 2,200,000 lbs. by Trade to ot eo | 


the Freach, making together, 5,900,000%5.. the Englith have obtained 3,178,000 Ibs. ‘this 


dadia. 


leaves the remainder at 2,722,000, |bs. which, it is prelumed, is very far fhort of the quantity « neil 


that bus found its way-to the Continentin Ameri¢an bottoms. 


It appears, for fome years prior to the year 1801, the price of Pepper fuffered no material 
depreffion. In September Sale 1801 it was 14$d. In March 1802 it fell 2d. and in the 
September Sale of the fame year it fell a further od. or-near 18 per cent. which redugion 


wes owing to an Import in Neutral’ Property, Privilege and Private ‘Trade, of nottels than «— 


10,351 bags, or 3,081,8eolbs. in addition to. the quantity fold by the Company; which was 
only 3,573,729 lbs. : 

In the March Sale of 1803, as the’ quantity:oP Privilege and Private Trade did not mach 
exceed 1,000 bags, the price echained aif the fante as.at the preceding fale; but there . 
being ‘another large quantity of Privilege ia the September Sale stitaryeors of about 3,100 
bags, the pie became further reduced to 9i44.; from which it has not dince’ recovered, 
although the quantity fold in the year 1804 was thort of that of the preceding year by newe 
two millions of pounds weight. ‘ < : 


In the year 1805, the quantity was further reduced to 3.475.274 pounds, or only about 
onechaif of what wea fold in the dio. precedinghyeste, anteneedee Gel Hea Dennen: 
duced to 1,276,137 pounds, or not above one-half of whatwas fold on an aver: per anna 
‘in the laft century, and the price has fallen to 77d. or near 50 per cent. ba sie atta 
and accuftomed medium. ee es 


Thus in the courfe of three years, the price of Pepper has fallen from 143d. to-7§d. or 68d. 
per pound, which isa reduction nearly equal to 50 ie cent. Teas: to patito ~ hae 
that there is at prefent in warehoufe feld, ‘but remaining inthe buyer's hands, a’ quantity 
vequal'to = - - - - - = * > + 24,000 

and the quantity unfoldis +" -- = 9- = D8 87,0005 


£ Total =. 51,000 


NI ae 


or upwards of 153 millions of pounds weight, which is more than equal to three years con- 
fumption, fo that if 4} millions are allowed for a year’s confumption, which ong valent: ss 
to remain upon hand to guard againft exigencies, and a further 2 millions is) as" 
fufficient to remain in the buyers hand, it will be found that the remaining {urplus is about » 
the quantity which bas been imported in Privilege and\ Private Trade-in the laft five years, ” 
and which has been the-means of reducing this Trade to its prefent deprefled fate. 


ies 
The quantity of Pepper cleared for home confumption in the 3, Was about 
779,000 lbs, per annum. ‘ et? 


The Exports to the Continent in the fame period, were, 


Int800 eS ee 

1801 - - - See pel 

1802 “en De, - = = 6 118,460 - “ 
1803. = PSN ees = 5 Coe eae 

184 = 98 = = TS Bog8ihas 

48050 OS eae n't MS Tee 2 1S 


SALTPETRE hang 

Saltpetre, though a confiderable branch of the Company’s Indian Tnyeftments, is im- 
ported under. {pecial reftrictions and regulations, the nature and tendency of which are ex- 
prefsly calculated to prevent ils becoming a beneficial article of Commerce, As a com- _ 
modity, that contributes effentially to the national defence, it has at all times claimed a large - 
Share of Government's attention, and, for more than a py patt, the Compan have 
been under‘an immediate obligation to import and fapply the Board of O: > with 500 
tous annually for His Majefty’s {ervice, at given rates of price in times of Peace ‘and War. 

The principal expenditure of Saltpetre is in the manufacture of Gunpowder, of which it 
forms he main ingredient. The demand of. courfe is ina great degree regulated by the 
courfe of political events, upon which it is impofiible for human wifdom to fpecalate, 
Hence, ina commercial view, the extent of the required Import can never be aicertai 
upon any fixed mercantile principle. a: :: Vy tara 

Aretrofpedtive view of the flate of the Trade in this commodity for the ae fait century, © 
neverthelels, affords fufticient reafon for co: that this isnot one o: raw inaterials 
hat is capable of being carried to an extent the-ability of the Company’s capital to. 
embrace, or that the Private Traders are likely to embark in, with any well-grounded profpet 
of advantage. mee Eye pea ws 


which, under the profpeét of a War with France, w. 
difpofed of. : iat ete 
151 fo 182. Li ‘ ‘From 


2 


Se fT. ae © . ¢ : 
In the year 1755, the quantity of Saltpetre offered for fale was 14,747 Bags, the whole of 1755. 
55s FE took pase Riad 5, was 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


No. 2. “ae * 
AM,OU NT of EXPORTS from Bexear to various Places, in the under-mentioned. Pegiods. 


— r — 


4 ad Various 
Htanburgh, | Copentagen.| Lisbon, | Leglora. | | America, iy 


other Places, 


a |. d 
3795-6 84,083,800 | 17,37,342 Stat ae 21,81:371 196495319 | 53,59,467 204350513 
*1,11,087 | 


1796-7 2) $0:79:310} 619.973] 17,73511 | 7,10:926 7 1) 74 2516267 | 455151429 | 153570197) 
<> "9.500185 | a j 


1797-8 69:71,529 | 2985,963) 356.572 | 12,85,595 ft 20,25,602 | 42,64,943 | 151:20,209, 
1798-9 © 41,07:834 | * 5,91,173] *1511:087 | %4,40,880 i +} |°43;89.542 | 74,83,597 |" 139,24,113) 
i . — _—_-__err os 
Years. 

eee —ar SSS a 
1799-1800 | * 67,91,406 "9560155 [3344435 if |°37585:937 |107,75,300 | * 257014,805, 
yBooer - | * 84,87,336 97,14,825 |#20,57:936 | = : "61 ,06,733 |107516,986 | * 280,83,816) 


‘Total : { 
4 Jor; 245:67,473 |  31:64.456) 3055,002 | 46,18,772 Y 77249730 pee Cian 


a8orrz = #131,97,420 * 2,955 |*16,88,486 | = * *45165,828 |120,09,824. 314641513 
Y * 242,33,107/ 

1802-3 - | *111,45,261 "254.709 |*26,59,588 |= - *48,18,897 |171,35,918 | 304:99,209, 
: , * 349325170 | 
4803-4 = | *108,18,545 *5,04:519 ]°24,66,343 ‘ W810 |*66,70,800 |151,43,037-]  35713,312 
- * 354045304 


RamhaL ae z 
oe or: 504,39,968 | * 61,582) 24,39,453 |192,16,788 : 996 |260,80.703 1657,81,065 | 115744751655 


eee —————— = ed —— 


* 89,16,168 © 2,145/"12,36,954 |*25, 3:13 °3544593 , 3621521845 
Sopeabt gre 4 : 361.23,327 


* 60,99,065 | * 1,57,902| *6,gn308 "13,96,343 qi * 373,95:897 


ds Tera oe Toran 
‘OT AR jondon, NS 2|_ London, 
Foreign Burope |ForcignEurope, Foreign Europe lporeign Europe 
and id 4 4 and 
America, ica, i a America. 


66,81,864 | 150,90,664 1799-1800 1495390505 
§7:62,458 | 108.41,768 1800-1 ; ¢ | 173,66,830 
38:83.737 | 108,55,266 1801-2 194,54,689 

* 23,32,682 | 64,40,516 I 1803-3 * 81,68.480 | 193,63,291 
pareaE yp) 1803-4 * 96,62,472 | 205:70:275 

186,60,741 | 432,28,214 ae =F) 


as pas 
= Total Igo) 20 6.945! 
tye yok 412,6456: 916 94.590 


1804-5 -| 76,36,174 


1805-6 -|  84,83,608 


‘Thofe marked * are corrected from the Report 1805-6. 
. 


x51 & 182. Nun 


Appendix, gNo. 47-SUPPLEMENT to FOURTH REPORT , 


No. 3. 
“WAL! E of faking GOODS Imported into Bexar, in the ander-mentioned Periods. 


ae SES 


Torn, 


Adtides 
for 
Manufac= 
ture Loternal 
and Ship! | stationary. fists , : ion, - Treafun 
building: 


Sundries 
for ¥ Merchaniy, 
Tresfare, 


Articles 
for 


and 


S¥ohllens,|  Mesals. 


rt 3548:hy 


43.71,052 


#7955 |- - -| 19,92974 
3796-7. | .78.808 | | 7:69.490 $,91,966; 53.47,032 | 27,27,929 
$7978 | 5954 | agsseese 6,60,653} 30,17:779 | 29,1394 |. 
4798-9 | 987,034 6.90,724) 61,121355 | 33,82,063 | 94-9448 | 

sy 


i F 
|si82,473428 34:39:280 |23, 6153" 3, ; 0985 35724994; 


729: tases 11,16,422 3] 459-492] 83,64,802 1108,46,600 | 190,11 93 
a8oo-1 ; eed 110.02,768 | 73,57,630 | 183,603 
LL Cee kn ae . t : 2p }ongeato | 72.64047 | 174-598 |) 
| 8802-5 Nee : ane TL] 2 7 \rego6as fuazdats6 | 229-814 
+ 1803-4 J * 4 * + 3 ot £7,36,197 $105,30.644 | 192,66,%4 
AOS tel ee a A a at Peseta Sa andl 
"i 3,8 32352] t164qa2 , 4,62,177|13,66,621/16,42,0C6] 7,94,525 sedge 495.38-061, 750401577 [ sre70., 
_, 3804-5 205.99,916 


ees Hes 15,84.959 


2805.6 109,30,799 |12939.615 | 238.7004 


Imports 


Sundey 


Re-ex- Tor at 


A 
iy Piece 
: Articles. forted; 
9795-6} 9483,284 | 62,5494 | 8,20,186 13,08,360 $149,062) 3,938,056 204,50,3} 
279%°7 | 74260752 | 34:35:797 [11557715] 15:35,255 3555,018} 4.855185) t55.57 
) x797°8| 5748617 | 5459844 | $46,752) Gu 157: 10,77,961 3:91,172] 279,018] 15 5,20,24 
1798-9 [7571742057 |°23:79,629: |14,01,646) +6,37:467\*4,59484)"1 39524, 11) 


£84.52,710 117 324,694 142:26,299), 4 E ; = = |gg2.719)16,147743] 648.5 1,69 
Se = See eet : eee =| | 
” aps » tea r i. ‘S - 
Vase |! 22008199 [735153949 |75:89:69:114,33,75 1)" 2349.274 fash ee, 94259 18,35.583|*2575 48a 
38c0-1}141,67,106 |*39,88,293 |'9,00, 110.5),957]*14,21,949 jreease 34)52.432 |> : ea nosd 80,383,311 
. 


165-91,309 |*33.48,139, sd'0t,7981 13,65, 882) woes Faaats a7.51.515 <= | 2151,406]11,170435 49,67,068] 5174.64.51 \ 
3 °342533s107 | 


° 5 

4802-3 185,94,576 |'29 73,754 |10,81,544116,38, 469 Ps44676 39,766 2 = |15:67,035}¢8,79.165 bug3t71 364.9909 
le - » : baum # 

1803-4 |£61,69,478 |°44,69,930 |10,71,366) 19,105 398, ga beod £20,987 |*41,88,225 23.13,295 151,008 985685 tn52 854 .3573338 


"354,62,304 | 


| 


aca 257457 5.055 


ae | 


75150678 [188340055 |67r44:498\74.000455 107,42,704'14,71,926 |t72.17,116 S505 aopasissgrais atest’ 


3804-5 /140,85,509 | 64.77,041 |18,20,446133,82,00. 28,89,913 


36z,52.845 


36 1523,987 


58,66,888 pease: <2] = = = | 780805) 373,05 09 


95>328 | 64,12,283 119,41,507| 1529.516] - - = | 9,638,497] 


r 2805 6/118,491670 | 52,21,5c9 |33,24,165 30586,491) 24,60,716 4,38,153 
é ‘ 


Thole marked * are comected from the Report 1805-6. a | 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


i No. 5. i , 
VALUE of GOODS Ywported into BENGAL from LONDON. 


-} Articles 
for Articles Sundries |. 
Manuface * for ’ for 
ture Internat | S8nties. | Reexpor 
Trade, 


951978 17gnees | 4,81,538 

‘| 525264| 571,673] 93,828] 6153-4931 33,678 |4,97.189]° 2470 | 45,316 1095 | 15349.906 34351096 
1797-8 ; BBings ‘48,603 11,838,043 | | 446,176 
21,394| 30.730] 554.855] _ 7,069) 3.483208 ‘ Prosts.205 *72301209 


— [$$ — | $$$ —___ SSE Rees Seen eT y 


31375648 | 3:575444 |2541,075] 189,656 |18,87,058 1,095 | 55:42,679 | 17.9019 


5 diese 31,50,696 16,36, 10 
| ftatsB2,6co (#1545 4,86 


"4098360 | "357431 


35,909,683, |*12.631387 | 
° 301553400 *9)85,601 [4 
peasy | 


175146789 | 45583955) 


~ |= - | = = [2934485 | #7197,680 9 
= = f= 0+ | = = [956,28,301 | *8,60%576 [ey 
‘ Sh 


a 
E 


Foreicn Europe and Amerrea. 


Merchandize. | Treafure. 


1798-9 = - ~| 854,611 | 45,24,138 

, 11799-1800 =| -42,01,832 | 76,48,1To 

] 1890-1 = 7.7 | 165105772 | $356,910 

< 1801-2 ee 985.972 “46.91180 

1802-3 12,91,260 645355537 

1803-4 é 9544087 | 63,00,452 

. “1804-5 . ‘ 12,63,442 54.05,818 
1805-6 S 17,36,069 | 74:00,695 = 


Thofe marked * are corrected from the Report 1805-6. 


Indigo, 


\! (490,416 | 61,44,186 
‘| 12,94)232 | 30,56,592 
11,87,710 | 535735861 


*8,85,058 |*23,71,941 


48,58,406 |169,46,580 


o |°15230479 |'35-28,416 


*12,28,637 60,28,524 
"3431582 [745023124 


$205:051 
477,000 
1,82,650 
°3:75/999 
: 
i 
13240700 


*6,98,667 
"319,406 
“217.899 
°2,30,727 

* 672 


12,67,371 


420,598 
*4,26,400 |'1,48,370) 


*1,70,906 M7,52,852 *58,092' = 


23,611 


any 334. 
$5223 
58,804, 

"284,808 


| $10,219 


295,050 | °33,166] * 4,802] - 


"956.444 | * 4,010 


19,69,398 | 938,398 


* 116 \%12,23,363 


“54.478 


*7.87)108 


£6,505 


22,520 
47,018 
62,851 
120,839 
* 105,647 


451,222 


*377:600 
536,801 
"654,884 
*403,292 
*227;253 


21,99,830 


Imports 
rbexported. 


| 1104357 
136.791 
105,653 
© 62,114, 


408,91 ry 


2,19,035 | 
. 
*4:7 4450 
"11,03,090 
*9,28,921 
*4,22,022 


34475518 


84,08,800 
5079310 
69,71,529 
*41,07,834 


245,67:473 
| 


°6 7.911406 
*84,87)336 
131497420 
°111,45:260 


108,18,545 


504,39:968 


To Foreign Evrorr and Axrtica. 


1798-9 


“1799-1800 


1800-4 
1801-2 
1802-3 
1803-4 
1804-5 
1805-6 


= See 


Thofe marked * are corrected from 


23532,682 


80,48,059 
98,79,494 
62,57,269 
81,68,480 
‘P62.472 
761361174 
 84,85,608 


the B 


“1452,905 
66,313 


*2155,764 


"25173550 


———7 


*89,16,168, 
*60,99,068 


0 the Affuita of The RAST INDIA COMPANY. 


94-586 
655731 
23,506 
30.827 


21716 


; 
1799-1800 28,393 
] 18co-1 > P 
1801-2 
| 1802-3, 
1803-4 * ~ 
——_ —_|—-—_ 
\"Votat 


is R'} 2,499 | 28,308 


21499 


for Manu- 


} 49.238 


Articles 
ohh, 
facture 
and Ship- 
building. 


and 


Stationery. 


761530 | 255334 
26,194 
271045 


33266. 


21,312 
24,652 


171.732 


No. 15. 


VALUB of GOODS Imported into BENGAL from AMERICA, 


Stores 
and 


Provifiong. 


32,885 


Articles 
for 
Ingernal 
‘Tiade. 


B35 970 
2545,596 
1243, 3,027, 
201,955 


Sundries | Toran 
for 


Suiidries|Re-export- Merchan~ 


‘Treafure. 
> size. 


3364-770 
444389) 
3,28.897) 


4885348 
11,08,384, 
Jett 
10,69,260 


4,626 


24,876 


22,607 


257 143 12) 


4626) 47,433 |13,96,368) 33.77.2053 


No. 16., 


ane 
$558,817) 
8,99:977 
6,681,326 
4:23-543 
2,49:507 


29,65,797 
4907 5,867 
“STG I17Y 
47532,088 
42,03,133 


128,00,57¢ 19745 1056 | 


<= 


Petre 34,92)181 


C08 


Toran 
Merchandize 
and s 
Treafure. 


845,018 
15:49.798 
10,430,108 
13,40,578 © 


————. 


ADTHSTX 


3524014 
4975844 
4382497. 
51,506,034 
45; 12,640. 
aah 
225,51,626 | 


ee 


39,23,317 © 
09,67,910 | 


ro.8y. 904 49:78, 


MERICA, 


Piece Goods. | Tadigo. 


\ 
1795-6 
1796-7 
1797-8. 
1798-9 


17470486 
20,77)886 
14,38,667 

8439459 


| 226.171 
36342248 
5:19,833) 
1,70,860) 


VALUE of GOODS Exported from BENGAL to A 


1,079 


Total Yr n4 


Pevears $ 60,94.498 


1799-1850 
1800-1 
1801-2 

| 1892-3) 
1803-4 = 


28.44.3393 
52435304 
#52244 
40.21942 
54:50:85, 


 66;256 
33,716 
ee 


Total i SRE 


SYean 2173055718) 99,972 


2,5 0,112 


1079 


Cottou, | Treasure, | Sundries, 
re-ex ported 


7.850 
27,555 1,19,571 


585567 |..- -,,| 234,420) 1,605,652 


Imports | 


19,49:319, 
| 25,060,267. 
20,25,602 
11,89,542 


77524739 


6.5034 

.} 5050543 
35105379) 
520544) = | 
85535313} 3.812 


28,78,089) 3,812 


a 1,609,772! 


= 284,217 
73,209) 


102,32! 
150.0335, 


_ 30,174) 


36,302 


68,561 


7 


3785.937 
61,06,733 
45;65,828 
48,625147 
| 67,60,058 


'260,80,703 


1Bo4-5 = 
1805-6 ~ 


773386 
12,1 3,890 


243895509 
49,63.132 


aja, & 382. 


6530352) 448 | 
11,695,261! - 


| 
14525) 


331445593 
62,78,055 


Customs, 


~ sea-ports anl harbours in’ the 


.« Without touching at any port or place whatever in t 
‘ymerely to procure refreshments or repai 


Sothe said European. Powers 


F 


4 


256 


Appendix, No 47—SUPPLEMENT ‘0 the FOURTH REPORT 


’ < 
of the territories in which they respectively lie has also fallen to us; but with regard to that 
Settlement, we apprehend (though we wish the poiat to be investigated) that its port has 
Been long used as a place of call by the ships of different nations visiting Inslia, cand we 
are not therefore disposed to interfere with a practice merely of this sort, for which pre- 
scription may be pleaded. Butif it. were attemptéd to elude any regulation we may now 
see fit to establish, respecting the trade of foreign flags, by making that place a port forit in 
away it has not hitherto been, we should then find it necessary to adopt further measures. 


. The permission given by our Governments to the resort of foreign flags, who had not 
national establishments of their own in India, was grounded upon the just policy of en- 
couraging the trade of our possessions; but it would have been better if that permission 
had been accorded: with a more cautious regard to future consequences, and with greater 
discrimination between the subjects of this country and strangers. y 

10. Having made these general observations, we proceed to give our more particular 
directions. ne »y es e 

11. Foreign .European shi ucten ei to any nation, having a settlement of its own in 
the East lattics, and being in amity with His bes eee freely enter the British sea-ports 
and harbours in that Country, whether they come'directly from their own country or from 
any of the ports and places ia the East Indies; they shall be hospitably received, and shall 
have liberty of trade there, in imports and. ee conformably to the regulations esta- 
blishedl in such place. . The said ships may also be cleared out for any port or. place in the 
Rast Indies; but if cleared our for Europe, shail be cleared out direct for the country in ~ 
‘urope to which such ships respectively belong. * 

n European blondiok fp eaputtis having no establishmentsin the East 


t Indies ; they shall be hospitably received there, and have 
rade in imports and exports, gevformably to the regulations of the place; 
ys, that.they pracecd from their own ports direct to the said British“territories, 
ver in the voyage out, except from necesgjty, 
in case of distress or accidents in the course of such 
Yyoyae, the burthen of the ie ‘of which necessity to rest on,the parties. And the vessels of 
jast-aforesaid, and of the said United States, shall not carry any 
ofthe articles exported by them from the said British territories to any port or place, except 
to sone port or placein, their own countries respectively, where the same shall be unladen. The 
snid ships are not to be cleared out to carry on the coasting or country trade in India; but 
-vessels’ goin with their original ear; or part thereof, from one British port of discharge 
ty another ritish port, are not to bé considered as carrying on the coasting trade. 

13 The ‘vessels shall not be allowed to proceed either with or without return cargo, 
id British territories to the settlements, or factories of any foreign European 
‘Nation in India, of to the Yerritory of auy Indian or Chinese Potentate or Power, except 
from thedike necessity aslis belore described, of which the proof to rest with them. Nor 
are the said vessels to enter the rivers in’that part of the British territory situated in Bengal, 
for any other purpose than that of proceeding to the port of Calcutta tor trade, retresh- 
mentor repai's; &ad in clearing out for their respective countries, the clearance shall be a 
“direct one. to the country, European or American, to which the vessel belongs, and to\no 
other whatever; they are to give bonds with the security of residents in the counwy, that 
they will deliver the cargo at the port for whieh the clearance is made, and such bond. is 
take ied when a certificate from a British Consul, or two known British merchants 


Indies, and 'sh ps belonging tothe United States of America, may, when those countries and 
"Stites respectively are in mick His Majesty, in like manner frecly enter the British 


Jree liber:y 
rovided al 


resident at such port, is produced, of the bona ‘fide delivery of the cargo there. ‘The’ 
yessels of those countries ate not to be sold or disposed of in ite said British territories, 


14, There are some other points belonging to this subject, on which we may hereafter 
have occasion to give our instructions. 3 


Ce We are your affectionate friends, f 


Haase, Parry, ~~ ge ate 
Charles G eae '. Majovibanks, 
ve Soe cane Red, 
; Gif Theltedton, Geo. Bile, 
¥ x John Inglis, 
s © Joke Travers, 
“= SLondon, ~~ R. Thornton, 
the 6th November 1807. 


ee ; : (No. 27.) ; ; 
d Separate LETTER, on the same Subject ;—3d August 1808. 
, ~) Separate Department —(Customs.) 
“Our Governor General in Council, at Fort William in Bengal. is 


“IN the last paragraph.of our separate Letter of the 6th November 1807, relative to the 
trade of Foreiga nations with the ports and settlements of the British territories in India, 


> 260 Appendix, No. 47—-SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT « 


Sek (No. 28,)? ° 
E © . 
Ay ACCOUNT of the quantity of Cotton Wool’ jmported into “Great Britain 
° 18uq and 1808. © 
Co That” nates 
In 1804 2 -  - =% =. - 61,867,329 
- 185 - = 5 © =° © 59,682,406 
- 1806. - - - - - - 58,176,283 
- 1807 ,- - - - - - - 74,925,308 
- 108 = = = 43,468,145 


Ax ACCOUNT of the quantity of Cotton Wool imported from the United States of 


America, and from Louisania, 1804 to 1808, Bs - 

7 i 

hig From Louisinia- | United Ses and | incaded . 

United States. Lovisania. in United States. ° 

Ibs. Ibs. Ibs. Ibs. 

1804 | — 23,041,567 3,371,802 26,413,369 4,772,699 
1805 | 20,675,195 5,268,085 31;043,280 6,758,019 
1806 24,403,122 815979559 28,000,681 6,809,183, 
2807 SS ie ae =e ee 44,090,079 10,341,278 


1808 | - =) - | = - 9s 12,228,397 3,018,906 


(No. 29.) 


Copy of a REPORT fro the Committee of Warehouses, approved in Court the 
gist May 1809, : 


+f, ; 
THE Governor General and Council having transmitted to the Court, in theit Letter in 


* the Commercial Department of the 8th February 1808, a Memorial from the Merchents, 


They particularly point out Cotton 
fight peewee 


Agents, and others, engaged in the Export Trade from Calcutta to the port of London, 
dated the 2oth November 1807;-in which the Merchants set forth the hardships they expe- 
rience from the great increase in the rate of freight ae by the Court for private 
tonnage ; your Committee have taken the same into consideration, and find the allegations 
of the Memorialists to be principally as follow : 

They complain of the sudden inerease of the price of tonnage from {.14 to £.22. 155. 
as contained in Court's Letter of 18th February 1807, publisbed in Calcutta Gazette 30th 
Tuly ; and state that gruff goods cannot afford that high freight, which will cause the trade 
of fides to flourish, and deprive: the port of “London of its advantages, as an 
entrepot, 2 

‘They state that the Americans pay less than f.11 sterling pes ton for the freight to 
India, and back ‘to America, and less pt oa of insurance than British Merchants, and 
that nothing but the fostering hand of the Company, in the article of freight, can enable 
the British. Merchants to contend with foreigners in the trade to Europe. 

They complain that £-22. 15 s. per ton is charged retrospectively for the seasons 1805 and 
1806; the former in opposition to a positive engagement on the part of the Court; and 
both without any intimation, that any increase was to be made, until it was notified in the 
Caleutta Gazette of July 1807. Sent 

They. represent that the freight for 1805, was fixed at £.14 og ton by the Court's 
Letter of 12th December 1804, published in Calcutta Gazette 201 Ayes 1805; and, as 

increase of the price of freight was notified in the year 1806, they therefore concluded 

at the price would be £-14 per ton in that season also. 

‘They state that they had shipped in 1805 and 6, and, prepared goods for shipping in 1807, 
which were unable to bear the advanced freight, and theretore coufidently, aie that freight 
for the goods shipped in seasons 1805 and 1806, may be charged at the rate of former years, 

~ ahd not exceeding £.14 perton, # the goods having partly arrived many months in London, 
“and the remainder having been shipped, eeecrijes: loug before any intimation of the 


"ae ee of freight was given to the proprietors or shippers, and that the increased rate of 
cla t: Vv 


Seca conti ‘Cite aaa Paice icle, which may be brought to Europe if 
ticle, whic 

, the interest of the Merchants is contained 

jovember 1807, “ that there are at present 

3t the Board are at no certainty that any 


msta 


Ps; 
extra Shi 
"of 


« 


je . on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 261 « ne 


e 
of the season 1805 did not arrive unfl the month of April 1806, and «their dispatch to Report” 
| Europe was, of course, proportiguably late. : of Committee of 

The Memorialisis observe, that the Court are careful that theirow1 psshall arrive in Warehouses: 
Tadia in thefine weather season; and notice, that only two exta Ships arrived in that seasorf’ 
ity 1805, "and none are at present arrived for the season 1807. ‘The statements in the present 20 Now 1807. 
Address will enable the Government General to judge of the result which must ensue from 
their shipments of gruff goods at £.22. 155. ton in extraShips, which will enable \ 

Government to deduce what it must be, should they pay at the rate off. 30. 108. on regular 
Ships. They must therefore embrace the alternative of shipping their goods on the terms 
now proposed, or submit to the detention of the goods in India, at the expense of high in- 
terest of money, of heavy charges on the bulky articles, of the probable luss of the market 
in England, and from the material injury which the goods of a perishable nature must. sus- . 
tain by remaining so long in warehouse in India, and in England before the proceeds can be 
brought to the credit of the unfortunate proprietors. : ; 

The Memorialists then suggest, that country tonnage may be taken up, equal to the im- és 

niediate occasion. 2 
"Your Committee beg leave to represent to the Court, that the observations contained in 
the Memorial, embrace two distinct considerations ; first, that the present system of supply- 
ing the Private Merchants in India with tonnage on Europe extra Ships, is not attended 
with sufficient facilities to those Merchants, that the rates of freight paid for the carriage 
of goods upon the extra Ships are higher than the trade can support ; and, secondly, that 
there has been a want of due care i Bond ictlna ie eraeR enc the puippeexta Ships, 
and of accommodating them to the views of the Merchants, agreeably to the intimations 
which have been made to the Publie by the Court, a gu : 
_ In order to bring the whole of this important subject into one point of view, it may be A 
necessary for your Committee briefly to recapitulate the circumstances which have led to the | 
present situation of the trade of the Indian Merchants, and to the participation which they 
now enjoy in the commerce between Great Britain and India, 7 

Previous to the year 1793, the Cpe exci trade oat granted by legisla- 
tive enactments ; and, except in the indulgence granted the mi and Officers of ‘, 
the ships? no British subjects were allowed to engage u the Indian trade; occasionally ¥ 
however, by special and temporary permission of the Com, Private goods were Jaden in « 


the Company’s Ships. Pei eeee we Talis ta tie 


e 


The Act of 1793 allowed that reogepeesh air: ; 
Company's Shins British Bey or produce to the extent of 3,000 tons or more _ 
annually, and import returns for the same at reasonable rates of freight, to be revised from 
dime to time, " i fie). ‘aha? 3 ; . 

At the passing of the Act of 1798, ie in existence, or in contemplation, exce 
the regular Ships of 800 tons, (for th di 
of the private goods had refi 

» the course of the sveconing > or 1 

were required by His Majesty’s Government for 
England enhanced the price of bread, i 
tities of rice aon Lae any fits! 
cargoes from jand: these c 
oe together mith the anxion: of ships residing in India, to be allowed 
to send to Europe in Indian ships 2 of India, beyond what in their 
Biol the capital of the Com; Y Jed to the introduc 
‘the trade: between India and | 
and cheaper 01 many of, to 


These ships were for 


upon the resent occasion to-¢ A A 
whether Re Indian ships shi 3 ‘erchani 
without the interference of the Company, or whether they should 
pany, and then rejet to the Merchants who might tol 

not cons: hi 


lers were nade in Judit 


° 


i ia e ° 862 Appendix, No. 47—SUPPLEMENT ¢o the FOURTH REPORT * * 
Report - «The price of freight which the Court fixed forife private goods on e&tra Ships which 
ef Commjitee of sailed from England in 1802-3, was £.5 for the yoyage owt, and £.11 forthe voyage from 
+. Warehouses: ~ India to England. . by 


© War with France was renewed in the year 1803; and the price of frejght wa$ aygmented 
by the Court upon ships sailing jp 1803-4 to £.6. ips. out, and £.14 home. ~ A 
E Information of the renewal of the war arrived in India in the month, of August 1803 3 
f and a: it was found necessary to engage some Indian tonnage for the purpose of transporting 
the private trade to Europe, eight ships were offered for that purpose in the month of De- 
cember 1803; but the freight required was £.21 per ton for the yoyage to England only, 
with advantigcons stipulations as to the return to India; and in the month of Febraary 1804, 
five other Indian ships were offered at freights from £.19 to £.22. 108. The ships which 
7 sailed from London in 1802-3, would be now taking in private goods at £.11 only, haying 
sailed during peace, * 
Q In December 1804, the Court sent information to the Governor General, that, privaté 
i Ls goods could be laden in India in their season 1805-6 at the same rate as in 1803-4, vig. 
ie £-14 per ton; but it afterwards appearing to the Court that the war contingenc; 
amounted to £.12. 133. 5d. on the extra Ships, instructions were sent to India, that if the 
Notice had not heea pub-ished, of the Court’s intention to charge £.14 per ton, the price 
to be paid was to be raised to £.20 for the Indian season 1805, being lower than the price 
id for Indian ships of the preceding season. But the Governor General and Council 
informed the Court, that in consideration of the Letter of December having been published, 
seg hae ea the price of freight for 1805-6 at £.14 only ; and the accounts were settled 
accordingly. 


: 


duct has been actuated by the most liberal principles: for the soupy who, rgther than 


> 
2. 
wR 
& 
= 
= 
=. 
5 
= 
+ 
E 
: 
cy 
2 
b 
eo 
S. 
a 
J 
S 
z 
& 
& 
= 
& 
5 
& 
E 
i 
z. 
3 
. 
A 
2 
a 


1 ost wholly, 
difficult to conceive ain 


| Mewes: Fart 
eae ante, "some of the persons who have signed the 
& eee 


d the 


remaining 
is that ant of 
see san sbip 
( in a subsequent para 
eing the case, the Merehant 
piece goods to Lendonon 
ants donot complain 
wners, which amounte 
ialists represent, that 
rted from. India to Es 
fo the situation of | 


rely brought 
: <a ith, ctor et Wool, . 
10 oO ito the Brit 


ian ships, and £2 . Europe extra Ships, cannot be an 
a aigte cae irectois, pees months before the Mer~ 
eprorial, had sy 


4 to import Cocton Wool, and had 
-_, we for that serv etermination of the Court might 
been known to tae Merchants at 


jue of writing their Memorial. With 
“ \ respect 


* Ores 


eon the Affirs pf ThOEAST INDIA COMPANY: ay) 
respect fo the term “ Unfortonse,” there is no doubt but that the private traders have sus- _ Ifeport ies, | 
tained gregt losses, from theif having overstocked the London market, (in iculae of Committee of » 


with piece-goods, which by law they are not permited to import;) but no man will venture Warehouses, 
to sty, that the utmost attention has ne® been shewn by the Company to the advantazeous 
management of the private géods*in London, and that his wishes and views have not been 
furthered with the greatest readiness, and at times at an extra expense to the Company, 
nittee apprehend that the only conclusion which the Memorialists propose should 
from these remarks is, that the employment of Indian ships would obviate such in- 
conveniences—an inference which your Committee deny, as the difference of freight, in 
any mode of calculating it, could form but an inconsiderable part of the loss. 
Note Committee will now proceed to consider that of the Memorial to which the 
eatest importance is attached by the Merchants, viz. that extra Ships were not provided by 
the Court tor the use of the Merchants in the Indian season 1805, until long after the sea- ° por 
sonable time of dispatch; which evil was continued until the period of the date of the 
‘Memorial, or the Indian season 1807. And here your Committee cannot but Jament, that 
the Memorialists omitted to state the cause of the ships not being in India, which, in can- 
dour, they ought to have done, as it must have been perfectly within the knowledge of every 
person in India. The Court did provide fourteen ships for the use of the ae traders in 
the season 1805, to the extent of 7,784 tons, which were brought afloat in London at several 
times between the 4th December 1804 and 28th May 1805; all of them in very sufficient 
time to haye been in India in the fair weather season. Three of these ships sailed from 
England early, and arrived in India in proper time; the remai na eres were put under> 
the convoy and direction of a squadron of King’s ships going to the Cape of God Hope, 
in consequence of which they su detention, both ia Lelia at ‘at the Cape. These 
¢leven ships did not sail from Cork harbour until the first of September 1805, and an 
‘accident happened to one of them, which reduced the number to ten. At Madeira, Sir 
Home Popham selected six ships for military purposes, and sent two on to Bengal, where 
they arrived 2d March ; Sir Home thea allowing the remainiug two to proceed to St. 
Helena awl Prince of Wales Island, at which latter place they bad a large quantity of stores 
to deliver for His Majesty’s naval service. In December 1805, the cadets, soldiers and 
seinen were ordered to land from eee wy gene assist in the 


private traders. “ 

Your Committee do not 
notices the advantages that 0 
in aa ine trade. in v 

ie degree of direct : th J 4 

should be allowed to the continental states of to 
discussed by the in the last hree ye be ee Iu 
ficient merely to refer the Court 


now the only neutrals, and their: 
character. Your 


‘ompany have ever 
the indulgence she 
Your Comm 
their regret that 
temporary incon’ 
in error, or are 


N 
nyu 


Digitized with financial assistance from 
Hermés Indi 
ermes indla 
a project facilitated by the Rotary Club of Bombay 


on 12 April, 2019 


