4?     ^  •"•" 
Haitt^        y0AH 


THE  LIBRARY 

OF 

THE  UNIVERSITY 
OF  CALIFORNIA 

LOS  ANGELES 


INV-SOI^        %H3 


:ALIFO^     ^ 

1L     & 

o      & 


^EUN'IVER%       ^N 


PRINCE   ADAM    CZARTORYSK.I. 


M  E  M  O  I  B  S 


OF 


PRINCE    ADAM 

CZARTORYSKI 


AND   HIS 


forty  ^teafor  I. 


DOCUMENTS   RELATIVE   TO    THE   PRINCE'S   NEGOTIATIONS  WITH  PITT, 
FOX,   AND    BROUGHAM,    AND  AN   ACCOUNT  OF    HIS    CONVERSA- 
TIONS WITH    LORD   PALMERSTON   AND   OTHER    ENGLISH 
STATESMEN      IN      LONDON      IN       1832 


EDITED   BY 

ADAM    GIELGUD 


TWO    VOL  U M ES 

WITH    PORTRAITS 


VOL.     I 


SECOND  EDITION 


REMINGTON     &     CO.,     PUBLISHERS 
HENRIETTA  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN 


1888 

ALL   RIGHTS    RESERVKD 


EBRATA 

In  pages  IS  and  If),  for  "\Volocxyn,  rend  Wolczyn. 

In  the  footnote  to  page  73,  for  1795,  read  1794. 

In  the  footnote  to  page  74,/-/?'  1434,  rend  1595. 

In  page  151,  line  11,  for  Wiszniowiec,  read  Wisniowiec  :  and  in  line  13. 
far  Wiszniowiecki,  read  Wisniowiecki. 

In  page  152,  line  5.  and  the  footnote,  for  Wiszniowiecki,  raid  Wisnio- 
wiecki. 

In  the  footnote  to  page  152.  for  1(575,  rnttl  1(>73. 

In  jiage  170,  line  27,  for  1793,  read  1798. 

In  the  footnote  to  page  183,  introduce  the  word*  and  at  Narva  after  v.-here. 


[An  Alphabetical  Index  to  this  work  will  be  found  at  end  of 
Second  Volume  .] 

College 
Library 

DK 
435.5* 


228 

.  / 


-•~f.oo.5~*- 
PREFACE       ..........  vii 

CHAPTER  I 

INTRODUCTORY    TO    THE    MEMOIRS  .....  I 

CHAPTER  II 

1776-1782 

EARLY  YOUTH. — FAMILY  RECOLLECTIONS. — LIFE  IN  A  POLISH  COUNTRY- 
HOUSE. PRINCES    AND    PRINCESSES    ON  THE    STAGE. A    CRIMINAL 

PRIEST. THE  POLISH  DIET      .  .  .  .  .  .  17 

CHAPTER  III 

1783 


JOURNEY    TO    VOLHYNIA    AND    PODOLIA. INTERVIEW    WITH    FREDERICK 

THE    GREAT  ........  33 


1142108 


iv  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  IV 

1784-1787 

PULAWY. EDUCATION  AND  STUDIES          .  .  .  .  .  42 

CHAPTER  V 

1786 

A    HOLIDAY    IN    GERMANY. — WIELAND. GOETHE. A  POLISH  CARNIVAL. 

VISITS  TO  ENGLAND     .......  44 

CHAPTER  VI 

1794-1795 

JOURNEY    TO     ST     PETERSBURG. — LEADING     PERSONAGES     IN     RUSSIAN 

SOCIETY     UNDKR      THE      EMPRESS     CATHERINE. THE     ZUBOFFS. — 

CATHERINE. HER     COURT. THE      YOUNG     PRINCES      ENTER     THE 

RUSSIAN    SERVICE  .......  55 

CHAPTER  VII 

1796 

CONVERSATIONS      WITH        ALEXANDER. STAY      AT       TSARSKOE-SELO. 

RELATIONS     BETWEEN     THE     GRAND-DUKE    PAUL    AND    HIS    SONS. — 
BIRTH    OP    NICHOLAS       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  109 

CHAPTER  VIII 

1796 

THE    PATE    OP    THE    PRISONERS. REFLECTIONS    ON    ALEXANDER'S    EDU- 
CATION.  ARRIVAL   OF    THE    KING  OF   SWEDEN. FAILURE    OF   THE 

NEGOTIATIONS     FOR     HIS     MARRIAGE     WITH     THE     GRAND-DUCHESS 
ALEXANDRA. DEATH    OF    CATHERINE.     .  .  .  .  127 


CONTENTS  v 

CHAPTER  IX 

1796-1798 

ACCESSION    OF    PAUL    I. HIS    CHARACTER. ARRIVAL    OP    KING    STANIS- 
LAS    AUGUSTUS. THE     EMPEROR'S     CORONATION     AT     MOSCOW. A 

POLISH    ENVOY     TO    ENGLAND. PRINCE    ADAM'S     RELATIONS     WITH 

ALEXANDER. COUNT    STROGONOFF     AND     M.    DE    NOVOSILTZOFF. — 

PROPOSED     ANNEXATION     OF     GALICIA     TO     HUNGARY.  —  DEATH    OF 

STANISLAS  AUGUSTUS. — PRINCE  VOLKONSKY. PRINCE  GALITZIN. — 

AN    IMPERIAL    PROGRESS     TO     KAZAN. A    PALACE     PLOT. RUSSIA, 

ENGLAND,       AND       MALTA. PITT      AND      ROSTOPCHIN. EUROPEAN 

COALITION   AGAINST    FRANCE  .  .  .  .  .  I  (JO 

CHAPTER  X 

1798-9 

STAY  AT    VIENNA. THE    GRAND-DUKE    CONSTANTINE. POZZO    DI  BORGO 

AND     THE     BRITISH     GOVERNMENT. THE      KING     OF     SARDINIA. — 

ALFIERI. — QUARREL  BETWEEN  RUSSIA  AND  AUSTRIA. RAPPROCHE- 
MENT    WITH     FRANCE.  THE     NEAPOLITAN     COURT. A     RUSSIAN 

LOTHARIO      .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  198 

CHAPTER  XI 

1801 

ASSASSINATION    OF    THE    EMPEROR    PAUL  ....  223 

CHAPTER  XII 

1801-2 

MY  RELATIONS  WITH  ALEXANDER. THE  SECRET  COUNCIL. EUROPEAN 

COALITION  AGAINST  ENGLAND. THE  DON  COSSACKS  MARCH  UPON 

INDIA. — NELSON'S    BOMBARDMENT   OF    COPENHAGEN. — ARRANGE- 
MENT BETWEEN  RUSSIA   AND  ENGLAND. MISSION   FROM  NAPOLEON 

TO      ALEXANDER. ALEXANDER'S      CORONATION. — INTERVIEW      BE- 
TWEEN ALEXANDER  AND  FREDERICK  WILLIAM  III  AT  MEMEL. THE 

STROGONOFFS. — THE      VORONTZOFFS. PLANS       OF       REFORM. MY 

APPOINTMENT  AS  ASSISTANT  FOREIGN  MINISTER  OF  RUSSIA. STATE 

OF  EDUCATION  IN  RUSSIA          .  .  .  .  .  .  256 


vi  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  XIII 

1803-4 

DIFFERENCES  WITH  SWEDEN. THE  CHANCELLOR  VORONTZOFF's    POLICY. 

— THE      FOREIGN      AMBASSADORS AUSTRIA,      PRUSSIA,      ENGLAND, 

FRANCE,     AND      SWEDEN. ALEXANDER^      PROFESSED      LIBERALISM 

PUT    TO    THE    TEST. HIS     FOREIGN     POLICY    AND    THAT     OF     NAPO- 
LEON.  PRINCE    CZARTORYSKI    BECOMES    UNPOPULAR    AT    COURT. — 

A      DUEL. THE     CHANCELLOR'S     ILLNESS. NAPOLEON     AND     THE 

RUSSIAN    AMBASSADOR 313 


PREFACE 


PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI  has  long -been  known,  and 
is  perhaps  still  remembered,  in  England  as  the  friend 
of  Earl  Grey,  Lord  Brougham,  and  other  leading 
English  statesmen  of  the  time  of  the  first  Reform  Bill, 
and  as  the  representative  and  champion  of  his  unhappy 
country  during  the  thirty  years  which  he  passed  in 
exile.  His  Memoirs,*  the  greater  part  of  which  were 
written  from  his  dictation  in  occasional  hours  of  leisure 
in  Paris,  end  at  the  battle  of  Austerlitz  ;  they  give 
vivid  pictures  of  the  life  of  the  Polish  aristocracy  dur- 
ing the  latter  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  of  the 
Court  of  the  Empress  Catherine,  of  the  assassination  of 
the  Emperor  Paul,  and  of  the  character  of  Alexander  I, 

*  A  French  edition,  with  a  preface  by  M.  Charles  de  Mazade,  of  the  French 
Academy,  was  published  in  Paris  in  May,  18S7  by  M.  M.  Plon,  Nourrit,  &  Co. 


viii  PREFACE 

who  had  made  Prince  Adam  his  Minister  and  con- 
fidential friend.  Of  the  remainder  of  his  busy  and 
eventful  life  no  detailed  history  has  yet  appeared. 
It  is  not  attempted  in  the  present  work  to  furnish  such 
a  history,  but  only  to  supplement  the  Memoirs  by 
diplomatic  papers,  and  other  matter  hitherto  unpub- 
lished, which  are  of  especial  interest  to  an  English 
reader.  The  documents  and  extracts  from  private 
letters  and  diaries  have  been  copied  or  translated  from 
the  originals  in  the  archives  of  the  Czartoryski  family, 
the  introductory  chapter  is  based  on  facts  taken  from 
the  late  M.  B.  Zaleski's  excellent  biography  of  the 
Prince,  unfortunately  unfinished,  and  the  account  of 
his  stay  in  England  after  the  collapse  of  the  Polish 
Revolution  of  1830-1  is  derived  from  a  manuscript 
work  now  in  preparation,  which  has  been  kindly  placed 
at  my  disposal  by  M.  L.  de  Gadon,  secretary  to  Prince 
Ladislas  Czartoryski,  the  son  of  Prince  Adam  and 
the  present  head  of  the  family.  In  order  to  elucidate 
the  text,  the  Memoirs  and  other  papers  have  been 
arranged  in  order  of  date,  and  are  connected  by  a  brief 
narrative  of  the  incidents  to  which  they  refer,  thus 
presenting,  it  is  hoped,  a  clear,  if  incomplete,  survey  of 
the  career  of  a  statesman  whose  distinguished  abilities, 
lofty  virtue,  and  ever-fervent  patriotism  mark  him 
out  as  one  of  the  noblest  and  most  striking  figures  of 

the  century. 

A.  G. 


JHtmoirs  of  prince  Jltmm  QUariorgsfei 


CHAPTER  I 

INTRODUCTORY    TO    THE    MEMOIRS. 

THE  Czartoryskis  come  of  an  old  Lithuanian  family, 
related  to  the  royal  dynasty  of  the  Jagiellons.  In 
1569,  John  and  Alexander  Czartoryski  took  a  promi- 
nent part  in  bringing  about  the  union  of  Poland  with 
Lithuania,  and  during  the  seventeenth  century  various 
other  members  of  the  family  distinguished  themselves 
by  their  valour  in  battle  and  their  ability  a,s  politicians 
and  churchmen,  but  it  did  not  attain  the  height  of  its 
celebrity  until  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  centur}^ 
when,  in  the  words  of  Mickiewicz,  it  became  the  only 
private  family  in  Europe  that  had  a  political  history. 
The  heads  of  the  house  were  at  that  time  the  Princes 
Michael  and  Augustus.  Michael,  the  eldest,  a  man 
of  remarkable  talents  and  energy,  received  an  excellent 
training  in  statesmanship  under  his  friend  Count 
Fleming,  the  Minister  of  King  Augustus  II,  and 

VOL.  I.  A 


2          MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

rapidly  rose  to  a  position  of  almost  unexampled  in- 
fluence among  his  countrymen.  Augustus,  his  brother, 
proud  and  reserved  in  character,  but  ambitious  and 
passionate,  chose  the  military  career.  He  became  a 
Knight  of  Malta,  and  took  part  in  the  capture  of 
Belgrade  under  Prince  Eugene,  who  presented  him 
with  a  sword  of  honour  in  recognition  of  his  bravery  on 
the  occasion.  In  1729,  he  became  a  Major-General 
in  the  Polish  army,  and  in  1731,  after  a  duel  with  one 
of  his  rivals  for  the  hand  of  Madame  Denhoff,  a  lady 
of  rare  intelligence  and  immense  wealth,  she  selected 
him  out  of  a  crowd  of  suitors,  among  whom  were 
various  foreign  princes,  such  as  the  Duke  of  Braganza, 
the  Prince  of  Charolais,  and  the  Duke  of  Holstein. 
Prince  Augustus  thus  became  one  of  the  wealthiest 
men  in  Europe,  and  by  good  management  he  not  only 
paid  the  debts  on  his  wife's  estates,  but  doubled  her 
income.  At  the  end  of  the  first  year  after  their 
marriage,  he  sent  to  her  a  number  of  boxes  full  of 
gold  pieces,  representing  the  revenue  from  her  estates, 
which  she  at  once  ordered  to  be  returned  to  him ; 
and  this  ceremony  was  repeated  annually  during  the 
forty  years  of  their  married  life. 

When  Augustus  III  was  called  to  the  Polish 
throne  in  1741,  Poland  was  enjoying  the  blessings  of 
peace,  while  the  surrounding  countries  were  desolated 
with  the  conflicts  of  hostile  armies ;  and  her  people 
presented  all  the  outward  signs  of  prosperity.  But  as 
a  State  she  was  powerless.  In  some  countries  it  is  a 
frequent  subject  of  complaint  that  the  people  do  riot 
take  sufficient  interest  or  part  in  politics,  and  that  the 
Government  consequently  falls  into  the  hands  of  pro- 


INTRODUCTORY  3 

fessional    politicians.       In    Poland,   not  to  take   part 
in  public  life  was  regarded  almost  as  a  crime.     Nearly 
every  voter*  was  an  active  politician ;   but  this  pro- 
duced  an    exaggerated   sense    of    the    importance    of 
individuals   in  the    State.      Each    man   had  his  own 
opinions,  and  refused  to  be  bound  by  those  of  others ; 
the    liberum    veto,    originating     in    times    when    the 
principle    of   government   by   majority   had   not   yet 
been  discovered,  was  regarded  as  a  palladium  of  liberty. 
Under    such    circumstances   government  was  impos- 
sible.t     The  Diets  had  repeatedly  to  be  dissolved  with- 
out passing  the  measures  necessary  for  administration, 
and  a  wide  field  was  opened  for  the  intrigues  of  foreign 
powers  and  ambitious  magnates,  especially  as  the  old 
principle  of  elective  monarchy  was  still  retained.     The 
two  Czartoryski  princes  set  themselves  to  the  task  of 
restoring  order  in  this  chaos,  of  combining  and  directing 
the  national  forces  which  were  dissipating  themselves 
in  futile  individual  effort,  and  of  enabling  Poland  to 
resume  her  position  among  the  independent  States  of 
Europe.     But  the  difficulty  of  the  task  was  greatly 
increased  by  the  fact  that  the  Poles  did  not  see  their 

*  It  is  a  common  mistake  among  Englishmen  to  talk  of  Poland  as  '  an  aristocratic 
republic. '  The  so-called  nobles  did  not  form  an  aristocracy  in  our  sense  of  the  term, 
but  consisted  of  all  those  who  had  political  privileges.  In  the  eighteenth  century 
they  numbered  one-fifth  of  the  population — a  proportion  considerably  greater  than 
that  of  the  electorate  to  the  population  in  England,  even  after  the  first  Reform  Bill. 

t  Another  cause  of  the  weakness  of  Poland  as  a  State  is  thus  indicated  by  Mr 
Lecky  (History  of  England  in  the  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  vi.  chap.  xxii.  p.  104) : — 
'  The  objects  of  Governments  are  not  only  various,  but  in  some  measure  incompatible, 
and  the  Dutch  constitution,  like  the  old  constitutions  of  Poland,  being  mainly  con- 
structed with  the  object  of  opposing  obstacles  to  the  encroachments  of  the  central 
power,  had  left  the  country  wholly  incapable  of  prompt  and  energetic  action  in  times 
of  public  danger.  No  augmentation  of  the  military  or  naval  forces,  no  serious 
measure  of  defence,  could  be  effected  without  the  separate  assent  of  all  the  provinces, 
and  the  forms  that  were  required  by  law  were  so  numerous  and  so  cumbrous  that  it 
was  probably  chiefly  its  more  favourable  geographical  position  that  saved  the  United 
Provinces  from  the  fate  of  Poland. ' 


4  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

danger  and  did  nothing  to  second  the  efforts  which 
were  made  to  save  them. 

The  princes  began  by  associating  with  them  in  the 
execution  of  their  plan  some  of  the  younger  and  more 
active    members    of  the    great    Polish    families — the 
Oginskis,  the  Poniatowskis,  and  the  Zamoyskis.     They 
thus  formed  a  strong  party  in  the  country,  which  by 
its   wealth  and  influence   was  able   to   give  effective 
support  to  the   Government  and   to  check  the  flood 
of  anarchy  which  was  rapidly  undermining  the  State. 
In  the  midst  of  the  general  indolence  and  disorganisa- 
tion, people   looked  up  with  respectful  awe  to  these 
self-denying  patriots  who,  in  the  midst  of  wealth  and 
luxury,  devoted  their  days  and  nights  to  the  improve- 
ment of  the  administration  and  the  strengthening  of 
the  position  of  their  country  with  regard  to  foreign 
powers.       Not    content  with   being  themselves    hard 
workers    in    the    cause,    the    two    princes    selected    a 
number  of  intelligent  and  able  young  men  whom  they 
trained    at   their    own    expense,    both   at   home    and 
abroad,  for  the  various  branches  of  the  public  service. 
Their  object  was,  above  all  things,  to  establish  a  strong 
and    orderly  government   in    Poland,   and  their  own 
conduct  of  affairs  was  a  model  on  a  small  scale  of  such 
a   government.       With    their    immense    wealth    and 
extensive  social  relations  all  over  the   country,  they 
constantly  stepped   in   to  remedy  the  defects  of  the 
existing  system,  protecting  the  poor  and  weak  against 
the  rich,  coming  forward  as  the  champions  of  order  in 
the  midst  of  the  incessant  conflict  of  opinion  in  the 
Diets,  and  setting  an  example  of  steady  work  and  high 
•  political  aims.       This   naturally  excited  the  jealousy 


INTRODUCTORY  5 

and  alarm  of  other  great  Polish  families,  such  as  the 
Potockis  and  the  Radziwills ;  but  they  persistently 
carried  out  their  scheme  of  action  in  the  face  of  all 
obstacles. 

Foreign  alliances  at  that  time  took  a  very  different 
shape  from  what  they  do  at  present.  In  1746  Eng- 
land, Austria  and  Russia  were  combined  against 
Frederick  the  Great,  who  was  supported  by  France 
and  Turkey.  The  Czartoryskis  sided  with  the  former 
powers,  the  Potockis  with  the  latter.  Poland  had 
sunk  into  such  a  state  of  anarchy  that  no  Polish 
statesman  could  gain  any  great  influence  among  his 
countrymen  unless  he  had  the  support  of  some  foreign 
ambassador,  and  it  was  therefore  necessary  for  the 
Czartoryskis  to  declare  themselves  openly  as  the 
partisans  of  one  of  the  great  powers  which  struggled 
with  each  other  for  leadership  in  the  moribund  Polish 
State,  especially  as  the  King  himself,  alarmed  at  their 
steadfast  and  uncompromising  honesty,  had  gone  over 
to  the  side  of  Prussia  and  France.  This  was  the 
beginning  of  the  alliance  of  the  Czartoryskis  with 
Russia — an  alliance  into  which  they  entered  with 
the  best  of  motives,  but  which  had  the  most 
disastrous  consequences.  The  first  fruit  of  the  alliance 
was  the  mission  of  Stanislas  Augustus  Poniatowski, 
the  nephew  of  the  Czartoryski  princes,  to  the  Russian 
Court  in  the  capacity  of  secretary  to  Sir  Hanbury 
Williams,  the  British  Ambassador.  Poniatowski, 
young,  handsome,  and  with  all  the  accomplishments 
of  a  courtier,  speedily  gained  the  favour  of  the  Grand- 
Duchess,  afterwards  Empress,  Catherine,  and  this 
greatly  strengthened  the  position  of  the  Czartoryskis 


6          MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

at  the  Russian  Court.  Finding  themselves  abandoned 
by  the  King,  they  looked  more  and  more  to  St 
Petersburg  for  support,  and  the  accession  to  the 
Russian  throne  of  the  Empress  Catherine  in  1762 
seemed  at  length  to  hold  out  a  prospect  of  the  realisa- 
tion of  their  hopes.  In  a  long  letter  announcing  the 
event  to  Poniatowski,  she  informed  him  that  she 
would  at  once  send  Count  Keyserling  to  Warsaw  to 
make  Poniatowski  King  after  the  death  of  the  reigning 
sovereign  ;  or,  if  this  should  not  be  possible,  to  endea- 
vour to  obtain  the  election  to  the  throne  of  Prince 
Adam  Casimir  Czartoryski,  the  son  of  Prince  Augustus 
and  the  father  of  the  writer  of  the  following  Memoirs.* 
Catherine  was  thought  at  that  time  to  be  a 
sovereign  of  liberal  ideas,  who  would  give  her  people 
a  constitution,  and  would  introduce  a  new  era  of 
freedom  and  universal  justice.  These  illusions  were 
so  general  that  even  such  experienced  and  sagacious 
politicians  as  the  Czartoryski  princes  were  deceived  by 
them  ;  they  thought  that  the  regeneration  of  Poland, 
for  which  they  had  worked  thirty  years,  was  at  hand. 
But  King  Augustus's  favourite  Minister,  Brlml,  did 
his  utmost  to  foil  their  plans.  The  chief  dignities 
in  the  country  were  taken  from  the  Czartoryskis  and 
their  adherents  and  given  to  their  adversaries,  and 
scandalous  scenes  were  got  up  in  the  Diets  with  the 
object  of  decrying  thorn  in  the  eyes  of  the  public.! 

*  '  J'envoie  incessamment  le  Comte  Keyserling  ambassadeur  en  Pologne  pour  vous 
faire  roi,  apres  le  deces  de  celui-ci,  et  en  cas  qu'il  ne  puisse  re"ussir  pour  vous,  qxie  ce 
soit  le  Prince  Adam.'  Memoires  de  Stanislas  Auguste  Pouiatowski  et  sa  corres- 
pondance  avec  Catherine  II.  Posen,  1862. 

t  The  following  letter,  of  which  there  is  a  copy  in  the  Czartoryski  archives,  was 
addressed  on  this  subject  by  the  Empress  Catherine  to  her  ambassador  Count 
Keyserling :  '  M.  le  Comte  de  Keyserling :  Je  viens  d'apprendre  que  la  diete  en 
Pologne  est  rompue  et  que  vos  amis  ont  pense"  etre  massacres.  Je  vous  recommande 


INTRODUCTORY  ^ 

This  brought  matters  to  a  crisis.     The  two  heads  of 

o 

the  Czartoryski  family  were  growing  old,  and 
Catherine  was  showing  an  inclination  to  conclude  an 
alliance  with  Frederick  the  Great ;  it  seemed  to  them 
that  if  they  did  not  at  once  take  decisive  action,  all  the 
fruit  of  their  life-labour  might  be  lost.  The  occasion 
was  afforded  by  the  candidature  of  Prince  Charles  of 
Saxony,  the  favourite  son  of  the  King  of  Poland,  for 
the  dukedom  of  Courland.  The  Russian  candidate, 
Biron,  was  supported  by  the  Czartoryskis,  but  the 
majority  of  the  senate  declared  itself  in  favour  of 
Prince  Charles,  and  a  note  asserting  his  claims  and  in- 
timating doubts  as  to  the  legitimacy  of  Catherine  was 
addressed  by  the  Ministry  to  the  Russian  ambassador. 
This  was  equivalent  to  a  rupture  with  Russia,  and 
the  Czartoryskis  proposed  to  Catherine  that  they 
should  form  an  armed  confederacy,  not  against  the 
King  of  Poland,  but  against  his  Minister  Bruhl, 
recalling  the  words  of  the  Due  de  Gramont  to  Louis 
XIV  :  '  We  make  war  against  Cardinal  Mazarin,  but 
we  serve  your  Majesty.'  The  confederacy  was  to 
take  the  government  of  the  country  into  its  own 
hands,  restore  order  and  reform  abuses,  and  after 
the  death  of  Augustus  III  give  up  the  throne  to  a 
prince  whose  election  should  be  agreeable  to  Russia. 
In  order  to  avoid  a  civil  war,  the  Czartoryskis  asked 
that  Russia  should  send  an  overwhelming  force  into 
the  country  to  support  them,  and  in  return  they 
promised  to  recognise  Catherine  as  Empress  of  Russia, 

d'offrir  tout  mon  appui  aux  princes  Czartoryski  et  a  leurs  amis  et  de  ne  rien  negliger 
en  tout  ce  qui  leur  peut  procurer  surete,  appui,  et  profit.  Je  vous  fais  cette  lettre  a 
ce  sujet,  vous  assurant  d'ailleurs  de  mon  affection.  Moscou,  ce  13  Octob.  1762. 
Catherine. ' 


8          MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

and  Biron  as  Duke  of  Courland ;  to  regulate  the 
frontier  between  Poland  and  Russia ;  and  to  give  the 
Empress  satisfaction  for  the  insult  which  had  been 
inflicted  upon  her.  That  the  Czartoryskis,  mistaken 
and  disastrous  as  their  policy  has  proved,  were 
sincere  in  their  professions  of  disinterestedness  and 
wished  only  for  the  good  of  their  country,  was  uni- 
versally acknowledged  at  the  time,  and  even  Herr 
Benoit,  the  Prussian  Ambassador,  wrote  to  Frederick 
the  Great  that  '  they  were  too  patriotic  to  seek  the 
throne  for  themselves  so  long  as  Augustus  III  was 
alive,  and  only  thought  of  the  regeneration  of  their 
country.'  Their  only  object  was  to  establish  a  strong 
arid  orderly  system  of  government  in  Poland ;  and 
finding  that  they  could  not  obtain  sufficient  support 
for  carrying  out  this  object  among  their  own  country- 
men, they  unhappily  trusted  in  the  apparent  liberalism 
and  justice  of  the  young  Empress  of  Russia. 

The  hesitation  of  Catherine,  and  the  death  of 
Augustus  III  in  1763,  necessarily  postponed  the 
execution  of  their  projects.  The  Empress,  who  had 
been  gradually  entering  into  friendly  relations  with 
Frederick  the  Great,  wrote  to  him  that  she  agreed  in 
his  opinion  that  the  crown  of- Poland  should  not 
be  retained  by  the  House  of  Saxony,  and  that  it 
should  be  given  to  a  Pole  ;  and  she  suggested  that 
Poniatowski  should  be  elected  king,  as  having  the 
least  right  to  the  crown,  he  would  be  most  under 
obligation  to  the  two  powers  that  helped  him  to  it. 
Frederick  readily  consented,  and  a  treaty  was  accord- 
ingly concluded  between  the  two  sovereigns  binding 
them  to  joint  action  with  regard  to  Poland.  This 


INTRODUCTORY  9 

alliance  opened  the  eyes  of  the  Czartoryskis  to  the 
danger  which  threatened  their  country  :  their  nephew 
Poniatowski  was  fully  aware  of  their  plans  and  had  so 
far  supported  them,  but  he  was  totally  unfitted  to 
occupy  the  throne  of  Poland  at  so  critical  a  period 
of  her  fortunes,  and  it  seemed  only  too  evident  that 
Russia  and  Prussia  intended  to  use  him  merely  as  a 
tool  for  establishing  their  influence  in  Poland  and 
perhaps  destroying  her  independence.  What  they 
most  dreaded,  however,  was  a  civil  war,  which  they 
were  convinced  could  only  precipitate  the  dangers  by 
which  Poland  was  threatened ;  and  they  accordingly 
persisted  in  the  course  of  policy  on  which  they  had 
started.  When  the  Diet  was  convoked  they  came 
supported  by  a  large  Russian  force  ;  their  opponents 
protested,  and  left  the  House ;  and  the  Czartoryskis 
at  once  took  the  opportunity  of  introducing  the  reforms 
for  which  they  had  laboured  so  long.  The  system 
under  which  the  high  State  dignitaries  were  indepen- 
dent of  each  other  and  of  the  King,  which  was  one  of 
the  chief  causes  of  the  anarchy  into  which  Poland  had 
fallen,  was  abolished,  and  replaced  by  an  organisation 
of  Ministers  appointed  by  the  sovereign  and  responsible 
to  the  Diet ;  all  classes  of  the  population  were  made 
equal  before  the  law  ;  and  a  multitude  of  smaller 
reforms,  all  in  the  same  spirit  of  liberty  and  order, 
became  part  of  the  Polish  constitution.  Rulhiere,  the 
historian  of  the  Saxon  party,  could  not  restrain  his 
admiration  at  the  Czartoryskis  having  '  in  six  weeks 
carried  out  reforms  which  the  French.,  kings  had  only 
executed  in  six  centuries.'* 

*  Histoire  <le  1' Anarchic  de  Pologue,  vol.  ii.  p.  229. 


io        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

The  triumph  of  theCzartoryskis  now  seemed  assured. 
Even  their  adversaries,  seeing  the  wise  measures  of 
which  they  were  the  authors,  and  the  benefits  which 
these  measures  were  already  conferring  on  the  country, 
abandoned  their  attitude  of  passive  resistance,  and 
Poniatowski  was  elected  king  without  opposition 
(1764),  after  which  the  Diet  passed  a  resolution  direct- 
ing that  statues  of  the  Princes  Michael  and  Augustus 
should  be  erected  at  Warsaw  and  Wilna  '  in  memory 
of  the  national  gratitude.'  The  princes  did  not,  how- 
ever, possess  the  qualities  which  ensure  popularity  : 
their  strict,  almost  harsh,  sense  of  justice,  their  aver- 
sion to  compromise  and  conciliation,  revived  the 
dormant  hostility  of  their  adversaries  and  alienated 
many  of  their  supporters.  Yet  the  Poles  had  never 
enjoyed  such  security  at  home,  or  greater  respect 
abroad  than  in  the  first  years  of  the  reign  of  their  new 
king,  when  the  Czartoryskis  were  the  virtual  rulers  of 
the  country.  '  Every  citizen,'  it  was  said,  '  at  length 
felt  that  his  life,  his  honour,  and  his  property  were 
safe,'  and  for  the  first  time  for  many  years  Russia  and 
the  other  neighbouring  powers  abstained  from  inter- 
ference in  Polish  affairs.  Unfortunately  the  influence 
of  the  Czartoryskis  did  not  last  long  enough  to  produce 
a  permanent  improvement  in  the  administration. 
Both  the  King  and  the  people  grew  restive  at  the  dic- 
tation of  these  two  rigid  old  men,  who  were  so  much 
their  superiors  in  wisdom  and  self-control,  who  despised 
popularity,  and  sought  no  approval  but  that  of  their 
own  consciences.  Moreover,  the  reforms  which  were 
gradually  and  quietly  being  introduced  by  them 
began  to  inspire  anxiety  in  the  neighbouring  States. 


INTRODUCTORY  IT 

Frederick  the  Great,  with  his  usual  sagacity,  saw  that 
the  effect  of  these  reforms  must  ultimately  be  to  make 
Poland  entirely  independent  of  her  neighbours,  and  his 
correspondence  with  the  Empress  Catherine  and  the 
Prussian  Ambassadors  at  Warsaw  shows  how  ea^er  he 

C7 

was  to  throw  every  possible  impediment  in  the  way  of 
the  Czartoryskis,  and  especially  to  prevent  the  abolition 
in  the  Great  Diet  or  Parliament  of  the  liberum  veto,  to 
which  the  Poles  still  blindly  clung  as  one  of  the 
pillars  of  their  freedom.  At  length  the  Russian  and 
Prussian  Ambassadors  openly  declared  themselves 
against  the  Czartoryskis,  and  taking  advantage  of 
their  unpopularity,  secured  a  majority  against  them 
in  the  first  Parliament  convoked  under  the  new  reign 
(1766).  The  Czartoryskis  accepted  this  defeat  with 
characteristic  stoicism  :  the  project  for  the  abolition 
of  the  liberum  veto  was  deferred  for  a  more  favourable 
opportunity,  but  they  remained  in  office  and  silently 
but  steadily  pursued  their  work  of  reform.  This, 
however,  did  not  at  all  suit  the  views  of  the  Russian 
Government,  which,  now  thoroughly  alarmed,  deter- 
mined to  come  forward  in  active  opposition  to  the 
Czartoryskis  and  the  King,  whom  it  regarded  as  their 
tool.  A  pretext  was  ready  to  hand  in  the  position  of 
the  dissenters,  who  were  under  the  same  disabilities 
as  the  Catholics  then  were  in  England,  and  whom 
Catherine  had  always  affected  to  protect,  thereby 
gaining  the  applause  of  her  friends  the  encyclopedists, 
and  making  a  display  of  liberalism  which  cost  her 
nothing  and  was  very  convenient  for  her  policy.  The 
Russian  Ambassador,  Repnin,  who  had  been  one  of 
the  warmest  of  the  supporters  of  the  Czartoryskis, 


12        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSK1 

was  instructed  to  demand  that  the  disabilities  of  the 
dissenters  should  be   removed.     The  princes   replied 
that  in  the  then  existing  state  of  public  opinion   it 
would  be  impossible  to  carry  such  a  measure  in  the 
Polish  Parliament,  upon    which    Catherine    sent  her 
troops  into  the  country  to  ravage  the  estates  of  the 
Czartoryskis  and  the  King,  and  issued  a  proclamation 
condemning  the  new  policy  of  reform  and  promising 
that   the    Empress    would   take   all   those    who   had 
grievances  under  her  special  protection.     The  Czar- 
toryskis, in  no  way  cowed  by  these  barbarous  reprisals, 
undauntedly  stood  their   ground,  and    when    Repnin 
called  upon  them  to   resign  office,  replied  that  they 
did  not  hold  their  posts  from  the  Empress  of  Russia, 
but  from  the  King  of  Poland.*     Their  steadfastness 
and  the   abuses   committed   by  the  Russian  soldiery 
produced  such  a  reaction  in  their  favour  that  Repnin, 
hoping  thereby  to  paralyse  the  growing  opposition  to 
his  plans,  caused  some  of  the  principal  senators  to  be 
arrested  and  sent  into  the  interior  of  Russia.     Those 
who  remained,  threatened  with  a  similar  fate,  passed 
all  the  measures  that  Repnin  proposed  to  them.     The 
disabilities  of  the  dissenters  were  abolished,   and    a 
treaty  was  concluded  with  Russia  assigning  to  that 
Power  the   right  of  protecting  and    controlling  the 
Polish  administration.     But  the  great  majority  of  the 
Polish  nation  indignantly  refused  to  ratify   the    de- 
cisions of  its  intimidated  representatives.     On  the  29th 

*  '  Je  n'ai  pas  re^u  mon  emploi  de  S.  M.  Imperials,  ainsi  elle  me  pardonuera  si  je 
ne  veux  pas  m'en  defaire  a  sa  requete.  Je  suis  vieux,  tres-vieux ;  elle  me  fera 
tres-peu  de  mal  en  m'otant  le  peu  de  jours  qui  me  restent.  Mais  j'ai  trop  soil)  de 
ma  gloire  pour  ternir  la  fin  d'une  vie  qui,  j'ose  le  dire,  a  ete  passee  sans  tache  au 
service  de  ma  patrie,  par  un  acte  que  le  moude  avec  raison  condamnerait  comme 
lache  et  interesseV 


INTRODUCTORY  13 

of  February,  1768,  an  armed  confederation  was  formed 
at  Bar  to  rid  the  country  of  its  Russian  aggressors. 
Russia,  hampered  by  her  war  with  Turkey,  strove  in 
vain  to  induce  the  King  to   declare   himself  against 
the  confederates,  and  the  Czartoryskis  entered  into 
communication    with   them  in    order   to    extend   the 
movement  over  the  whole  country,  and  enable  Poland 
to  present  a  united  front  against  her  northern  neigh- 
bour.    These  efforts  failed  through  the  un popularity 
of  the    King   and   the  jealousy    of  the    other   great 
aristocratic  families.     Yet  the  confederation  stood  its 
ground  ;  its  principal  founder,  Joseph  Pulaski,  was  an 
old  retainer  of  the  Czartoryski  family ;  and  Repnin's 
successor  in  the  embassy,  Prince  Wolkonski,  reported 
to  Catherine  that  '  nothing  could  be  done  so  long  as 
the  Czartoryskis  remained  in  Warsaw.'     The  Russian 
Government  then   confiscated  their    property.      They 
persisted,  however,  in  their  patriotic  attitude,  declaring 
that  whatever  happened  they  would  remain  faithful 
to    their    country  ;  and  the    King,  feeling  that  they 
were  his  only  support  and  that  he  had  neither  the 
ability  nor  the  character  which  alone  could  in  such  a 
crisis    enable    him    to  maintain    himself,    refused    to 
abandon  them. 

Even  Catherine  was  impressed  by  this  noble 
courage  and  perseverance.  She  restored  to  the 
Czartoryskis  their  confiscated  estates,  and  appointed  a 
new  ambassador  to  Warsaw,  Count  Saldern,  who 
treated  the  King  and  his  Ministers  in  a  conciliatory 
spirit  very  different  from  that  of  his  predecessors. 
But  Prussia,  alarmed  at  the  apparent  reconciliation 
between  Russia  and  the  King,  now  sent  her  troops 


14         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

into  Poland.  The  confederation  of  Bar  was  crushed, 
and  the  first  partition  was  arranged  with  Kussia  and 
Austria  by  Frederick  the  Great. 

Michael  and  Augustus  Czartoryski  did  not  long 
survive  the  fall  of  their  country,  for  which  they  had 
laboured  so  much  and  so  well.  The  former  died  on 
the  13th  of  August  1775  ;  the  latter,  on  the  4th  of 
April  1782,  leaving  an  only  son,  Adam  Casimir, 
to  whom  Catherine  had  assigned  the  throne  of 
Poland  in  the  event  of  its  not  being  accepted  by 
Poniatowski.  Like  the  rest  of  his  family,  Prince 
Adam  Casimir  maintained  frequent  relations  with 
England,  and  he  studied  English  institutions  when  a 
young  man  in  the  house  of  his  father's  friend,  Lord 
Mansfield,  then  Lord  Chief  Justice.  His  amiable 
character,  wit,  and  accomplishments  made  him 
universally  popular,  and  he  would  certainly  have 
been  elected  King,  and  perhaps  have  averted  some 
of  the  misfortunes  of  his  country,  if  Catherine  had 
not  supported  the  candidature  of  his  cousin  Poni- 
atowski. The  Prince  de  Ligne,  a  man  well  acquainted 
with  the  various  European  courts,  calls  him  in  his 
Memoirs  '  the  most  distinguished  man  of  the  four 
quarters  of  the  world.'  Joseph  II  of  Austria  fre- 
quently corresponded  with  him,  and  Frederick  the 
Great  was  the  first  promoter  of  the  negotiations  which 
resulted  in  the  marriage  of  his  relative,  Prince  Louis 
of  Wlirtemberg,  with  Prince  Adam  Casimir's  second 
daughter  Marie.  As  Commandant  of  the  Lithuanian 
Guard  and  of  the  Corps  of  Cadets,  the  Prince  showed 
remarkable  ability  and  zeal,  and  some  of  the  most 
eminent  Polish  patriots,  including  Kosciuszko,  were 


INTRODUCTORY  15 

trained  under  his  immediate  superintendence.  His 
services  in  the  promotion  of  national  education  were 
equally  valuable  and  untiring.  As  a  judge,  his 
impartiality  was  such  that  he  sentenced  some  of  the 
most  powerful  dignitaries  in  the  country,  including 
his  own  father,  for  acts  of  oppression  committed  by 
their  stewards  on  their  poorer  tenants. 

Prince  Adam  Casimir  married  on  the  19th 
September  1761,  the  Countess  Elizabeth  Fleming, 
daughter  of  the  celebrated  minister  of  Augustus  II ; 
they  had  five  children,  two  boys  and  three  girls. 
The  eldest  son,  Adam  George,  the  author  of  the 
following  Memoirs,  was  born  at  Warsaw  on  the  14th 

O  7 

of  January  1770,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  he  describes 
his  impressions  from  a  very  early  age.  His  mother, 
who  in  later  years  was  looked  up  to  with  attachment 
and  respect  by  the  whole  Polish  nation,  is  frequently 
referred  to  by  him  in  terms  of  warm  affection,  and 
before  proceeding  to  the  perusal  of  his  Memoirs  the 
reader  may  be  interested  in  the  following  description 
of  her  appearance  and  character  taken  from  her 
'portrait,'  written  by  herself  in  her  thirty-seventh 
year : — 

'  I  was  never  handsome,  but  I  have  often  been 
pretty ;  I  have  beautiful  eyes,  and  as  all  my  feelings 
are  reflected  in  them,  the  expression  on  my  face  is 
often  interesting.  My  complexion  is  white  enough 
to  be  almost  brilliant  when  I  blush ;  a  smooth 
forehead  does  not  make  my  face  ugly,  and  my  nose 
completes  the  symmetry  of  my  features.  My  mouth 
is  large,  my  teeth  white,  my  smile  amiable,  and 
the  shape  of  my  face  a  graceful  oval.  I  have  enough 


1 6         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

hair  to  make  an  easy  and  becoming  head-dress  ;  it  is 
dark,  like  my  eyebrows.  I  am  rather  tall  than  short : 
my  figure  is  elegant,  my  bust  perhaps  too  thin,  my 
hands  ugly,  but  my  feet  charming  ;  and  there  is  much 
grace  in  my  movements.  I  have  an  extreme  desire  to 
please,  and  am  skilful  in  showing  both  my  physical  and 
my  mental  qualities  to  the  best  advantage.  Though 
vain  and  ill-tempered,  I  am  endowed  with  such  tact 
that  I  very  seldom  do  anything  which  does  not  either 
give  pleasure  or  inspire  lively  interest.  I  am  most 
warm  and  constant  in  my  friendships  ;  nothing  can 
abate  my  confidence  in  those  I  love,  and  I  always 
look  up  to  them  as  superior  to  myself.  My  predom- 
inent  passion  is  the  love  of  my  country.  This  is  a 
sort  of  religion  with  which  all  my  future  is  bound  up, 
and  which  my  husband  and  children  and  my  own 
disposition  have  made  the  dearest  and  most  indispens- 
able sentiment  of  my  life.' 

( The  Memoirs  of  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski,  with 
some  notes  and  other  supplementary  matter  illustrative 
of  the  text  ivhich  have  been  added  l)ij  the  Editor,  begin 
in  the  next  Chapter.) 


CHAPTER  II 

1776-1782 

EARLY  YOUTH. FAMILY  RECOLLECTIONS. LIFE  IK  A    POLISH  COUNTRT- 

HOUSE. PRINCES    AND    PRINCESSES    ON    THE    STAGE. A  CRIMINAL 

PRIEST. THE    POLISH    DIET. 

MY  recollections  of  the  days  of  my  childhood  pass 
before  my  eyes  like  a  landscape  in  which  some  objects 
stand  out  here  and  there  in  clear  and  definite  forms, 
while  others  disappear  in  a  mist  or  in  the  distance. 

The  first  place  of  which  I  have  any  precise  remem- 
brance is  Kozanka,  on  the  river  Bug,  where  there  was 
an  old  stone  mansion,  with  numerous  underground 
cellars  containing  excellent  old  wines. 

This  was  in  the  year  1776.  My  father,  then  com- 
mander of  a  regiment  of  the  Lithuanian  Guard,  had 
taken  his  detachment  to  Rozanka  during  the  summer 
in  order  to  train  his  troops  in  some  military  man- 
oeuvres which  he  wished  to  introduce  into  Poland. 
He  obtained  some  good  soldiers  from  Prussia,  and 
sent  young  Poles  there  to  learn  the  Prussian  system 
of  drill. 

I  well  remember  the  tents  which  were  pitched  on 
the  green  meadow,  and  the  officers  of  the  Guard  who 
used  to  assemble  there  for  dinner,  with  a  monk  of  St 
VOL.  i.  B 


1 8        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 
Bernard,  who  was  the  almoner  of  the  regiment — a 

'  O 

tall,  stout  man,  very  popular  with  the  officers  on 
account  of  his  merry  conversation. 

I  also  recollect  the  hetman  Branicki,  who  was  for 
many  years-  my  father's  intimate  friend,  coming  to 
Rozanka.  At  that  time  the  hetrnans  had  entirely 
recovered  their  former  authority,  and  M.  Branicki 
was  accordingly  received  with  all  the  official  honours 
as  well  as  with  the  hospitality  always  accorded  to  a 
guest.  The  whole  regiment  was  in  parade  uniform, 
and  seemed  to  me  a  large  army,  though  it  was  only 
composed  of  two  battalions.  My  father's  man-servant 
was  at  that  time  in  attendance  upon  me.  He  was  a 
Frenchman  named  Boissy,  a  native  of  Pontoise,  near 
Paris ;  a  worthy  and  intelligent  man,  who  by  his 
democratic  spirit  had  preserved  me  from  the  influence 
of  the  habits  of  grandeur  which  at  that  time  were 
pretty  generally  prevalent  in  Poland.  His  example 
induced  me  to  develop  from  my  earliest  youth  a  spirit 
of  activity  and  independence. 

At  this  time  my  parents  were  in  the  habit  of  pass- 
ing the  summer  at  Woloczyn,  some  miles  from 
Rozanka,  and  my  later  recollections  are  connected 
with  the  vast  palace  of  Woloczyn,  which  was  then 
occupied  by  the  Chancellor  Michael  Prince  Czar- 
toryski,  my  father's  uncle.  It  was  there  that  my 
mother  was  educated  under  the  supervision  of  the 
Chancellor's  wife,  and  she  was  also  married  there  to 
her  maternal  uncle,  the  son  of  my  grandfather 
Augustus. 

The  two  old  princes  were  very  favourable  to  the 
match,  but  it  was  vehemently  opposed  by  the  Princess 


EARLY  YOUTH  19 

Lubomirska,  my  father's  sister.  The  chief  reason  of 
her  opposition  was  this.  Shortly  before  her  marriage, 
my  mother  went  to  see  one  of  the  peasants  on  the 
estate,  and  found  in  the  cottage  a  child  suffering  from 
a  very  severe  attack  of  smallpox.  This  gave  her  a 
great  shock,  as  she  had  lost  several  of  her  sisters  from 
the  same  illness  ;  and  she  caught  the  infection  so 
dangerously  that  her  life  was  despaired  of.  Directly 
she  recovered,  her  parents  hastened  the  marriage,  and 
she  came  to  the  altar  with  her  face  covered  with  marks 
of  the  disease  and  a  wig  on  her  head,  as  she  had  lost 
all  her  hair.  The  Princess  Lubomirska  was  much 
grieved  to  see  so  ugly  a  woman  given  in  marriage  to 
her  brother  ;  but  though  she  used  all  her  influence 
with  her  father  against  the  match,  she  could  not 

O  7 

prevent  it,  as  it  was  considered  a  very  advantageous 
one.  Some  time  after,  my  mother  entirely  recovered 
her  health,  and  soon  became  celebrated  for  her  beauty. 

The  main  building  at  Woloczyn  was  of  wood,  and 
the  outbuildings  of  stone.  I  remember  the  portraits 
of  Charles  XII,  Augustus  II,  and  Poniatowski,  the 
King's  father ;  there  was  a  large  garden  crossed  by  a 
long  and  wide  canal,  at  the  end  of  which  was  a  statue 
of  Neptune  and  his  attendants,  in  the  French  style 
then  in  fashion,  imitated  from  the  statues  in  the 
gardens  of  Versailles. 

There  were  some  brilliant  fetes  at  Woloczyn,  at 
which  the  guests  were  amused  by  music  and  theatri- 
cals. Once  there  was  a  swimming  race,  in  which  the 
swimmers  were  dressed  as  tritons,  and  among  them 
the  one  who  was  most  remarked  was  General  Count 
Briihl. 


20        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

My  mother  taught  me  French.  One  day  she  told 
me  to  learn  by  heart  some  verses  of  Racine  which  we 
had  read  together,  and  in  which  Mithridates  discloses 
to  his  children  his  plans  against  the  Romans.  I  have 
never  forgotten  these  verses,  as  I  was  punished  for 
not  having  learnt  them  by  being  obliged  to  stop  at 
home,  while  the  other  people  at  the  palace  went  on  an 
excursion  to  a  neighbouring  village  with  a  spring,  in 
a  very  picturesque  spot,  which  my  mother  had  de- 
corated with  flowers.  These  expeditions  were  very 
merry  and  noisy,  and  I  was  bitterly  disappointed  at 
not  being  allowed  to  go. 

My  first  recollections  of  Warsaw  are  very  vague. 
One  of  the  incidents  which  struck  me  the  most  was 
the  general  mourning  which  followed  the  death  of  my 
father's  uncle,  Prince  Michael ;  *  all  the  inhabitants 
of  the  '  blue  palace 't  were  dressed  in  black. 

I  also  recollect  the  shame  and  grief  which  I  felt 
one  day  when  I  cast  the  blame  of  some  fault  I  had 
committed  upon  one  of  the  running  footmen  employed 
in  the  palace.  This  man's  name  was  Anthony,  and  he 
was  so  stout  that  his  place  was  practically  a  sinecure. 
He  came  dressed  as  for  a  journey,  with  a  sheepskin 
coat  on,  and  reproached  me  with  having  been  the 
cause  of  his  dismissal,  upon  which  I  at  once  admitted 
that  I  was  the  culprit.  I  learnt  afterwards  that  the 
story  of  his  dismissal  was  an  invention  ;  but  it  pro- 
duced a  salutary  effect. 

Shortly  after,  I  became  seriously  ill.  There  were 
several  physicians  at  ray  grandfather's,  including  one 

*  On  the  13th  of  August,  1775,  when  the  author  of  the  Memoirs  was  five  years 
old.     (See  preceding  Chapter). 

t  The  residence  of  the  Czartoryskis  at  Warsaw. 


FA  MIL  Y  RECOLLECTIONS  2 1 

named  Bart ;  they  all  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that 
my  recovery  was  hopeless.  My  mother  begged  them 
to  remain  in  attendance  upon  me,  but  none  of  them 
would  take  the  responsibility.  A  friend  of  my  parents 
then  brought  Dr  Bekler,  physician  to  King  Stanislas 
Augustus,  and  he  restored  me  to  health. 

From  this  date  I  began  a  new  life.  Colonel 
Ciesielski  was  appointed  niy  tutor ;  great  care  was 
taken  of  my  health,  and  I  resided  sometimes  at 
Powonzki,*  sometimes  at  Warsaw.  Impromptu  fetes, 
in  which  I  and  my  two  sisters  took  part,  used  at  that 
time  to  be  given  in  the  '  blue  palace,'  and  there  were 
several  Frenchmen  \vho  contributed  in  a  material 
degree  to  these  entertainments.  M.  Dorigny,  a  very 
efficient  dancing  master,  formerly  attached  to  the 
opera  in  Paris,  and  ballet-master  at  Stuttgart,  where 
the  Duke  of  Wiirtemberg  ruined  himself  in  theatrical 
performances,  presided  over  the  dancing ;  M.  Patonar 
directed  the  music,  and  M.  Norblin  designed  the 
costumes  and  the  scenery. 

One  day  a  fire  broke  out  after  one  of  these  fetes, 
just  as  the  last  guest  had  gone.  It  began  in  the  wing 
of  the  building  where  iny  sisters  lived.  The  actors, 
who  still  had  their  costumes  on,  were  the  first  to  help. 
One  of  them  had  red  silk  stockings,  and  while  he  was 
occupied  in  extinguishing  the  flames,  a  servant  threw 
a  large  pailful  of  water  on  his  legs,  thinking  they 
were  on  fire.  My  sisters  and  their  governess,  Made- 1 
moiselle  Petit,  had  to  escape  to  the  other  side  of  the 
building  with  their  friends,  the  Miss  Narbutts. 

Meanwhile  the    flames  continued  to  spread,  and 

*  A  villa  near  Warsaw. 


22       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

had  covered  the  whole  of  the  wing.  The  fire  did  not, 
however,  penetrate  the  main  body  of  the  building,  and 
my  sisters  established  themselves  there.  A  third 
sister,  Sophia,  was  born  at  this  time.  My  health  was 
still  delicate,  and  it  was  thought  necessary  to  teach 
me  riding,  which  gave  me  great  pleasure. 

My  rides  were  usually  taken  in  the  direction  of 
Powonzki ;  and  the  time  I  passed  there  was  the 
happiest  in  my  life.  The  estate  was  a  sort  of  green 
oasis,  whose  verdure  was  the  more  attractive  as  it  was 
surrounded  by  a  sea  of  sand.  Each  of  the  children 
had  a  cottage  and  a  garden,  and  in  the  centre,  on  a 
hillock,  was  a  larger  house  inhabited  by  my  mother, 
with  a  wood  on  each  side  of  it,  and  looking  down  on  a 
little  lake,  wrhose  waters  flowed  into  a  stream  that 
bathed  all  the  plantations  of  the  estate.  My  mother 
also  had  some  artificial  ruins  erected,  after  the  fashion 
of  the  time,  to  complete  the  attractions  of  the  place. 
There  were  an  island  in  the  lake,  a  mill,  a  grotto  on  the 
island,  stables  in  the  shape  of  a  classical  amphitheatre, 
and  a  large  courtyard  with  a  great  many  hens  and 
pigeons  which  we  used  to  feed. 

We  seldom  received  strangers  ;  but  living  as  we 
did  for  each  other — our  mother  for  her  children  and 
we  for  her — our  life  was  a  very  happy  one.  It  was 
like  an  eclogue — a  true  picture  of  rustic  poetry. 

Each  of  the  cottages  in  our  colony  had  its  particu- 
lar emblem.  My  sister  Marie  had  a  chaffinch  with 
the  motto,  'GaieteV  My  device  was  a  branch  of  oak 
with  the  word  '  Fermete  '  inscribed  upon  it.  At  the 
top  of  my  mother's  house  was  a  hen  with  her  chickens  ; 
on  that  of  my  sister  Teresa,  a  basket  of  white  roses, 


LIFE  IN  A  POLISH  COUNTRY  HOUSE  23 

• 
with  the  inscription  '  Bonte"  ; '  on  that  of  the  steward, 

a  swarm  of  bees,  and  below  the  word  '  ActiviteV  The 
Miss  Narbutts  also  had  their  cottages  at  Powonzki ; 
and  the  whole  organisation  of  the  place  had  been 
devised  and  carried  out  by  my  mother. 

We  got  up  early,  breakfasted  either  at  my 
mother's  or  with  the  steward's  wife,  who  gave  us  some 
excellent  coffee,  and  then  went  to  work  in  the  gardens. 
At  dinner-time  one  of  our  servants  named  Martin 
used  to  come  from  Warsaw,  leading  a  donkey  which 
carried  our  food  in  two  panniers,  and  which  was 
always  received  with  joy  and  expected  with  impati- 
ence. Dinner  was  laid  sometimes  in  one  place,  some- 
times in  another,  and  was  announced  by  a  gong. 

We  often  went  out  on  donkeys,  and  on  Sundays 
we  used  to  go  to  Mass,  some  riding  and  others  on 
foot. 

Occasionally  there  were  grand  fetes,  at  which  the 
King  was  sometimes  present.  One  day  the  signing 
of  the  peace  of  Chocim*  was  represented  in  the  middle 
of  a  little  wood  of  elder  trees,  in  a  grove  generally 
used  for  theatrical  performances.  Lubomirski,  who 
had  succeeded  Chodkiewicz  in  the  command  of  the 
army,  and  a  Turkish  Pasha,  advanced  towards  each 
other  with  their  respective  escorts.  These  grand 
ceremonies  were  the  things  that  gave  me  the  least, 
pleasure. 

Meanwhile  the  question  of  my  education  was  being 
seriously  considered  at  the  '  blue  palace,'  and  my  tutor 
sometimes  objected  to  my  going  so  often  to  Powonzki; 
but  the  attractions  of  the  place  were  so  irresistible 

*  In  1621,  when  Sigismund  III  was  King  of  Poland. 


24       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

0 
that,  yielding  to  the  wish  of  my  mother,  he  pitched 

his  tent  next  to  my  cottage. 

Those  happy  times  lasted  for  a  few  years  and  were 
interrupted  by  a  great  misfortune.  We  lost  my 
eldest  sister  through  a  terrible  accident.  We  looked 
upon  her  as  a  second  mother,  and  were  very  fond  of 
her,  for  she  was  devoted  to  her  younger  brothers  and 
sisters.  One  day,  as  she  was  standing  before  the 
chimney-piece,  her  dress  took  fire.  She  fled  in  terror  ; 
Mademoiselle  Constance  Narbutt  tried  to  hold  her 
back  and  extinguish  the  flames,  but  could  not  stop 
her.  In  the  next  room  was  the  governess,  Made- 
moiselle Petit,  who  as  usual  was  playing  piquet  with 
M.  Norblin.  The  latter,  hearing  the  screams  of  the 
children,  ran  out  and  wrapped  my  unfortunate  sister 
in  a  cloak,  thereby  extinguishing  the  flames.  She 
was,  however,  severely  burnt  ;  for  some  days  it  was 
hoped  that  she  might  recover,  but  she  was  too  delicate 
to  bear  the  shock,  and  she  died  shortly  afterwards.* 

My  mother  was  at  this  time  confined  to  her  bed, 
and  gave  birth  to  a  little  girl,  my  sister  Gabrielle,  who 
only  lived  a  few  days. 

It  was  necessary  to  conceal  from  my  mother  the 
death  of  my  eldest  sister  ;  she  was  always  asking  to 
see  her,  but  Dr  John,  who  was  her  physician,  did  not 
allow  her  to  leave  her  bed.  Every  day  she  wrote  to 
her  daughter  and  insisted  on  her  being  allowed  to 
come  into  her  room,  so  that  at  length  Dr  John  was 
obliged  to  tell  her  the  truth.  The  news  brought  on 

*  In  the  Czartoryski  Museum  at  Cracow  there  is  a  little  book  of  24  pages  con- 
taining a  poem  on  the  death  of  this  princess,  entitled  "Therese  Czartoryska,'  by  J 
K.  L.  (supposed  to  be  Lavater),  and  published  at  Zurich  on  the  22nd  of  September 
1780. 


PRINCES  AND  PRINCESSES  ON  THE  STAGE       25 

an  attack  of  paralysis  of  the  side,  and  for  a  long  time 
afterwards  my  mother  had  to  walk  with  crutches.  It 
was  only  by  the  application  of  electricity  that  she  re- 
covered the  use  of  her  leg. 

I  also  was  recovering  from  a  serious  illness  which 
caused  much  anxiety.  For  some  time  my  sister's 
death  was  concealed  from  me,  and  my  man-servant, 
who  pretended  to  ask  for  news  of  my  sister,  told  me 
that  she  continued  in  the  same  state.  I  was  deeply 
attached  to  her,  and  when  I  learnt  the  truth  I  for  the 
first  time  shed  tears  of  real  grief.  I  still  often  think 
of  her,  so  good,  so  amiable,  and  with  so  fine  a  soul 
that  her  parents  and  the  younger  members  of  the 
family  were  deeply  attached  to  her. 

My  father  was  at  this  time  at  Wilna,  where  he 
was  President  of  the  Judicial  Court.  When  he  came 
back  to  Warsaw  for  the  holidays  he  did  not  know 
anything  of  what  had  happened.  As  he  was  crossing 
the  Vistula  on  the  ferry-boat  between  Praga  and 
Warsaw,  he  asked  the  ferryman  for  the  news,  and  was 
told  of  my  sister's  death.  My  father  refused  to  believe 
him,  but  was  convinced  when  further  details  were 
given  him  by  my  grandfather  Augustus.  He  nearly 
fainted,  leaning  for  support  against  the  wall  of  the 
room ;  and  I  saw  a  flood  of  tears  flow  from  his 
eyes. 

My  sister's  cottage  was  moved  into  the  wood,  and 
was  kept  there  in  remembrance  of  her.  Each  Thurs- 
day, the  day  of  her  death,  was  for  a  long  time  given 
up  to  mourning  and  pious  meditation,  and  my  mother 
consecrated  it  by  a  good  action. 

The  Princess    Anna   Sanguszko,  daughter  of  the 


26        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Princess  Sapieha,  Chanceliere  of  Lithuania,  also  be- 
longed to  the  colony  at  Powonzki,  and  later  on  it  was 
joined  by  Madame  Sewerin  Potocka.  My  mother 
often  went  into  their  house,  where  there  were  amuse- 
ments of  all  kinds.  There  was  a  performance  of  an 
opera  called  Zemire  et  Azor,  in  which  two  of  my 
sisters  and  Mademoiselle  Narbutt  appeared  in  an 
enchanted  palace,  striving  to  calm  the  grief  of  Ze'mire. 
After  my  sister's  death  this  opera  was  performed  at 
the  Warsaw  theatre  ;  my  mother  wished  to  be  present, 
but  she  was  so  affected  at  the  scene  above  described 
that  she  had  to  quit  the  theatre  in  a  fit  of  despair,  in 
spite  of  the  efforts  of  the  Princess  Sanguszko  to 
console  her.  I  was  a  witness  of  this  painful  inci- 
dent. 

After  a  time  everything  resumed  its  usual  course, 
as  generally  happens  in  this  world ;  the  fetes  were 
revived  and  new  members  were  admitted  into  the 
colony.  A  great  friend  of  my  mother's,  the  Countess 
Tyszkiewicz,  nee  Kinska,  daughter  of  the  Princess 
Poniatowska,  and  niece  to  the  King,  was  received 
with  great  ceremony.  She  had  lost  an  eye  through  an 
illness  in  early  youth,  and  had  replaced  it  by  one  of 
glass ;  still  she  was  very  pretty,  and  was  fond  of 
active  sports,  such  as  hunting  and  riding. 

Being  desirous  of  returning  my  mother's  polite- 
ness, the  Countess  Tyszkiewicz  had  a  comedy  played 
in  her  house  under  the  title  of  *  L'amoureux  de  Quinze 
Ans.'  She  herself  took  the  part,  dressed  in  man's 
costume,  of  the  lover,  and  my  second  sister  played 
the  heroine.  The  theatre  was  in  the  sheepfold,  and 
the  Countess  went  to  it  on  horseback,  in  the  costume 


PRINCES  AND  PRINCESSES  ON  THE  STAGE        27 

in  which  she  was  to  act.  After  the  play  there  was 
a  collation. 

There  were  also  theatrical  representations  in  the 
house  of  the  Chanceliere  Princess  Sapieha.  One  of 
the  pieces  that  were  played  there  was  an  opera,  '  La 
Colonie,'  in  which  the  performers  were  the  Princess 
Radziwill,  nee  Przezdiecka,  who  often  came  to 
Powonzki  and  had  a  fine  voice ;  my  mother ;  M. 
Wojna,  who  wras  afterwards  ambassador  at  Rome ; 
and  General  Briihl,  of  the  artillery. 

On  another  occasion  they  played  '  Andromaque.' 
The  leading  part  was  taken  by  the  young  Princess 
Sanguszko,  who  had  just  married ;  she  was  very 
pleasant  and  good-natured,  but  a  little  frivolous,  and 
she  had  taken  lessons  of  a  celebrated  tragic  actress 
from  Paris.  The  part  of  Hermione  was  played  by 
another  Princess  Sanguszko,  who  was  afterwards 
Princess  of  Nassau ;  that  of  Orestes,  by  Prince 
Casimir  Sapieha  ;  that  of  Pyrrhus,  by  a  Swiss  named 
Glaize  ;  and  that  of  his  confidant,  by  Prince  Calixtus 
Poninski.  This  tragedy  did  not  produce  any  impres- 
sion upon  me  ;  I  only  recollect  that  Prince  Sapieha 
was  dressed  in  a  Greek  costume,  and  M.  Glaize  in  a 
Roman  one. 

When  we  were  at  Warsaw  I  was  often  sent, 
according  to  the  custom  of  that  time,  to  assist  at  my 
grandfather's  toilet.  When  I  went  to  him  they  had 
to  put  pomatum  on  my  hair,  and  to  powder  and  curl 
it,  which  was  very  unpleasant  to  my  mother,  who  did 
not  like  to  see  me  thus  disfigured.  On  one  of  these 
visits  it  was  Corpus  Christi  day,  and  there  was  an 
altar  in  the  courtyard.  The  Bishop,  a  protege  of  my 


28       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

grandfather's,  was  under  the  canopy,  and  my  grand- 
father assisted  at  the  mass.  Shortly  after  my  grand- 
father died,*  and  all  amusements  ceased.  He 
was  buried  in  the  church  of  the  Holy  Cross,  and 
his  death  caused  general  regret — especially  to  his 
daughter,  the  Princess  Lubomirska,  who  was  at 
Warsaw  at  the  time,  and  did  not  leave  him  until  the 
last  moment. 

He  died  simply  and  naturally,  without  the  least 
desire  to  attract  remark.  Every  day  after  dinner  he 
used  to  play  at  a  game  called  '  tryset,'  which  was  very 
like  whist,  and  was  played  by  four  people ;  the  Pope's 
Nuncio  generally  joined  in  the  game.  The  Prince 
kept  up  this  habit  to  the  last,  and  although  he  was 
very  weak,  he  had  himself  dressed  to  go  to  the  card- 
table.  On  the  very  day  of  his  death  he  came  as 
usual,  bowed  to  the  Bishop  Archetti  (who  afterwards 
became  a  cardinal),  and  apologised  for  coming  a  little 
late.  As  his  sight  was  failing,  he  asked  why  they 
had  not  lit  the  candles,  although  the  room  was  lighted 
up  as  usual.  Meanwhile  the  Princess  Lubomirska 
was  in  her  apartments  in  deep  grief,  and  could  not 
come  down  into  the  room,  where  my  mother  was  with 
the  whole  family.  All  the  people  of  the  house,  down 
to  the  lowest  servant,  were  assembled  in  profound 
silence.  The  Prince,  who  was  in  an  invalid  chair, 
turned  to  Dr  Bart,  who  never  left  him,  and  asked 
him  in  German :  '  Wie  lange  wird's  dauern '  (How 
long  will  it  last)  ?  The  doctor  felt  his  pulse,  and 
replied :  '  Another  half-hour,  I  think.'  The  Prince 
then  apologised  for  not  being  able  to  play  any  longer 

*  On  the  4th  of  April,  1782.     (See  preceding  Chapter). 


A  CRIMINAL  PRIEST  29 

with  the  Nuncio,  and  had  himself  taken  into  the 
bedroom ;  the  prelate  followed  him,  and  began  to 
read  the  psalms  for  the  dying.  While  he  was  reading 
he  held  the  Prince's  hand,  and  as  he  spoke  the  words 
of  the  Psalmist :  '  My  God,  I  give  up  my  soul  to 
Thee,'  the  Prince  pressed  his  hand  and  gave  up  his 
last  breath.  The  crowd  which  had  penetrated  into 
the  palace,  hitherto  respectfully  silent,  then  burst  into 
tears  and  sobs. 

At  the  time  of  my  grandfather's  death,  my  father 
was  still  at  Wilna,  where  he  was  for  the  second  time 
President  of  the  Chief  Tribunal  of  Lithuania.  He 
entirely  devoted  himself  to  his  functions  in  this 
capacity.  Several  magistrates  were  accused  of  having 
done  injustice  to  individuals  either  through  indul- 
gence for  others,  or  from  motives  of  personal  re- 
venge. I  heard  people  say  that  while  my  father 
was  in  office,  an  action  was  brought  against  my 
grandfather  by  a  gentleman  who  had  a  claim  on 
his  estate,  and  that  my  grandfather  was  condemned 
in  costs. 

There  was  much  talk  at  this  period  about  a  crime 
which  had  been  committed  some  years  earlier,  but 
the  author  of  which  could  not  be  discovered.  By  a 
singular  accident  the  first  trace  of  the  criminal  was 
found  in  1781,  and  it  drew  suspicion  upon  a  man 
named  Ogonowski,  who  had  become  a  priest  and  was 
protected  by  the  Bishop  of  Wilna,  Massalski,  well 
known  for  his  dissolute  life.  My  father,  who  was 
then  President  of  the  Court,  used  all  his  influence  to 
have  the  culprit  brought  to  trial. 

The   Abbe    Ogonowski,   who   had  rapidly  passed 


30        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  various  ecclesiastical  grades  which  lead  to  final 
ordination  as  a  priest,  hearing  that  he  was  in  danger, 
took  refuge  in  a  convent,  under  the  protection  of 
Bishop  Massalski.  A  detachment  of  troops  belonging 
to  the  Lithuanian  Guard,  of  which  my  father  was  in 
chief  command,  was  ordered  to  surround  the  con- 
vent during  the  night,  and  succeeded  in  getting 
the  doors  opened,  notwithstanding  the  resistance  of 
the  priests.  Ogonowski  was  found  with  some  diffi- 
culty in  a  cell,  and  taken  to  prison  in  spite  of  his 
protests  and  those  of  the  clergy.  He  was  convicted 
of  murder  and  other  offences,  after  a  very  long  and 
careful  trial,  and  was  condemned  to  death  and 
executed. 

Several  old  cases  were  settled  while  my  father  was 
in  office,  and  the  procedure  became  much  more  regu- 
lar than  had  previously  been  the  case.  He  finally 
withdrew  from  his  post  in  1782,  and  hastened  to 
return  to  Warsaw  to  take  part  in  the  Diet  which  had 
been  opened  under  the  presidency  of  Colonel  Krasinski. 
This  was  the  first  meeting  of  the  Diet  at  which  I 
was  present.  My  tutor  and  myself  frequently  went 
both  to  the  senate  and  to  the  Chamber  of  Deputies. 
I  was  struck  by  the  grave  and  imposing  presence 
of  Prince  Lubomirski,  Marshal  of  the  Crown, 
who,  as  I  have  heard  other  people  say,  wTas  emi- 
nently fitted  to  keep  order  at  the  meetings  of  both 
Houses. 

The  most  important  matter  that  was  considered 
at  this  Diet  was  the  withdrawal  by  the  chapter  of  the 
Cathedral  at  Cracow  (with  the  support  of  Prince 
Poniatowski,  Bishop  of  Plock)  of  Monsignor  Soltyk, 


THE  POLISH  DIET  31 

Bishop  of  Cracow,  from  the  adminstration  of  that 
diocese,  on  the  pretext  of  mental  incapacity. 

The  anti-Russian  party  defended  the  bishop,  who 
had  been  one  of  the  most  valiant  members  of  the 
Confederation  of  Bar.*  The  party  of  the  King  and 
of  Russia  strove  to  maintain  and  justify  the  act  of 
violence  committed  against  Monsignor  Soltyk,  and 
being  the  most  numerous,  succeeded  in  obtaining  a 
majority  in  favour  of  the  measure. 

The  opposing  parties  spoke  with  much  passion, 
endeavouring  to  prove  on  the  one  hand  that  the 
Bishop  of  Cracow  was  perfectly  sane,  and  on  the 
other  that  he  was  rnad.  One  of  the  most  moving 
and  eloquent  of  the  speeches  was  that  of  the  Castellan 
Ankwicz,  who  was  at  that  time  regarded  as  an 
exemplary  patriot,  but  afterwards  passed  over  to  the 
Muscovite  party.  He  was  one  of  the  victims  of 
Kosciuszko's  revolution  ;  the  people  of  Warsaw 
themselves  executed  the  sentence  which  had  been 
pronounced  against  him. 

During  his  year's  residence  in  Lithuania,  my 
father  had  gained  the  sympathies  of  the  citizens 
of  that  province,  and  he  thought  that  he  would  have 
the  majority  of  the  Lithuanian  votes  at  the  Diet 
in  favour  of  the  party  of  which  he  was  one  of  the 
chiefs ;  but  the  fear  of  Russia  and  the  King's 
presents  decided  otherwise.  Many  of  the  Deputies 
found  reasons  to  avoid  the  inconvenient  results  Avhich 

*  The  originators  of  the  Confederation  of  Bar  were  two  bishops,  Soltyk  and 
Krasinski.  The  object  of  the  Confederation,  which  was  formed  by  Casimir  Pulaski 
on  the  29th  of  February,  1708,  was  to  deliver  Poland  from  the  domination  of  Russia. 
The  confederates  maintained  their  ground  by  extraordinary  feats  of  arms  against 
the  Russian  troops  for  five  years,  and  were  finally  crushed  by  Souvaroff  in  1772,  a 
few  months  before  the  first  partition  of  Poland.  (See  the  previous  Chapter). 


32        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

would  ensue  from   an   open   rupture   with    the    King 
and  the  Russians. 

The  Diet  having  thus  come  to  a  close  in  so 
unfavourable  a  way  for  our  party,  my  father  deter- 
mined to  visit  the  estates  which  he  had  inherited 
in  Volhynia  and  Podolia. 


CHAPTEK  III 

1783 

JOURXEY    TO    VOLHYNIA    AND    PODOLIA. INTERVIEW    WITH    FREDERICK 

THE    OREAT. 

BEFORE  leaving  for  Volhynia,  I  went  with  ray  tutor 
to  pay  a  visit  to  Prince  -Lubomirski.  This  was  the 
lasktime  that  I  saw  him  ;  he  did  not  long  enjoy  the 
fortune  which  his  wife  had  inherited,  and  died  in 
the  same  year,  universally  regretted.  He  lived  in 
the  palace  which  afterwards  became  that  of  the 
Tarnowskis,  and  belonged  by  right  to  the  Czarto- 
ryskis.  The  Princess  and  her  husband  were  very 
sensible  people,  but  as  often  happens  in  the  marriages 
of  great  families,  their  characters  were  not  suited 
to  each  other.  The  Prince  left  heavy  debts  which 
his  widow  admitted  and  scrupulously  paid.  His 
sallies  and  repartees  were  characteristically  Polish. 
My  mother  esteemed  him  greatly,  and  he  was  a  true 
friend  to  her.  I  do  not  know  on  what  occasion  he 
once  said  to  her  that  he  would  come  to  see  her  after 
his  death,  and  for  a  long  time  she  feared  he  would 
keep  his  word.  These  apprehensions  recurred  nightly, 
when  everybody  was  asleep ;  the  slightest  noise  re-^ 
called  to  her  the  promise  of  her  deceased  friend. 
VOL.  T.  c 


34        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

We  left  for  the  estates  in  Podolia  with  a  large 
suite.  My  father  at  that  time  had  a  very  numerous 
court,  chiefly  composed  of  noblemen's  sons,  many  of 
whom  came  even  from  Lithuania.  The  rendezvous 
was  at  Pulawy,  from  which  place  we  started.  Dozens 
of  carriages  followed  each  other  in  line,  and  we 
travelled  at  the  rate  of  not  more  than  six  miles*  a 
day.  After  breakfast  we  proceeded  to  the  next  stage, 
where  we  dined  ;  the  food  and  wine  always  preceded 
us.  There  were  a  great  many  led  horses,  and  we 
often  mounted  them  to  get  over  a  stage  more  quickly. 
One  of  the  principal  officials  of  the  court  always  went 
on  beforehand  to  get  our  quarters  ready.  We  were 
accompanied  by  several  young  pages  dressed  after  the 
Polish  fashion  ;  and  before  we  left  Warsaw,  the  majoi'- 
domo  thought  proper,  as  a  prudential  measure,  to 
administer  some  corporal  discipline  to  them.  My 
father,  as  he  was  coming  out  of  the  house,  perceived 
traces  of  tears  and  vexation  on  their  faces,  and  asked 
what  was  the  matter.  '  See  how  the  major-domo  has 
punished  us,'  they  answered.  My  father  then  asked 
the  major-domo  what  they  had  done,  to  which  the 
latter  rejoined  that  it  was  a  good  thing  to  prepare 
them  in  this  way  for  their  journey. 

We  stopped  on  our  way  at  the  houses  of  several 
landowners,  many  of  whom  joined  our  party,  which 
increased  the  number  of  our  led  horses  and  carriages ; 
we  had  also  brought  some  camels  with  us,  as  my  father 
wished  to  introduce  them  into  general  use.  The 
caravan  stopped  at  Klewan,  the  first  of  my  father's 
estates  in  Volhynia.  We  next  arrived  on  the  property 

*  A  Polish  mile  is  equal  to  five  English  miles. 


JOURNEY  TO  VOL1IYNIA  AND  PODOLIA  35 

of  Prince  Sapieha,  who  received  us  with  the  amplest 
hospitality.  The  Prince  suffered  much  from  gout,  and 
this  was  attributed  to  the  custom,  which  at  that  time 
was  very  general,  of  always  drinking  with  a  visitor. 
Prince  Sapieha  came  every  evening  leaning  on  a  cane 
to  look  at  the  brilliant  illuminations  in  the  garden. 
Our  next  halting-place  was  Mikolajew,  in  Podolia. 
There  were  not  enough  rooms  here  for  the  whole  of 
our  party,  which  had  become  very  numerous,  and 
many  of  us  slept  in  tents. 

Among  the  many  friends  who  accompanied  us  on 
this  journey  was  Niemcewicz,*  my  father's  aide-de- 
camp.  Opportunities  were  frequently  taken  of  em- 
barking on  various  love  adventures,  in  allusion  to 
which  one  of  the  poets  of  our  party  wrote  a  song  of 
which  the  first  couplet  was  as  follows  : 

'  Beautiful  Tomira,  this  is  probably  the  last  of  our 
pleasant  evenings  ;  I  am  with  you  to-day — to-morrow 
I  shall  be  alone,  and  woods  and  streams  will  separate 
us.  But  when  I  shall  no  longer  be  there,  remember  I 
was  the  first  to  love  you.' 

Niemcewicz  was  very  assiduous  in  his  attentions 
to  the  sex.  One  of  the  houses  where  we  stayed  the 
longest  was  that  of  M.  Onufry  Morski.  This  gentle- 
man had  a  very  important  position  in  Podolia,  and 
was  a  friend  of  my  father's,  for  whom  he  had  a 
great  liking.  He  had  a  very  handsome  wife,  of  whom 
he  was  jealous,  and  he  did  not  trust  the  friendship  of 
Niemcewicz.  One  day  the  comedy  of  '  Le  Joueur? 
which  my  father  had  translated  from  the  French,  was 

*  An  eminent  Polish  writer,  best  known  for  his  '  Historical  Songs '  and  his 
excellent  translations  from  various  English  poets.  He  was  born  in  1757,  and  died 
n  exile  at  Paris  in  1841. 


36        MEMOIRS  OF  I' HINGE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

performed  at  his  house,  and  his  wife  took  a  part  in  it. 
He  himself  played  the  hero,  and  had  to  address  her 
in  a  speech  full  of  ardent  love,  to  which  she  listened 
with  the  greatest  coldness,  as  I  remarked  at  each 
performance.  Morski's  younger  brother  was  after- 
wards the  ambassador  of  the  King  of  Saxony  and 
Grand-Duke  of  Warsaw  at  Madrid.  His  elder  brother, 
the  canon,  was  passionately  fond  of  dancing ;  I  still 
remember  with  what  entrain  he  danced  the  mazurka 
at  a  masked  ball  at  Siedlce,  and  he  was  not  a  man 
of  very  rigid  morals. 

Among  the  more  intimate  guests  at  my  father's 
house  was  Colonel  Molski,  a  wag  fond  of  bon-mots  and 
good  eating.  He  once  made  a  bet  that  he  would  eat 
an  enormous  dish  of  piroyi*  alone,  without  hurting 
himself.  He  gained  his  bet,  and  drank  some  punch 
to  wash  the  pirogi  down. 

At  Miendzyboz  we  met  a  large  detachment  of 
Gossacks,  which  gave  us  the  idea  of  constructing  a 
sort  of  fortress  and  feigning  attacks  upon  it.  My 
tutor  shut  himself  up  in  the  fortress  with  my  brother  ; 
the  besiegers  were  under  the  command  of  Colonel 
Molski,  to  whom  I  acted  as  aide-de-camp.  When  the 
day  for  the  attack  came,  there  was  much  noise  and 
fighting  on  horseback.  M.  Siehen,  mounted  on  a  very 
spirited  horse  and  riding  at  full  gallop,  encountered 
one  of  the  Cossacks,  and  the  shock  was  so  violent  that 
Siehen  fell  from  his  horse  and  became  insensible. 
When  he  recovered  consciousness,  he  had  completely 
lost  his  memory,  and  he  did  not  recollect  what  had 
happened  until  several  days  afterwards.  The  Cossack 

*  Small  meat  puddings. 


JOURNEY  TO   VOLHYNIA  AND  PODOLIA  37 

escaped  with  a  few  contusions.  Soon  after  there  was 
almost  a  real  battle  between  the  Cossacks  and  the 
inhabitants  of  the  village,  a  detachment  of  whom  were 
in  the  fortress  where  we  were  to  breakfast.  The  be- 
sieged at  last  ate  the  food  that  had  been  prepared  for 
us,  and  an  arrangement  was  then  made  to  prevent 
further  accidents.  I  assisted  at  this  fight  on  horse- 
back, and  it  greatly  interested  me. 

From  Miendzyboz  we  went  to  Kamieniec,  where 
was  M.  Witt,  the  father  of  General  Witt,  whose  wife 
was  the  beautiful  Greek  that  afterwards  married  Felix 
Potocki.  At  that  time  she  was  in  all  the  freshness  of 
her  beauty,  and  shortly  after  she  travelled  all  over 
Europe,  her  charms  attracting  universal  admiration. 
She  did  us  the  honours  of  her  house  at  Kamieniec,  sur- 
rounded by  people  distinguished  by  their  youth,  their 
birth,  or  their  talents.  All  paid  her  implicit  obedience, 
and  besides  her  beauty  she  attracted  by  a  sort  of 
originality  proceeding  either  from  a  feigned  naivete  or 
from  ignorance  of  the  language.  I  was  told  that 
when  people  admired  her  beautiful  eyes,  or  when  she 
spoke  of  them  herself,  she  used  to  say  in  French  : 
'  mes  beaux  yeux,'  thinking  that  this  was  a  single 
word. 

M.  Witt  took  me  and  my  tutor  over  the  ramparts 
of  the  fortress  to  show  us  that  it  was  impregnable. 
The  rock  on  which  it  is  built  is  surrounded  by  a 
moat,  on  the  other  side  of  which  is  another  rock, 
containing  vast  casemates  to  hold  troops  for  the 
defence  of  the  place.  The  only  channel  by  which  the 
inner  rock  communicates  with  the  outer  one  is  very 
narrow,  and  is  provided  with  very  solid  ramparts. 


38        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

From  Kamieniec  we  went  to  Chocim,  which  at 
that  time  belonged  to  Turkey,  and  where  the  officer 
in  command  was  a  pasha  who  displayed  much  luxury 
and  politeness  in  receiving  my  father  as  general  of  the 
Podolian  territories.  After  handing  round  chibouks 
and  coffee,  the  pasha's  son,  a  tall  young  man,  ap- 
proached me  and  my  brother  and  invited  us  to  visit 
the  harem  with  his  father's  permission.  We  followed 
him,  a  portiere  was  raised  and  then  drawn  down 
behind  us,  and  we  entered  the  seraglio. 

I  saw  through  the  doors  of  the  rooms  looking  into 
a  passage  some  women,  who  seemed  much  astonished 
and  alarmed  at  our  presence.  We  went  to  a  place 
where  was  the  young  man's  mother,  the  pasha's  wife, 
surrounded  by  several  female  attendants ;  this  was  a 
sort  of  kiosk  erected  in  a  corner  of  a  rectangular 
garden.  We  did  not  like  these  women,  and  thought 
them  very  untidily  dressed.  They  received  us  very 
amiably,  examined  us  with  much  curiosity,  and  asked 
us  some  questions ;  but  the  conversation  was  neither 
long  nor  animated. 

We  returned  to  Miendzyboz,  which  was  the  last 
stage  of  our  journey,  for  to  tny  great  regret  we  did 
not  go  as  far  as  Cracow. 

We  travelled  through  Galicia,  and  after  stopping 
at  Oleszyce,  Sieniawa,  and  Jaroslaw,  we  arrived  at 
Pulawy,  where  we  finally  took  up  our  residence. 

[On  the  27th  of  October,  1784,  Prince  Adam's 
sister  Marie  was  married  to  Prince  Louis  of  Wiirtem- 
berg,  the  brother  of  the  wife  of  the  Grand-Duke  Paul 
of  Russia  (afterwards  the  Emperor  Paul)  and  a 
relative  of  Frederick  the  Great.  The  newly-married 


INTERVIEW  WITH  FREDERICK  THE  GREAT       39 

pair  went  to  Berlin,  and  soon  after  Prince  Adam's 
mother  paid  them  a  visit.  Here  she  had  an  inter- 
view with  Frederick,  which  she  thus  graphically 
describes  in  a  manuscript  diary  preserved  in  the 
Czartoryski  archives  :-— 

1  The  King  of  Prussia  always  lived  at  Potsdam, 
and  only  received  on  certain  days  which  were  fixed 
beforehand.  It  was  not  without  a  certain  degree  of 
fear  that  I  made  myself  ready  to  visit  him.  Having 
from  my  childhood  constantly  been  told  of  his  genius 
and  great  deeds,  I  had  formed  in  my  mind  so  high  an 
idea  of  him  that  I  felt  timid.  I  hoped  I  would  be 
admitted  to  his  presence  with  many  others,  and  be 
lost  in  the  crowd  ;  but  Madame  Voss,  the  Queen's 
lady-in-waiting,  took  me  alone  into  the  drawing-room, 
and  directly  I  entered,  the  door  opposite  me  opened, 
and  the  King  came  in  also  alone.  Madame  Voss 
merely  mentioned  my  name  and  withdrew.  I  thus 
remained  tete-a-tete  with  a  man  who  filled  me  with 
fear,  and  whom  I  believed  to  far  exceed  in  genius  and 
learning  all  those  whom  I  had  yet  seen.  I  was  so 
dazed  that  if  I  had  at  once  left  the  room,  I  could 
have  sworn  that  Frederick  was  at  least  six  feet  high. 
He  took  my  hand  kindly,  and  said  :  "  I  am  old,  and 
my  sight  is  bad ;  allow  me,  Princess,  to  take  you  to 
the  window,  so  that  I  may  have  a  good  look  at  you." 
This  completed  my  confusion  ;  tears  were  in  my  eyes, 
and  I  trembled  like  a  leaf.  The  King,  no  doubt 
to  give  me  courage,  then  himself  began  the  conversa- 
tion, still  holding  my  hand.  "  You  have  given  us 
an  angel,  Princess,"  he  said.  "  I  saw  her  yesterday, 
and  she  inspires  me  with  the  greatest  interest."  I 


40        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

then  ventured  to  look  at  the  man  who  had  called 
my  daughter  an  angel.  To  my  surprise  I  saw  not  a 
giant,  but  a  little  man,  shorter  than  myself,  rather 
crooked,  and  in  a  shabby  uniform  covered  with  snuff. 
He  had  beautiful  blue  eyes,  a  mild  but  penetrating 
glance,  and  a  manner  which  inspired  confidence. 
Seeing  that  I  was  looking  at  him,  but  that  I  did  not 
yet  venture  to  open  my  lips,  he  continued  :  "  Your 
angel  will  always  find  in  me  a  friend.  She  has 
married  my  nephew,  but  I  must  plainly  tell  you  that 
they  are  not  made  for  each  other,  she  is  an  angel  and 
he* —  The  King  did  not  finish  the  phrase,  but  added, 
"  Anyhow  you  know  him  and  will  do  him  justice ;  all 
I  will  say  now  is  that  this  cannot  last,  but  let 
her  boldly  come  to  me  whenever  she  finds  it 
necessary."  These  words  calmed  my  anxiety,  arid 
there  remained  only  a  feeling  of  gratitude  which  it  was 
easy  for  a  mother  to  express  when  speaking  of  her 
daughter.  The  interview  lasted  over  an  hour. 
Frederick  II  afterwards  spoke  of  many  other  things. 
He  asked  me  about  Poland  and  our  King.  This 
was  a  very  delicate  subject,  as  he  had  only  recently 
plundered  our  King  with  the  help  of  his  allies,  who 
had  shared  in  the  spoil.  Among  the  questions  he 
addressed  to  me  I  remember  his  asking  whether 
Stanislas  Augustus  wore  a  military  uniform.  I  felt 
the  irony  of  this  question,  as  our  army  had  at 
that  time  been  so  reduced  that  we  hardly  had  any 
troops  at  all.  I  answered,  as  was  the  fact,  that 
the  King  wears  the  uniform  of  the  School  of  Cadets. 

Prince  Louis  of  Wiirtemberg  was  afterwards  deprived  of  his  command  in  the 
Polish  army  for  declining  to  fight  against  Russia,  and  his  wife,  the  Princess  Marie, 
then  refused  to  live  with  him. 


INTERVIEW  WITH  FREDERICK  THE  GREAT       41 

"He  is  right,"  observed  Frederick;  " cest  vraiment 
un  roi  d  I'ecole"  I  felt  indignant  at  this  remark,  which 
seemed  to  me  quite  uncalled  for.  I  turned  red,  the 
tears  again  rose  to  my  eyes,  and  I  exclaimed  without 
thinking  :  "  Sire,  vous  lid  avtz  donne  une  legon  cruelle 
et  pen  meritee."  When  I  came  in  I  did  not  dare  to 
raise  my  eyes  to  him ;  afterwards,  when  he  began 
to  speak  of  my  daughter,  I  felt  bolder,  and  I  was 
thoroughly  roused  when  he  spoke  slightingly  of  my 
unhappy  country  and  King,  whom  he  had  humiliated 
after  plundering  him.  After  I  had  spoken  I  felt 
frightened,  but  Frederick  thus  went  on,  as  if  he  had 
not  heard  what  I  said  :  "I  have  often  remarked  that 
in  Poland  women  should  govern  ;  if  they  did,  every- 
thing would  be  better  there,  and  our  conversation 
to-day  has  confirmed  me  in  that  belief."  He  then 
bowed  to  me  politely  and  respectfully,  again  saying 
that  my  daughter  could  always  reckon  on  his  protec- 
tion ;  and  with  this  our  first  interview  ended.'] 


CHAPTER  IV 

1784-1787 

PULAWY. EDUCATION  AND  STUDIES. 

AT  Pulawy  we*  began  an  existence  which  was  entirely 
new  to  us,  and  we  entered  on  our  studies  seriously 
and  regularly. 

Up  to  that  time  we  had  only  been  taught  elemen- 
tary knowledge,  and  our  lessons  were  frequently 
interrupted,  while  now  they  became  almost  our  sole 
occupation.  M,  Lhuillier  taught  us  mathematics  and 
universal  history ;  Colonel  Ciesielski,  the  history  of 
Poland ;  Kniaznin,  literature  and  Latin.  Our  clas- 
sical master  was  at  first  a  Dane  named  Schow,  and 
afterwards  Groddeck,  who  subsequently  became  a 
professor  at  the  University  of  Wilna. 

I  do  not  quite  remember  whether  it  was  then  or 
later  on  that  rny  father  appointed  as  our  tutor  M. 
Dupont  de  Nemours,  a  member  of  the  National 
Assembly,  who  was  much  esteemed  in  France  for  his 
ability  and  character.  He  had  with  him  a  secretary 
named  Noyer,  a  very  importunate  man  who  paid 

*  The  author  and  his  brother  Constantino.  The  Bohemian  traveller  Tanner, 
writing  in  1G78,  says  of  this  magnificent  country  seat  of  the  Czartoryski  family  : — 
'  Prospeximus  hie  a  dextra  numinis  parte  Pulavii  castrum  splendidum,  efc  a  circum- 
jacentium  hortorum  amzenitate  deliciosum.' 


EDUCATION  AND  STUDIES  43 

marked  attention  to  Madame  Petit.  One  day  he 
knocked  at  her  door,  and  not  knowing  any  other  way 
to  get  rid  of  him,  she  told  him  she  was  not  at  home. 
M.  Dupont  did  not  stay  long  with  us  ;  he  returned  to 
France,  and  I  saw  him  in  Paris  at  the  time  of  the 
Restoration.  He  introduced  himself  to  me  as  my  old 
tutor,  but  I  had  entirely  forgotten  him. 

There  was  a  fencing-master  at  Pulawy  who  gave 
us  a  lesson  every  morning  in  the  garden  after  we  got 
up,  which  was  very  early,  and  then  we  passed  to  other 
studies.  The  company  used  to  be  very  large  at 
dinner,  as  all  the  persons  in  the  service  of  the  family 
were  present. 

Besides  our  studies,  we  had  various  pleasures,  such 
as  hunting,  excursions  to  the  house  of  M.  and  Madame 
Filipowicz,  the  steward  of  the  Pulawy  estates  at 
Konska  Wola,  country  rides,  and  especially  coursing. 
I  was  very  fond  of  this  pastime  ;  in  a  wood  in  the 
vicinity  there  were  hares  on  the  hills,  and  a  brood  of 
foxes  which  we  amused  ourselves  by  driving  out  of 
their  holes  with  dogs. 

This  was  for  us  children  what  I  may  call  'the 
Pulawy  period.'  My  father's  stay  in  Lithuania  at- 
tracted to  our  house  a  great  number  of  citizens  of  that 
province  ;  several  young  men  also  came  from  Lithuania 
to  be  educated  at  our  house,  and  they  amused  the 
company  during  the  hours  which  were  not  given  up 
to  study. 

Our  daily  fencing-lessons  took  place  in  the  garden 
during  the  summer.  Although  accustomed  to  the  use 
of  the  foil  at  the  school  of  Cadets,  Rembilinski,  one  of 
our  tutors,  was  once  hit  in  the  eye,  and  on  another 


44         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYXKI 

occasion,  as  he  was  fencing  with  me,  iny  foil  pierced 
his  mask  and  wounded  him  in  the  mouth.  He  was 
much  frightened,  and  his  first  thought  was  to  ascertain 
whether  his  second  eye  had  not  been  hurt.  I  was 
profuse  in  my  apologies,  and  thanked  God  that  my 
awkwardness  had  not  had  any  more  serious  con- 
sequences. 

We  used  to  hold  meetings  like  those  of  the  Diets, 
at  which  we  discussed  public  questions.  I  recollect 
that  at  one  of  these  meetings  the  question  discussed 
was,  which  was  the  best  government,  one  in  which 
political  power  was  distributed  among  the  people,  or  a 
government  in  which  all  power  proceeded  from  a 
central  authority.  I  advocated  the  greatest  possible 
liberty,  while  to  my  great  surprise  Rembilinski  de- 
clared himself  in  favour  of  a'  central  and  paternal 
government.  His  speech  was  so  eloquent  that  I 
could  not  find  words  to  answer  him,  which  greatly 
dissatisfied  me.  I  was  beaten,  but  not  convinced. 


CHAPTER  V 

1786 

A    HOLIDAY    IX    GERMANY. — WIELAND. — -GOETHE. — A    POLISH 
CARNIVAL. — -VISITS  TO  ENGLAND. 

IN  1786,  I  first  went  to  travel  abroad  ;  I  was  accom- 
panied by  ray  tutor,  who  had  been  ordered  to  take 
the  waters  at  Carlsbad.  Madame  Oginska,  the 
hetman's  wife,  my  father's  cousin  and  my  mother's 
aunt,  started  for  Carlsbad  at  the  same  time  as  we 
did,  accompanied  by  a  numerous  suite,  as  was  then 
the  custom.  We  visited  several  German  towns  where 
I  came  into  contact  with  many  eminent  men.  I  can- 
not say  that  I  made  their  acquaintance,  for  my  mind 
was  as  yet  not  sufficiently  developed ;  but  I  still 
remember  having  met  them. 

My  father  had  invited  to  Pulawy  a  professor  of 
Latin  and  Greek  who  had  been  recommended  to  him 
by  Steine,  the  celebrated  professor  of  Gottingen. 
He  was  a  young  Dane  and  an  enthusiastic  admirer 
of  the  beauties  of  ancient  literature,  like  all  who 
came  from  that  university.  I  shared  this  enthusiasm 
—a  little  childishly,  but  very  sincerely— under  the 
influence  of  Kniaznin,  who  taught  us  Polish  and 


46        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Latin  literature.  I  neglected  the  tedious  though 
indispensable  study  of  grammar,  and  tried  to  under- 
stand the  classic  poets,  which  gave  me  the  appearance 
of  knowing  much  more  than  I  did  in  reality  ;  and  I 
paraded  my  knowledge  in  the  presence  of  the  German 
savants  whom  I  met  on  my  travels.  At  Prague  I 
made  the  acquaintance  of  Meissner,  professor  of  Greek 
literature  and  author  of  several  German  works. 
His  reputation,  which  at  that  time  was  very  great, 
did  not  survive  him.  I  recollect  with  pleasure  the 
conversations  I  had  with  him,  and  I  was  much 
astonished  to  find  that  I  was  able  to  quote  to  him 
from  memory  some  verses  from  the  Greek  poets. 

We  passed  through  Gotha,  where,  thanks  to  a 
letter  of  introduction  from  my  father,  we  made  the 
acquaintance  of  Baron  Frankenburg,  Minister  to  the 
Duke  of  Gotha.  He  was  an  intelligent,  amiable,  and 
cultivated  man,  and  he  placed  us  in  relations  with 
other  celebrated  and  interesting  persons.  He  gave 
us  letters  with  which  we  went  to  Weimar,  already 
known  as  the  German  Athens,  where  I  saw  Wieland 
and  Herder,  with  whom  my  father  kept  up  a  corres- 
pondence. 

Wieland's  appearance  was  anything  but  poetical  ; 
he  was  short,  rather  stout,  somewhat  advanced  in 
years,  wrinkled,  and  wearing  a  sort  of  nightcap  which 
he  seldom  took  off. 

Baron  Frankenburg  also  enabled  us  to  make  the 
acquaintance  of  Goethe,  and  I  was  admitted  with  my 
tutor  to  a  private  house  where  the  poet  read  to 
some  friends  his  play  of  '  Iphigenia  in  Tauris,'  which 
he  had  just  finished.  I  listened  with  great  en- 


GOETHE  47 

thusiasm.  Goethe  was  then  in  the  brightest  period 
of  his  youth  ;  he  was  tall,  and  his  face  was  handsome 
and  imposing,  with  a  piercing  look,  sometimes  a  little 
disdainful,  as  if  he  were  looking  down  upon  the 
horizon  of  humanity.  This  slight  tinge  of  arrogance 
was  also  visible  in  the  smile  on  his  beautiful  mouth. 
He  hardly  remarked  the  admiration  of  a  youth 
like  myself,  for  this  was  a  homage  to  which  he  was 
accustomed.  When  he  afterwards  became  Minister 
to  the  Grand-Duke  of  Weimar  he  no  longer  showed 
the  same  disregard  of  official  favours  and  decorations  ; 
but  he  always  retained  in  his  face  and  demeanour  a 
sort  of  grandeur  which  made  people  compare  him  to 
Phidias's  statue  of  the  Olympian  Jove. 

At  length  we  arrived  at  Carlsbad,  where  we 
found  Madame  Oginska,  whose  presence  greatly 
contributed  to  our  pleasure.  She  had  with  her 
several  young  ladies,  the  daughters  of  her  major- 
domo  Siedlecki,  and  also  Dr  Kittel,  who  was  young 
and  very  handsome,  and  was  consequently  much  in 
request  with  ladies  whose  health  required,  or  seemed 
to  them  to  require,  a  doctor's  care. 

There  was  at  that  time  at  Carlsbad  a  very  bril- 
liant casino,  where  the  whole  society  of  the  place 
assembled,  and  where  there  was  dancing  almost  every 
evening.  One  of  the  ladies  was  said  to  be  much 
admired  by  the  Archduke  Leopold,  whose  weakness 
for  the  sex  was  notorious,  and  who  ascended  the 
throne  some  years  later.  I  was  struck  by  the  beauty 
of  the  features  of  this  lad}1",  and  especially  by  the 
extraordinary  vivacity  of  her  movements. 

We  returned  home  in  the  autumn,  and  the  winter 


48         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

of  178G  to  1787  was  passed  partly  at  Pulawy,  partly 
at  Siedlce.  We  continued  our  studies  at  Pulawy 
without  much  regularity,  but  with  great  interest  and 
diligence,  and  passed  the  carnival  at  Siedlce,  where 
there  was  a  numerous  and  brilliant  gathering  of 
visitors.  Madame  Oginska,  who  held  her  Court 
there,  was  very  pious,  but  her  sole  anxiety  was  to 
amuse  her  guests  and  make  them  merry.  She  had 
in  her  house  a  great  many  charming  young  ladies 
belonging  to  noble  families.  When  her  toilet  was 
over,  her  guests  were  admitted  into  her  apartments, 
and  these  young  ladies  were  to  be  seen  taking  to  her 
some  article  of  dress — a  flower,  a  ribbon,  a  veil,  or  a 
bonnet — which  was  to  be  worn  in  the  course  of  the 
day.  Afterwards  everybody  went  into  the  drawing- 
rooms,  where  amusements  of  all  kinds  were  constantly 
going  on. 

Madame  Oginska  was  very  fond  of  playing  at 
cards,  and  invited  the  best  players  to  Siedlce.  This 
was  not  perhaps  very  praiseworthy,  but  it  con- 
tributed to  our  amusement  for  part  of  the  day.  In 
the  evening  there  was  dancing  and  drawing-room 
games  ;  in  the  summer  we  walked  about  in  a  large 
garden  which  was  called  Alexandria,  and  which 
Madame  Oginska  had  decorated  in  the  English 
fashion  ;  in  the  autumn  we  went  out  shooting,  and 
she  used  to  join  our  party,  firing  from  her  place  at 
the  birds  as  they  flew  by. 

It  was  difficult  to  suffer  from  ennui  at  Siedlce, 
and  the  natural  consequence  was  that  romantic 
adventures  frequently  occurred,  in  which  I  sometimes 
played  a  part.  I  had  found  some  books  which  fired 


VISITS  TO  ENGLAND  49 

my  imagination  ;  I  read  them  during  several  nights, 
when  I  should  have  done  better  to  devote  the  time 
to  study.  One  of  the  young  ladies  at  Siedlce, 
Mademoiselle  Marie  Niezabitowska,  became  the  object 
of  my  '  sighs/  which  I  did  not  venture  to  communicate 
to  her  without  great  hesitation.  To  enter  into  the 
young  ladies'  room  was  beyond  my  power,  and  often  I 
used  to  stand  near  the  door,  fearing  to  cross  the 
threshold.  At  length  I  got  over  my  timidity,  and  my 
usual  place  was  on  a  box  in  the  young  ladies'  room. 

To  make  love  or  fall  in  love  was  the  lot  of  every 
young  man  at  Siedlce,  and  I  had  some  rivals,  among 
whom  was  Niemcewicz.  Mademoiselle  Niezabitowska 
was  one  of  the  prettiest  of  the  young  ladies  there,  and 
she  was  also  endowed  with  other  qualities  by  Nature 
which  distinguished  her  from  other  women  during 
her  long  life.  Poets  wrote  verses  to  her,  and  I 
remember  that  one  of  these  effusions  ended  by 
deploring  her  severity  to  those  who  surrounded  her. 
It  was  indeed  difficult  to  secure  her  good  graces,  and 
she  treated  her  admirers  with  much  rigour. 

Some  cases  of  scarlet  fever  having  broken  out  in 
the  ladies'  apartments,  my  mother  recalled  me  to 
Pulawy. 


[Here  there  is  a  break  in  the  Memoirs,  which  are 
not  resumed  until  the  3^ ear  1795,  when  Prince  Adam 
Czartoryski  proceeded  with  his  brother  Constantino 
to  St  Petersburg.  In  1789,  when  he  was  nineteen 
years  of  age,  he  went  with  his  mother  to  Paris  and 
then  to  London,  where  he  stayed  for  some  weeks 
VOL.  i.  D 


5o        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

with  Lord  Mansfield,  to  complete  his  political  educa- 
tion by  studying  the  English  constitution.     During 
this  time  he  witnessed  the  trial  of  Warren  Hastings  ; 
and  afterwards  he  visited  Scotland  and  the  principal 
manufacturing  towns  in  England.     One  of  his  English 
acquaintances  of  that  period,  Dr  Currie  of  Liverpool, 
thus  describes,  in  a  letter  to  Mr  F.   Creevy,   M.P., 
dated  the  31st  of  October,   1803,  his  impressions  of 
the  Prince  in  1790: — 'I  dined  yesterday  by  special 
invitation  with  Prince  William  of  Gloucester.     There 
was  a  good  deal  of  talk  about  the  Northern  coasts, 
where  the  Prince  and  several  of  his  suite  were  last 
year,  and  I  was  a  good  deal  interested  to  hear  that 
the    politics    of  Russia    were    led    by    Prince    Adam 
Czartoryski,    the    Secretary  of    State.     The    Prince 
said  that  he  was  a  most  agreeable,  accomplished  man, 
but  decidedly  in  the  French  interest,  a  Jacobin,  etc. 
etc.,  and   that   his   influence  was   the   great   bar    to 
England  resuming  her  proper  weight  at   the    Court 
of  St  Petersburg.      Now  you  must  know  this  Czar- 
toryski is  an  old  acquaintance  of  mine — was  a  cor- 
respondent, and  might  have  been  so  yet,  but  for  my 
own  neglect,  for  he  wrote  me   several  letters   since 
I  ceased  to  write  to    him.      He  made    the   tour    of 
the  island  along  with  his  mother  in  grand  style,  some 
time  in  the  earlier  and  better  stages  of  the  French 
Revolution.     He  was  then  about  twent}T  or  twenty- 
one,  and  a  very  fine  young  man  indeed,  full  of  great 
expectations   of  happy   changes    in   society ;    full    of 
ardour,  benevolence,  and  adventure.     He  had  passed 
the  preceding  winter  at  Paris,  in  close  attendance  on 
the  National  Assembly  in  the  most  brilliant  days  of 


VISITS  TO  ENGLAND  51 

Mirabeau.  He  had  afterwards  been  a  close  attendant 
on  the  debates  in  our  own  Parliament,  at  that  time 
so  interesting.  He  seemed  to  me  extremely  capable 
of  appreciating  the  great  talents  then  displayed  on 
the  theatres  of  both  nations,  and  was  very  fond  of 
comparing  the  statesmen  and  orators  of  France  and 
England.  Mirabeau  and  Fox  were  his  heroes — but 
he  preferred  the  latter.  He  was  absolutely  as  great 
an  idolater  of  Fox  as  you  are  of  the  General  [Sir 
John  Moore],  and  seemed  to  me  to  have  that  sim- 
plicity and  elevation  of  soul  which  is  necessary  to 
appreciate  our  incomparable  Charley.  I  took  to 
Czartoryski  extremely,  and  he  used  to  ride  out  with 
me  and  walk  with  me  during  the  fortnight  he  stayed 
here,  as  you  do.  He  is  an  English-looking  man,  a 
black  fellow,  very  tall  and  handsome — spoke  our 
language  and  loved  our  country.  I  had  several 
letters  from  him  during  his  tour  in  Scotland  (where  I 
introduced  him)  and  mean  to  have  a  search  for  them. 
He  was  very  deeply  interested  in  the  Revolution  in 
Poland,  in  which  I  think  his  mother  played  a  prin- 
cipal part.  She  was  with  him,  and  took  the  direction 
of  him — a  woman  then  still  handsome,  and  said  to  be 
of  great  address  of  every  kind,  but  perfectly  intel- 
ligible and  feminine.  When  I  revolve  all  these  things, 
Sheridan's  scheme  of  sending  Fox  to  St  Petersburg 
struck  me  as  a  noble  thought.  Depend  upon  it,  if  it 
could  be  accomplished,  that  his  influence  there  would 
be  speedily  felt.  For  this  Czartoryski  is  a  virtuous 
man,  and,  if  we  knew  how  to  approach  him,  neither  is 
nor  can  be  the  tool  of  Bonaparte.' 

Prince   Adam   returned   to  Poland  in  1791,    and 


52         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

entered  the  army  under  the  command  of  his  brother-in- 
law,  the  Prince  of  Wiirtemberg.  It  was  in  this  year 
that  the  famous  Reformed  Constitution  of  the  3rd  of 
May,  which  was  afterwards  made  by  Russia  and  Prussia 
the  pretext  for  a  second  partition  of  the  country,  was 
passed  by  the  Grand  Diet  (known  as  '  the  Four  Years' 
Diet ')  at  Warsaw.*  This  Constitution  was  regarded 

*  'It  was  the  deliberate  and  systematic  policy  of  Russia  and  Prussia  to  maintain 
anarchy  in  Poland,  in  order  that  it  might  never  rise  to  prosperity  or  power  or  ' 
independence.  With  this  object  they  agreed,  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of 
Stanislas  Poniatowski,  that  they  would  maintain  by  force  the  existing  Constitution, 
and  oppose  any  attempt  to  abolish  the  Lib^ru/n  Veto,  or  to  make  the  monarchy 
hereditary.  A  strong  and  earnest  effort  was,  notwithstanding,  made  to  effect  the 
former  object,  and  the  reform  was  so  powerfully  supported  that  it  would  have 
undoubtedly  succeeded  had  not  Russia  again  interfered,  and  re-established,  with  the 
concurrence  of  Prussia,  Liber  urn  Veto  in  its  full  stringency.  The  jealousy  of  three 
great  powers  alone  for  a  time  saved  Poland.  At  last  they  agreed  upon  their  share  of 
the  spoil.  In  1772  they  signed  'in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity,'  treaties  for  the 
plunder  of  Poland,  and  in  a  few  months  the  first  partition  was  easily  effected.  It 
was  justified  at  the  time,  and  has  been  defended  by  some  later  historians  on  the 
ground  of  that  very  anarchy  which  it  had  been  for  many  years  a  main  object  of  two 
of  the  plundering  powers  to  foment  and  to  perpetuate.  Prussia  solemnly  guaranteed 
the  integrity  of  Poland.  She  promised  to  assist  her  against  all  hostile  attacks,  and 
all  interference  with  her  internal  concerns.  The  King  of  Prussia  not  only  fully 
recognised  the  right  of  the  Polish  people  as  an  independent  nation  to  revise  their 
Constitution,  but  he  also  strongly  urged  them  to  do  so. 

'  The  Prussian  policy  of  detaching  Poland  from  Russia  was,  however,  perfectly 
successful,  and,  relying  on  Prussian  support,  the  Polish  Diet,  which  first  met  in 
September  1788,  and  which  was  confederated  for  the  emergency,  carried  a  series  of 
reforms  which  totally  changed  the  constitution  and  condition  of  Poland.  It  was 
decreed  that  the  army  should  be  raised  from  20,000  to  100,000  men.  The  system  of 
taxation  was  thoroughly  revised.  A  considerable  representation  was  given  to  the 
trading  towns.  The  excessive  powers  of  the  Dietines  were  abolished.  The  Liberum 
Veto  was  swept  away,  and  finally  on  May  3,  1791,  a  new  Constitution  was  voted,  in 
which,  after  the  reigning  King,  the  crown  was  offered  to  the  Elector  of  Saxony,  and 
to  his  heirs  for  ever.  It  was  certain  that  Russia  would  resist  bitterly  what  was 
done,  and  she  early  announced  to  the  Diet  that  she  would  permit  no  change  what- 
ever in  the  Constitution  of  1775.  The  King  of  Prussia  expressed  his  satisfaction  at 
what  had  occurred,  to  the  Polish  Minister  at  his  Court,  to  the  King  of  Poland,  and 
the  Elector  of  Saxony.  He  urged  the  Elector  to  accept  the  Polish  crown  :  lie 
offered  him  his  warm  alliance,  and  he  professed  himself  fully  determined  to  fulfil 
his  own  treaty  obligations. 

'  As  for  the  policy  of  Russia  towards  Poland,  it  was  one  of  cynical,  undisguised 
rapacity.  The  course  of  events  depended  largely  on  the  King  of  Prussia.  That 
sovereign,  as  we  have  se*en,  had  first  induced  the  Poles  to  assert  their  independence 
of  Russia.  He  had  himself  urged  them  to  amend  their  constitution.  He  had  been 
the  first  to  congratulate  them  on  the  constitutional  reform  of  May  1791.  He  had 
bound  himself  before  God  and  man,  by  two  solemn  and  recent  treaties,  to  respect 
the  integrity  of  Poland  ;  to  defend  the  integrity  of  Poland  against  all  enemies  ;  to 
oppose  by  force  any  attempt  to  interfere  witli  her  internal  affairs.  Yet,  as  we  have 


VISITS  TO  ENGLAND  53 

by  the  greatest  statesmen  and  political  writers  of  the 
time  as  the  highest  step  yet  attained  in  the  science 
of  government.  Burke  said  that  it  was  '  a  glory  to 
humanity'  and  '  the  noblest  and  greatest  benefit  shed 
upon  the  human  race.'  Fox  described  it  as  '  a  work  to 
which  all  the  friends  of  freedom  should  be  sincerely 
attached,'  and  Volney  remarked  that  Poland  was  the 
only  country  of  Northern  Europe  which  had  amelio- 
rated the  hard  lot  of  its  peasantry. 

In  1792,  Prince  Adam  took  part  in  the  campaign 
against  the  Russians,  who  had  invaded  Poland  in  con- 
sequence of  the  issue  of  the  new  constitution  ;  he 
fought  in  the  battle  of  Granno,  and  was  decorated  by 
the  King  for  his  bravery. 

In  1793,  he  again  went  to  England,  and  entered 
into  close  relations  with  nearly  all  the  politicians  of 
note  in  that  country.*  It  was  while  he  was  still 
staying  there  in  1794  that  the  Kosciuszko  insurrection 
broke  out.  Directly  he  heard  the  news,  he  hurried 
back  to  join  the  insurgents,  but  was  stopped  at 
Brussels  and  put  in  arrest  under  orders  from  the 
Austrian  Government.  Meanwhile  the  insurrection 
was  suppressed,  and  the  third  partition  of  Poland  took 
place.  Soon  after  the  Prince  rejoined  his  parents  at 
Vienna,  where  the  Emperor  Francis  intervened  with 
the  Empress  Catherine  of  Russia  to  cancel  the  confis- 

also  seen,  he  had  resolved  as  early  as  March  1792,  not  only  to  break  his  word  and  to 
betray  his  trust,  but  also  to  take  an  active  part  in  the  partition  of  the  defenceless 
country  which  he  had  bound  himself  in  honour  to  protect.'  (Lecky,  History  of 
England  in  the  Eighteenth  Century,  Vols  V  and  VI. ) 

*  Tliere  are  in  the  Czartoryski  archives  several  bulky  manuscripts  written  by  the 
Prince  during  his  stay  in  England  at  this  time.  Two  of  these,  in  the  English 
language,  are  treatises  on  English  law  and  on  the  system  of  police  and  civil 
administration  generally ;  a  third,  in  Polish,  is  on  the  judicial  administration  in 
England. 


54 

cation  of  the  estates  of  the  Czartoryski  family,  ordered 
by  her  in  consequence  of  their  participation  in  the 
insurrection.  The  Empress  insisted,  as  a  condition  of 
her  entering  into  negotiations  on  this  subject,  that  the 
two  young  princes  should  go  to  St  Petersburg  to 
enter  the  Russian  service,  and  after  much  deliberation 
at  a  family  council  this  condition  was  accepted.] 


CHAPTEK  VI 

1794-1795 

JOURNEY     TO     ST     PETERSBURG. — HEADING      PERSONAGES  IN      RUSSIAN 

SOCIETY     UNDER      THE      EMPRESS     CATHERINE. THE     ZUBOFFS. 

CATHERINE. — HER      COURT. THE      YOUNG     PRINCES  ENTER     THE 

RUSSIAN    SERVICE. 

IT  was  the  12th  of  May  1795,  when  my  brother  and  I 
arrived  at  St  Petersburg.  In  order  to  form  an  idea 
of  our  feelings  on  entering  that  city,  it  is  necessary  to 
know  the  principles  in  which  we  were  brought  up. 
Our  education  had  been  entirely  Polish  and  Republican. 
The  study  of  ancient  history  and  literature,  and  of  the 
history  and  literature  of  our  country,  had  occupied 
the  years  of  our  adolescence.  Our  minds  were  full  of 
Greeks  and  Romans,  and,  following  the  example  of 
our  ancestors,  we  thought  only  of  perpetuating  the 
ancient  virtues  on  the  soil  of  our  fatherland.  With 
regard  to  political  liberty,  more  recent  examples, 
taken  from  the  history  of  England  and  France,  had 
up  to  a  certain  point  rectified  our  ideas,  without  in 
any  way  diminishing  their  energy.  The  love  of  our 
country,  of  its  glories,  its  institutions,  and  its  liberties 
had  been  inculcated  into  us  by  our  studies,  and  by 
everything  we  had  seen  or  heard  around  us.  I  should 


56        MEMOIRS  OF  PRIXCE  ADAM  CZARTOKYSKI 

add  that  this  feeling,  which  penetrated  the  whole  of 
our  moral  nature,  was  accompanied  by  an  invincible 
aversion  to  all  who  had  contributed  to  the  ruin  of  the 
fatherland  which  we  so  much  loved. 

This  two-fold  sentiment  of  love  and  hatred  domi- 
nated me  so  entirely,  that  I  could  not  meet  a  Russian 
either  in  Poland  or  elsewhere  without  feeling  a  rush  of 
blood  to  the  head — without  blushing  or  turning  white 
with  anger — for  every  Russian  seemed  to  me  an 
author  of  the  misfortunes  of  my  country. 

My  first  task  was  promptly  to  replace  on  a  satis- 
factory footing  the  affairs  of  my  father.  Three- 
fourths  of  his  fortune,  all  consisting  of  land  situated 
in  the  provinces  seized  by  Russia,  had  been  seques- 
trated. These  estates  were  mortgaged  to  a  consider- 
able extent,  so  that  not  only  my  father's  own  property, 
but  also  that  of  a  great  number  of  our  countrymen, 
was  in  question.  The  representations  made  in  my 
father's  favour  by  the  Court  of  Vienna  had  had  no 
result.  Catherine  was  provoked  by  the  patriotism  of 
my  father  and  mother,  and  their  sympathy  with 
the  Kosciuszko  insurrection.  '  Let  their  two  sons 
come  to  me,'  she  said,  'and  then  we  will  see.'  She 
wished  to  keep  us  as  hostages. 

Our  departure  for  St  Petersburg  was  thus  indis- 
pensable. Our  father,  kind  and  considerate  as  ever, 
did  not  venture  to  demand  this  sacrifice  from  us ;  and 
it  was  the  fact  of  our  knowing  this  that  prevailed 
over  every  other  consideration.  Our  fatherland  was 
lost :  were  we  also  to  condemn  our  parents  to  want, 
and  make  it  impossible  for  them  to  discharge  their 
debts  ?  We  did  not  hesitate  an  instant.  At  the  same 


JOURNEY  TO  ST  PETERSBURG  57 

time  we  knew  well  that  to  go  to  St  Petersburg, 
far  from  all  our  connections — to  give  ourselves  up 
as  prisoners,  so  to  say,  into  the  hands  of  the  most 
detested  of  our  enemies,  of  the  executioners  of  our 
country — was  in  our  situation  the  most  painful  sacrifice 
we  could  make  to  paternal  affection  ;  for  to  do  this  it 
was  necessary  to  act  in  opposition  to  all  our  senti- 
ments, all  our  convictions,  all  our  plans— to  every- 
thing that  was  nearest  to  our  hearts  and  minds. 

I  described  with  all  the  ardour  of  a  youthful  poet 
my  state  of  mind  at  this  time,  in  some  verses  entitled 
'  The  Song  of  the  Bard,'  which  I  composed  during  my 
stay  at  Grodno.  When  I  left  that  town  I  sent  the 
manuscript  to  our  friend  Kniaznin,  and  it  was  often 
read  with  tears  of  sympathy  by  my  family. 

We  bade  adieu  to  our  parents  (who  at  that  time 
were  residing  at  Vienna),  in  the  month  of  December 
1794.  After  sadly  passing  a  few  days  at  ^ieniawa,* 
wre  proceeded  on  our  journey  at  the  beginning  of 
January,  and  stopped  at  Grodno  (where  the  King 
Stanislas  Augustus  then  lived  under  the  surveillance 
of  Prince  Repnin),  until  we  received  permission, 
which  did  not  arrive  till  the  following  spring,  to  go 
on  to  St  Petersburg.  The  Empress  at  first  refused 
to  give  this  permission,  and  we  were  shown  a  note  in 
her  own  hand  in  which  she  stated  as  the  reason  of  her 
refusal  that  my  mother  had,  as  in  the  story  of 
Hamilcar  and  Hannibal,  made  us  swear  eternal  hatred 
to  Russia  and  her  sovereign.  While  at  Grodno  we 
often  went  to  see  the  King,  and  we  were  witnesses  of 
his  grief  and  bitter  self-reproaches  at  not  being  able 

*  Iu  Galicia,  now  the  country  residence  of  Priiice  Ladislas  Czartoryski. 


5 8        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

either  to  save  his  country  or  to  perish  in  fighting  for 
her. 

Since  my  first  arrival  at  St  Petersburg  my  feelings 
have  never  changed,  but  their  outward  expression  has 
necessarily  been  modified  by  events.  The  same 
juvenile  ardour  which  made  us  regard  our  departure  as 
a  heroic  sacrifice  to  paternal  affection,  made  the  detested 
position  in  which  we  were  placed  more  tolerable. 
When  one  is  young,  there  are  few  things  that  cannot 
be  borne  ;  one  is  strong  enough  to  contend  with  every 
kind  of  adversity  and  even  of  misfortune.  New 
scenes,  new  impressions,  though  painful,  yet  hitherto 
unknown,  always  distract  the  mind  in  the  end  even 
if  they  do  not  change  it. 

We  were  received  in  St  Petersburg  society  with 
much  consideration  and  good-will.  Our  father,  who 
had  lived  in  the  Russian  capital  at  the  time  of 
Elizabeth,  of  Peter  II,  and  of  the  accession  of 
Catherine,  was  well  known  and  respected  there  by 
the  older  inhabitants.  His  letters,  which  we  brought 
with  us,  procured  us  a  favourable  reception.  The 
injustice  with  which  we  had  been  treated  by  the 
Cabinet,  elicited  a  sympathy  in  our  favour  which  was 
not  entirely  barren,  as  it  was  openly  and  fearlessly 
expressed.  I  have  no  doubt,  remembering  the  com- 
pliments which  were  paid  to  us,  that  the  courtiers 
of  whom  St  Petersburg  society  was  at  that  time 
almost  entirely  composed,  knew  beforehand  that  their 
politeness  to  the  disinherited  of  Poland — the  foster- 
children  of  liberty — could  not  compromise  them  at 
Court.  Perhaps  they  had  even  received  a  hint  that 
this  conduct  on  their  part  would  be  pleasing  to  the 


RUSSIAN  SOC11ETY  59 

Empress.  After  a  few  weeks  we  had  made  many 
acquaintances,  and  we  received  invitations  every  day 
from  the  members  of  the  aristocracy.  Dinners,  balls, 
concerts,  soirees,  private  theatricals,  succeeded  each 
other  without  intermission. 

We  were  everywhere  accompanied  by  M.  James 
Gorski,  who  had  been  requested  by  our  father  to  be 
our  friend  and  guide,  and  to  assist  us  by  his  advice. 
No  better  mentor  could  have  been  selected.  Easy- 
going, merry,  tolerant,  a  genial  and  witty  companion, 
and  at  the  same  time  scrupulously  honourable  and 
never  hesitating  to  tell  an  unpleasant  truth,  he  was 
the  very  man  to  keep  us  in  the  right  way  without 
alienating  us  by  excessive  severity.  We  were  very 
happy  in  the  society  of  this  excellent  friend,  and  I 
only  satisfy  the  demands  of  my  conscience  in  here 
expressing  our  gratitude  to  him  and  our  grief  at  his 
unexpected  loss.  He  encouraged  us  to  take  advan- 
tage of  the  friendly  reception  given  to  us,  by  entering 
into  relations  with  the  persons  who  were  ultimately 
to  bring  about  the  restitution  of  our  fortune.  Gorski 
spoke  French  with  a  strong  Polish  accent,  but  this 
did  not  in  any  way  disconcert  him.  All  he  said  and 
did  was  marked  by  a  laconic  precision  which  was 
thoroughly  in  accordance  with  his  character  and  ap- 
pearance. He  held  his  head  high,  and  had  a  proud 
manner  and  a  brief  and  decided  way  of  speaking, 
always,  however,  within  the  limits  of  politeness. 
Although  he  did  not  much  esteem  the  majority  of  his 
acquaintances,  they  were  devoted  to  him.  He  was 
very  fond  of  pleasure  and  good  living,  and  persuaded 
us  to  go  into  society,  which  perhaps  our  melancholy, 


60        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

and  also  a  little  natural  indolence,  would  otherwise 
have  prevented  us  from  doing.  He  never  lost  sight 
of  the  object  of  the  journey  we  had  undertaken,  and 
he  never  neglected  any  means  calculated  to  achieve 
it.  He  always  urged  us  to  pay  visits  and  take  steps 
which  were  inexpressibly  disagreeable  to  us,  and  it 
was  to  his  persistence  in  this  respect  that  our  success 
was  mainly  due. 

This  period  of  our  youth  was  a  decisive  one  for 
the  rest  of  our  career  :  for,  thus  suddenly  introduced 
into  a  state  of  things  entirely  foreign  to  us  and 
contrary  to  our  ideas,  we  saw  all  our  plans  disappear 
and  our  future  changed  and  broken  in  opposition  to 
our  wishes  and  our  convictions.  As  regards  myself 
this  phase  of  my  life  produced  deep  and  painful 
results.  The  misfortunes  of  my  country,  of  my 
parents,  and  of  many  others  of  my  countrymen,  the 
defeat  of  justice  and  the  triumph  of  violence  and 
crime,  had  unhinged  my  mind.  I  began  to  doubt 
the  ways  of  Providence.  I  saw  only  contradictions 
and  aimless  struggles ;  nothing  seemed  to  me  to 
deserve  any  serious  attention  ;  I  was  absorbed  by 
a  feeling  of  scepticism,  of  cold  and  despairing  indiffer- 
ence. I  have  since  more  than  once  relapsed  into  these 
attacks  of  despair.  But  although,  seeing  nowhere 
any  solid  basis  of  action,  and  suspecting  everybody, 
I  looked  upon  men  and  things  with  contempt,  an 
interior  voice  suggested  to  my  reason  that  virtue 
and  charity  were  indubitable  realities  that  were  worth 
living  for,  and  that  even  if  this  were  not  the  case, 
they  were  to  be  preferred  to  anything  else.  This 
debate  of  niy  conscience  alone  saved  me  from  the 


RUSSIA  N  SOCIETY  6 1 

fatal  effects  of  universal  doubt.  The  first  germs  of 
belief,  though  weakened,  still  remained  in  my  soul. 

Compliments  and  pleasures  always  produce  their 
effect  on  a  youthful  mind,  though  they  do  not 
prevent,  and  indeed  sometimes  promote,  a  feeling  of 
scepticism.  Our  souls  retained  their  wounds,  but  we 
felt  some  change  on  the  surface.  We  found  that, 
according  to  the  proverb,  the  devil  is  not  so  black  as 
he  is  painted,  especially  if  he  makes  himself  amiable  ; 
that  it  was  not  just,  notwithstanding  the  outrages 
that  had  been  committed  on  our  country,  to  accuse 
the  whole  Russian  nation  of  them — to  include  in  our 
detestation  of  the  Government,  individuals  who  had 
nothing  in  common  with  it ;  that  the  appearances  of 
things  chano-e  according  to  the  condition  and  status  of 

o  o  ~ 

persons,  and  that  to  arrive  at  a  sound  judgment  of 
their  private,  and  still  more  of  their  public,  conduct, 
one  should  put  one's  self  in  their  place  and  have  regard 
to  the  circumstances  by  which  they  are  surrounded. 
By  degrees  we  came  to  the  conviction  that  these 
Russians,  whom  we  had  instinctively  learnt  to  hate— 
whom  we  indiscriminately  classed  as  malignant  and 

«/  O 

sanguinary  beings,  with  whom  we  were  to  avoid  every 
contact,  and  whom  we  could  not  even  meet  without 
disgust — that  these  Russians  were  much  like  other 
people  ;  that  there  were  among  them  young  men  who 
were  witty  and  courteous,  and  even  kind,  so  far  at 
least  as  could  be  judged  from  their  words  ;  that 
Russian  ladies  were  very  amiable  ;  that,  in  a  word,  one 
could  live  among  Russians  without  repulsion,  and 
even  sometimes  feel  obliged  to  give  them  one's 
friendship  and  gratitude. 


62        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORY8KI 

I  only  make  these  self-evident  remarks  to  show 
that  we  were  in  no  way  prepared  for  the  transition, 
and  that,  passing  so  suddenly  from  one  extreme  to 
the  other,  we  felt  as  if  we  had  been  cast  from  a  preci- 
pice on  a  sea  where,  not  being  able  to  land,  we  were 
obliged  to  direct  our  course  as  best  we  could.  We 
were  young,  and  we  met  with  dangerous  and  insidious 
acquaintances  and  amusements.  The  society  of  St 
Petersburg  was  on  the  whole  brilliant,  animated,  and 
full  of  variety.  Many  houses  of  different  kinds  were 
open  to  us,  and  strangers  were  everywhere  received 
with  eagerness. 

The  salons  of  the  Princess  Basil  Dolgoroukoff  and 
those  of  the  Princess  Michael  Galitzin,  both  of  whom 
have  since  become  well  known  in  Paris,  were  dis- 
tinguished by  their  elegance.  These  two  ladies 
rivalled  each  other  in  wit,  beauty,  and  amiability. 
It  was  said  that  both  had  been  admired  by  Prince 
Potemkin.  The  unfortunate  adorer  of  the  Princess 
Dolgoroukoff  was  at  that  time  Count  de  Cobentzel, 
the  Austrian  ambassador,  while  the  Princess  Galitzin 
had  enchained  Count  de  Choiseul-Gouffier,  known  by 
his  mission  to  Constantinople  and  the  narrative  of 
his  travels  in  Greece.  He  had  converted  the 
Princess's  palace  into  a  sort  of  art  museum,  though 
she  herself  did  not  much  care  for  art. 

The  Narishkin  palace  was  of  quite  a  different 
kind.  With  all  its  anachronisms,  it  was  a  true 
Russian  building  of  the  Asiatic  type,  and  the  young 
ladies  there,  who  were  less  looked  after  than  they 
usually  are  in  Russia,  were  said  to  have  been  also 
distinguished  by  Prince  Potemkin.  The  doors  were 


J2USSIAX  SOCIETY  63 

open  to  everybody,  and  Cossacks,  Tartars,  Cir- 
cassians, and  other  Asiatics  were  among  the  guests. 
The  owner,  Leo  Narishkin,  gay,  affable,  good- 
natured,  an  old  favourite  of  Peter  III,  and  after- 
wards a  courtier  of  the  Empress  Catherine,  always 
ready  to  please  her  favourites,  with  all  of  whom  he 
was  on  good  terms,  spent  enormous  sums  as  Grand 
Equerry  in  balls  and  receptions,  and  yet,  though  he 
had  been  doing  this  for  ten  years,  did  not  manage  to 
get  through  his  fortune.  I  do  not  know  if  his  heirs, 
who  had  the  same  taste  for  lavish  expenditure,  have 
been  more  successful. 

At  the  Grolowin  palace  there  were  not  daily 
soirees,  as  elsewhere,  but  little  coteries  like  those  got 
up  in  Paris,  to  perpetuate  the  ancient  traditions  of 
Versailles.  The  mistress  of  the  house,  whose  two 
daughters  have  since  married  MM.  Fredro  and 
Potocki,  was  very  witty,  talented,  sentimental,  and 
fond  of  art. 

Another  house  which  had  a  peculiar  character  of 
its  own  was  the  palace  of  Count  Strogonoff.  The 
Count  had  lived  for  a  long  time  in  Paris,  and  had 
contracted  habits  there  which  were  in  singular  con- 
trast to  the  old  Muscovite  customs.  He  and  his 
friends  talked  of  Voltaire,  of  Diderot,  of  the  Parisian 
stage,  and  discussed  the  merits  of  the  pictures  of  the 
old  masters,  of  which  the  Count  had  a  rich  collection; 
and  while  this  conversation  was  going  on,  a  huge 
table  was  laid,  with  a  barbaric  disorder  betraying  the 
origin  of  his  Siberian  riches,  at  which  people  dined 
without  being  invited  and  were  waited  upon  by  a 
crowd  of  serfs. 


64        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

I  will  not  sketch  in  detail  the  society  of  St  Peters- 
burg ;  I  have  to  speak  of  more  serious  subjects.  I 
will  only  add  that  Russian  society  was  at  that  time, 
as  it  probably  is  still,  only  a  reflection  of  the  Court. 
It  might  be  compared  to  the  vestibule  of  a  temple, 
where  no  one  has  eyes  or  ears  for  anything  but  the 
divinity  within.  Every  conversation,  I  had  almost 
said  every  phrase,  always  ended  in  a  reference  or 
question  relating  to  the  Court — what  was  said  or  done 
there,  or  what  was  intended  to  be  done.  Every 
important  impulse  came  from  the  Court ;  this  de- 
prived society,  it  is  true,  of  any  distinctive  character, 
yet  it  seemed  to  be  animated  and  gay. 

The  Empress  Catherine,  the  immediate  author  of 
the  ruin  of  Poland,  whose  very  name  inspired  us  with 
horror,  and  who  was  cursed  by  everyone  with  the 
heart  of  a  Pole — who,  in  the  opinion  of  people  outside 
her  capital,  neither  had  virtue  nor  even  womanly 
decency — had  nevertheless  succeeded  in  gaining  the 
veneration  and  even  the  love  of  her  servants  and 
subjects.  During  the  long  years  of  her  reign  the 
army,  the  privileged  classes,  arid  the  administrators 
had  their  days  of  prosperity  and  lustre.  There  can 
be  no  doubt  that  since  her  accession  the  Russian 
Empire  had  gained  in  prestige  abroad  and  in  order  at 
home  far  more  than  during  the  preceding  reigns  of 
Anne  and  Elizabeth.  People's  minds  were  still  full 
of  the  ancient  fanaticism  and  of  a  servile  feeling  of 
adoration  for  autocrats.  The  prosperous  reign  of 
Catherine  had  confirmed  the  Russians  in  their  servility, 
though  some  gleams  of  European  civilisation  had 
already  penetrated  among  them.  Thus  the  people, 


RUSSIAN  SOCIETY  65 

great  and  small,  were  not  in  the  least  shocked  at  the 
depravred  tastes  of  their  sovereign  or  the  murders  and 
other  crimes  which  she  committed.  Everything  was 
allowed  to  her.  Her  luxuriousness  was  a  sacred  thing, 
and  no  one  dreamt  of  condemning  her  debaucheries  : 

o 

it  was  like  the  pagans  respecting  the  crimes  and  the 
obscenities  of  the  gods  of  Olympus  and  the  Caesars  of 
Home. 

The  Muscovite  Olympus  had  three  stages.  The 
first  was  the  so-called  '  young  court/  occupied  by  the 
young  princes  and  princesses,  all  of  whom  were  grace- 
ful and  cultivated,  and  promised  well  for  the  future. 
The  second  was  held  solely  by  the  Grand-Duke  Paul, 
whose  sombre  character  and  fantastic  humour  inspired 
terror,  and  sometimes  contempt.  At  the  top  of  the 
edifice  was  Catherine,  with  all  the  prestige  of  her 
victories,  of  her  prosperity,  and  of  her  confidence  in 
the  love  of  her  subjects,  whom  she  could  always  lead 
according  to  her  caprices. 

All  the  hopes  that  could  be  based  on  the  '  young 
court '  belonged  only  to  a  distant  future,  and  did  not 
in  any  way  diminish  the  general  affection  for  the 
supreme  authority  of  the  Czarina,  especially  as  the 
'  young  court '  was  regarded  only  as  a  creation  of  the 
ruling  power.  Catherine  reserved  to  herself  exclu- 
sively the  care  of  the  education  of  her  grandchildren ; 
and  their  parents  were  forbidden  to  exercise  any 
influence  in  this  respect.  Directly  they  were  born 
the  princes  and  princesses  were  taken  away  from  their 
parents,  and  they  grew  up  under  the  eyes  of  the 
Empress,  to  whom  alone  they  seemed  to  belong. 

The   Grand-Duke    Paul   was   the  shadow   in  the 


66         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

picture,  and  augmented  its  effect.  The  terror  which 
he  inspired  greatly  strengthened  the  general  attach- 
ment for  the  rule  of  Catherine.  Everyone  wished 
that  the  reins  of  government  should  long  remain  in 
her  strong  hands  ;  and  as  all  feared  Paul,  they  admired 
the  more  the  power  and  the  great  abilities  of  his 
mother,  who  held  him  in  dependence,  far  from  a 
throne  which  by  right  belonged  to  him. 

This  rapid  sketch  will  explain  the  idolatry  of  the 
inhabitants  of  St  Petersburg  for  their  female  Jupiter. 
It  was  in  some  sort  a  reproduction  of  the  adoration  of 
Louis  XIV  before  death  had  carried  away  his  numer- 
ous descendants. 

It  would  have  been  very  difficult,  if  not  impossible, 
for  a  stranger  arriving  at  St  Petersburg  to  resist 
impressions  and  prejudices  so  deeply  rooted.  Once 
he  entered  the  Court  atmosphere  and  the  society 
which  depended  upon  the  Court,  he  was  imperceptibly 
carried  away  by  the  same  ideas,  and  generally  ended 
by  joining  in  the  concert  of  praise  which  was  con- 
tinually rising  around  the  throne.  As  a  proof  of 
this,  illustrious  travellers  might  be  cited,  such  as  the 
Prince  de  Ligne,  the  Counts  de  Segur  arid  de 
Choiseul,  and  many  others.  In  the  group  of  strangers 
and  natives  who  slandered  their  acquaintances,  who 
would  sacrifice  anything  to  a  bon  mot,  and  who  had  no 
reason  to  mistrust  us,  there  was  not  one  who,  so  far  as 
I  knew,  ever  ventured  to  make  a  joke  at  the  expense 
of  the  Empress.  They  respected  nothing  and  gossipped 
about  everything  ;  a  disdainful  and  mocking  smile 
often  accompanied  the  name  of  the  Grand-Duke  Paul ; 
but  if  that  of  Catherine  was  mentioned,  all  men's  faces 


RUSSIAN  SOCIETY  67 

at  once  put  on  an  air  of  seriousness  and  submission. 
There  were  no  more  smiles  or  jests ;  no  one  dared 
even  to  murmur  a  complaint  or  a  reproach,  as  if  the 
most  unjust  and  outrageous  actions,  when  committed 
by  her,  were  decrees  of  fate,  to  be  accepted  with  re- 
spectful submission. 

Catherine  was  ambitious,  spiteful,  vindictive,  ar- 
bitrary, and  shameless  ;  but  her  ambition  was  com- 
bined with  love  of  glory,  and  although  when  her 
personal  interests  or  passions  were  concerned  every- 
thing had  to  give  way,  her  despotism  was  in  no  way 
capricious.  Her  passions,  disorderly  as  they  were, 
were  dominated  by  her  reason  and  her  abilities.  Her 
tyranny  was  not  the  fruit  of  impulse,  but  of  calcula- 
tion. She  did  not  commit  crimes  which  were  of  no 
advantage  to  her.  She  even  consented  sometimes  to 

o 

be  equitable  in  matters  to  which  she  was  indifferent, 
in  order  that  the  glory  of  justice  might  increase  the 
splendour  of  her  throne.     Moreover,  being  jealous  of 
every  kind    of  fame,   she   aspired   to   the  title    of  a 
legislator,  in  order  to  give  herself,  at  least  in  the  eyes  of 
Europe  and  of  history,  a  reputation  for  statesmanship. 
She  knew  only  too  well  that  sovereigns  cannot  dis- 
pense with  appearing  just,  even  if  they  are  not  so  in 
reality.      She  was  anxious  to  gain  over  public  opinion 
to  her  side  so  long  as  it  did  not  run  contrary  to  her 
views  ;   otherwise  she  disregarded  it.      The  political 
crimes  which  she  committed  in  Poland,  she  explained 
as  necessary  for   the   security  of  the    State   and  as 
adding  to  its  military  glory.     She  seized  the  estates 
of  the   Poles  who  had  shown  most  zeal  for  the  in- 
dependence of  their  country,  but  in  distributing  these 


68         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

estates  she  benefited  the  great  Russian  families,  and 
the  bait  of  an  illicit  gain  induced  all  around  her  to 
flatter  her  taste  for  a  criminal,  pitiless,  and  conquering 
policy. 

Much  astonishment  was  expressed  when  General 
Fersen,  the  winner  of  the  battle  of  Maciej^o vice,*  re- 
fused the  confiscated  estates  of  the  Czacki  family,  and 
asked  as  his  reward  some  bonds  of  the  Imperial 
domains.  No  one  else  would  have  ventured  to  make 
so  legitimate  a  request,  as  every  order  of  the  Empress 
was  received  with  blind  submission.  Her  wish,  even 
if  it  entailed  a  revolting  act  of  injustice,  was  not  to  be 
discussed:  to  do  so  would  have  been  a  proof  of  un- 
exampled boldness.  People  held  that  her  acts  were 
not  to  be  judged  by  ordinary  standards,  and  that  even 
the  principles  of  equity  were  subject  to  her  decrees. 

I  will  quote  an  example  of  this  which  made  some 
noise  at  the  time.  The  Princess  Schakoffskoy,  who 
had  a  colossal  fortune,  had  married  her  daughter  to 
the  Duke  of  Aremberg.  This  had  happened  abroad. 
Catherine,  indignant  at  her  consent  not  having  been 
asked,  ordered  the  princess's  goods  to  be  confiscated. 
The  mother  and  daughter  came  to  implore  the 
Empress's  pardon,  but  Catherine  was  deaf  to  their 
prayers.  She  cancelled  the  marriage,  saying  that  it 
was  invalid,  as  it  had  been  contracted  without  her 
permission.  The  mother  and  daughter  quietly  sub- 
mitted, and  the  public  took  this  iniquitous  decision  as 
a  matter  of  course  ;  at  least  nobody  said  a  word  about 
it.  Some  time  after,  the  young  princess  was  per- 

*  The  battle  in  which  Kosciuszko's  insurrection  was  finally  suppressed,  and 
Kosciuszko  himself  was  wounded  and  taken  prisoner  (10th  of  October  1794). 


RUSSIAN  SOCIETY  69 

suaded  to  contract  a  second  marriage  ;  but  being 
sincerely  attached  to  her  first  husband,  and  stung  by 
remorse,  she  killed  herself. 

There  was  also  an  analogy  between  the  Court  of 
the  Empress  Catherine  and  that  of  Louis  XIV  in  so 
far  that  his  mistresses  played  exactly  the  same  part  at 
Versailles  as  her  favourites  did  at  St  Petersburg.  As 
to  the  immorality,  the  license,  the  intrigues,  and  the 
baseness  of  the  Court  of  St  Petersburg,  they  are 
rather  to  be  compared  to  what  we  read  of  the  courts 
of  the  Byzantine  Emperors  ;  while  for  a  parallel  to  the 
submission  and  the  veneration  of  the  people  we  must 
look  to  the  fascination  exercised  upon  the  English 
nation  by  Queen  Elizabeth,  who,  equally  cruel  and 
ambitious,  was  endowed  with  greater  talents  and  a 
masculine  energy. 

Even  the  libertine  spirit  of  Catherine,  which  often 
prompted  her  to  improvised  amours,  was  of  service  to 
her  with  the  army,  the  Court,  and  the  privileged 
classes.  Every  subaltern,  every  young  man  who 
possessed  physical  attractions,  aspired  to  the  favours 
of  his  sovereign  ;  and  although  she  descended  from 
her  Olympus  only  too  often  to  visit  ordinary  mortals, 
her  subjects  did  not  the  less  respect  her  power 
and  her  authority  ;  on  the  contrary,  they  were 
always  admiring  her  discretion  and  cleverness.  Those 
who  approached  her,  of  whatever  sex,  and  who  had 
enjoyed  her  benefits,  were  truly  attached  to  her,  and 
were  never  weary  of  praising  her  goodness  and 
amiability. 

For  some  time  we  were  forbidden  to  see  this  source 
of  favour  and  power,  whose  rays  dazzled  all  eyes.  In 


70        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

other  words,  we  had  not  received  permission  to  present 
.ourselves  at  the  Imperial  Court,  which  as  usual 
occupied  the  Tauris  Palace  from  the  beginning  of 
spring.  The  only  members  of  the  Imperial  family 
we  had  seen  were  the  young  princes,  who  were  in  the 
crowd  on  the  day  of  our  arrival,  the  1st  of  May 
according  to  the  Russian  calendar,  when  nearly  the 
whole  of  the  population  goes  to  the  promenade  of 
Catherinenhoff.  Some  time  after,  when  we  were 
already  received  in  society,  we  were  invited  to  assist 
at  a  fete  which  was  to  last  about  twenty-four  hours, 
for  it  was  to  begin  with  a  breakfast,  to  continue  with 
a  dance,  walks,  and  the  theatre,  and  to  end  with  a 
supper.  This  fete  was  given  by  the  Princess  Galitzin 
in  honour  of  the  'young  court.'  We  had  not  been  as 
yet  presented  ;  but  the  Princess  Galitzin,  following 
the  instructions  she  had  received  from  the  Countess 
Schouvaloif,  her  mother,  who  had  been  given  a  hint 
by  the  Empress,  had  invited  us,  and  this  gave  us  a 
certain  position  in  society.  It  would  be  impossible  to 
see  a  handsomer  couple  than  the  Grand-Duke 
Alexander,  who  was  then  eighteen,  and  his  wife,  who 
was  only  sixteen.  Both  beamed  with  youth,  grace, 
and  goodness. 

The  evenings  were  passed  in  the  amusements  I 
have  described,  but  during  the  day,  which  is  so  long 
in  that  climate,  the  whole  bitterness  of  our  situation 
forced  itself  upon  our  minds.  We  had  to  visit,  to 
solicit,  to  humble  ourselves.  It  was  hard,  arid  we 
should  have  had  much  more  difficulty  in  doing  it  if 
Gorski  had  not  been  there  to  keep  us  up  to  the  work. 
He  exercised  all  his  authority  over  us  ;  he  did  not 


THE  ZUBOFFS  71 

leave  us  a  moment's  relaxation,  repeating  that 
the  effects  of  our  neglect  would  fall  upon  our  parents, 
and  that  the  only  object  for  which  we  were  at  St 
Petersburg  was  to  replace  them  in  their  estates. 

Plato  Zuboff  was  at  that  time  the  most  powerful  of 
the  Empress's  favourites,  and  we  had  to  go  to  him 
first.     We  came  to  his  apartments  in  the  Tauris  Palace 
at  the  appointed  hour.     He  had  a  brown  coat  on,  and 
was  leaning  on  a  piece  of  furniture.     He  was  under 
middle   age,    with   a   good   figure   and    an   agreeable 
countenance  ;  his   dark  hair  was  curled  and  brushed 
up  into  a  tuft ;  his    voice   was   soft  and  clear.     He 
received    us    with   an   air    of    benevolent    protection. 
Gorski  acted  as  our  interpreter,  and  hastened  to  reply 
to  the   questions  which   Zuboff  addressed  to  us ;  his 
French  was  not  correct,   but   his   mien   was  always 
imposing.     Zuboft'  assured  us  that  he  would  do  all  he 
could  to    help    us,   but  added  that  we   must  not  be 
under  any  illusions,  that  everything  depended  on  her 
Majesty's  favour,   and   that  neither  himself  nor  any 
one    else   was    able    to    influence    her    decisions.     He 
added  that  we  would  soon  be  admitted  to  her  presence. 
Prince  Kourakin,  brother  to  the  future  ambassador, 
who   had   undertaken   to    protect    us,    had   taken    us 
to    Zuboff;    but    at    the   moment    when    we    entered 
he  disappeared,  or  rather  stayed  behind  in  the  ante- 
chamber.    He    rejoined    us   as    we    were    going    out, 
and  listened  with  a  smile  of  curiosity  to  our  account 
of  what   had    happened.     All    his    questions    proved 
that   he    was    convinced   that  we   had  just    left   the 
most  powerful  man  in  Europe. 

But   there   was  another  man   equally   important ; 


72         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

this  was  Valerian  Zuboff,  Count  Plato's  younger 
brother.  His  more  masculine  face  and  figure  made 
him  more  attractive  than  his  brother,  and  it  was 
said  that  the  Empress  liked  him  so  much  that  if 
he  had  presented  himself  first  he  would  have  become 
the  favourite.  As  it  was,  the  fact  of  his  being  Count 
Plato's  brother,  and  his  personal  qualities,  gave  him 
great  influence  over  the  mind  of  the  old  Czarina. 
We  were  therefore  obliged  to  pay  him  a  visit.  By  a 
singular  coincidence,  Valerian  Zuboff  had  been  the 
commander  of  the  detachment  which  had  sacked 
Pulawy*  in  the  previous  year.  The  horrors  which 
marked  the  passage  of  the  Russian  troops  through 
Poland  are  well  known,  and  though  Zuboff  did  not 
preside  in  person  over  the  pillage  of  Pulawy,  it  can 
hardly  be  credited  that  the  most  savage  soldiery 
would  have  acted  in  so  outrageous  a  manner  without 
their  commander's  consent.  If,  as  is  probable,  they 
acted  under  orders  from  above,  a  man  of  honour  would 
have  taken  care  to  show  that  it  was  with  reluctance 
that  he  acquitted  himself  of  such  a  mission,  and  would 
have  at  least  moderated  the  execution  of  it.  No  such 
moderation,  however,  was  shown;  and  we,  the  victims 
of  the  pillage,  had  to  ask  the  spoiler  (for  such  we 
thought  him)  for  his  protection.  We  were  even 
obliged  to  request  his  intercession  to  be  admitted  into 
the  presence  of  his  brother,  and  it  was  to  him  that 
we  owed  the  special  honour  of  a  private  reception. 

In  the  opinion  of  the  Russians,  however,  Valerian 
Zuboff  was  a  young  man  of  loyal  and  noble  senti- 
ments. All  that  was  said  against  him  was  that  he 

*  See  note  on  page  42. 


THE  EMPRESS  CATHERINE  73 

was  too  fond  of  pleasure  ;  his  honour  was  believed  to 
be  untarnished.  He  was  at  that  time  engaged  in  a 
love  intrigue  with  Madame  Prot  Potocka,  who  had 
followed  him  to  St  Petersburg,  where  she  lived  in 
concealment :  this,  however,  did  not  prevent  him  from 
making  other  liaisons.  He  had  lost  a  leg  in  a 
skirmish,  before  Praga*  was  taken  by  assault,  and 
his  crutches  seemed  to  add  to  his  charms  in  the  eyes 
of  the  Empress  and  other  ladies.  On  examining  him 
more  closely  one  saw  the  nonchalance  of  a  young 
man  spoiled  by  fortune  and  by  women.  His  rooms 
were  always  full  of  flatterers  of  all  kinds.  In  the 
interest  of  our  parents,  our  worthy  friend  Gorski 
took  us  there  also,  much  against  our  will.  When,  by 
repeating  our  visits,  our  relations  had  developed  into 
a  sort  of  familiarity,  we  still  felt  them  to  be  inex- 
pressibly tedious  ;  there  were  no  points  of  sympathy 
between  us,  and  it  was  impossible  to  enter  into  any 
conversation.  Count  Valerian  usually  began  by 
assuring  us  that  he  and  his  brother  did  not  possess 
anything  like  the  influence  they  were  supposed  to 
exercise  over  Catherine's  mind,  and  that  very  often 
she  did  the  very  opposite  to  that  which  they  wished 
her  to  do.  I  believe,  however,  that  Count  Valerian 
Zuboff  was  the  only  one  who  had  our  interests  at 
heart.  Whether  as  a  matter  of  conscience,  or  from 
a  desire  to  retrieve  his  reputation,  he  urged  his 
brother  to  help  us,  and  he  pleaded  warmly  to  the 
Empress  in  our  behalf. 

The    principal    favourite    acted    very   differently. 

*  A  suburb  of  Warsaw,  captured  in  1795  by  Souvaroff,  who  put  its  inhabitants 
to  the  sword.  This  event  was  followed  by  the  capitulation  of  Warsaw,  the  abdica- 
tion of  King  Stanislas  Augustus,  and  the  third  partition  of  Poland. 


74        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Count  Plato  Zuboff,   as   I   said  above,   had   granted 
us  the  honour  of  a  special  audience,  and,  like  other 
applicants,  we  had  to  remind  his  Excellency  of  our 
existence  in   order  to   obtain  his  protection.     Every 
day  about  eleven  o'clock  he  had  a  levee,  in  the  literal 
sense  of  the  word.     An  immense  crowd  of  petitioners 
and   courtiers  of  all  ranks   hastened  to  assist  at  his 
toilet.     The  street  was  full  of  carriages  with  four  or 
six   horses,   exactly  as   at    the    theatre.     Sometimes, 
after  a  long  period  of  waiting,  the  crowd  was  informed 
that  the  Count  would  not  see  them  on  that  day,  and 
they  then  dispersed  to  come  again   on   the   morrow. 
If  Zuboff  was  disposed  to  see  them,  the  folding  doors 
were   opened,  and   generals,  high  civil  functionaries, 
Circassians,  and  merchants  with  long  beards,  crowded 
into    the   room.     Among  the   applicants  were   many 
Poles   who  came  to    claim    the    restoration    of  their 
estates,  or  redress  for  some  grievance.     One  of  these 
was    Prince    Alexander    Lubomirski,    who    intended 
to  sell  his  estates  in  order  to  save  the  remains  of  his 
fortune,  which  had  been  involved  in  the  ruin  of  the 
country.     There   was  also   the    Metropolitan    of  the 
United  Greeks,*  named  Sosnowski,  who  came  to  bow 
his  venerable  head  to  the  favourite  in  order  to  obtain 
the  restitution  of  his  property  and  save  his  church, 
which  the   Russian   Government  had  already  begun 
cruelly  to  persecute.     M.  Oskierko,  a  young  man  of 
interesting  appearance,  came  to  ask  for  an  amnesty 
for  his  father,  who  had  been  imprisoned  or  banished 
to  Siberia,  and  whose  fortune  had   been   confiscated. 

*  The  union  of  the  Roman  and  Greek  churches  in  Poland  was  effected  in  the 
1434. 


CATHERINE'S  COURT  75 

The  number  of  persons  who  had  been  thus  treated 
was  immense  ;*  the  proportion  of  them  who  would  be 
able  to  avail  themselves  of  the  doubtful  chances  of 
the  so-called  amnesty  was  very  small.  Some  were  in 
chains,  others  in  Siberia;  and  it  was  not  every  one 
who  could  get  permission  to  go  to  St  Petersburg. 
All  complaints  were  suppressed,  and  the  Government 
officials,  who  constituted  a  hierarchy  of  fabulous 
extent,  did  not  give  the  required  permission  unless 
they  themselves  derived  some  advantage  from  it. 
And  even  when  all  difficulties  had  been  overcome, 
and  the  petitioner  had  obtained  admission  to  the 
Russian  Court,  the  usual  answer  was  that  given  to 
the  Metropolitan  of  the  United  Greeks — that  the 
Empress's  decrees,  whether  just  or  unjust,  were 
irrevocable,  that  complaint  was  useless,  and  that  W7hat 
had  been  done  could  not  be  undone — especially  as 
official  avidity  closed  the  doors  to  every  appeal. 

To  return  to  the  assemblages  in  the  favourite's 
rooms.  Each  suitor  showed  in  his  face  what  he 
wanted.  Some  expressed  grief  and  a  simple  desire  to 
defend  their  property,  their  honour,  and  their  exist- 
ence ;  others  betrayed  a  design  to  seize  somebody 
else's  property,  or  to  keep  it  if  they  had  already 
obtained  it.  Thus  some  were  led  by  misfortune, 
others  by  greed.  Others  again  only  came  to  pros- 
trate themselves  before  the  rising  star.  It  seemed 
almost  impossible  to  be  humiliated  on  finding  one's 
self  in  a  crowd  composed  of  the  h'rst  dignitaries  of  the 

*  Many  of  these  exiles,  being  deprived  of  all  means  of  communication  with  their 
friends  and  relatives  in  Poland,  remained  in  Siberia  for  the  rest  of  their  lives. 
There  are  thousands  of  Polish  families  now  in  Siberia  which  are  descended  from  the 
confederates  of  Bar  and  men  who  took  part  in  subsequent  Polish  insurrections. 


76        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Empire,  men  of  the  most  illustrious  names,  and  generals 
in  command  of  our  provinces,  who  placed  everybody 
in  their  districts  under  tribute  and  inspired  universal 
fear,  and  who,  after  coming  in  all  humility  to  bow  their 
heads  before  the  favourite,  either  went  away  without 
obtaining  a  look  from  him,  or  stood  waiting  like  mes- 
sengers while  he  changed  his  dress  reclining  on  a  sofa. 
The  following  was  the  usual  course  at  these  recep- 
tions. When  the  folding-doors  were  opened,  Zuboff 
slowly  entered  the  room  in  a  dressing-gown,  with 
scarcely  any  underclothing,  and  after  nodding  slightly 
to  the  suitors  and  courtiers,  who  stood  respectfully  in 
a  circle,  began  his  toilet.  The  servants  approached 
him  to  dress  his  hair  and  powder  it.  Meanwhile 
other  applicants  came  in  ;  they  also  were  honoured 
by  a  nod  when  the  Count  perceived  them;  all  watched 
carefully  for  an  opportunity  to  catch  his  eye.  We 
were  among  those  who  were  always  received  with  a 
gracious  smile.  Everybody  remained  standing,  and 
none  dared  to  speak.  It  was  by  his  gestures,  by  an 
eloquent  silence,  that  each  person  advocated  his  cause 
before  the  all-powerful  favourite.  Only  those  spoke 
to  whom  the  Count  addressed  himself,  and  on  these 
occasions  he  never  talked  of  the  subject  of  the  applica- 
tion. Often  he  did  not  say  a  word,  and  I  do  not 
remember  his  having  ever  offered  anybody  a  seat 
except  Field  Marshal  Soltykoff,  who  was  the  chief 
personage  at  Court,  and  had,  it  was  said,  made  the 
Zuboffs'  fortune  ;  it  was  through  his  intervention  that 
Count  Plato  had  succeeded  Mamonoff.  The  despotic 
pro-consul  Toutoulmin,  who  at  that  time  was  the 
terror  of  Podolia  and  Volhynia,  having  been  invited 


THE  ZUBOFFX  77 

by  one  of  the  servants  to  take  a  seat,  only  ventured 
to  sit  on  the  edge  of  a  chair  and  got  up  directly 
afterwards. 

While  the  favourite  was  having  his  hair  dressed, 
his  secretary,  Gribovsky,  usually  brought  him  papers 
to  sign.  The  applicants  used  to  whisper  to  each 
other  the  sum  that  was  to  be  paid  to  induce  him  to 
get  his  master  to  look  favourably  on  their  requests, 
and  he  took  these  presents  with  as  much  pride  as  Gil 
Bias.  When  the  hair- dressing  was  over  and  the 
papers  were  signed,  the  Count  put  on  his  uniform  or 
his  coat  and  withdrew  into  his  apartments.  All  this 
was  done  with  a  nonchalance  which  he  tried  to  pass 
off  as  gravity  and  dignity  ;  but  there  was  too  much 
artifice  in  it.  When  the  Count  had  disappeared,  all 
went  to  their  carriages,  more  or  less  discontented  at 
their  reception. 

We  did  not  plead  our  case  before  any  Minister,  as 
in  Gorski's  opinion  it  was  better  to  rely  on  the  protec- 
tion of  Zuboff  alone.  We  were  introduced,  however, 
to  several  other  eminent  persons.  One  of  the  most 
important  of  these  was  Count  Bezborodko.  He  was 
a  native  of  Little  Russia,  and  had  begun  his  career 
under  the  orders  of  Marshal  Romantzoff.  Having 
been  recommended  to  the  Empress  by  his  chief,  he 
soon  obtained  by  his  talents,  his  great  aptitude  for 
work,  and  his  extraordinary  memory,  rapid  promotion 
both  as  regards  fortune  and  dignities.  He  was 
appointed  a  member  of  the  Committee  of  Foreign 
Affairs,  and  was  employed  by  Catherine  in  the  most 
secret  negotiations.  With  the  outward  appearance  of 
a  bear,  he  had  a  keen  wit,  a  lucid  intelligence,  and  a 


78        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTOR7SKI 

rare  power  of  mastering  a  subject.  Lazy  to  a  degree, 
and  given  up  to  pleasure,  he  never  set  to  work  till  the 
last  moment :  but  then  he  worked  very  rapidly  and 
without  stopping.  This  gained  him  the  esteem  of  the 
Empress,  who  loaded  him  with  rewards.  He  was  the 
only  man  of  any  distinction  at  Court  who  did  not 
flatter  the  Zuboffs ;  he  did  not  even  visit  them.  All 
admired  his  courage ;  but  no  one  imitated  it. 

The  old  Count  Osterman,  Vice-Chancellor  and 
senior  member  of  the  Committee  of  Foreign  Affairs, 
looked  like  a  figure  in  a  piece  of  old  tapestry.  Long, 
thin,  pale,  dressed  in  the  ancient  fashion  with  cloth 
boots,  a  brown  coat,  gold  buttons,  and  a  black 
ribbon  round  his  neck,  he  represented  the  period  of 
the  Empress  Elizabeth.  He  was  quoted  as  an  ex- 
ample of  honesty,  a  rare  quality  in  those  days ;  he 
was  grave  in  manner,  and  without  saying  a  word 
he  would  wave  his  visitors  to  their  seats  with  his 
long  arm.  He  now  only  appeared  at  solemn  dinners 
on  great  occasions,  when  there  was  a  question  of  a 
final  despatch  or  declaration  to  which  his  name  was 
to  be  signed  at  the  head  of  those  of  the  other 
members  of  the  Committee.  Though  advanced  in 
years  and  of  moderate  capacity,  Count  Osterman  was 
valued  for  his  high  principle,  his  good  sense,  and  his 
great  experience.  He  was  the  only  member  of  the 
Council  that  had  opposed  the  partition  of  Poland  ;  he 
represented  that  such  an  event  would  rather  be  of 
advantage  to  Austria  and  Prussia  than  to  Russia. 
His  advice  was  not  taken,  but  he  should  have  the 
credit  of  it.  Since  then  his  influence  declined  daily, 
and  although  still  the  titular  head  of  the  department 


THE  ZUBOFFS  79 

of  Foreign  Affairs,  he  was  really  shelved;  this,  how- 
ever, did  not  prevent  Catherine  from  treating  him 
with  every  consideration. 

At  the  time  of  the  accession  of  the  Emperor 
Paul,  Osterman  retired  to  Moscow,  with  the  title 
of  Chancellor  of  the  Empire.  His  elder  brother, 
the  Senator,  known  for  his  absence  of  mind,  also 
lived  there.  These  two  old  men  were  still  in  exist- 
ence at  the  time  of  the  coronation  of  the  Emperor 
Alexander.  As  they  did  not  leave  any  direct  heir, 
they  adopted  as  their  successor  Count  Tolstoi,  who 
assumed  the  name  of  Tolstoi-Osteraian,  and  after- 
wards distinguished  himself  by  his  bravery  at  the 
battle  of  Culm,  where  he  lost  a  leg. 

Count  Samoiloff,  Procurator-General  (an  office 
which  at  that  time  comprised  the  direction  of  the 
Ministries  of  the  Interior,  of  Justice,  and  of  Finance), 
although  he  was  a  nephew  of  Potemkin,  was  one  of 
the  most  assiduous  of  the  flatterers  of  the  Zuboffs, 
who,  as  everybody  knew,  were  declared  adversaries 
of  his  late  uncle.  SamoilofF  was  not  remarkable  for 
ability,  and  indeed  he  made  himself  ridiculous  by  his 
foolish  pride.  He  was  not  ill-natured,  but,  as  was 
well  said  by  Niemcewicz,  he  committed  evil  actions 
by  his  want  of  discernment,  his  meanness,  and  his 
pusillanimity,  rather  than  by  inherent  wickedness. 
In  making  use  of  him,  Catherine  wished  to  prove  to 
the  world  that  she  could  govern  her  immense  empire 
even  with  an  incapable  minister.  She  took  a  pride 
in  showing  that  she  was  thoroughly  acquainted  with 
legislation  in  everything  that  related  to  the  conduct 
of  the  affairs  of  the  country,  and  one  must  in  justice 


8o         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

admit  that  its  internal  organisation  was  visibly  im- 
proved under  her  reign.  Samoi'loff,  however,  had 
really  no  preponderant  position  in  the  Government, 
and  any  one  who  had  to  do  business  with  him  gener- 
ally found  reason  to  regret  it — not  because  he  wished 
to  do  harm,  but  because  he  was  incapable  of  under- 
standing anything  clearly,  and  was  at  the  same  time 
too  vain  to  admit  it.  Prince  Alexander  Lubomirski, 
who  negotiated  with  him  for  the  purchase  of  his 
estates,  and  our  unfortunate  fellow-countrymen  who 
were  locked  up  in  prison,  had  only  too  much  reason 
to  know  this. 

Days  and  weeks  thus  passed  in  constant  move- 
ment— various  scenes,  sometimes  disagreeable,  some- 
times unimportant,  succeeding  each  other  and  at  least 
giving  variety  to  our  lives.  But  neither  our  constant 
anxiety  as  to  the  recovery  of  our  parents'  fortune,  nor 
the  splendour  of  the  society  into  which  we  were 
thrown,  effected  any  change  in  the  deeper  sentiments 
of  our  hearts.  When  we  returned  to  our  rooms  we 
always  thought  of  our  parents,  our  sisters,  our  country, 
and  of  the  sad  position  in  which  we  were  placed. 
What  we  felt  most  bitterlv  was  that,  at  the  moment 

i/ 

when  we  were  passing  our  time  at  balls  and  entertain- 
ments, the  most  heroic  of  our  countrymen  were  in 
prison.  It  was  very  difficult  and  dangerous  to  get 
news  of  them  ;  but  fortune  favoured  us  in  this  respect. 
After  the  second  partition,  when  part  of  the  Polish 
army  in  Podolia  and  the  Ukraine  was  forced  to  enter 
the  Russian  service,  two  young  men  put  on  the 
Russian  uniform  and  managed  to  obtain  places  in  the 
service  of  Plato  Zuboff.  One  of  these  was  Komar, 


777^  ZUBOFFS  81 

afterwards  the  possessor  of  millions  in  Podolia,  who 
was  not  unknown  to  us,  as  his  father  had  been 
employed  by  my  grandfather  to  manage  his  affairs  ; 
the  other  was  Poradowski,  afterwards  a  valiant 
general,  killed  in  the  war  of  1812. 

Poradowski  had  been  an  officer  in  the  regiment  of 
my  brother-in-law,  the  Prince  of  Wiirtemberg  ;  we 
were  thus  old  acquaintances.  These  two  gentlemen, 
Poradowski  especially,  found  means  of  obtaining  some 
news  for  us  about  the  prisoners.  We  learnt  in  this 
way  that  Niemcewicz,  Konopka,  and  Kilinski  were 
shut  up  in  the  casemates  of  the  fortress ;  that 
Kosciuszko  had  been  removed  from  them  and  con- 
fined somewhere  else,  and  that  he  was  treated  with 
every  consideration  and  generally  respected.  He  was 
placed  in  charge  of  Major  Titoff,  who  was  much 
attached  to  him  and  related  various  anecdotes  of  him 
which  were  very  insignificant  (the  Major  was  very 
rough  and  ignorant),  but,  being  about  such  a  man  as 
Kosciuszko,  were  repeated  from  mouth  to  mouth, 
Potocki,  Zakrzewski,  Mostowski,  and  Sokolnicki  were 
confined  in  a  house  in  Liteina  Street.  Not  being:  able 

o 

to  do  anything  for  them,  wre  at  least  gave  ourselves 
the  pleasure  of  often  going  through  this  street,  either 
in  a  carriage  or  on  foot,  in  the  hope  of  seeing  them. 
Sometimes  we  succeeded  in  catching  a  glimpse  of 
them  passing  like  shadows  before  our  eyes ;  but  they 
probably  never  perceived  us,  as  the  house  was  very 
strictly  guarded  both  within  and  without.  Our  hearts 
beat  fast,  however,  when  we  raised  our  eyes  to  the 
windows  behind  which  the  prisoners  were  confined. 
Except  Marshal  Potocki,  they  were  not  personally 
VOL.  i.  F 


82         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

known  to  us  ;  but  they  had  become  dear  to  the  heart 
of  every  good  Pole  by  the  great  deeds  which  they 
were  being  made  to  expiate  by  sufferings  equally  cruel 
and  unjust. 

When  we  came  back  in  the  evening  we  used  to 
talk  of  the  impressions  of  the  day.  Our  worthy 
friend  Gorski  did  not  spare  his  epithets  with  regard 
to  those  whom  he  had  been  obliged  to  treat  with 
consideration  in  public.  Whenever  the  name  of  any 
of  these  people  (except  a  few  whom  he  realty  re- 
spected) was  pronounced,  he  immediately  added : 
'  Yes,  he  is  a  villain,  a  rascal,'  and  so  on.  These 
expressions  he  used  particularly  with  regard  to  Poles 
of  an  equivocal  or  tarnished  reputation.  People  un- 
fortunately were  to  be  found  daily,  who  thought  that 
their  indifference  to  the  fate  of  their  country  and 
their  treasonable  practices  would  gain  them  the  favour 
of  the  Ministers  and  the  Court.  If  their  former 
services  did  not  seeui  to  them  to  have  been  suffi- 
ciently rewarded,  they  tried  to  show  themselves  more 
base  in  order  to  get  a  larger  reward.  We  had  more 
than  once  to  blush  at  this  disgraceful  conduct  on  the 
part  of  some  of  our  countrymen.  We  were  not,  how- 
ever, confounded  with  them ;  the  Poles  at  St  Peters- 
burg were  divided  into  two  classes,  entirely  distinct  by 
their  qualities,  their  manners,  and  their  sentiments. 

There  was  no  Pole  whose  society  we  enjoyed  more 
than  that  of  Prince  Alexander  Lubomirski.  He  was 
a  good  patriot  and  a  wise  and  worthy  man  ;  the  turn 
of  his  mind  was  both  tranquil  and  gay,  so  that  he 
sometimes  evoked  merriment  out  of  the  saddest 
events.  He  often  went  with  us  on  our  visits. 


CATHERINE  83 

Between  one  visit  and  another  we  gave  free  course  to 
our  observations  and  criticisms,  as  sometimes  happens 
when  men  who  are  tired  of  concealing  their  thoughts, 
and  of  feigning  to  agree  by  a  gesture  to  what  they  do  not 
approve,  can  afterwards,  when  they  are  in  the  society 
of  people  with  whom  they  are  intimate,  freely  express 
their  true  opinions,  and  thereby  compensate  them- 
selves for  the  constraint  and  humiliations  they  have 
been  obliged  to  suffer. 

Notwithstanding  these  moments  of  confidential 
talk,  the  sad  necessity  of  concealing  our  sentiments 
and  our  bufferings,  of  dissimulating  our  thoughts, 
the  impossibility  of  declaring  aloud  what  we  felt — 
were  most  painful  to  us ;  and  they  influenced  my 
character  and  my  intellectual  faculties  in  the  most  disas- 
trous manner.  This  clog  on  my  frankness  made  me 
sombre,  extremely  silent,  and  reserved,  and  I  seldom 
made  any  remark  except  to  myself.  It  may  be  that 
I  was  by  nature  inclined  to  reticence,  but  more 
propitious  circumstances  would  perhaps  have  made 
this  inclination  disappear  or  might  have  diminished 
it,  while  my  position  at  St  Petersburg  only  aggra- 
vated it.  During  the  whole  of  my  life  I  have  not 
been  able  to  master  this  tendency,  imposed  on  my 
youth  by  an  inevitable  fate. 

At  length,  after  waiting  for  several  months,   we 

O  '  *-J 

were  informed  that  we  were  to  be  presented  to  the 
Empress  at  Tsarskoe-Selo,  the  summer  residence  of 
the  Court.  This  was  a  decisive  moment  for  us,  for 
until  that  time  we  had  not  had  the  slightest  idea  of 
what  was  to  be  the  result  of  my  father's  memorial 
announcing  that  he  had  sent  us  to  St  Petersburg  and 


8<j         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

I 

asking  for    the  restitution  of  his  estates.     We  were 
advised   to    come    early :    the    presentation    was    to 
take   place   after    church.       Meanwhile    we    went    to 
General   Branicki.  who    was    married   to   a    niece    of 
Potemkin's,    and    had     rendered    great     service     to 
Catherine  in  the  affairs  of  Poland  ;  he    was  still    in 
high  favour  with  her,  and  an  apartment  was  reserved 
for  him  in  all  the   Imperial  Palaces.      It   was  very 
unfortunate  that  he  should  have  degraded  himself  by 
assisting    in   the    ruin    of  his   country.       A   courtier 
stained   with   misdeeds,    ambitious,  unprincipled,  and 
greedy   of    wealth,    he   yet   felt   himself    a    Pole    at 
heart,  notwithstanding  his  family  relations  with  the 
Russians ;  and  he  would  have  preferred  to  satisfy  his 
tastes  and  his  ambition  in  Poland  rather  than  in  any 
other  country.     He  was  still  proud  of  the  Poland  he 
had  lost ;  he  regretted  her  and  suffered  at  her  humilia- 
tion.    He  detested  the  Russians,  whom  he  knew  well, 
and  he  revenged  himself  upon  them  by  silent  contempt 
and  mockery  of  their  faults.     On  the  other  hand,  his 
heart  was  open  to  some  old  friends  to  whom  he  could 
speak  without   fear.      His   lively,   essentially   Polish 
mind  and  his  witty  remarks  made  his  conversation  gay 
and  interesting.     Though  very  fond  of  describing  his 
experiences,  he  avoided  all  allusion  to  the  fatal  league 
of  Targowitza.*     He  also  liked  to  talk  of  old  times, 
and  then  he  assumed  a  grand  seigneur  air  which  entirely 
disappeared   when  he  was  in  the  crowd  of  courtiers 
whose  nothingness  he  felt,  or  in  the  presence  of  Cathe- 
rine, who  often  invited  him  to  play  cards  with  her. 

*  This  League,  formed  by  Branicki  and  others  at  the  instigation  of  the  Empress 
Catherine,  was  the  precursor  of  the  second  partition  of  Poland. 


CATHERINE'S  COURT  85 

He  seemed  really  attached  to  our  parents,  with 
whom  he  had  passed  many  long  and  eventful  years ; 
but  he  could  only  help  us  by  advice,  which  might  be 
expressed  in  the  words  '  patience  and  submission.' 
He  told  us  of  all  that  passed,  and  offered  us  a  room 
at  Court  on  the  audience-days,  when  people  had  to 
wait  a  long  time.  We  accordingly  went  to  him  on 
arriving  at  Tsarskoe-Selo  to  wait  for  the  hour  when 
we  should  be  presented.  He  gave  us  his  instructions, 
and  when  we  asked  whether  we  were  to  kiss  the 
Empress's  hand,  he  replied,  '  Kiss  her  where  she  likes, 
so  long  as  she  gives  you  back  your  fortune.'  He 
also  showed  us  how  to  bend  the  knee. 

The  Empress  was  still  in  the  chapel  when  those 
who  were  to  be  presented  to  her  went  to  the  reception 
room.  We  were  first  presented  to  Count  Schouvaloff, 
Grand-Chamberlain,  formerly  the  favourite  of  the 
Empress  Elizabeth  ;  he  was  at  that  time  all-powerful, 
and  was  known  for  his  correspondence  with  D'Alem- 
bert,  Diderot,  Voltaire,  and  other  eminent  writers  who 
solicited  his  favour.  It  seems  that  it  was  by  Elizabeth's 
orders  that  he  engaged  Voltaire  to  write  the  life  of 
her  father  Peter,  and  Catherine,  who  was  then  young, 
also  strove  to  gain  his  good-will.  Count  Schouvaloff 
was  now  old,  but  still  vigorous,  and  insisted  on  per- 
forming the  functions  of  his  office.  We  were  placed 
by  him  in  a  line  near  the  door  through  which  the 
Empress  was  to  come.  The  mass  being  over,  the 
procession  passed  two  abreast.  First  came  the 
gentlemen  of  the  chamber,  the  chamberlains,  and  the 
great  dignitaries ;  then  the  Empress  herself,  accom- 
panied by  the  princes,  the  princesses,  and  the  ladies  of 


85        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  Court.  We  had  no  time  to  look  at  her  closely,  for 
it  was  necessary  to  bend  the  knee  while  she  pronounced 
our  names.  Then  we  stood  in  a  circle  with  the  ladies 
and  other  Court  personages,  and  the  Empress  walked 
round  addressing  a  few  words  to  each  person. 

She  was  well  advanced  in  years,  but  still  fresh, 
rather  short  than  tall,  and  very  stout.  Her  gait,  her 
demeanour,  and  the  whole  of  her  person  were  marked 
by  dignity  and  grace.  None  of  her  movements  were 
quick ;  all  in  her  was  grave  and  noble  ;  but  she  was 
like  a  mountain  stream  which  carries  everything  with 
it  in  its  irresistible  current.  Her  face,  already  wrinkled, 
but  full  of  expression,  showed  haughtiness  and  the 
spirit  of  domination.  On  her  lips  was  a  perpetual 
smile,  but  to  those  who  remembered  her  actions,  this 
studied  calm  hid  the  most  violent  passions  and  an 
inexorable  will.  In  coining  towards  us  her  face 
assumed  a  gentler  expression,  and  with  that  sweet 
look  which  has  been  so  much  praised,  she  said  :  '  Your 
age  reminds  me  of  that  of  your  father  when  I  saw 
him  for  the  first  time.  I  hope  this  country  suits  you.' 
These  few  words  sufficed  to  attract  to  our  side  a 
crowd  of  courtiers,  who  began  to  lavish  upon  us 
compliments  even  more  flattering  than  those  we  had 
previously  received.  We  were  invited  to  occupy  seats 
at  the  table  under  the  colonnade  ;  this  was  a  parti- 
cular honour,  as  the  Empress  never  gave  such  invi- 
tations but  to  her  private  friends. 

Our  reception  by  the  Empress  and  the  society  of 
St  Petersburg  was,  considering  our  age  and  position, 
evidently  only  the  last  echo  of  old  traditions  relative 
to  Poland — of  the  high  opinion  still  held  by  the 


CATHERINE'S  COURT  87 

Muscovites  as  to  our  leading  men.  Our  family 
especially,  which  during  the  previous  century  had 
unfortunately  been  forced  into  frequent  relations  with 
Russia,  was  better  known  than  the  others.  My 
grandfather  and  my  father  were  generally  respected 
in  Russia,  and  we  met  at  St  Petersburg  the  two 
Narischkins  and  their  wives,  who  had  known  my 
father  when  he  was  in  great  favour  with  Peter  III, 
and  with  Catherine  at  the  time  of  her  accession. 

We  were  presented  on  the  same  day  to  the  Grand- 
Dukes.  Paul  received  us  coldly,  but  with  dignity  ; 
his  wife,  the  Grand-Duchess  Maria,  showed  us  much 
consideration,  chiefly  on  account  of  her  brother,  whom 
she  wished  to  reconcile  with  our  sister.*  The  younger 
Grand-Dukes  received  us  frankly  and  graciously. 

The  wealthier  classes  at  St  Petersburg  pass  the 
summer  in  country-houses  in  the  vicinity.  Every 
great  nobleman  has  one,  and  lives  in  it  as  luxuriously 
as  in  the  capital.  As  the  fine  season  is  short,  every 
one  tries  to  use  it  to  the  best  advantage,  so  that  for 
some  months  the  town  is  deserted.  Our  visits  conse- 
quently had  to  be  paid  in  the  country,  and  as  we 
were  always  travelling  we  often  returned  to  town 
very  late.  There  is  scarcely  any  night  in  the 
summer,  and  the  recollection  of  our  moonlight  nights 
in  Poland  made  us  sad.  Gorski  allowed  us  no 
breathing  time ;  we  had  to  renew  our  journeys  daily, 
and  neglect  no  opportunity  of  multiplying  our  rela- 
tions. This  was,  indeed,  the  only  means  of  attaining 
our  object,  for  in  spite  of  our  flattering  reception  at 
Court,  and  the  repeated  recommendations  of  people 

*  See  note  ou  page  40. 


88        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

in  power,  our  business  was  still  in  suspense.  Catherine, 
who  was  well  informed  as  to  everything  that  was 
going  on,  knew  that  we  were  popular  in  the  capital, 
and  the  praise  that  was  lavished  upon  us  could  not 
fail  to  produce  a  good  impression  upon  her. 

Besides  our  journeys  to  the  country  villas,  which 
were  in  themselves  very  fatiguing,  we  had  to  go 
every  other  Tuesday  and  on  each  holiday  to  Tsarskoe- 
Selo  to  assist  at  ZubofFs  toilet.  Having  been  pre- 
sented, we  were  also  qualified  to  go  to  the  Palace,  and 
on  these  occasions  we  were  usually  invited  to  dine  at 
the  principal  table.  At  the  head  of  this  table  sat  the 
Empress  and  the  Imperial  family,  but  people  of  all 
the  higher  classes  were  admitted  to  it.  We  were 
also  advised  to  take  part  in  the  evening  entertain- 
ments, which  in  fine  weather  took  place  in  the  garden. 
The  Empress  walked  there  with  the  whole  of  her 
Court,  or  sat  on  a  bench  surrounded  by  the  older 
courtiers,  while  the  young  Grand-Dukes  and  Grand- 
Duchesses,  with  the  younger  ladies  and  gentlemen 
of  the  Court,  played  at  various  games  before  her  on 
the  grass.  The  Grand-Duke  Paul  never  took  part 
in  these  amusements,  for  when  divine  service  or 
dinner  was  over  he  went  to  his  residence  at  Pavlovsk. 
While  playing  at  these  games  we  became  more  closely 
acquainted  with  the  Grand-Dukes,  who  were  most 
amiable  to  us. 

It  was  the  custom  for  certain  of  the  elect,  our- 
selves included,  to  go  after  dinner  to  ZubofFs  rooms. 
This  was  not  a  ceremonious  visit ;  one  was  supposed 
to  be  admitted  to  a  certain  familiarity,  and  to  form 
part  of  a  friendly  meeting.  The  favourite  used  to 


CATHERINE'S  COURT  89 

wear  a  loose  coat,  and  was  more  nonchalant  than 
ever  ;  he  would  ask  his  visitors,  who  usually  were 
not  numerous,  to  sit  down,  and  would  then  stretch 
himself  at  full  length  on  a  sofa.  The  conversation 
was  characteristic  of  the  host :  it  was  sometimes 
brightened  by  Count  Cobentzel,  the  Austrian  Am- 
bassador, or  by  Count  Valentine  Esterhazy,  after- 
wards master  of  the  ceremonies  at  Vienna.  The 
latter  was  a  welcome  guest  at  Tsarskoe-Selo,  having 
by  his  good  stories,  and  a  bluntness  of  manner  which 
is  best  suited  to  every  kind  of  flattery,  insinuated 
himself  so  far  into  the  good  graces  of  Zuboff  and 
the  Empress  that  he  obtained  some  considerable 
estates  in  Volhynia.  Neither  Count  Esterhazy  nor 
his  wife  had  any  nobility  of  character  or  appearance, 
yet  the  latter  was  on  a  very  intimate  footing  with 
Catherine.  Their  scapegrace  of  a  son,  a  spoilt  child 
brought  up  in  the  palace  with  a  Calmouk  girl,  and 
amusing  by  his  tricks,  greatly  contributed  to  the  good 
fortune  of  his  parents. 

It  was  whispered  at  the  Court  that  while  Count 
Plato  Zuboff  was  being  loaded  with  favours  by  his 
septuagenarian  mistress,  he  paid  court  to  the  Princess 
Elizabeth,  the  wife  of  the  Grand-Duke  Alexander, 
who  was  at  that  time  only  sixteen.  This  aspiring 
and  chimerical  pretension  covered  him  with  ridicule ; 
people  were  surprised  at  his  having  dared  to  nourish 
such  a  thought  under  the  very  eyes  of  Catherine. 
As  for  the  young  Grand-Duchess,  she  took  no  notice 
of  him  whatever.  It  seems  that  he  was  seized  with 
a  love-fit  generally  after  dinner,  and  he  then  did 
nothing  but  sigh,  lie  on  a  sofa  with  a  sad  air,  and 


co        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

look  as  if  he  were  oppressed  by  a  heavy  burthen  on 
his  heart.  Nothing  would  please  him  but  the  melan- 
choly and  voluptuous  sounds  of  the  flute,  and  he 
had  all  the  appearance  of  a  man  seriously  in  love. 
It  is  said  that  he  had  imparted  the  secret  to  some 
of  his  confidants,  who  professed  to  sympathise  with 
his  sorrows  without  appearing  to  have  guessed  their 
cause.  His  servants  alleged  that  whenever  he  re- 
turned to  his  rooms  after  a  visit  to  the  Empress,  he 
was  prostrate  with  fatigue  and  pitiably  sad  ;  he  then 
used  to  pour  scent  on  his  handkerchief  and  receive 
intimate  visitors  with  an  air  of  depression  which 
was  the  subject  of  general  remark.  Yet  he  refused 
to  take  any  rest,  alleging  that  sleep  deprives  us  of 
some  of  the  most  beautiful  moments  of  our  lives. 

In  this  manner  the  summer  season  of  1795  passed 
away.  In  the  autumn  the  Court  returned  to  the 
Tauris  Palace,  and  our  morning  visits  to  the  favourite 
recommenced  with  more  frequency  than  ever,  as  the 
day  was  approaching  when  our  case  was  to  be  de- 
cided. The  Zuboffs  constantly  repeated  to  us  that 
their  good-will  was  not  sufficient,  and  that  they  could 
not  do  all  they  wished.  No  good  augury  wras  to  be 
discovered  in  these  words.  Meanwhile,  the  suitors 
became  more  and  more  pressing  :  some  sought  to 
recover  their  estates,  while  many  others  set  every 
engine  in  motion  to  obtain  part  of  the  sequestrated 
estates  for  themselves.  From  the.  highest  to  the 
lowest,  each  wished  for  a  share  of  the  spoil :  for 
Catherine^had  not  yet  said  anything  as  to  what  she 
would  do  with  the  immense  private  estates,  crown 
domains,  and  church  property,  which  she  had  seized. 


CATHERINE'S  COURT  91 

The  crisis  was  very  interesting,  and  its  solution 
was  looked  forward  to  on  all  sides  with  anxiety. 
How  many  Russians  founded  upon  it  their  hopes  of 
enlarging  their  estates  and  increasing  the  number  of 
their  serfs  or  '  souls,'*  as  they  called  them  !  This  gave 
a  new  stimulus  to  sycophancy,  not  only  with  regard 
to  the  favourite,  but  to  his  secretaries,  who  aped  his 
ridiculous  morning  receptions,  and  rehearsed  his 
arrogance  before  the  stupid  mob  that  crowded  their 
ante-chambers.  Among  the  speculators  who,  like 
pillagers  on  a  battlefield,  sought  to  enrich  themselves 
at  the  expense  of  the  vanquished,  there  were  unfortu- 
nately some  Poles  unworthy  of  the  name  they  bore. 
Appealing  to  their  services,  to  their  treason  to  the 
fatherland,  they  chose  their  victims  among  those  who 
had  been  convicted  or  even  suspected  of  patriotism. 
The  more  they  increased  the  number  of  these  victims, 
the  greater  were  their  chances  of  plunder. 

Our  parents,  pressed  by  their  creditors,  and 
anxious  about  their  fate,  were  still  more  so  for  us,  as 
at  the  time  when  we  were  informing  them  of  the 
friendly  receptions  we  had  met  with  at  St  Petersburg 
my  mother  had  received  an  anonymous  letter,  written 
in  excellent  French,  describing  in  exaggerated  language 
the  effect  we  had  produced  in  society  and  our  favour- 
able reception  at  Court,  but  adding  that  what  was 
most  to  our  credit  was  that,  insensible  to  all  cajoleries, 
we  remained  steadfast  in  our  love  for  our  country  and 
our  hatred  for  the  Empress  Catherine.  As  it  was 
known  that  all  letters  to  my  family  were  opened  at 

*  Serfage  properly  so  called,  i.e.,  the  rigLt  of  selling  a  peasant  as  part  of  one's 
property,  never  existed  in  Poland  ;  it  was  a  purely  Russian  institution. 


92         MEMOIRS  OF  PRIXCE  ADAM  CZARTORY8KI 

the  post-office,  my  mother's  distress  on  receiving  this 
communication  may  easily  be  imagined.  It  was  evi- 
dent that  the  anonymous  letter  had  only  been  written 
with  the  intention  of  awakening  Catherine's  suspicions, 
and  preventing  the  restitution  of  my  father's  estates. 
It  will  be  recollected  that  during  our  stay  at  Grodno, 
Prince  Repnin  had  shown  us  the  autograph  of  a  note 
from  Catherine,  with  regard  to  an  oath  of  hatred  to 
Russia  and  the  Empress  which  I  was  supposed  to 
have  taken  before  my  mother.  This  story  was  pro- 
bably also  manufactured  by  one  of  our  countrymen  ; 
it  was  absurd  to  suppose  that  such  a  theatrical  demon- 
stration should  be  necessary  to  inspire  us  with  hatred 
for  such  enemies. 

The  only  means  left  to  us  for  obtaining  the  re- 
covery of  our  parents'  estates  was  to  resign  ourselves 
to  entering  the  Russian  service.  This  was  the  sine 
qua  non,  the  completion  of  our  sacrifice,  the  inevitable 
consequence  of  our  journey  to  St  Petersburg.  At 
one  of  our  evening  visits  to  Tsarskoe-Selo,  Zuboff  had 
told  us  that  the  Empress  intended  to  give  us  commis- 
sions as  officers  of  her  guard  ;  and  that  it  was  the 
greatest  piece  of  good  fortune  that  could  happen  to 
us  that  we  should  thus  become  part  of  a  glorious  and 
irresistible  army,  which  was  strong  enough  to  march 
across  the  world  without  being  stopped  by  any 
obstacle.  This  was  indeed  the  prevalent  idea  among 
the  officers  in  the  Russian  army,  and  they  could  not 
as  yet  rid  themselves  of  it.  Although  we  were  pre- 
pared for  the  proposal,  our  hearts  failed  us  when  it 
was  made  officially.  It  was  impossible,  however,  to 
refuse  it,  and  moreover,  having  once  determined  to 


CATHERINE'S  COURT  93 

give  ourselves  up  to  the  Russians,  the  form  which 
the  sacrifice  should  take  was  a  matter  of  very  little 
importance.  We  considered  that  it  would  be  unworthy 
of  us  to  propose  the  slightest  compromise,  or  to  show 
the  least  anxiety  to  obtain  any  higher  position.  The 
highest  rank  would  be  as  insupportable  to  us  as  the 
lowest ;  any  discussion  on  this  point  would  show  that 
we  attached  importance  to  the  proposal,  while  the 
fact  was  that  it  was  to  us  a  matter  of  perfect 
indifference. 

With  bowed  heads,  feeling  like  victims,  we  were 
ready  to  accept  any  suggestion  that  might  be  made  to 
us,  without  enquiry  into  its  consequences.  A  traveller 
suddenly  placed  by  some  chance  in  Central  Africa, 
would  not  attach  the  least  importance  to  the  forms, 
distinctions,  or  honours  used  among  the  savages,  and 
this  was  precisely  our  case.  Thrown  out  of  our  natural 
sphere  by  misfortune,  surrounded  by  violence  and 
compulsion,  filled  with  disgust  and  despair,  we  thought 
it  our  duty  not  to  express  any  wish  whatever  :  it  was 
not  worth  while. 

At  length  came  the  long-expected  ukase  announc- 
ing the  decision  of  the  Government  as  to  the  confiscated 
estates.  Catherine  distributed  a  whole  mass  of  them 
among  her  favourites,  her  Ministers,  her  generals, 
governors  of  provinces,  and  even  subaltern  officials; 
also  among  some  Poles  who  were  traitors  to  their 
country.  She  did  not  restore  my  parents'  estates,  but 
without  mentioning  them  she  made  a  present  of  their 
fortune  (amounting,  according  to  the  Russian  mode  of 
calculation,  to  42,000  souls)  to  my  brother  and  myself. 
The  estates  of  Latyczew  and  Kamieniec,  which 


94         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

formerly  belonged  to  my  father,  fell  to  the  lot  of 
Count  Markoff.  The  ukase  did  not  mention  my 
sisters ;  but  this  arbitrary  and  illegal  act  having 
always  been  regarded  by  my  family  as  invalid,  it 
remained  without  result  both  with  regard  to  my 
sisters  and  my  parents.  The  property  really  went 
back  to  them,  as  all  we  had  to  do  was  to  send  my 
father  full  power  to  dispose  unconditionally  of  the 
fortune  which  had  been  ceded  to  us. 

There  had  been  so  much  uncertainty  as  to 
Catherine's  final  decision  in  this  matter,  that  the 
result  was  received  in  society  with  general  satisfac- 
tion. We  were  told  that  the  loss  of  Latyczew  and 
Kamieniec  should  be  regarded  as  a  fine,  and  that 
we  had  no  reason  to  complain.  We  thanked  Catherine 
with  one  knee  on  the  ground,  as  required  by  the 
etiquette  of  the  Court,  and  almost  immediately  after 
we  had  our  uniforms  on.  Mine  was  that  of  the 
cavalry  of  the  guard ;  my  brother's,  that  of  the 
Ismailoff  regiment  of  infantry. 

It  would  not  have  been  proper  abruptly  to  cease 
our  visits  to  the  favourite,  and  Gorski  was  too  much 
a  man  of  the  world  to  allow  it.  We  also  received 
several  invitations  to  the  concerts  in  the  Tauris 
Palace,  which  was  regarded  as  an  extraordinary  favour 
for  officers  of  the  guard  who  do  not  form  part  of  the 
Court.  These  were  further  signs  of  the  Empress's 
good-will ;  but  they  all  ceased  directly  the  Court 
moved  to  the  Winter  Palace.  We  were  then  classed 
as  officers  of  the  guard,  who  only  go  to  the  palace 
on  Sundays  and  holidays,  when  they  have  to  stand 
at  a  door  next  to  the  diplomatic  corps  as  the  Empress 


ENTERING  THE  RUSSIAN  SERVICE  95 

goes  by.  She  merely  gratified  us  with  a  look  as  she 
went  to  the  chapel  and  returned  from  it.  The  Grand- 
Dukes  always  bowed  to  us  with  much  grace. 

It  was  for  these  dress  receptions,  which  were 
repeated  on  every  Sunday  and  holiday,  that  the 
dandies  of  the  barracks  put  on  their  best  uniforms, 
tightened  their  waists,  put  pomatum  on  their  hair, 
and  placed  themselves  in  line  with  the  hope  of 
attracting  the  eyes  of  the  Empress  and  fascinat- 
ing her  with  their  tall  stature  and  broad  shoulders. 
It  is  said  that  some  of  them  used  in  days  gone 
by  to  be  promoted  to  her  favour  on  these  occa- 
sions ;  but  she  was  now  too  old  to  indulge  in  such 
fancies. 

The  military  service  in  the  Guards'  regiments  was 
at  that  time  much  neglected,  but  it  was  necessary  to 
attend  drill  at  least  once  a  year.  Some  officers  really 
liked  the  service  and  performed  it,  but  this  was 
because  they  chose  to  do  so,  and  their  zeal  was 
thought  rather  ridiculous  by  young  men  of  fashion. 
The  generals  who  commanded  us  did  not  take  any 
pains  to  make  us  work.  We  were  seldom  on  guard 
in  the  palace,  and  my  turn  only  came  once.  As  to 
my  brother,  being  an  infantry  officer,  he  was  on  duty 
with  a  detachment  of  his  regiment,  which  always  had 
to  guard  the  castle  at  night.  The  Empress  having 
perceived  him,  said  that  now  he  was  on  guard  she 
would  sleep  in  peace. 

An  amusing  adventure  happened  at  this  time  to 
my  friend  Gorski.  The  ukase  relating  to  my  father's 
family  had  been  published,  but  the  order  for  handing 
over  the  property  to  us  had  not  yet  appeared.  Plato 


9 6         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Zuboff  was  entrusted  with  the  task  of  communicating 
the  order  to  the  Governor-General  Toutoulmin,  who 
was  then  at  St  Petersburg,  hoping  to  participate  in 
the  act  of  spoliation  and  to  derive  illicit  advantages 
from  it ;  but  Zuboff  did  not  hurry.  We  were  there- 
fore obliged  to  continue  to  assist  at  his  toilet.  One 
day  the  favourite,  who  had  on  his  shoulders  a  white 
towel,  beckoned  to  Gorski  to  come  to  him.  The 
latter  came  up  at  once,  and  listened  with  such 
attention  to  Zuboff  that  he  allowed  some  snuff  to  drop 
from  his  nose  and  stain  the  favourite's  towel.  The 
audience  expected  some  tragical  denotement,  but 
Gorski,  who  never  lost  his  presence  of  mind,  finished 
what  he  had  to  say  and  returned  to  his  place  as  if 
nothing  had  happened. 

On  New  Year's  Day  we  were  appointed  Gentle- 
men of  the  Chamber.  Court  appointments  were  at 
that  time  held  in  much  higher  estimation  than  they 
are  now.  Ranks  at  Court  stood  on  the  same  footing 
as  corresponding  ranks  in  the  army,  and  took  preced- 
ence of  ranks  in  the  civil  service ;  the  consequence 
was  that  families  with  a  great  name,  or  with  great 
interest,  always  placed  their  sons  in  the  Guards,  and 
tried  at  the  same  time  to  obtain  for  them  an  appoint- 
ment at  Court.  Being  thus  raised  in  the  hierarchy 
of  the  tchin,  they  afterwards  passed  into  the  civil  or 
military  service  with  the  rank  to  which  they  had 
been  promoted. 

Catherine  wished  the  Grand-Duke  Constantine  to 
marry  while  she  was  still  living,  and  all  preliminary 
preparations  were  made  for  the  establishment  of  his 
household.  People  intrigued  for  places  either  for 


MARRIAGE  OF  THE  GRAND-DUKE  CONSTANTINK    97 

themselves  or  for  others,  and  lists  were  formed  of  the 
gentlemen  of  the  chamber  and  the  chamberlains,  the 
former  with  the  rank  of  brigadier,  and  the  latter  with 
that  of  major-general.  The  Duchess  of  Saxe-Coburg, 
accompanied  by  her  three  children,  had  just  appeared 
at  St  Petersburg,  and  it  is  from  that  time  that  the 
elevation  of  this  princely  family  began.  Whenever 
a  princess  was  wanted  at  Moscow,  a  diplomatic  agent 
was  sent  to  the  capitals  of  the  small  German  princes 
who  had  pretty  daughters  to  marry,  and  made  a 
detailed  report  on  the  qualities  of  these  princesses, 
and  the  moral  character  and  blood-relations  of  their 
parents.  After  reading  these  reports,  the  Empress 
designated  the  princesses  whom  she  wished  to  see 
at  St  Petersburg,  in  order  to  make  her  selection. 
She  had  in  her  time  herself  undergone  an  examina- 
tion of  this  kind,  and  did  not  think  that  she  was 
inflicting  any  humiliation  on  these  ladies  by  subject- 
ing them  to  the  same  ordeal.  Indeed  all  the  German 

O 

princesses  were  very  glad  to  get  a  summons  of  this 
kind  for  any  of  their  daughters,  and  felt  very  flattered 
when  one  of  them  was  chosen  as  the  bride  of  a  Grand- 
Duke.  During  the  past  century  Russia  had  perhaps 
more  prestige — in  Germany  at  least — than  she  has 
now,  and  the  young  princesses  who  were  destined  for 
that  country  looked  forward  to  a  life  the  prospect  of 
which  singularly  pleased  their  old  mothers.  They 
were  like  the  Circassian  women  who  think  their 
fortunes  made  when  they  are  taken  as  slaves  to 
inhabit  the  harems  of  Turkish  pashas.  The  mothers 
looked  upon  the  brilliant  position  of  Catherine  as  a 
presage  for  their  daughters,  and  were  not  repelled  by 

VOL.   I  G 


93        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

any  thought  of  possible  sacrifices,  or  else  only  looked 
upon  them  as  difficulties  from  which  the  young 
Grand-Duchesses  could  easily  extricate  themselves, 
and  which  therefore  need  not  cause  them  any  anxiety. 
It  was  Baron  Budberg,  then  a  diplomatic  agent,  and 
afterwards  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  who  procured 
for  the  Duchess  of  Saxe-Coburg  the  happiness  of 
bringing  her  three  daughters  to  St  Petersburg. 

The  Duchess  was  very  clever,  and  her  daughters 
were  all  pretty.  It  was  painful  to  see  this  mother 
offering  her  daughters  like  goods  for  sale,  and  watch- 
ing anxiously  to  discover  on  which  of  them  would  fall 
the  eye  of  the  Empress  and  the  handkerchief  of  the 
Grand-Duke  Constantine.  There  was  something  so 
humiliating  in  this  conduct  that  we  tried  not  to  notice 
it,  especially  as  the  Duchess  and  her  daughters  were 
in  all  other  points  very  amiable  and  worthy  of  respect. 
Various  anecdotes  about  the  Grand-Duke  Constantine 
were  current  which  were  far  from  confirming  the  hope 
that  the  match  would  be  a  happy  one.  These  stories 
ought  to  have  opened  the  eyes  of  the  daughters  and 
their  mother,  but  perhaps  they  thought  that  as  they 
had  come  from  so  far  it  was  too  late  to  go  back,  or 
maybe  their  eyes,  fascinated  by  the  splendour  of 
greatness,  did  not  see  things  in  their  right  light. 

Catherine  had  received  the  mother  and  her 
daughters  with  open  arms ;  she  was  continually  with 
them,  and  while  she  talked  with  the  mother,  her 
grandsons  had  plenty  of  opportunities  of  becoming 
acquainted  with  the  daughters,  as  there  were  fetes, 
soirees,  balls,  and  promenades  every  day.  The  Grand- 
Duke  Constantine  had  received  orders  from  his  grand- 


MARRIAGE  OF  THE  GRAND-DUKE  CONSTAXTINE    99 

mother  to  marry  one  of  these  princesses ;  he  was  only 
allowed  to  choose  from  among  the  three.  Constantine 
was  then  seventeen  years  old.  When  he  was  older, 
and  indeed  during  the  whole  of  his  career,  he  always 
proved  by  his  conduct  that  his  passions  were  indepen- 
dent both  of  his  will  and  his  reason.  It  was  not 
therefore  probable  that  at  so  early  an  age  he  should 
have  consulted  either ;  he  simply  obeyed  the  orders 
of  his  all-powerful  grandmother. 

It  was  thought  in  the  capital  (we  did  not  yet 
belong  to  the  Court)  that  the  Grand-Duke  would 
select  the  youngest  of  the  three  sisters.  The  eldest 
had  managed  to  withdraw  by  frankly  declaring  that 
her  heart  was  not  free  ;  and  she  was  the  only  one  who 
could  congratulate  herself  on  her  courage.  She  had 
accepted  the  addresses  of  a  young  Austrian  officer 
(afterwards  a  general) ;  her  parents,  not  wishing  to 
oppose  her  inclinations,  finally  gave  their  consent,  and 
she  alone  of  the  three  sisters  was  happy. 

The  appointments  of  officers  of  the  Guards  and  of 
Gentlemen  of  the  Chamber  were  both  sinecures.  At 
the  same  time  this  combination  of  military  rank  in 
the  Guards  regiments,  to  which  no  duty  was  attached, 
and  of  honorary  rank  in  the  Court,  was  not  without 
its  advantages.  It  furnished  a  career  of  adventure 
and  emotion  to  young  men  who  were  ambitious,  rich, 
and  fond  of  pleasure.  They  were  admitted  to  the 
games,  dances,  soirees,  and  theatrical  performances  of 
the  Court — into  the  interior  of  that  sanctuary  in  the 
midst  of  which  people  who  had  real  duties  to  perform 
could  not  penetrate  unless  they  had  attained  the 
highest  ranks.  It  seemed  strange  that  men  without 


ioo      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTO-RYSKI 

any   personal    merit    should    find   the   gates    of   the 
palace  open  to  them,  while  generals  of  long  service 
mixed  with  the  crowd  in  the  ante-chambers.     We  had 
at   least   some    satisfaction    in   seeing     the     terrible 
Governor-General  of  a  province  totally  eclipsed  in  the 
capital,  barely  obtaining  a  look    from  the  favourite, 
and  not  daring  to  show  himself  in  any  distinguished 
society.       There    was  some   sweetness    in    this   little 
revenge  ;  but,  the  sentiment  of  social  superiority  apart, 
all  other  relations  remained  the  same ;  for  this  governor, 
who    was    treated    with    contempt    in    the    capital, 
indulged   in  the   same  tyranny  as  before  directly  he 
returned  to  his  province  :  he  compensated  himself  over 
and  over  again  for  the  humiliations  he  had  had  to  put 
up  with,  and,  sure  of  impunity,  inflicted  rapine  and 
persecution    on   the    members    of  families    which   he 
dared  not  visit  at  St  Petersburg.     It  was  difficult,  if 
not  impossible,  to  obtain  justice  with  regard  to  the 
permanent  abuses  of  discretionary  power,  so  long  as 
these  abuses  were  not  too  revolting — revolting  in  a 
country  where  nothing  shocks  ! — and  were  covered  by 
certain  forms.     In  the  provinces  everything  was  done 
by   officials   and    secretaries   who    had    no    access   to 
society,  still  less  to  the  Court,  and  who  decided  every 
case  in  the  name  of  their  chiefs,  most  of  whom  were 
either  indolent  or  stupid.     To  have  on  one's  side  the 
clerks  was  a  sure  way  of  success,  for  the  provincial 
oppressors  and  pillagers  kept  up   so  close  an  under- 
standing with  the  underlings  of  the  senate  and  the 
ministerial  departments  that  the  truth  could  not  come* 
out  any  where. 

Our  appointment  as  Gentlemen  of  the  Chamber 


MARRIAGE  OF  THE  GRAND-DUKE  CONSTANTINE   101 

initiated  us  into  the  private  habits  of  the  Court,  and 
enabled  us  to  make  a  closer  acquaintance  with  several 
high  dignitaries  and  with  some  young  men  whom  we 
met  in  the  salons  and  who  became  our  comrades.  It 
also  had  the  effect  of  bringing  us  nearer  to  the  Grand- 
Dukes. 

I  will  first  speak  of  the  ceremonies  which  attended 
the  marriage  of  the  Grand-Duke  Constantine.  His 
choice  was  well  known  to  the  public.  The  young 
Princess  Julia,  who,  as  the  future  Grand-Duchess, 
was  to  assume  the  name  of  Anna,  was  already  being 
taught  the  Russian  catechism,  and  was  preparing 
to  change  her  religion.  It  is  said  that  German 
princesses  who  had  any  chance  of  marrying  a  Russian 
Prince,  did  not  receive  any  special  or  profound  in- 
struction as  to  the  dogmas  which  mark  the  line  of 
distinction  between  the  various  Christian  religions. 
This  precaution  was  taken  by  the  prudent  parents 
so  that  the  princesses  might  change  their  religion 
without  much  conscientious  scruple.  Be  this  as  it 
may,  the  facility  with  which  they  adopted  the 
Russian  faith  certainly  gave  the  statement  a  colour 
of  truth.  They  were  mostly  quite  indifferent  to 
religious  dogmas,  or  if  not,  they  adhered  secretly  to 
the  religion  which  they  had  publicly  disowned. 

The  day  of  renunciation  and  baptism — for  even  if 
you  are  a  Christian  you  have  to  be  baptised  over 
again  when  you  embrace  the  Russian  religion — came 
first.  The  Imperial  family  and  all  the  courtiers  pro- 
ceeded in  splendid  dresses  to  the  chapel,  which  was 
already  occupied  by  the  bishops  and  the  clergy.  It 
was  painful  to  see  the  young  princess  advancing  in  a 


:02      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

dress  of  cloth  of  gold  laden  with  diamonds,  like  a 
victim  crowned  with  flowers,  to  bow  her  head  to 
images  which  were  in  no  way  sacred  to  her,  to  submit 
to  the  exigencies  of  a  ceremony  which  was  opposed  to 
her  convictions  and  her  sentiments.  It  \vas  evident 
that  she  did  this  simply  out  of  deference,  knowing 
opposition  was  useless,  and  without  attaching  the 
slightest  importance  to  the  ceremony. 

The  Russian  rite  reminds  one  rather  of  pagan  than 
of  Christian  observances.  The  bishops  and  popes,  all 
with  long  beards,  involuntarily  recall  to  one's  mind 
the  high  priests  of  antiquity.  Everything  is  calculated 
for  external  pomp  and  to  appeal  to  the  senses ;  there 
is  no  provision  for  that  religion  of  the  heart,  lifting 
up  the  soul  to  the  Creator,  which  demands  tranquillity 
and  reflection.  Preaching  is  a  mere  form ;  I  have 
never  heard  a  good  sermon  in  a  Russian  church  either 
at  Court  or  elsewhere.  Moreover,  the  clergy  never 
preach  except  on  grand  occasions.  Their  sermons  are, 
both  by  habit  and  obligation,  borrowed  to  a  great 
extent  from  the  writings  of  the  primitive  Slavonic 
church  ;  this  always  makes  their  eloquence  subtle  and 
pompous  rather  than  instructive  or  convincing. 
Hymns  and  ceremonial  take  up  the  whole  time  of  the 
service,  so  that  there  is  none  left  for  doctrine.  The 
services  are,  in  fact,  theatrical  representations  copied 
direct  from  those  of  idolaters.  The  chalices  carried 
on  the  acolytes'  heads,  the  opening  and  closing  doors 
of  the  sanctuary,  the  worship  before  images,  the 
censers  constantly  in  motion,  present  a  scene  very  like 
those  we  read  of  in  connection  with  pagan  sacrifices. 
One  would  look  in  vain  for  the  simplicity  and  in- 


MARRIAGE  OF  THE  GRAND-DUKE  CONST AXTINE  103 

struction  to  be  found  in  Protestantism,  or  the  devotion 
and  the  tender  aspirations  of  Catholicism  ;  these  bear 
the  stamp  of  civilization,  while  the  Russian  rite  is 
Asiatic  and  barbarous.  There  is  something  strange 
even  in  its  manifestations  of  devotion.  Thus  every- 
body— young  or  old,  elegant  or  shabby — takes  the 
sacrament.  People  who  belong  to  the  churches  of 
Western  Europe  often  do  not  wish  or  do  not  dare  to 
approach  the  holy  table,  yet  they  often  have  more 
faith  and  true  piety ;  their  abstention  from  the  sacra- 
ment, though  sometimes  blameable,  is  accompanied  by 
respect  for  their  religion,  and  may  be  merely  a  con- 
sequence of  it.  In  Russia,  on  the  other  hand,  religious 
Ceremonies  are  often  performed  not  in  satisfaction  of 
one's  moral  aspirations,  but  merely  as  a  matter  of 
custom,  and  the  people  who  go  to  church  turn  the 
hymns  and  prayers  sung  by  the  popes  into  ridicule. 
At  confession  the  priest  reads  to  the  penitent  or 
penitents  (for  sometimes  several  confess  their  sins  at 
the  same  time)  a  list  of  sins,  and  the  penitent  usually 
does  not  answer  aloud,  but  when  some  sin  is  mentioned 
of  which  he  is  guilty,  he  murmurs  long  prayers,  often 
without  seeming  to  pay  attention  to  them,  and  then 
goes  to  take  the  sacrament. 

These  reflections  occurred  to  me  when  I  saw  the 
young  princess,  endowed  by  nature  with  gaiety  and 
charm,  accepting  the  new  religion  without  foreseeing 
her  destiny — which,  however,  it  was  easy  to  guess 
at ;  while  those  of  her  family  who  were  present 
seemed  to  beam  with  happiness.  / 

Some  days  afterwards  the  marriage  took  place. 
The  princess  was  given  to  a  youth  barely  entering  man- 


104      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

hood,  but  with  a  violent  temper  and  savage  caprices 
which  had  already  furnished  many  a  topic  of  conversa- 
tion. The  ceremonious  dinners,  balls,  entertainments 
of  all  kinds,  and  fireworks  lasted  for  several  weeks  ; 
but  as  usual  all  these  noisy  diversions,  splendid  as 
they  were,  did  not  inspire  mirth.  The  marriage 
ceremony  always  has  a  tinge  of  melancholy  ;  it  is  a 
solemn  moment  which  decides  the  whole  future  of 
the  persons  who  are  united  by  it,  and  those  who 
witness  it  cannot  help  reflecting  on  the  fact  that  at 
that  moment  the  happiness  of  two  human  beings  is  at 
stake.  This  was  especially  the  case  at  the  marriage 
of  the  Grand-Duke  Constantine  ;  a  sinister  veil  of 
sadness  hovered  over  the  ceremony  and  the  fetes 
which  followed  it.  It  was  a  mournful  spectacle,  this 
handsome  young  princess,  come  from  so  far  to  adopt 
a  foreign  religion  on  a  foreign  soil,  to  be  delivered  up 
to  the  capricious  will  of  a  man  who  it  was  evident 
would  never  care  for  her  happiness.  These  fatal 
presentiments  were  soon  confirmed  by  the  confidential 
avowals  of  the  Grand-Duke  himself.  What  he 
related  to  those  with  whom  he  was  intimate  about 
his  honeymoon  was  marked  by  an  unexampled  want 
of  delicacy  towards  his  wife.  She  and  the  wife  of 
the  Grand-Duke  Alexander  became  friends.  Beino- 

o 

both  German  and  both  far  from  their  respective 
families,  they  were  naturally  inclined  to  a  mutual 
confidence  which  might  be  their  consolation  in  case 
of  adversity,  and  might  double  their  happiness  if 
their  marriages  should  prove  a  success.  The  Grand- 
Duchess  Elizabeth,  who  was  destined  to  a  more 
elevated  position,  and  was  incomparably  more-  fortu- 


MARRIAGE  OF  THE  GRAND-DUKE  CONSTANTINE    105 

nate  in  the  character  of  her  husband,  seemed  to  be 
the  supporter  and  protectress  of  her  sister-in-law, 
and  a  substitute  for  her  mother  and  sisters,  who  were 
soon  to  leave  St  Petersburg.  The  inequality  of  their 
respective  positions  drew  the  bonds  between  them 
still  closer. 

When  the  fetes  were  over,  and  the  Coburg 
family  had  gone,  the  Court  resumed  its  normal  life. 
Sledging  parties  were  organized  ;  the  Empress  some- 
times wished  them  to  take  place  in  the  morning,  and 
the  Gentlemen  of  the  Chamber  who  were  on  duty 
were  then  called  to  accompany  her.  On  one  of  these 
occasions  I  saw  Catherine  in  a  morning  neglige  and 
Zuboff  coming  familiarly  out  of  her  room  in  a  pelisse 
and  kid  boots — which  did  not  disconcert  either  the 
Empress,  her  favourite,  or  the  bystanders. 

In  the  Winter  Palace,  so  called  because  the  Court 
inhabited  it  at  that  season,  the  evening  assemblies 
used  to  take  place  in  a  room  known  as  the  salle  des 
diamants,  because  the  crown  jewels  were  kept  in  it 
in  glass  cupboards.  This  room  communicated  on  one 
side  with  the  bedroom  and  other  private  rooms  of  the 
Empress,  and  on  the  other  with  the  rooms  allotted 
to  her  servants.  The  throne-room,  which  was  re- 
garded as  belonging  to  the  private  apartments, 
separated  the  servants'  rooms  from  the  drawing-rooms 
beyond.  The  chevaliers-gardes,  a  detachment  of 
officers  selected  for  their  stature  and  merit,  used  to 
sit  at  the  entrance  to  the  throne-room.  They  were 
the  direct  descendants  of  the  famous  company  of 
grenadiers  who  had  placed  the  Empress  Elizabeth  on 
the  throne,  and  had  been  rewarded  for  this  service  by 


io6      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

all  of  them  who  were  soldiers  being  promoted  to  the 
rank  of  officer  and  made  her  private  guard.  This 
guard  was  maintained  on  the  same  footing  until 
Catherine's  death,  and  it  always  kept  its  rich  costume. 

The  ordinary  Court  assemblies  used  to  take  place 
in  the  salle  des  diamante;  one  only  saw  there  people 
who  were  on  intimate  terms  with  the  Imperial  family 
and  officers  on  duty.  The  Empress  used  to  play 
cards  with  Zuboff  and  other  dignitaries.  It  was 
remarked  that  the  favourite  did  not  pay  much  atten- 
tion either  to  his  sovereign  or  to  the  game  ;  he  was 
often  absent-minded,  and  his  eyes  were  constantly 
turned  to  the  table  where  the  two  Grand-Duchesses 
were  with  their  husbands.  It  was  surprising  that 
the  Empress  did  not  notice  what  was  evident  to 
every  one  else.  These  evenings  would  have  been 
terribly  dull  in  any  other  place,  and  even  in  the 
Empress's  salon  people  were  glad  they  were  so  short. 
The  Empress  did  not  wait  for  supper,  but  used  to 
leave  early  and  withdraw  into  her  room.  She  bowed 
with  dignity  to  the  princesses  and  the  members  of 
the  Court,  the  folding-doors  of  her  room  opened,  and 
then  Zuboff,  bowing  like  the  Empress,  used  to  go 
in  with  her  and  the  doors  were  shut.  The  Grand- 
Dukes  and  Grand-Duchesses  withdrew  at  the  same 
time  as  the  Empress. 

Two  snow  hills  were  sometimes  erected  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  Tauris  Palace.  The  princesses  and 
the  whole  personnel  of  the  Court  used  to  go  there 
to  descend  in  sledges  according  to  the  Russian  custom. 
People  were  very  merry  at  these  entertainments,  the 
young  men  having  young  and  pretty  ladies  as  their 


COURT  AMUSEMENTS  107 

partners.  One  day  young  StrogonofF  gave  the  officer 
of  police,  who  wished  to  prevent  his  passing,  a  box 
on  the  ear.  Strogonoff'  was  reprimanded,  and  there 
was  an  end  of  the  matter.  Some  excellent  concerts 
were  given  in  the  Grand-Duchess's  apartments,  and 
at  the  Hermitage  Palace  French  plays  and  Italian 
operas  were  admirably  performed.  The  Austrian 
Ambassador,  Count  de  Cobentzel,  usually  conversed 
with  the  Empress ;  besides  these  the  only  persons 
present  were  the  Grand-Dukes  and  Grand-Duchesses 
and  people  belonging  to  the  Court.  These  perform- 
ances took  place  twice  a  week,  and  were  very  pleasant 
as  there  was  no  constraint  of  any  kind.  I  still  see  the 
audience  as  it  then  appeared  to  me.  In  front  of  the 
stage  was  the  Empress,  occupying  a  double  seat  owing 
to  her  size  ;  next  to  her  was  the  Count  de  Cobentzel, 
with  his  squint,  and  his  bald  head  covered  with  a 
thick  coat  of  powder,  approving  everything  she  said. 
On  either  side  were  the  Imperial  family,  all  fresh 
and  pretty  faces,  except  that  of  the  Grand-Duke 
Constantine ;  and  the  rest  of  the  society  occupied 
seats  raised  in  the  shape  of  an  amphitheatre. 

The  Empress  was  quite  satisfied  at  her  second 
grandson's  marriage,  and  she  seemed  to  revel  in  the 
leisure  which  was  given  her  by  the  favourable  turn 
in  foreign  politics.  Everything  went  smoothly  :  the 
affairs  of  unfortunate  Poland  had  been  settled  accord- 
ing to  her  wish,  the  King  of  Prussia  was  about  to 
cede  the  city  of  Cracow  to  Austria  in  compliance 
with  her  orders,  and  all  the  European  monarchies 
were  at  her  feet,  approving  and  flattering  her  plans. 
This  was  because  England  and  Austria  wished  to 


io8       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

procure  her  active  assistance  against  France,  while 
Naples,  Rome,  and  Sardinia,  fearing  the  republican 
movement,  sought  the  same  object.  The  King  of 
Prussia  took  care  not  to  oppose  her  in  anything. 
But  while  Catherine  issued  the  most  vehement  diplo- 
matic notes  against  the  Revolution  and  the  French 
Republic,  and  fomented  the  whole  of  Europe  against 
them,  she  prudently  avoided  war,  observing  the 
vicissitudes  of  the  fortunes  of  the  allies,  and  taking 
care  not  to  allow  her  troops  to  intervene.  While 
the  others  were  exhausting  themselves  in  sanguinary 
battles,  she  twice  *  robbed  Poland  of  territory  and 
distributed  fragments  of  the  booty  among  her  accom- 
plices ;  she  was  supreme  over  the  whole  of  Northern 
Europe,  the  terror  of  the  Turks,  and  proud  of  the 
universal  homage  paid  to  her.  Tranquil  at  home, 
she  sent  troops  to  Persia  under  the  orders  of  Valerian 
Zuboff,  for  her  feminine  instincts  were  always  mixed 
up  with  the  masculine,  or  rather  Macchiavellian,  enter- 
prises of  her  policy.  These  were  the  last  of  her  happy 
days.  The  victories  of  Buonaparte  in  Italy  and  the 
conduct  of  the  young  King  of  Sweden  were  soon  to 
fill  with  bitterness  the  last  year  of  her  life. 

*  In  the  partitions  of  1773  and  1792. 


CHAPTER   VII 

1796 

CONVERSATIONS       WITH        ALEXANDER. STAY       AT        TSARSKOE-SELO. 

RELATIONS     BETWEEN     THE     GRAND-DUKE    PAUL    AND    HIS    SONS.— 
BIRTH    OF   NICHOLAS. 

BEFORE  the  break-up  of  the  ice  on  Lake  Ladoga, 
which  generally  occurs  towards  the  end  of  April,  St 
Petersburg  usually  has  a  few  days  of  fine  weather, 
with  bright  sun  and  a  moderate  temperature  ;  and  the 
quays  are  then  full  of  gaily  dressed  people  walking 
and  driving.  The  Grand-Duke  Alexander  was  often 
there  either  alone  or  with  his  wife  ;  and  this  was  an 
additional  incentive  for  high  society  to  assemble.  I 
used  also  to  come  with  rny  brother,  and  whenever  the 
Grand-Duke  met  one  of  us,  he  stopped  to  talk,  and 
showed  us  particular  attention. 

These  morning  meetings  were,  so  to  say,  a  con- 
tinuation of  the  Court  soirees,  and  our  relations  with 
the  Prince  daily  became  more  intimate.  In  the  spring 
the  Court  moved  as  usual  to  the  Tauris  Palace,  where 
the  Empress  Catherine  professed  to  live  in  greater 
retirement,  and  only  admitted  very  select  company  in 
the  evening.  The  Grand-Duke  still  came  occasionally 
to  the  quay ;  he  told  me  he  was  sorry  to  see  me  so 


no      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

seldom,  and  asked  me  to  come  to  him  to  the  Tauris 
Palace  for  a  walk  in  the  garden,  which  he  wished  to 
show  me.  Spring  had  already  begun,  and  as  generally 
happens  in  this  climate,  nature  had  made  up  for  lost 
time,  and  vegetation  had  rapidly  developed  itself  in  a 
few  days ;  the  trees  and  fields  were  green  and  covered 
with  flowers.  I  went  on  the  day  and  hour  fixed  by 
the  Prince.  I  am  sorry  I  did  not  take  note  of  the 
exact  date,  for  that  day  had  a  decisive  influence  on  a 
great  part  of  my  life  and  on  the  destinies  of  my 
country.  Thenceforward  I  became  devoted  to  the 
Grand-Duke,  and  I  may  say  that  our  conversation 
then  led  to  a  mutual  friendship,  followed  by  a  series  of 
fortunate  and  unfortunate  events,  whose  results  still 
make  themselves  felt  and  will  be  perceived  for  many 
years  to  come. 

As  soon  as  I  came  in,  the  Grand-Duke  took  me 
by  the  hand,  and  proposed  that  we  should  go  into  the 
garden,  in  order,  he  said,  that  he  might  enable  me  to 
judge  of  the  skill  of  his  English  gardener.  We  walked 
about  in  every  direction  for  three  hours,  keeping  up 
an  animated  conversation  all  the  time.  The  Grand- 
Duke  told  me  that  my  conduct  and  that  of  my  brother, 
the  resignation  we  showed  in  a  position  which  must 
be  painful  to  us,  and  the  calm  indifference  \vith  which 
we  had  received  both  the  smiles  and  the  frowns  of 
fortune,  had  gained  us  his  esteem  and  confidence  ;  that 
he  divined  and  approved  our  sentiments  ;  that  he  had 
felt  it  necessary  to  let  us  know  what  he  really  thought, 
and  that  he  could  not  bear  the  idea  that  we  should 
judge  him  otherwise  than  as  he  really  was.  He 
added  that  he  did  not  in  any  way  share  the  ideas  and 


CONVERSATIONS  WITH  ALEXANDER  m 

doctrines  of  the  Cabinet  and  the  Court ;  and  that  he 
was  far  from  approving  the  policy  and  conduct  of  his 
grandmother,  whose  principles  he  condemned.  He 
had  wished  for  the  success  of  Poland  in  her  glorious 
struggle  and  had  deplored  her  fall.  Kosciuszko,  he 
said,  was  in  his  eyes  a  man  who  was  great  by  his 
virtues  and  the  cause  which  he  had  defended,  which 
was  the  cause  of  humanity  and  of  justice.  He  added 
that  he  detested  despotism  everywhere,  no  matter  in 
what  way  it  was  exercised ;  that  he  loved  liberty,  to 
which  all  men  had  a  right ;  that  he  had  taken  the 
strongest  interest  in  the  French  Revolution,  and  that 
while  condemning  its  terrible  excesses,  he  wished  the 
French  Republic  success  arid  rejoiced  at  its  establish- 
ment. He  spoke  to  me  with  veneration  of  his  tutor, 
M.  de  la  Harpe,  as  a  man  of  great  virtue,  of  true 
wisdom,  of  strict  principles,  and  of  energetic  character. 
He  owed  to  him  all  he  knew  and  any  good  qualities 
he  might  possess — especially  those  principles  of  truth 
and  justice  which  he  was  happy  to  bear  in  his  heart 
and  with  which  M.  de  la  Harpe  had  inculcated 
him. 

While  we  were  walking  about  in  the  garden  we 
several  times  met  the  Grand-Duchess,  who  also  was 
taking  a  walk.  The  Grand-Duke  told  me  that  he 
confided  his  thoughts  to  his  wife,  that  she  alone  knew 
and  shared  his  sentiments,  and  that  I  was  the  only 
person  besides  herself  to  whom  he  had  dared  to  speak 
of  them  since  his  tutor  had  gone  ;  that  he  could  not 
mention  them  to  any  Russian,  as  none  were  as  yet 
capable  even  of  understanding  them  ;  and  that  I  must 
therefore  feel  how  great  a  pleasure  it  would  be  for 


ii2      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

him  to  have  in  future  some  one  with  whom  he  could 
talk  openly  and  in  entire  confidence. 

This  conversation  was,  as  may  be  imagined, 
occasionally  interrupted  by  demonstrations  of  friend- 
ship on  his  part,  and  of  astonishment,  gratitude,  and 
devotion  on  mine.  He  bade  me  farewell,  saying  that 
he  would  try  to  see  me  as  often  as  possible,  and  urging 
on  me  the  greatest  circumspection  arid  secrecy,  though 
at  the  same  time  he  authorised  me  to  communicate 
to  my  brother  the  subject  of  our  conversation. 

I  was  deeply  moved,  and  could  hardly  believe  my 
ears.  That  a  Russian  Prince,  Catherine's  successor, 
her  grandson  and  her  favourite  child,  whom  she 
would  have  wished  to  see  reigning  after  her  instead 
of  her  son,  and  of  whom  it  was  said  that  he  wrould 
continue  her  reign,  should  disavow  and  detest  his 
grandmother's  principles — should  repel  the  odious 
policy  of  Russia— should  be  a  passionate  lover  of 
justice  and  liberty — should  pity  Poland  and  wish  to 
see  her  happy — seemed  incredible.  And  that  such 
noble  ideas  and  great  virtues  should  be  able  to  grow 
and  flourish  in  such  an  atmosphere  and  with  such 
surroundings,  was  surely  little  less  than  a  miracle. 

I  was  young,  full  of  exalted  sentiments  and  ideas ; 
extraordinary  things  did  not  long  astonish  me,  for  I 
readily  believed  in  anything  that  seemed  to  me  great 
and  virtuous.  I  was  subjugated  by  a  charm  which 
it  is  easy  to  understand  :  there  was  so  much  candour, 
innocence,  resolution  which  seemed  unshakeable,  and 
elevation  of  soul  in  the  words  and  countenance  of  this 
young  prince,  that  he  seemed  to  me  a  privileged 
being  whom  Providence  had  sent  to  this  wrorld  for 


CON  VERSA  TIONS   WITH  A  LEX  A  NDER  1 1 3 

the  happiness  of  humanity  and  of  my  country.  My 
attachment  to  him  was  boundless,  and  the  feeling 
with  which  he  inspired  me  at  that  moment  lasted 
even  after  the  illusions  which  had  given  birth  to  it 
successively  disappeared ;  it  resisted  the  attacks 
which  Alexander  himself  made  upon  it,  and  it  never 
died  in  spite  of  the  many  events  and  sad  misunder- 
standings which  might  have  destroyed  it.  I  told  my 
brother  of  our  conversation,  and  after  giving  a  free 
rein  to  our  surprise  and  admiration,  we  plunged  into 
reveries  of  a  radiant  future  which  seemed  to  be 
opening  before  us.  It  should  be  remembered  that  at 
that  time  so-called  liberal  opinions  were  much  less 
prevalent  than  they  are  now,  and  had  not  yet  pene- 
trated into  all  the  classes  of  society  and  even  into  the 
Cabinets  of  sovereigns.  On  the  contrary,  every- 
thing that  had  the  appearance  of  liberalism  was 
anathematised  in  the  Courts  and  salons  of  most  of  the 
European  capitals,  and  especially  in  Russia  and  at  St 
Petersburg,  where  all  the  convictions  of  the  old 
French  regime  were  grafted  in  an  exaggerated  form 
on  Russian  despotism  and  servility. 

It  was  assuredly  a  moVfc  fortunate  and  important 
incident  that  in  the  midst  of  these  elements  there 
should  be  a  prince,  the  future  ruler  of  Russia,  who 
would  necessarily  exercise  immense  influence  in 
Europe,  holding  such  decided  and  generous  opinions 
entirely  opposed  to  the  existing  state  of  things.  Now 
that  I  look  back,  forty  years  afterwards,  upon  the 
events  which  have  taken  place  since  that  conversation, 
I  see  only  too  well  how  little  they  have  realised  the 
picture  that  our  youthful  imaginations  had  drawn. 
VOL.  i.  H 


1 1 4       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZA K TOR YSKI 

Liberal  ideas  were  at  that  time  in  our  eyes  still 
surrounded  by  an  aureole  which  has  paled  since  they 
have  been  tested  by  experience  ;  their  realisation  had 
not  yet  produced  the  cruel  deceptions  which  have  so 
often  disheartened  us.  That  period,  in  the  years  1796 
and  1797,  was  the  most  brilliant  one  of  the  dawn  of 
liberal  ideas  :  the  cycle  of  the  French  Empire  had 
not  yet  chilled  and  dispersed  the  warmest  partisans  of 
the  Revolution. 

Our  Polish  sentiments,  our  wishes,  our  inexperi- 
ence— our  faith  in  the  ultimate  success  of  justice  and 
liberty — will  explain  how  at  that  moment  we  aban- 
doned ourselves  with  joy  to  the  most  seductive  illu- 
sions. For  some  days  after  this  remarkable  conver- 
sation we  had  not  an  opportunity  of  talking  with  the 
Grand-Duke  ;  but  whenever  he  met  us  we  exchanged 
friendly  words  and  sympathetic  gestures. 

Soon  after,  the  Court  left  for  Tsarskoe-Selo.  All 
the  cavalry  officers  of  the  guard  had  to  go  there  on 
Sundays  and  holidays  to  attend  at  mass,  at  dinner, 
and  in  the  evening  ;  some  even  resided  there,  either 
in  one  of  the  very  inconvenient  little  houses  which 
surrounded  the  courtyard  opposite  the  palace,  or  in 
the  village,  where  the  discomfort  was  equally  great, 
but  where  the  officers  were  less  under  constraint. 

Alexander  at  first  urged  us  to  come  often,  and 
then  to  stay  at  Tsarskoe-Selo,  in  order,  as  he  said,  to 
have  an  opportunity  of  being  more  with  him.  He 
liked  our  society  and  wished  for  it,  as  it  was  only 
with  us  that  he  could  speak  unreservedly.  We 
had  a  right  to  come  into  the  Imperial  apartments 
when  the  Empress  went  there  in  the  evening,  to  take 


CONVERSATIONS  WITH  ALEXANDER  115 

part  in  the  promenades  and  games  which  took  place 
every  fine  day,  and  to  join  the  courtiers  who  met  under 
the  colonnade,  a  part  of  the  palace  which  the  Empress 
liked  best,  and  which  was  close  to  her  apartments. 
The  officers  did  not  on  ordinary  days  dine  at  the 
Empress's  table  unless  they  were  on  duty.  This 
happened  to  me  once  ;  I  was  placed  opposite  to 
Catherine  and  had  to  wait  upon  her,  which  I  did 
with  some  awkwardness. 

We  often  returned  to  Tsarskoe-Selo,  and  soon 
after  we  settled  there  for  the  season.  Our  relations 
with  Alexander  naturally  aroused  much  interest : 
it  was  a  kind  of  freemasonry,  but  the  Grand-Duchess 
was  let  into  the  secret.  An  intimacy  whose  object 
was  at  that  time  so  recent  and  so  ardently  discussed 
furnished  material  for  conversations  which  were  sus- 
pended only  to  be  resumed  on  the  next  opportunity. 
Political  opinions  which  now  seem  trite  and  hack- 
neyed were  at  that  time  startling  on  account  of  their 
novelty,  and  the  mystery  we  had  to  preserve,,  the 
idea  that  we  were  expressing  these  opinions  under 
the  eyes  of  a  Court  encrusted  with  the  prejudices  of 
absolutism  and  of  Ministers  puffed  up  with  their 
supposed  infallibility,  added  interest  and  piquancy  to 
these  relations,  which  grew  more  frequent  and 
intimate  every  day. 

The  Empress  Catherine  looked  favourably  upon 
the  connection  which  was  establishing  itself  between 
her  grandson  and  ourselves ;  she  approved  it,  of 
course  without  guessing  at  its  true  motive  or  at  its 
probable  consequences.  Probably,  with  her  old  ideas 
as  to  the  splendour  of  the  Polish  aristocracy,  she 


n6       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

thought  it  would  be  useful  to  attach  an  influential 
family  to  her  grandson.  She  in  no  way  suspected 
that  this  friendship  would  confirm  him  in  the  opinions 
which  she  detested  and  feared — that  it  would  be  one 
of  the  thousand  causes  of  the  progress  of  liberty  in 
Europe,  and  of  the  re-appearance — only  for  a  time, 
alas  ! — of  Poland,  which  she  had  thought  she  had 
buried  for  ever,  on  the  political  scene.  Her  approval 
of  the  marked  preference  shown  us  by  Alexander 
closed  the  mouths  of  all  objectors,  and  encouraged 
us  in  continuing  our  relations,  which  were  so  attractive 
to  us  in  all  respects. 

The  Grand-Duke  Constantine,  from  a  spirit  of 
imitation,  and  seeing  that  his  doing  so  pleased  the 
Empress,  now  made  great  professions  of  friendship  to 
my  brother,  invited  him  to  his  rooms,  and  admitted 
him  to  the  intimacy  of  his  family  ;  but  there  was  no 
question  of  politics  in  this  connection.  My  brother 
was  not  in  this  respect  as  fortunate  as  I  was  ;  none 
of  the  motives  which  had  bound  us  to  Alexander 
existed  in  the  case  of  Constantine,  and  his  capricious 
and  violent  character,  not  admitting  any  impression 
but  that  of  fear,  rendered  all  intimacy  with  him 
undesirable.  Alexander,  however,  requested  my 
brother  to  take  Constantine's  overtures  in  good  part, 
at  the  same  time  charging  him  not  to  reveal  the 
secret  of  our  political  conversations. 

At  first  Alexander  was  quartered  in  the  palace, 
and  did  not  yet  live  in  the  separate  building  in  the 
park  which  the  Empress  had  ordered  to  be  built 
for  him,  and  which  had  just  been  completed.  We 
used  to  go  there  for  our  afternoon  walks  until 


S  TA  Y  A  T  TSA  RSKOE-SEL  0  117 

Alexander  established  himself  in  the  new  building, 
when  he  was  much  more  free  to  see  us.  He  often 
had  either  my  brother  or  myself  to  dinner,  and  a  day 
seldom  passed  but  one  of  us  supped  with  him  also, 
when  the  rooms  at  the  palace  were  quite  finished. 
In  the  morning  we  used  to  take  long  walks  together  ; 
the  Grand-Duke  was  very  fond  of  walking  and  of 
visiting  the  villages  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  it  was 
especially  on  these  occasions  that  he  used  to  talk  of 
his  favourite  subjects.  He  was  under  the  charm  of 
early  youth,  which  creates  images  and  dwells  upon 
them  without  being  checked  by  impossibilities,  and 
which  makes  endless  projects  for  a  future  which  seems 
to  it  eternal. 

His  opinions  were  those  of  one  brought  up  in 
the  ideas  of  1789,  who  wishes  to  see  republics  every- 
where, and  lool^  upon  that  form  of  government  as 
the  only  one  in  conformity  with  the  wishes  and  the 
rights  of  humanity.  Although  I  was  myself  at  that 
time  very  enthusiastic— although  born  and  brought  up 
in  a  Republic  where  the  principles  of  the  French 
Revolution  had  been  accepted  with  ardour — yet  I 
had  constantly  to  moderate  the  extreme  opinions 
expressed  by  Alexander.  He  held,  among  other 
things,  that  hereditary  monarchy  was  an  unjust  and 
absurd  institution,  and  that  the  supreme  authority 
should  be  granted  not  through  the  accident  of  birth 
but  by  the  votes  of  the  nation,  which  would  best 
know  who  is  most  capable  of  governing  it.  I  repre- 
sented to  him  the  arguments  against  this  view,  the 
difficulty  and  the  risks  of  an  election,  jvhat  Poland 
had  suffered  from  such  an  institution,  and  how  little 


i.8      ^fE^fOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Russia  was  adapted  to  or  prepared  for  it.  I  added 
that  now  at  any  rate  Russia  would  not  gain  anything 
by  the  change,  as  she  would  lose  the  man  who  by  his 
benevolent  and  pure  intentions  was  most  worthy  of 
accedino-  to  the  throne.  We  had  incessant  discussions 

o 

on  this  point.  Sometimes  during  our  long  walks  we 
talked  of  other  matters.  We  turned  from  politics 
to  nature,  of  whose  beauties  the  young  Grand-Duke 
was  an  enthusiastic  admirer.  One  had  to  be  a  great 
lover  of  nature  to  discover  its  beauties  in  the  country 
we  walked  in  ;  but  everything  is  relative  in  this 
world,  and  the  Grand-Duke  flew  into  ecstasies  about 
a  flower,  the  greenness  of  a  tree,  or  the  view  over 
an  undulating  plain.  There  is  nothing  uglier  or  less 
picturesque  than  the  neighbourhood  of  St  Petersburg. 
Alexander  loved  gardens  and  fields,  and  was  fond  of 
agriculture  and  the  rustic  beauty  rif  village  girls ; 
the  occupations  and  labours  of  the  country,  a  simple, 
quiet,  and  retired  life  in  some  -pretty  farm,  in  a  wide 
and  smiling  landscape — such  was  the  dream  he  would 
have  liked  to  realise,  and  to  which  he  was  always 
returning  with  a  sigh. 

I  knew  well  that  this  was  not  the  thing  best 
suited  to  him  ;  that  for  so  high  a  destiny  more  ele- 
vation, force,  ardour,  and  self-confidence  were  necessary 
than  Alexander  seemed  to  possess ;  that  it  was  not 
right  for  a  man  in  his  position  to  wish  to  rid  himself 
of  the  enormous  burthen  which  was  reserved  for  him, 
and  to  yearn  for  the  pleasures  of  a  quiet  life.  It  was 
not  enough  to  perceive  and  feel  the  difficulties  of 
his  position ;  he  should  have  been  filled  with  a 
passionate  desire  to  surmount  them.  These  reflec- 


STA  Y  A  T  TSAR8KOE-SBLO  1 1 9 

tions  occasionally  presented  themselves  to  my  mind, 
and  even  when  I  felt  their  truth,  they  did  not 
diminish  my  feelings  of  admiration  and  devotion  for 
Alexander.  His  sincerity,  his  frankness,  his  self- 
abandonment  to  the  beautiful  illusions  that  fascinated 
him,  had  a  charm  which  it  was  impossible  to  resist. 
Moreover,  he  was  still  so  young  that  his  character 
might  yet  gain  the  qualities  in  which  it  was  defective; 
circumstances  and  necessities  might  develop  faculties 
which  had  not  the  time  or  the  means  of  showing 
themselves;  and  although  he  was  afterwards  much 
changed,  he  retained  to  the  last  a  portion  of  the 
tastes  and  opinions  of  his  youth. 

Many  people — my  countrymen  especially — in  later 
years  reproached  me  for  having  placed  too  much  con- 
fidence in  Alexander's  assurances.  I  have  often 
maintained  against  his  detractors  that  his  opinions 
were  sincere.  The  impression  produced  by  the  first 
years  of  our  relations  could  not  be  effaced.  Assuredly, 
when  Alexander,  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  spoke  to  me 
with  an  effusiveness  which  relieved  his  mind,  about 
opinions  and  sentiments  which  he  concealed  from 
everybody  else,  it  was  because  he  really  felt  them, 
and  wished  to  confide  them  to  someone.  What  other 
motive  could  he  have  had  ?  Whom  could  he  have 
wished  to  deceive  ?  He  certainly  followed  the  inclina- 
tion of  his  heart  and  expressed  his  real  thoughts. 

Besides  our  political  discussions,  and  the  ever-wel- 
come topic  of  the  beauties  of  nature,  and  the  dream  of 
a  quiet  country  life  after  the  destinies  of  free  Russia 
should  have  been  secured,  Alexander  had  also  a  third 
object  to  which  he  ardently  devoted  himself,  and 


120       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

which  was  not  at  all  in  accordance  with  the  others, 
namely,  the  army,  which  was  his  hobby,  as  it  was 
that  of  his  father,  the  Grand-Duke  Paul.  This 
prince  lived  during  the  summer  in  his  country-house 
of  Pavlovsk,  half-a-league  from  Tsarskoe-Selo.  The 
Empress  Catherine  had  allowed  him  to  keep  there  for 
his  amusement  some  battalions  of  marines.  He  was 
Grand-Admiral,  and  this  honorary  title  gave  him 
certain  privileges.  The  Empress  pretended  not  to 
perceive  that  Paul  made  too  large  a  use  of  them,  and 
that  following  the  example  of  Peter  III,  his  unfor- 
tunate father,  he  had  created  for  himself  a  sort  of 
little  army,  which  he  clothed  and  endeavoured  to  drill 
according  to  the  system  he  had  observed  in  Prussia 
when  he  visited  Frederick  the  Great  at  Berlin.  This 
army  was,  I  believe,  composed  in  all  of  twelve  very 
small  battalions,  some  cuirassiers,  dragoons,  and 
hussars,  and  some  guns ;  and  all  promotions  in  this 
force  were  in  the  Grand-Duke's  hands.  The  uniforms 
were  very  eccentric  in  cut,  and  were  in  striking 
contrast  to  the  uniforms  of  the  Russian  army  in  this 
respect ;  they  were  a  caricature  of  the  uniforms  of  the 
troops  of  the  Great  Frederick.  Many  'people  of 
society  and  of  the  Court  had  obtained  permission  to 
wear  these  uniforms,  and  they  were  the  only  courtiers 
whom  Paul  allowed  to  attend  at  his  country-houses. 
Among  them  was  M.  Rostopchin,  who  played  an 
important  part  after  Paul  became  Emperor,  and  was 
afterwards  much  talked  about  at  the  time  of  the  fire 
of  Moscow.  These  courtiers  took  their  uniforms  with 
them  whenever  they  went  to  Pavlovsk  or  to  Gatchina, 
another  country-house  belonging  to  the  Grand-Duke, 


THE  GRAND-DUKE  PAUL  AND  HIS  80  SS         121 

or  oven  to  his  soirees  in  the  Winter  Palace,  for  Paul 
never  went  to  his  mother's  in  the  evening.  People 
only  appeared  in  this  costume,  however,  in  Paul's 
apartments;  everywhere  else  it  was  tabooed  so  long 
as  Catherine  lived,  and  people  laughed  at  it  with 
impunity. 

The  two  young  Grand-Dukes  had  commands  in 
Paul's  army.  They  gave  themselves  up  to  their 
duties  with  the  zeal  of  young  men  who  are  for  the 
first  time  given  something  to  do,  and  the  Court  and 
the  public  compared  them  to  children  playing  at 
soldiers.  This,  however,  produced  no  impression 
upon  them  ;  all  they  thought  of  was  to  obey  the 
wishes  and  even  the  eccentricities  of  their  father. 

There  occurred  at  the  parades  and  manoeuvres  of 
this  miniature  army  grave  events,  defeats,  ups  and 
downs  of  favour,  misfortunes  or  successes,  which 
sometimes  caused  the  deepest  consternation,  at  others 
the  greatest  joy.  I  heard  of  them  from  the  two 
brothers,  who  took  a  pleasure  in  relating  all  the 
vicissitudes  of  the  Court  of  Pavlovsk.  To  these 
young  princes  it  was  an  active  life  which  gave  them 
importance,  in  a  restricted  circle  no  doubt,  but  where 
they  played  a  part  which,  while  it  nattered  their 
\7anit3%  contented  their  juvenile  activity  without 
much  expenditure  of  thought.  The  regulated  uni- 
formity of  their  grandmother's  Court,  on  the  other 
hand,  where  they  had  no  serious  occupation,  was 
often  inexpressibly  tedious  to  them.  Their  bodily- 
fatigues,  the  necessity  of  keeping  out  of  the  way  of 
their  grandmother  when  they  returned  tired  from 
their  drill,  in  a  dress  which  they  had  to  take  off  at 


122       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

once — even  their  father's  scoldings,  which  they  greatly 
feared — gave  attractions  to  this  mode  of  life,  which 
was  very  different  from  the  one  which  the  public 
of  St  Petersburg  and  the  views  of  Catherine  had 
marked  out  for  them. 

The  Empress  did  not  know  how  to  appeal  to  the 
imagination  of  her  grand-children  or  how  to  give 
them  active  and  varied  occupation.  Their  father  was 
more  successful,  and  this  was  a  great  evil  which  had 
unfortunate  consequences.  The  young  Grand-Dukes 
thought  themselves,  and  were  in  reality,  more  a  part 
of  the  army  of  Gatchina  than  of  the  Russian  army. 
Gatchina  was  Paul's  favourite  Palace  and  his  resi- 
dence during  the  autumn ;  he  was  there  at  some 
distance  from  St  Petersburg,  and  could  give  himself 
up  without  constraint  to  his  hobbies.  The  Grand- 
Dukes  regretted  not  to  be  able  to  go  there,  but  they 
liked  to  imitate  the  manners  of  Paul's  troopers,  and, 
in  speaking  of  what  was  done  in  his  little  army,  to 
say,  '  That  is  our  way,  after  the  fashion  of  Gatchina ' 
(Po  naszemu,  po  Gatcldnski). 

I  recollect  that  the  Empress  one  day  thought  of 
sending  Alexander  with  General  Kutuzoff,  to  inspect 
the  fortresses  on  the  Swedish  frontier.  The  young 
Prince  did  not  seem  to  like  the  idea,  and  it  was 
consequently  abandoned.  The  minutiae  of  the  mili- 
tary service  and  the  habit  of  attaching  extreme 
importance  to  it  gave  an  unfortunate  turn  to  Alex- 
ander's mind  ;  he  took  a  liking  for  it  of  which  he 
could  not  afterwards  rid  himself,  even  after  he  had 
perceived  its  absurdity.  During  the  whole  of  his 
reign  he  had  a  mania  for  parade  which  made  him 


THE  GRAND-DUKE  PAUL  AND  HIS  SONS         123 

lose  much  precious  time  while  he  was  on  the  throne, 
and  prevented  him  during  his  youth  from  working 
usefully  and  acquiring  indispensable  knowledge.  This 
was  also  the  bond  of  union  between  Alexander  and 
Constantine,  and  it  often  gave  the  latter  too  great 

7  O  O 

an  influence  over  his  brother,  for  Constantine  was 
well  versed  in  military  science  so  far  as  mere  drill 
is  concerned,  and  his  brother  could  not  help  having 
a  great  idea  of  him  in  this  respect.  It  was  the 
constant  subject  of  their  most  animated  conversa- 
tions. 

The  Empress  Catherine  saw  the  understanding 
between  Paul  and  his  sons  with  displeasure,  though 
she  did  not  foresee  all  its  consequences,  for  if  she  had, 
she  would  probably  have  prohibited  it.  Alexander 
said  to  me  one  day  as  he  was  returning  from 
Pavlovsk  :  '  They  do  us  the  honour  of  fearing  us,' 
meaning  that  Catherine  was  beginning  to  be  anxious 
at  the  maintenance  of  the  troops  at  Pavlovsk,  and 
at  the  sort  of  concert  which  had  been  established 
between  Paul  and  his  sons.  Alexander  was  flattered 
at  the  thought  of  having  inspired  some  fear  in  the 
Empress ;  but  I  doubt  whether  she  really  felt  any 
such  sentiment ;  if  she  did  so  it  was  very  occasionally 
and  to  a  very  slight  extent.  Catherine  knew  too 
well  the  cowardly  spirit  of  her  son,  the  ridiculous 
appearance  of  his  troops,  and  the  disfavour  with 
which  they  were  regarded  by  the  public  and  the  rest 
of  the  army,  to  trouble  herself  by  fearing  them.  She 
remained  in  peace  under  the  protection  of  a  single 
company  of  Grenadiers,  while  Paul  was  manoeuvring 
with  his  little  army  half-a-league  off. 


i24       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

The  Empress  Elizabeth  had  done  the  same  at  Peter- 
hoft*  with  Peter  III,  who  lived  at  Oranienbaum,  sur- 
rounded by  a  corps  of  devoted  Holsteiners ;  she  also 
knew  the  extreme  pusillanimity  of  her  successor,  and 
perhaps  also  his  kind  heart.  Various  rumours  have 
been  current  as  to  the  legitimacy  of  Paul  I ;  but 
those  who  saw  the  extreme  resemblance  of  character 
and  conduct  between  him  and  Peter  III,  could  have 
no  doubt  that  he  was  really  Peter's  son. 

During  this  year  an  event  occurred  which  had 
vast  consequences  for  Europe  and  terrible  ones  for 
Poland.  The  Grand-Duchess  Maria  gave  birth  to 
a  son.  The  baptismal  ceremony  took  place  in  the 
chapel  of  Tsarskoe-Selo  ;  the  whole  Court  attended 
in  full  dress  in  the  spacious  hall  which  precedes  the 
chapel.  The  ceremony,  as  was  to  be  expected,  was 
a  most  sumptuous  one.  The  ambassadors  were 
present,  and  some  of  them  held  the  child  at  the 
baptismal  font  as  the  representatives  of  their  respec- 
tive sovereigns.  He  was  named  Nicholas  !  Looking 
at  him  then  in  his  swaddling  clothes  as  he  moved 
about  impatiently  while  the  long  baptismal  ceremony 
of  the  Russian  Church  was  being  performed,  I  little 
thought  that  this  weak  and  pretty  child  would  one 
day  become  the  scourge  of  my  country. 

Among  the  motives  which  attracted  the  young 
Grand-Dukes  to  their  father  was  one  that  was  more 
noble  and  sensible  than  those  above  mentioned. 
They  were  painfully  impressed  by  the  cruelty  of 
Catherine  in  not  allowing  her  sons  and  their  wives 
to  enjoy  the  company  of  their  children  even  in  ex- 
treme youth.  As  soon  as  the  Grand-Duchess  Maria 


BIRTH  OF  NICHOLAS  125 

could  leave  her  bed,  her  child  was  taken  away  from 
her  to  be  brought  up  with  his  brothers  and  sisters 
under  the  eyes  of  their  grandmother.  Not  one  of 
them  was,  so  long  as  Catherine  lived,  left  to  the 
care  of  its  parents  or  remained  with  them.  Such 
injustice  revolted  the  young  princes  and  alienated 
them  from  the  Empress.  Moreover,  Alexander's 
views  as  to  his  grandmother's  policy  did  not  make 
him  disposed  to  follow  her  wishes  when  he  could  do 
otherwise.  He  always  found  some  objection  to  raise, 
and  showed  nothing  but  ennui  and  indifference  when 
he  was  called  upon  to  take  part,  however  little,  in  a 
government  which  was  not  at  that  time  at  all  in 
accordance  with  his  opinions.  Constantine,  who  did 
not  share  his  brother's  liberal  views,  yet  agreed  with 
him  in  his  disapproval  of  the  manners  and  character 
of  Catherine.  I  have  heard  him  more  than  once 
speak  about  his  grandmother,  even  after  she  was 
dead,  with  outrageous  rudeness  and  in  the  coarsest 
terms. 

The  stay  of  the  Court  at  Tsarskoe-Selo  was  draw- 
ing to  a  close.  This  gave  us  a  feeling  of  sadness  :  we 
regretted  our  unceremonious  meetings,  our  daily 
conversations,  our  long  walks  in  the  gardens  and  in 
the  country.  We  had  gathered  the  first  flower  of 
youthful  and  confiding  affection — we  had  enjoyed  the 
dreams  with  which  it  is  soothed.  Whatever  we  may 
do,  we  do  not  a^ain  find  sensations  so  strong  and 

7  O  O 

fresh  ;  as  we  advance  in  life  they  become  more  and 
more  rare. 

The  Court  proceeded  as  usual  to  the  Tauris  Palace 
for  the  season  which  precedes  the  winter.  Alexander 


126       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

was  not  so  often  visible,  and  could  not  have  us  so 
often  with  him  at  his  meals.  Yet  our  relations,  the 
partial  interruption  of  which  caused  us  much  regret, 
continued  to  be  the  object  of  our  constant  pre-occu- 
pations. 


CHAPTER   VIII 


1796 


THE    FATE    OF    THE    PRISONERS. REFLECTIONS    ON    ALEXANDER'S     EDU- 
CATION.— -ARRIVAL   OF  THE    KING    OF    SWEDEN. FAILURE    OF    THE 

NEGOTIATIONS      FOR     HIS     MARRIAGE     WITH     THE     GRAND-DUCHESS 
ALEXANDRA. DEATH    OF    CATHERINE. 

OUR  friendship  with  Alexander  had  not  helped  us  to 
improve  the  condition  of  our  countrymen  who  were 
imprisoned  in  the  town  or  the  casemates  of  the  fortress. 
We  often  talked  of  them  and  of  Kosciuszko;  Alexander 
always  spoke  with  enthusiasm  of  the  devotion  and 
the  great  deeds  of  these  martyrs  of  patriotism,  and 
was  indignant  at  the  unjust  tyranny  of  which  they 
were  the  victims.  But,  bound  by  his  position,  and 
timid  from  a  consciousness  of  his  youth  and  inex- 
perience, he  took  no  part  in  affairs  of  State,  and  did 
not  even  think  he  ought  to  seek  to  interfere  in  them. 
He  accordingly  had  no  influence  or  even  contact  with 
those  who  had  the  management  of  affairs. 

It  is  certainly  astonishing  that  Catherine,  who 
took  pleasure  in  the  thought  that  Alexander  would 
continue  her  reign  and  her  glory,  did  not  think  of 
preparing  him  for  this  task  by  familiarising  him  in 
his  early  youth  with  the  various  branches  of  govern- 


i28       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

merit.  Nothing  of  the  sort  was  attempted.  Perhaps 
he  would  not  have  acquired  very  correct  information 
on  many  things,  but  he  would  have  been  saved  from 
the  want  of  occupation.  Yet  it  would  seem  that  either 
the  Empress  and  her  council  had  no  such  idea,  or  that 
the  former  did  not  at  least  insist  upon  its  being  carried 
out.  Alexander's  education  remained  incomplete  at  the 
time  of  his  marriage,  in  consequence  of  the  departure 
of  M.  de  la  Harpe.  He  was  then  eighteen  years  old  ; 
he  had  no  regular  occupation,  he  was  not  even  advised 
to  work,  and  in  the  absence  of  any  more  practical 
task  he  was  not  given  any  plan  of  reading  which 
might  have  helped  him  in  the  difficult  career  for  which 
he  was  destined.  I  often  spoke  to  him  on  this 
subject,  both  then  and  later.  I  proposed  that  he 
should  read  various  books  on  history,  legislation,  and 
politics.  He  saw  that  they  would  do  him  good,  and 
really  wished  to  read  them ;  but  a  Court  life  makes 
any  continued  occupation  impossible.  While  he  was 
Grand-Duke,  Alexander  did  not  read  to  the  end  a 
single  serious  book.  I  do  not  think  he  could  have 
done  so  when  he  became  Emperor,  and  the  whole 
burthen  of  a  despotic  government  was  cast  upon  him. 
The  life  of  a  Court  is  fatiguing  and  yet  idle.  It 
furnishes  a  thousand  excuses  for  indolence,  and  one 
is  constantly  busy  in  doing  nothing.  When  Alexander 
came  to  his  rooms  it  was  to  take  rest  and  not  to 
work.  He  read  by  fits  and  starts,  without  ardour 
or  zeal.  The  passion  of  acquiring  knowledge  was  not 
sufficiently  strong  in  him ;  he  was  married  too  young, 
and  he  did  not  perceive  that  he  still  knew  very  little. 
Yet  he  felt  the  importance  of  useful  study,  and 


REFLECTIONS  ON  ALEXANDERS  EDUCATION    129 

wished  to  enter  upon  it ;  but  his  will  was  not  suffi- 
ciently strong  to  overcome  the  daily  obstacles  presented 
by  the  duties  and  unpleasantnesses  of  life.  The  few 
years  of  his  early  youth  thus  passed  away,  and  he 
lost  precious  opportunities  which  he  had  in  abundance 
so  long  as  Catherine  was  alive,  and  of  which  he 
might  have  recovered  a  part  even  under  the  Emperor 
Paul. 

While  he  was  Grand-Duke,  and  even  during  the 
first  years  of  his  reign,  Alexander  remained  what  his 
education  had  made  him,  and  was  very  different  from 
what  he  became  later  on  when  he  followed  his  natural 
propensities.  It  must  be  concluded  that  nature  had 
endowed  him  with  rare  qualities,  as  notwithstanding 
the  education  he  had  received  he  became  the  most 
amiable  sovereign  of  his  age  and  the  cause  of 
Napoleon's  fall.  After  having  reigned  for  some  years, 
and  acquired  the  experience  entailed  by  the  necessity 
of  at  once  taking  the  management  of  important  affairs 
of  State  and  by  constant  intercourse  with  men  in 
office,  people  were  surprised  to  find  him  not  only  an 
accomplished  man  of  the  world,  but  an  able  politician, 
with  a  penetrating  and  subtle  mind,  writing  without 
assistance  excellent  letters  on  complicated  and  difficult 
subjects,  and  always  amiable,  even  in  the  most 
serious  conversations.  What  would  he  have  become 
had  his  education  been  less  neglected  and  more 
adapted  to  the  duties  which  were  to  occupy  his  life  ? 
M.  de  la  Harpe  was  the  only  man  that  can  be 
mentioned  with  praise  among  those  to  whom  the 
education  of  the  two  Grand-Dukes  was  entrusted.  I 
do  not  know  exactly  who  were  the  persons  directed 

VOL.  I.  I 


130       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

by  Catherine  to  select  their  tutors  ;  probably  they 
were  some  encyclopaedists  of  the  clique  of  Grimm  or 
the  Baron  d'Holbach. 

M.  de  la  Harpe  does  not  seem  to  have  directed 
Alexander  into  any  serious  course  of  study,  though  he 
had  acquired  so  much  influence  over  the  Grand-Duke's 
mind  and  heart  that  I  believe  he  could  have  made 
him  do  anything.  Alexander  derived  from  his 
teaching  only  some  superficial  knowledge  ;  his  infor- 
mation was  neither  positive  nor  complete.  M.  de  la 
Harpe  inspired  him  with  the  love  of  humanity,  of 
justice,  and  even  of  equality  and  liberty  for  all ;  he 
prevented  the  prejudices  and  flatteries  which  sur- 
rounded him  from  stifling  his  noble  instincts.  It  was 
a  great  merit  in  M.  de  la  Harpe  to  have  inspired  arid 
developed  these  generous  sentiments  in  a  Russian 
Grand-Duke,  but  Alexander's  mind  was  not  penetrated 
by  them  ;  it  was  filled  with  vague  phrases,  and  M.  de 
la  Harpe  did  not  sufficiently  make  him  reflect  on  the 
immense  difficulty  of  realising  these  ideas — on  the 
thorny  task  of  finding  means  to  obtain  possible 
results.  He  was,  however,  merely  charged  with 
Alexander's  literary  education  ;  the  choice  which  was 
made  of  those  who  were  to  look  after  his  moral 
training  was  extraordinary.  Count  Nicholas  SoltykofF, 
who  was  a  subaltern  during  the  Seven  Years'  War 
and  had  not  since  seen  any  active  service  (which  did 
not  prevent  him  from  attaining  the  highest  rank  in 
the  army),  was  the  superintendent  of  the  education  of 
the  two  Grand-Dukes.  Short,  with  a  large  head, 
affected,  nervous,  and  of  health  so  delicate  that  it 
required  constant  attention  (he  could  not  wear  braces, 


EFL  EC  TIONS  ON  AL  EX  A  ND  ER'S  ED  UCA  TION    1 3 1 

and  constantly  hitched  up  his  breeches  like  a  sailor) 
he  had  the  reputation  of  being  the  most  astute 
courtier  in  Russia.  When  Catherine  discovered  that 
her  favourite  Momonoff  had  formed  intimate  relations 
with  one  of  her  maids  of  honour,  she  ordered  the 
culprits  to  come  before  her,  had  them  married,  and 
then  expelled  them  from  her  Court;  after  which 
Soltykoff  at  once  introduced  to  her  Plato  Zuboff,  who 
speedily  became  Momonoft's  successor.  The  elevation 
of  Zuboff  so  angered  Prince  Potemkin  that  he  de- 
clared he  would  go  to  St  Petersburg  to  extract  this 
tooth  (zul)  means  tooth  in  Russian) ;  but  he  died 
before  he  could  carry  out  his  intention,  and  Soltykoff 
remained  in  high  favour  with  the  Empress.  He  was 
not  only  the  channel  by  which  her  messages  and 

«/  *J  O 

admonitions  were  conveyed  to  the  young  princes ;  he 
also  acted  as  intermediary  whenever  Catherine  had 
anything  to  communicate  to  the  Grand-Duke  Paul. 
Soltykoff  used  to  omit  or  soften  any  words  which 
seemed  too  disagreeable  or  severe  in  the  orders  or  the 
reproaches  of  his  Imperial  mistress,  and  he  did  the 
same  with  regard  to  the  replies  he  had  to  convev  to 
her.  This  gave  satisfaction  to  both  sides ;  he  alone 
knew  the  truth,  and  took  good  care  not  to  tell  it. 
There  wras  perhaps  some  merit  in  doing  this  success- 
fully, but  Count  Soltykoff  was  certainly  not  the  man  to 
direct  the  education  of  the  young  heir  to  the  throne, 
or  to  make  a  salutary  impression  on  his  character. 

Besides  Count  Soltykoff,  each  of  the  two  princes 
had  a  special  director  of  studies  with  assistants.  The 
selection  of  the  two  directors  was  even  more  extra- 
ordinary than  that  of  the  chief  superintendent.  The 


i32      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

one  attached  to  Alexander  was  Count  Protasoff,  ] 
whose  only  merit  was  to  be  the  brother  of  the  ' 
demoiselle  d  portrait*  an  old  favourite  of  the  Empress 
as  to  whose  functions,  though  she  was  a  good  woman 
at  heart,  there  were  all  sorts  of  extraordinary 
anecdotes.  Constantino's  special  director  was  Count 
Sacken,  a  weak-minded  man  who  was  the  object  of 
incessant  ridicule  on  the  part  of  his  pupil.  Count 
Protasoff  may  justly  be  said  to  have  been  a 
complete  imbecile  ;  Alexander  did  not  laugh  at  him, 
but  he  had  never  the  smallest  esteem  for  him.  The 
assistant  directors  were  selected  solely  by  favour, 
with  the  exception  of  Mouravieff,  whom  Alexander 
when  he  ascended  the  throne  made  his  secretary  for 
petitions,  and  afterwards  appointed  curator  of  the 
schools  of  the  Moscow  district.  He  was  a  worthy 
man  and  was  said  to  be  well-informed,  but  he  was  so 
timid  as  to  be  almost  incapable  of  transacting  business. 
I  should  also  not  omit  Baron  Budberg,  who  some 
years  later  succeeded  me  as  Minister  of  Foreign 
affairs. 

Such  surroundings  could  only  produce  a  bad  effect 
on  the  young  princes,  and  the  qualities  displayed  by 
Alexander  are  the  more  astonishing  and  praiseworthy, 
as  he  developed  them  notwithstanding  the  education 
he  had  received  and  the  examples  which  were  before 
his  eyes. 

At  the  close  of  the  stay  in  the  Tauris  Palace  in 
179G,  the  last  year  Catherine  was  there  with  her 
Court,  the  chief  topic  was  the  approaching  arrival  of 

*  A  decoration  which  gives  the  rank  of  Field  Marshal.  Three  ladies  under 
Paul,  and  one  under  Nicholas,  obtained  this  rank. 


ARRIVAL  OF  THE  KING  OF  SWEDEN  133 

the  young  King  of  Sweden,  who  came  to  marry  the 
eldest  of  the  Grand-Duchesses.  The  Empress  directed 
the  ladies  of  the  Court  to  learn  the  French  contre- 
danse,  which  was  then  the  favourite  dance  at  the 
Court  of  Stockholm,  and  this  was  the  daily  occupation 
of  all  at  Court  who  were  dancers.  The  King  of 
Sweden  was  received  with  exquisite  politeness.  He 
came  with  the  Regent,  his  uncle,  Duke  of  Suder- 
mania,  and  with  a  numerous  suite.  The  Swedish 
costume,  which  resembled  that  formerly  worn  in 
Spain,  produced  a  fine  effect  at  the  receptions,  balls, 
and  other  fetes  which  were  given  to  the  young  King 
and  his  suite ;  all  the  Court  entertainments  were 
for  them.  The  Grand-Duchesses  only  danced  with 
Swedes,  and  never  did  a  Court  show  more  courtesy 
to  strangers. 

While  the  fetes  were  going  on  at  the  Winter 
Palace,  and  balls,  concerts,  and  montagnes  Russes 
were  daily  repeated  at  the  Tauris  Palace,  the  King  of 
Sweden  was  admitted  to  the  presence  of  the  Grand- 
Duchess  Alexandra  as  her  future  husband.  She  was 
of  rare  beauty  and  sweetness  of  character  ;  to  know 
her  was  to  admire  her,  and  his  daily  interview  with 
her  could  only  add  to  the  motives  which  seemed  to 
prompt  the  King  of  Sweden  to  unite  himself  by 
family  ties  with  the  House  of  Romanoff.  The  Duke 
of  Sudermania  was  strongly  in  favour  of  the  match, 
and  had  urged  his  nephew  to  go  to  St  Petersburg  so 
as  to  leave  no  doubt  as  to  his  intentions.  All  that 
remained  was  to  agree  as  to  forms  and  the  treaty 
to  be  drawn  up  between  the  two  powers ;  and  this 
did  not  seem  of  a  nature  to  cause  any  difficulty. 


13-1       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

As  both  parties  were  said  to  be  agreed,  no  negotiation 
seemed  requisite,  and  the  task  of  framing  the  neces- 
sary documents  was  entrusted  to  Count  Markoft', 
whom  the  Zuboffs  were  putting  forward  in  order  to 
eclipse  Count  Bezborodko,  who,  though  he  had  refused 
to  cringe  to  them,  yet  kept  his  place  and  his  credit 
with  the  Empress. 

After  some  gay  and  brilliant  weeks  the  day  of  the 
betrothal  was  fixed ;  the  ceremony  was  to  take  place 
in  the  evening.  The  Archbishops  of  St  Petersburg 
and  Novgorod,  with  a  numerous  suite  of  clergy,  went 
to  the  chapel  where  the  ceremony  was  to  take  place. 
The  whole  of  the  Court,  the  Ministers,  the  Senate, 
and  many  generals  were  assembled  in  the  waiting- 
room.  We  waited  for  several  hours.  It  was  getting 
late,  and  people  observed  whisperings  among  those 
who  were  likely  to  be  well  informed,  and  movements 
to  and  fro  of  persons  proceeding  to  the  Empress's 
apartments,  all  of  whom  came  out  at  a  quick  pace. 
At  length,  after  four  hours  of  suspense,  we  were 
told  that  the  ceremony  would  not  take  place. 
The  Empress  sent  to  apologise  to  the  Archbishops 
who  had  come  in  their  pontifical  robes,  to  the  ladies 
in  panniers,  and  to  the  rest  of  the  Court,  and 
announced  to  them  that  the  ceremony  had  been  post- 
poned owing  to  some  unexpected  difficulties. 

Soon  after  it  became  known  that  the  marriage  was 
broken  off.  Count  Markoff,  frivolous  through  self- 
sufficiency,  and  inattentive  through  pride  and  disre- 
gard of  all  but  himself,  was  persuaded  that  all  was 
arranged  without  troubling  himself  to  put  the  arrange- 
ment in  writing  and  get  it  signed.  It  was  when  the 


FAILURE  OF  MARRIAGE  NEGOTIATIONS          135 

signature  was  required  that  difficulties  arose.  King 
Gustavus  IV  wished  to  limit  the  liberty  which  the 
Russian  princess  who  was  to  be  his  queen  should 
enjoy  in  following  the  rites  of  her  religion.  The 
Swedes,  who  are  staunch  Protestants,  had  made 
objections  on  this  subject,  but  Count  Markoff  took  no 
notice,  and  proceeded  to  act  as  if  the  matter  had 
already  been  decided,  thinking  that  the  Swedes  would 
not  dare  to  withdraw  at  the  last  moment,  and  that 
the  Grand-Duchess's  beauty  would  succeed  where  the 
ability  of  the  Russian  Ministers  had  failed.  But  he 
was  wrong  in  his  calculations.  The  young  King  was 
the  most  zealous  Protestant  in  his  kingdom,  and  he 
would  never  consent  to  his  wife  having  a  public  Russian 
chapel  at  Stockholm.  His  Ministers,  his  Councillors, 
and  the  Regent  himself,  fearing  the  consequences  of 
an  affront  to  the  Empress,  pressed  him  to  yield  or  to 
seek  a  compromise,  but  in  vain.  Instead  of  inclining 
to  the  Russian  demands,  Gustavus  IV,  in  the  pro- 
longed conversations  which  he  had  with  the  Grand- 

o 

Duchess,  strove  to  convert  her,  and  almost  made  her 
promise  that  she  would  adopt  the  religion  of  her 
husband  and  of  the  country  in  which  she  was  to 
reside. 

The  King  obstinately  rejected  all  the  proposals 
which  Count  Markoff  made  to  him  with  the  view  of 
overcoming  the  difficulty  ;  he  was  told  in  vain  that 
he  would  expose  himself  to  a  war  with  Russia,  if  after 
having  gone  so  far,  he  broke  off  the  marriage  just 
as  it  was  about  to  be  concluded.  All  was  useless — 
even  the  fixing  of  the  day,  the  presence  of  Catherine 
in  her  Imperial  robes,  and  the  convocation  of  the 


136      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

clergy  and  the  whole  Court,  failed  to  move  the  Swedish 
King. 

The  young  sovereign's  obstinacy  at  first  made 
the  Swedes  anxious,  then  frightened  them,  but  finally 
pleased  them ;  they  were  proud  at  their  King  having 
shown  so  much  character.  As  for  the  Russians,  all 
the  excitement  produced  by  the  appearance  of  the 
King  of  Sweden  in  their  capital  was  changed  into 
a  sombre  silence  of  disappointment  and  vexation. 
The  next  day  was  the  birthday  of  one  of  the  little 
Grand-Duchesses  (afterwards  the  Queen  of  Holland), 
and  there  was  a  Court  ball  in  honour  of  the  occasion. 
The  Empress  appeared  with  her  eternal  smile,  but 
her  eyes  had  a  sombre  expression  of  sadness  and 
anger ;  people  admired  the  impassive  dignity  with 
which  she  received  her  guests.  The  King  of  Sweden 
and  his  suite  showed  constraint,  but  not  embarrass- 
ment ;  there  was  a  stiffness  of  manner  both  on  their 
part  and  on  that  of  the  Euipress  which  communicated 
itself  to  the  whole  company.  The  Grand-Duke  Paul 
expressed  great  irritation,  though  I  suspect  he  was  not 
really  displeased  at  the  blunder  made  by  the  Cabinet. 
As  for  Alexander,  he  was  indignant  at  the  insult 
which  had  been  offered  to  his  sister,  but  cast  the 
blame  of  it  on  Count  Markoff ;  and  the  Empress  was 
very  glad  to  see  her  grandson  share  her  indignation. 

The  Swedish  cloaks  and  plumes  seemed  no  longer 
to  float  in  the  air  with  the  same  grace  as  before  and 
shared  in  the  general  constraint ;  they  were  no  longer 
the  fashion.  Some  minuets  were  danced  with  even 
more  gravity  than  usual.  My  brother  was  one  of 
the  dancers,  and  he  acquitted  himself  very  well. 


DEATH  OF  CATHERINE  137 

Two  days  after  the  King  left  with  his  suite,  and  St 
Petersburg  remained  gloomy  and  silent.  People 
were  astounded  at  what  had  happened  ;  they  could 
not  believe  that  a  '  little  kinglet '  should  thus  dare 
to  insult  the  Sovereign  of  all  the  Russias.  What 
would  she  do  now  ?  It  was  impossible  for  Catherine 
II  to  pocket  the  affront  and  not  take  her  revenge. 
So  at  least  people  said.  As  for  the  Court,  the 
Grand-Duke  Paul  was  at  Gatchina,  while  the  Empress 
remained  in  her  apartments  ;  and  it  was  thought  that 
she  was  preparing  some  resolute  step  which  would 
make  the  King  of  Sweden  repent  his  obstinacy.  But 
it  was  Catherine  herself  that  succumbed. 

It  was  November ;  the  weather  was  cold  and 
foggy,  and  harmonised  with  the  appearance  of  the 
Court  and  the  Winter  Palace  after  the  fetes  which 
had  animated  them.  Alexander  continued  his  walks 
on  the  quays,  and  one  day  he  met  my  brother.  After 
having  walked  for  some  time,  they  stopped  at  the 
door  of  the  lodgings  where  we  lived.  I  had  just  come 
down  and  we  were  talking  together,  when  a  footman 
of  the  Court  who  was  looking  for  Alexander  came  to 
tell  him  that  Count  Soltykoff  wished  to  see  him  as 
soon  as  possible.  Alexander  immediately  followed 
the  man,  not  guessing  the  cause  of  this  urgent 
message. 

The  Empress  had  had  an  apoplectic  stroke.  Her 
feet  had  for  sometime  been  much  swollen,  and  she  had 
not  done  anything  that  her  physicians  had  prescribed, 
but  had  taken  some  quack  remedies  which  her 
chambermaids  had  recommended  to  her.  The  humi- 
liation inflicted  upon  her  by  the  King  of  Sweden 


138       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

was  too  hard  a  blow  to  her  pride,  and  it  may  be  said 
that  Gustavus  IV  shortened  her  life  by  several  years. 
She  got  up  the  same  day,  to  all  appearance  in  good 
health,  and  remained  in  her  dressing-room  longer  than 
usual.  The  valet  in  waiting,  not  seeing  her  returning, 
went  to  the  door,  and  opening  it  softly  saw  the 
Empress  lying  unconscious.  When  Zuboff  came,  she 
opened  her  eyes,  placed  her  hand  on  her  heart  with 
an  expression  of  extreme  pain,  and  then  shut  them  for 
ever.  This  was  the  only  and  the  last  sign  of  life 
and  consciousness  which  she  gave.  The  physicians 
hastened  to  the  room  and  for  three  days  used  all  the 
resources  of  their  science,  but  in  vain. 

Next  day  the  news  of  the  Empress's  fatal  illness 
spread  in  the  town.  Those  who  had  the  entry  to  the 
Court  went  there  with  a  feeling  of  terror,  of  anxiety, 
and  of  doubt  as  to  the  future.  Both  the  town  and 
the  Court  were  in  the  greatest  confusion.  Most  of 
those  who  were  present  in  the  room  expressed  sincere 
grief;  the  pale  and  distorted  features  of  many  be- 
trayed a  fear  of  losing  the  position  they  enjoyed  and 
perhaps  of  being  obliged  to  render  an  account  of  their 
administration.  My  brother  and  myself  were  among 
the  spectators  of  this  scene  of  regret  and  of  terror. 
Zuboff,  with  his  hair  dishevelled  and  an  air  of  conster- 
nation on  his  face,  attracted  all  eyes.  Both  himself 
and  all  those  whose  fortunes  he  had  made  were 
naturally  in  despair.  At  one  time  he  was  busy 
burning  papers  which  might  have  compromised  him;  at 
others  he  came  to  see  if  the  remedies  tried  by  the 
physicians  gave  any  hope.  All  was  disorder,  and 
etiquette  was  abandoned. 


DEATH  OF  CATHERINE  139 

We  entered  the  room  where  the  Empress  was 
lying  on  the  ground  on  mattresses,  lifeless,  like  a 
machine  whose  movement  has  ceased. 

When  Zuboff  learnt  from  the  physicians  that 
there  was  no  longer  any  hope  or  possibility  of  her 
reviving,  he  sent  his  brother,  after  destroying  a 
number  of  papers,  to  the  Emperor  Paul  at  Gatchina 
to  inform  him  of  his  mother's  death.  Although  Paul 
had  for  some  time  thought  of  the  chances  of  this 
event  soon  occurring,  he  was  thunderstruck,  and 
arrived  at  St  Petersburg  much  troubled  with  the 
uncertainty  of  what  was  awaiting  him,  and  doubting 
whether  his  mother  would  not  recover  after  all.  So 
long  as  her  body  moved,  although  she  had  completely 
lost  consciousness,  Paul  did  not  make  use  of  the 
power  which  had  already  accrued  to  him,  and 
remained  concealed  in  his  mother's  room,  or  in  his 
own  apartments.  He  came  with  the  whole  of  his 
family  to  see  the  lifeless  body,  and  repeated  this 
lugubrious  visit  twice  a  day. 


CHAPTER  IX 

1796-1798 

ACCESSION    OF    PAUL    I. HIS    CHARACTER. ARRIVAL    OF    KING    STANIS- 
LAS    AUGUSTUS. THE     EMPEROR'S     CORONATION     AT     MOSCOW. A 

POLISH    ENVOY     TO    ENGLAND. PRINCE    ADAM'S     RELATIONS     WITH 

ALEXANDER. COUNT    STROGONOFF     AND     M.    DE    NOVOSILTZOFF.— 

PROPOSED     ANNEXATION     OF     GALICIA     TO     HUNGARY. DEATH    OF 

STANISLAS  AUGUSTUS. PRINCE  VOLKONSKY. PRINCE  GALITZIN. — 

AN    IMPERIAL    PROGRESS     TO     KAZAN. A    PALACE     PLOT. RUSSIA, 

ENGLAND,       AND       MALTA. — PITT      AND       ROSTOPCHIN. EUROPEAN 

COALITION   AGAINST    FRANCE. 

NEVER  was  there  any  change  of  scene  at  a  theatre  so 
sudden  and  so  complete  as  the  change  of  affairs  at 
the  accession  of  Paul  I.  In  less  than  a  day  costumes, 
manners,  occupations,  all  were  altered.  Under 
Catherine  we  had  worn  our  collars  so  high  as  to  cover 
the  lower  part  of  the  face  ;  we  now  had  to  wear  them 
narrow  and  turned  down,  showing  thin  necks  and 
prominent  jaws  which  until  then  had  remained  unseen. 
The  hair  was  dressed  en  pigeon  in  the  Parisian 
fashion  ;  it  was  worn  flat  and  long  behind,  with  two 
very  stiff  curls  above  the  ears,  and  a  pigtail,  all  well 
pomatumed  and  powdered.  Hitherto  the  dandies  had 
endeavoured  to  give  a  more  graceful  cut  to  their 
uniforms,  which  they  often  wore  unbuttoned,  while 
now  the  Prussian  uniform  of  Frederick  the  Great, 


ACCESSION  OF  PAUL  I  141 

already  used  by  the  troops  of  Gatchina,  was  adopted 
for  the  army  generally.  The  military  parade  became 
the  chief  occupation  of  each  day  ;  it  was  then  that 
the  most  important  events  occurred,  making  the 
Emperor  either  indulgent  and  lavish  of  his  favours, 
or  severe  and  even  terrible,  for  the  rest  of  the 
day. 

Soon  the  little  army  of  Gatchina  made  its  solemn 
entry  into  St  Petersburg.  It  was  to  be  a  model  for 
the  Guards  and  the  whole  Russian  army.  The  Grand- 
Dukes  were  much  agitated,  for  they  had  been  ordered 
to  place  themselves  at  the  head  of  these  troops  and 
take  them  to  the  capital.  They  had  to  appear  before 
a  public  which  had  hitherto  been  ill-disposed,  and, 
which  was  more  difficult,  to  give  satisfaction  to  the 
Emperor.  But  all  went  off  well.  The  Gatchina 
troops  were  placed  in  battle  array  on  the  great 
square  of  the  Winter  Palace,  in  the  midst  of  a  timid 
crowd  astounded  at  the  sight  of  soldiers  entirely 
different  from  those  it  had  been  accustomed  to  see. 
The  troops  defiled  in  good  order  before  the  Emperor, 
who  expressed  to  his  sons  his  satisfaction  at  the 
manner  in  which  they  had  carried  out  this  first 
manifestation  of  his  rule.  They  were  much  pleased 
at  the  Emperor's  words,  and  the  new  comers  were  at 
first  quartered  on  the  inhabitants,  who  hastened  to 
give  them  a  friendly  reception.  In  the  evening 
grenadiers  with  pointed  hats  like  Prussians,  whose 
hosts  had  freely  treated  them  with  wine  and  brandy, 
were  to  be  seen  staggering  about  dead  drunk  in  the 
streets. 

During  the  long  years  of  his  retirement  Paul  had 


1 4 2       ^fE^fOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADA ^f  CZA RTOR YSKI 

planned  out  everything  he  proposed  to  do  directly 
he  should  come  into  power.  Changes  and  novelties 
accordingly  succeeded  each  other  with  extraordinary 
rapidity.  The  men  of  Gatchina  were  divided  among 
the  three  regiments  of  foot  guards  and  the  regiment 
of  horse  guards.  The  regiment  of  cavalier  guards 
was  supplied  with  silver  helmets  and  cuirasses  which 
were  manufactured  for  the  occasion,  as  these  articles 
of  uniform  had  ceased  to  be  worn  in  the  Russian 
army.  The  officers  of  Gatchina  were  all  promoted, 
and  one  soon  saw  old  soldiers  and  courtly  officers  of 
the  Guards  obliged  either  to  retire  or  to  obey  the 
commands  of  ill-bred  braggarts,  whose  names  they 
had  never  mentioned  except  to  laugh  at  them. 

In  the  midst  of  all  that  was  eccentric  and  ridicu- 
lous about  the  first  acts  of  Paul's  reign,  there  was  an 
element  of  seriousness  and  justice  ;  thus  the  Emperor 
ordered  the  young  courtiers  to  choose  some  career 
and  devote  themselves  to  it.  No  one  was  allowed  to 
join  the  Guards  as  an  amateur;  and  the  service  became 
so  severe  that  most  young  men  preferred  a  civil 
career. 

Scarcely  had  Paul  come  into  power  when  his 
first  thought  was  to  render  a  striking  act  of  homage 
to  the  memory  of  his  father,  and  at  the  same  time  a 
sort  of  verdict  upon  those  who  were  guilty  of  his 
death.  During  the  first  few  days  after  the  death  of 
the  Empress  and  the  time  necessary  for  embalming 
her  body,  the  whole  of  the  Court,  including  ladies  and 
high  functionaries  of  State,  were  ordered  to  watch 
by  the  body  day  and  night  in  the  Imperial  apart- 
ments, and  soon  after  the  Emperor  directed  that  his 


ACCESSION  OF  PAUL  I  143 

father's  remains  should  be  exhumed  and  carried  in 
ceremony  from  the  Nevski  convent  to  the  Winter 
Palace  to  be  deposited  by  the  side  of  Catherine.  There 
were  still  living  three  or  four  of  those  who  had  been 
accused  of  complicity  in  the  murder  of  Peter  III. 
They  were  at  that  time  privates  or  sub-officers  in  the 
Guards ;  they  were  now  great  nobles  with  large 
incomes.  Among  them  was  the  Court-Marshal, 
Prince  Bariatynski,  who  was  disliked  because  he  was 
rude,  ill-bred,  and  ill-tempered,  and  Passeyk,  Gover- 
nor-General of  White  Russia,  who  was  the  Empress's 
aide-de-camp.  There  were  very  few  who  possessed 
this  title,  and  it  gave  very  high  rank  and  great 
privileges.  When  the  Imperial  aide-de-camp  was 
present  he  alone  held  a  cane,  commanded  at  the 
palace,  and  watched  over  the  safety  of  his  sovereign. 
Passeyk  disappeared  on  the  day  of  Catherine's  death, 
and  Prince  Bariatynski  almost  died  of  fear.  He  and 
some  of  his  accomplices  were  forced  to  watch  at  the 
coffin  of  Peter  III  and  follow  his  body  in  the  funeral 
procession.  Count  Alexis  Orloff,  one  of  the  principal 
assassins  of  the  late  Emperor,  was  the  only  one  who 
walked  with  a  firm  step  and  a  countenance  apparently 
tranquil. 

The  Emperor  Paul  had  the  two  coffins  placed 
together  on  a  bier,  where  they  were  exposed  (that  of 
Catherine  was  open)  to  the  sight  of  the  crowd.  The 
high  functionaries  and  ladies  of  the  Court  continued 
their  service  by  the  side  of  the  bodies  night  and  day 
for  six  weeks  ;  this  gave  rise  to  singular  meetings, 
and  created  friendly  relations  among  people  who  had 
previously  been  almost  strangers.  Others,  after  pass- 


1.14       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

ing  twenty-four  hours  together  at  a  stretch,  arid  find- 
ing each  other  amiable  and  pleasant  companions,  never 
saw  their  fellow-watchers  again. 

The  burial  of  Peter  and  Catherine  took  place  six 
weeks  after  ;  they  were  interred  in  the  same  vault  of 
the  Nevski  convent.  All  the  troops  of  the  garrison  of 
St  Petersburg  and  of  its  neighbourhood  accompanied 
the  procession,  and  all  who  belonged  to  the  Court  or 
Government  went  on  foot  to  the  convent,  which  is 
at  the  other  end  of  the  town.  Neither  the  men  nor 
the  women  were  allowed  to  wear  powder,  and  as  they 
had  not  altered  their  way  of  dressing  the  hair,  this 
was  very  unbecoming.  Mourning  was  strictly  pre- 
scribed and  observed ;  and  as  the  funeral  procession 
was  extremely  long,  the  ceremony  lasted  a  whole 
day. 

The  Emperor  kept  the  apartments  at  the  Winter 
Palace  which  he  had  occupied  when  he  was  Grand- 
Duke.  The  waiting-room  was  usually  filled  by  those 
who  were  admitted  to  his  presence.  People  some- 
times passed  the  whole  day  there,  and  went  as  if  to  a 
diverting  entertainment.  There  was  incessant  agita- 
tion and  excitement  :  footmen  and  aides-de-camp  in 
thick  boots  ran  about  knocking  against  each  other, 
some  carrying  the  Emperor's  orders,  others  looking 
for  some  one  they  were  sent  to  summon  to  his  pre- 
sence. Those  who  were  called  ran  up  breathless,  not 
knowing  what  was  to  be  their  fate  ;  many  entered 
the  room  and  left  it  immediately  after  with  radiant 
faces  and  a  red  or  blue  sash  across  their  chests.  One 
of  those  whom  I  saw  coming  out  of  the  room  was 
Count  Nicholas  Zuboff,  appointed  Grand-Equerry 


ACCESSION  OF  PAUL  I  145 

and  decorated   with   a  blue  ribbon  for   having  been 

o 

the  first  to  bring  Paul  the  news  of  his  accession. 
Changes  were  occurring  daily.  Nearly  all  that 
had  been  great  and  distinguished  under  Catherine 
became  neglected  and  insignificant  under  Paul.  New 
persons  were  constantly  coming  forward  and  being 
advanced  with  extraordinary  rapidity,  and  almost  all 
the  Ministers  were  changed. 

Plato  Zuboff,  who  looked  like  a  dethroned 
sovereign,  went  to  his  estates  in  Lithuania,  a  vast 
domain  which  Catherine  had  given  him  (arid  the 
desire  to  acquire  which  was  one  of  the  causes  of  the 
two  last  partitions  of  Poland),  sufficient  to  furnish 
him  with  ample  means  to  defray  the  expense  of  his 
travels.  He  visited  several  towns  in  Germany. 
Some  women  of  ready  wit  and  easy  virtue  made  him 
lose  that  air  of  languid  dignity  which  he  usually  wore. 
He  recognised  the  advantages  of  an  independent 
existence,  but  soon  his  ambition  and  vanity,  leading 
him  to  believe  that  he  was  destined  still  to  play  a 
great  part,  brought  him  back  to  St  Petersburg,  and 
rendered  him  more  guilty  and  unfortunate  than  he 
had  ever  been  before. 

The  only  one  of  Catherine's  Ministers  whom  Paul 
adopted  was  Count  Bezborodko ;  this  was  because  of 
his  remarkable  talents,  his  high  reputation,  and  per- 
haps also  because  he  had  neglected  Zuboff  when  he 
was  at  the  height  of  his  favour  with  the  Empress. 
Paul  felt  that  while  he  was  still  inexperienced  in  the 
art  of  government  he  needed  Bezborodko's  services, 
and  he  loaded  him  with  distinctions  of  all  kinds.  He 
made  him  a  prince,  consulted  him  when  he  wanted  to 

VOL.  I.  K 


146       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

carry  out  some  of  his  hobbies,  and  doubled  his 
property  by  grants  of  land  and  of  considerable  sums 
in  cash. 

The  Emperor's  choice  of  his  Ministers  was  always 
directed  by  one  dominant  idea— that  of  surrounding 
himself  with  servants  on  whom  he  could  entirely 
rely ;  for  from  the  moment  of  his  accession  he  fore- 
saw and  dreaded  a  Palace  revolution.  He  raised  to 
the  highest  positions  persons  who  were  quite  insig- 
nificant and  often  the  least  capable  of  performing 
their  new  duties.  They  were  chiefly  taken  from 
among  those  (or  their  descendants  or  relations),  whom 
he  had  employed  at  Gatchina,  and  who  had  given 
proofs  of  fidelity  to  his  father.  He  persecuted  and 
dismissed  those  who  had  been  in  favour  with  his 
mother ;  this  alone  made  him  suspect  them.  The 
fear  of  treason  was  continually  present  to  his  mind 
during  the  whole  of  his  reign.  He  erred  in  the 
selection,  and  especially  in  the  extent,  of  the  means 
which  he  employed  to  save  his  life  and  his  "power ; 
they  only  precipitated  his  deplorable  end.  Among 
the  men  whom  he  suspected,  he  persecuted  some 
with  implacable  rigour,  while  he  retained  others  at 
their  posts  and  endeavoured  to  secure  their  fidelity 
by  presents ;  this,  however,  only  made  them  ungrate- 
ful. Never  was  there  a  sovereign  more  terrible  in 
his  severity,  or  more  liberal  when  he  was  in  a  gener- 
ous mood.  But  there  was  no  certainty  in  his  favour. 
A  single  word  uttered  intentionally  or  by  accident 
in  a  conversation,  the  shadow  of  a  suspicion,  sufficed 
to  make  him  persecute  those  whom  he  had  protected. 
The  greatest  favourites  of  to-day  feared  to  be  driven 


PAUL'S  CHARACTER  147 

from  Court  on  the  morrow,  and  banished  to  a  distant 
province.  Yet  the  Emperor  wished  to  be  just. 
Notwithstanding  his  capricious  and  disorderly  im- 
pulses, he  had  a  profound  feeling  of  equity,  which 
often  caused  him  to  perform  praiseworthy  actions. 
It  often  happened  that  after  he  had  dismissed  some 
one  whom  he  had  badly  treated,  he  called  him  back, 
embraced  him,  almost  asked  his  pardon,  confessed 
that  he  was  wrong,  that  he  had  unjustly  suspected 
him,  and  gave  him  presents  to  make  up  for  his  past 
severities.  He  inspired  all  the  officials  of  his  empire 
with  the  terrors  which  he  often  felt  himself,  and  this 
universal  fear  produced  salutary  effects.  While  at 
St  Petersburg  and  at  the  centre  of  Government  the 
uncertainty  of  the  morrow  tormented  and  agitated 
people's  minds,  in  the  provinces,  the  civil  governors, 
the  governors-general,  and  the  troops,  fearing  lest  the 
abuses  they  committed  should  reach  the  Emperor's 
ears,  and  they  should  some  day  be  suddenly  dismissed 
without  any  form  of  trial  and  banished  to  Siberia, 
paid  more  attention  to  their  duties,  treated  their 
subordinates  with  more  humanity,  and  refrained  from 
abuses  of  a  flagrant  kind.  In  the  Polish  Provinces 
especially  the  inhabitants  felt  the  change,  and  the 
reign  of  Paul  is  still  mentioned  there  as  a  period 
when  there  were  less  abuses  and  acts  of  oppression  and 
injustice  than  at  any  other  time  when  Poland  was 
under  foreign  rule. 

One  of  Paul's  first  and  most  generous  thoughts 
after  his  accession,  was  to  liberate  the  Polish  prisoners. 
Like  his  father,  when  he  visited  Ivan  VI  in  his  prison, 
Paul  went  himself  to  Kosciuszko  and  ordered  him  to  be 


148      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

treated  with  the  greatest  consideration,  telling  him 
that  if  he  had  been  on  the  throne  at  the  time,  he 
would  not  have  consented  to  the  partition  of  Poland, 
and  that  he  regretted  that  so  unjust  and  impolitic  a 
deed  had  been  committed  ;  but  that  it  was  not  now 
in  his  power  to  withdraw  it.  At  Kosciuszko's  request 
he  liberated  all  the  other  prisoners,  only  requiring 
them  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance.  Whenever  Paul 
did  not  grant  a  request  made  by  Kosciuszko  on  behalf 
of  his  countrymen,  he  excused  himself  by  alleging 
that  he  was  obliged  to  pay  attention  to  the  represen- 
tations of  his  Ministers,  who  prevented  him  from 
following  his  inclination  in  this  respect.  Kosciuszko, 
oppressed  by  a  feeling  of  sadness,  covered  with  wounds 
which  were  not  yet  healed,  and  bearing  on  his  face  an 
expression  of  despair,  of  touching  resignation,  almost 
of  remorse  at  being  still  alive  and  having  failed  to 
save  his  country,  greatly  interested  the  Emperor  and 
did  not  inspire  him  with  the  least  fear  or  suspicion. 
He  often  used  to  visit  Kosciuszko,  accompanied  by 
the  whole  of  the  Imperial  family,  which  showed  real 
interest  and  almost  affection  for  the  unfortunate 
patriot.  Alexander  no  doubt  felt  these  generous 
sentiments  more  than  anybody,  but  his  duties  at  that 
time  entirely  absorbed  him,  so  that  at  first  I  could 
hardly  see  him.  Since  Paul's  accession  our  relations 
had  become  more  rare  and  more  difficult,  and  his 
extreme  fear  of  his  father  prevented  him  from 
expressing  on  his  own  account  to  Kosciuszko  what  he 
had  long  felt  with  regard  to  him. 

We  were  each    called   to  the   palace  to  sign  an 
assurance  that  Marshal  Potocki  would  not  enter  on 


PAUL'S  CHARACTER  149 

any  enterprise  prejudicial  to  the  State,  and  to  be 
guarantees  for  his  conduct  at  our  own  risk.  This 
obligation  had  to  be  expressed  clearly  and  precisely  in 
writing.  The  meeting  was  a  numerous  one.  Prince 
Kourakin,  the  new  Vice -Chancellor,  was  present,  and 
was  directed  to  see  that  each  document  clearly  ex- 
pressed the  obligations  undertaken  by  the  signer  of  it. 
My  brother  and  I  signed  without  hesitation ;  we  had 
long  felt  too  much  esteem  and  family  attachment  for 
the  Marshal  to  hesitate  to  give  this  general  assurance 
which  alone  could  restore  him  to  liberty.  Some 
raised  difficulties,  others  went  away  directly  they 
learnt  the  object  of  the  meeting.  Among  the  latter 
was  Count  Irenoeus  Chreptowicz,  the  son  of  the 
Chancellor  of  that  name  who  had  done  the  most  to 
induce  King  Stanislas  Augustus  to  join  the  Con- 
federation of  Targowitza,*  and  who  soon  became 
entirely  Russian.  The  number  of  signatures,  how- 
ever, was  sufficiently  large  to  induce  the  Emperor  to 
liberate  Count  Potocki. 

One  may  imagine  how  happy  the  prisoners  were 
to  see  each  other  again  after  so  long  and  painful  a 
confinement,  though  their  happiness  was  mingled 
with  regret.  The  most  illustrious  members  of  the 
Grand  Diet  of  l788-92t  were  assembled  there  :  Count 
Potocki,  Count  Thaddeus  Mostowski,  Julian  Niem- 
cewicz ;  Zakrzewski,  mayor  of  Warsaw,  known  by 
his  integrity,  his  patriotism,  and  his  great  courage  ; 
General  Sokolnicki,  who  voluntarily  went  to  prison 
with  him,  not  wishing  to  leave  him ;  and  Kilinski  and 

*  See  page  84. 

t  The   Diet  which  passed  the  famous  Constitution   of  the   3rd   of  May   1791 
(see  page  52). 


150      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Kapostasz,  worthy  citizens  of  Warsaw,  the  first  a 
master  bootmaker,  and  the  second  a  money-changer, 
who  exercised  great  influence  over  the  population  of 
that  city.  We  saw  them  every  day.  After  having 
had  the  happiness  of  being  liberated  from  prison  and 
of  seeing  each  other,  they  had  to  disperse  in  different 
directions.  The  Emperor  lavished  presents  of  money 
on  Kosciuszko  to  make  him  independent,  and  the 
latter  was  obliged  to  accept  them.  When  he  arrived 
in  America,  however,  he  sent  them  back  with  a 
letter  expressing  his  gratitude  and  that  of  the  other 
prisoners. 

On  Twelfth-day,  one  of  the  most  solemn  festivals 
of  the  Russian  Church,  there  was  a  great  military 
parade  in  the  Russian  fashion,  and  the  Emperor 
wished  the  day  to  be  celebrated  with  all  possible 
pomp.  The  Guards  and  all  the  regiments  in  the 
neighbourhood  were  posted  on  the  banks  of  the  Neva, 
between  the  Winter  Palace  and  the  Admiralty.  The 
Imperial  family  alighted  there,  and  the  Emperor  took 
the  command  of  the  troops  in  person  ;  he  liked  to 
put  himself  forward  on  these  occasions.  He  defiled 
at  the  head  of  the  army  together  with  the  Grand- 
Dukes  before  the  Empress  and  the  Princesses.  I 
thought  this  inarch  past  would  never  end.  The  cold 
was  intense,  and  we  were  in  Court  dress,  with  silk 
stockings ;  although  we  wore  warm  coats,  we  were 
almost  frozen.  My  arms  and  legs  were  numbed,  and 
I  and  several  others,  feeling  that  our  lives  were  in 
danger,  stamped  our  feet  and  moved  our  arms  about 
to  keep  up  the  circulation.  I  could  not  stand  this 
martyrdom,  and  went  home,  where  it  took  me  some 


ARRIVAL  OF  KING  STANISLAS  AUGUSTUS        151 

hours  to  get  warm.     My  fingers  have  since  that  day 
lost  all  feeling  whenever  there  was  the  slightest  cold. 

Our  King,  Stanislas  Augustus,  with  whom  we  had 
dined  during  our  six  months'  stay  at  Grodno,  was 
invited  by  Paul  immediately  after  his  accession  to 
come  to  St  Petersburg.  During  Paul's  journey 
abroad  (in  1785  I  think)  with  his  wife,  they  had 
passed  through  Southern  Poland,  and  King  Stanislas 
Augustus  had  left  Warsaw  to  meet  them.  The 
principal  reception  took  place  in  the  Palace  of 
Wisznioviec,  which  belonged  to  Count  Mniszek, 
Grand  Marshal  of  the  Crown.  This  palace  was  a 
princely  abode  that  had  belonged  to  the  Wiszniowiecki 
family,  now  extinct,  whose  last  heir  had  married  a 
Mniszek,  the  descendant  of  the  one  whose  daughter 
was  for  some  time  seated  on  the  throne  of  the  Russian 
Czars.*  The  apartments  of  the  palace  were  full  of 
valuable  historical  portraits.  Among  them  was  that 
of  the  famous  Marina  and  of  Dirnitri ;  there  were 
also  pictures  representing  their  consecration  at 
Moscow. 

It  was  in  this  beautiful  palace  that  the  King  of 
Poland  welcomed  the  Grand-Duke  of  Russia  to  his 
kingdom.  Stanislas  Augustus  had  the  gift  of 
amiability,  and  Paul  took  a  liking  to  him  ;  he  also 
made  himself  agreeable  to  the  Grand-Duchess  Maria. 
They  had  several  confidential  interviews,  at  which 
perhaps  promises,  or  at  least  hopes,  which  were  never 
realised,  were  expressed  that  when  Paul  should  come 
into  power,  he  would  repay  to  his  host  a  hundredfold 
the  splendid  reception  given  him  in  Poland.  It  is 

*  Marina  Mniszek,  married  to  '  the  false '  Dimitri  18  May  1603. 


i52       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

said  that  Marshal  Mniszek  at  that  time  hoped  that 
the  goodwill  of  Catherine's  successor  might  one  day 
bring  them  even  to  the  throne,  to  which  he  might 
perhaps  have  thought  he  had  a  claim  as  the  heir  of 
Wiszniowiecki  *  and  the  descendant  of  the  father  of 
the  celebrated  Czarina.  The  story  goes  that  in  the 
course  of  a  familiar  conversation  with  him  the  Grand- 
Duchess,  showing  her  diamonds  to  make  her  hosts 
remark  the  beauty  of  a  diadem  in  precious  stones 
which  was  in  her  jewel-box,  placed  it  on  the  head  of 
the  King's  niece,  and  then  on  that  of  the  Grand 
Marshal.  '  I  accept  the  augury,'  said  the  latter, 
carried  away  by  an  impulse  of  naivete  or  of  empty 
vanity  which  he  probably  regretted  immediately 
afterwards. 

By  inviting  to  his  Court  the  prisoner-King  from 
his  confinement  at  Grodno— an  invitation  in  which  the 
Empress  Maria  heartily  concurred — Paul  made  some 
return  for  the  hospitality  he  had  received,  and  gladly 
found  an  opportunity  of  showing  himself  more  gener- 
ous than  his  mother  had  been.  The  King  was 
received  at  St  Petersburg  with  all  the  honours  due  to 
a  sovereign.  On  approaching  the  capital  he  was  met 
by  chamberlains  and  other  high  dignitaries,  who  compli- 
mented him  on  behalf  of  the  Emperor  and  the  mem- 
bers of  the  Imperial  family.  Paul  offered  him  one  of 
his  palaces,  furnished  it  magnificently,  and  did  all  he 
could  to  make  the  King's  stay  at  St  Petersburg 
agreeable.  There  were  mutual  receptions  and  ban- 
quets, and  at  first  no  cloud  obscured  the  friendly 
relations  which  seemed  to  be  a  continuation  of  those 

*  Michael  Wiszniowiecki,  King  of  Poland  from  1069  to  1C75. 


ARRIVAL  OF  KING  STANISLAS  AUGUSTUS        153 

of  Wiszniowiec  ;  but  there  was  no  talk  of  Stanislas 
returning  to  his  kingdom,  except  perhaps  that  the 
Emperor  told  him,  as  he  had  done  to  Kosciuszko, 
that  it  was  impossible  to  undo  what  had  been  done, 
however  unjustly,  by  the  Empress  Catherine. 

The  first  years  of  Paul's  reign  were  marked  by  a 
curious  confusion  ;  they  were  a  series  of  moving 
incidents  and  of  singular  and  ridiculous  scenes,  which 
seemed  to  foreshadow  the  reversal  of  the  existing 
state  of  things  arid  the  establishment  of  a  new  one,  not 
radically,  but  only  in  outward  form.  The  civil  officials 
and  generals  were  constantly  changed,  and  promotion 
was  given  without  any  enquiry  as  to  the  capacity  of 
those  whom  seniority  placed  in  ranks  to  which  they 
had  never  hoped  to  attain. 

The  Emperor's  only  consideration  in  the  decisions 
he  gave,  was  that  his  will,  although  the  fruit  of  im- 
pulse and  not  of  reflection,  should  at  once  be  executed. 
The  terror  which  he  inspired  ensured  submission  to 
his  most  unexpected  and  most  eccentric  commands. 
The  parades  daily  gave  rise  to  singular  and  provoking 
incidents.  Generals  and  other  officers  of  rank  received 
for  mere  trifles,  degradations  or  distinctions  which 
only  unpardonable  faults  or  great  services  to  the  State 
could  have  justified. 

Paul  had  forbidden  round  hats,  which  he  regarded 
as  a  sign  of  liberalism.  If  a  poor  man,  with  an  old 
round  hat  on  his  head,  showed  himself  in  the  crowd 
which  witnessed  the  parades,  an  aide-de-camp  imme- 
diately pursued  the  culprit,  who  fled  to  avoid  being 
bastinadoed  at  the  first  guard-house.  The  chase  was 
often  continued  in  the  streets,  to  the  great  amuse- 


154       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

ment   of  the   people,   who   hoped   the   unhappy   man 
would  succeed  in  making  his  escape. 

Lord  Whitworth,  the  British  Ambassador,  was 
obliged  to  have  a  hat  of  peculiar  shape  made  for  him, 
so  as  to  be  able  to  walk  about  in  the  morning  without 

O 

contravening  the  Emperor's  orders. 

Paul  drove  through  the  town  daily  in  a  sledge 
or  an  open  carriage,  accompanied  by  one  of  his  aides- 
de-camp.  When  he  met  a  carriage  it  stopped,  the 
coachman  and  footmen  had  to  take  off  their  caps, 
and  the  persons  in  the  carriage  had  to  alight  and 
make  a  profound  bow  to  the  Emperor,  who  observed 
whether  it  was  sufficiently  respectful.  Sometimes 
women,  with  their  children  trembling  with  fright, 
were  seen  descending  into  the  snow  in  a  hard  frost, 
or  into  the  mud  during  a  thaw,  to  accomplish  this 
salutation.  Paul  always  thought  that  people  wished 
to  slight  him  as  they  did  when  he  was  Grand-Duke ; 
he  liked  everywhere  to  meet  with  marks  of  fear  and 
submission.  When  people  went  out  into  the  streets 
in  carriages  or  on  foot,  all  took  care  to  avoid  meeting 
their  Imperial  master ;  they  fled  at  his  approach  and 
went  down  a  side  street  or  hid  under  a  gateway. 
Another  dangerous  person  to  meet  was  the  terrible 
Archaroff,  Grand-Master  of  Police,  who  also  drove 
through  the  town  to  see  that  everything  was  being 
done  according  to  his  orders.  He  prohibited  rapid 
driving  in  sledges,  which  is  one  of  the  greatest 
pleasures  of  a  Russian  ;  and  when  he  perceived  a 
sledge  which  seemed  to  go  at  a  forbidden  pace  he 
at  once  ordered  it  to  be  seized,  had  the  coachman 
flogged,  and  then  appropriated  both  sledge  and  coach- 


COURT  ETIQUETTE  155 

man  to  his  own  use  for  any  period  he  pleased,  while 
the  occupant  of  the  sledge  had  to  walk  home.  This 
once  happened  to  my  brother.  He  had  driven  out 
in  a  sledge  and  met  the  Emperor,  upon  which  he 
at  once  jumped  to  the  ground.  As  he  passed,  Paul 
cried  out  to  him,  'You  might  have  broken  your  neck.' 
On  his  return,  M.  Archaroff  sent  by  the  Emperor's 
orders  for  my  brother's  horses  and  his  sledge,  and 
used  them  for  a  week,  after  which  he  returned  them. 

Both  at  Court  and  at  parade  the  Emperor  wished 
to  establish  strict  exactitude  in  the  ceremonies,  in 
the  way  of  approaching  him  and  the  Empress,  and  in 
the  number  and  kind  of  salutations  to  be  made.  The 
Grand-Master  of  the  Ceremonies,  ISTatouyeff,  treated 
the  courtiers  like  recruits  who  do  not  yet  know  their 
drill  and  in  what  order  they  ought  to  march.  When- 
ever they  met  the  Emperor  they  had  first  to  make  a 
profound  bow,  and  then,  with  one  knee  on  the 
ground,  apply  a  sounding  kiss  to  the  Emperor's  hand 
while  he  kissed  them  on  the  cheek.  The  same  genu- 
flexion had  to  take  place  when  they  approached  the 
Empress,  after  which  they  had  to  withdraw  without 
turning  their  backs,  which  often  caused  confusion,  as 
they  trod  on  the  toes  of  the  other  courtiers  who  were 
coming  forward  to  perform  the  same  ceremony. 
Thanks  to  the  efforts  of  the  Grand-Master  of  the 
Ceremonies,  the  courtiers  at  length  learnt  to  go 
through  this  manoeuvre  without  a  hitch,  and  Paul, 
satisfied  at  the  look  of  fear  and  submission  which  he 
saw  on  their  faces,  then  made  the  etiquette  less  rigid. 
My  brother  and  I  had  to  go  through  this  ordeal,  and 
in  doing  so  we  nearly  fell  into  disgrace.  The 


i56       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Emperor  and  Empress  were  once  present  at  the 
christening  of  a  child  in  the  Chapel  of  the  Palace. 
We  were  on  duty  together  with  two  chamberlains, 
and  we  had  to  be  ready  to  precede  their  Majesties  as 
they  left  their  apartments.  We  were  late,  and  when 
the  time  for  the  ceremony  came  we  were  not  at  our 
posts.  Paul,  not  seeing  his  escort  as  he  came  out  of 
his  room,  flew  into  a  terrible  rage.  We  arrived 
breathless  with  haste,  and  found  all  the  courtiers 
assembled  at  the  closed  door  of  the  chapel,  anxious  to 
see  what  would  happen.  The  door  opened  ;  Paul  came 
out  and  passed  before  us  with  a  threatening  look, 
making  furious  gestures  and  breathing  hard  as  he 
generally  did  when  he  was  angry  and  wished  to  inspire 
terror.  Our  punishment,  however,  was  slight ;  we 
were  simply  ordered  to  remain  in  our  apartments  and 
not  leave  them  until  further  orders.  Alexander 
interfered  on  our  behalf,  explained  that  we  had  not 
received  our  orders  in  time,  and  pleaded  in  our  favour 
so  effectively,  with  the  assistance  of  KoutayschofF,* 
the  Emperor's  barber,  that  in  a  fortnight's  time  we 
were  free.  Soon  after  we  entered  the  army,  in  con- 
formity with  the  rule  that  every  officer  of  the  Court 
must  take  up  an  active  career. 

Our  rank  in  the  army  was  that  of  brigadier,  the 
one  usually  given  to  gentlemen  of  the  chamber  ;  and 
by  a  special  favour  due  to  the  preference  shown  to  us 
by  the  Grand-Dukes,  I  was  appointed  aide-de-camp 
to  Alexander  and  my  brother  to  Constantine.  These 
appointments  greatly  pleased  us,  as  they  attached  us 
more  closely  to  the  Grand-Dukes  and  relieved  us  of 

See  page  184. 


THE  EMPEROR'S  CORONATION  AT  MOSCOW      157 

the  functions  of  the  Court,  for  which  we  had  no 
vocation.  Our  duties  consisted  in  accompanying  the 
Grand-Dukes  at  military  parades,  and  in  standing 
behind  them  when  the  Emperor  passed  the  officers 
in  review.  He  used  to  address  his  sons  by  the  title 
of  Mohseigneur,  and  then  returned  to  place  himself  in 
the  midst  of  the  officers  and  superintend  the  drill 
which  usually  preceded  the  regular  parade. 

We  constantly  saw  the  Grand-Dukes  in  our 
capacity  of  aides-de-camp.  Both  of  them  were  ab- 
sorbed by  their  Court,  family,  and  military  functions, 
and  by  endless  details  connected  with  their  command 
of  the  two  regiments  of  the  Guards.  The  whole 
morning  was  taken  up  by  these  occupations,  which 
involved  more  bodily  fatigue  than  mental  work,  al- 
though great  attention  was  necessary  not  to  omit  any 
of  the  minute  details  of  the  service.  Alexander 
almost  always  dined  with  the  Emperor.  The  after- 
noon was  the  only  time  when  one  could  speak  to  him 
more  freely,  but  he  was  generally  too  tired  by  his 
work  of  the  morning,  and  he  took  some  rest  until 
the  evening,  when  he  had  to  go  to  the  Empress. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  spring  of  1797  the  Emperor 
went  to  Moscow  for  his  coronation.  All  the  society 
of  St  Petersburg  followed  him.  It  was  still  very 
cold,  and  the  habitues  of  the  salons  of  St  Petersburg 
were  to  be  seen  passing  each  other  on  the  roads, 
wrapped  up  in  furs  and  reclining  in  sledges,  all 
hastening  to  the  ancient  capital  of  the  Empire. 
Moscow  had  at  that  time  a  characteristic  appearance, 
which  must  have  greatly  changed  since  it  was  burnt 
down  and  rebuilt.  It  was  like  a  collection  of  towns 


i58      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

communicating  with  each  other  not  only  by  gardens 
and  parks,  but  by  vast  fields.  People  often  had  to 
drive  for  an  hour  to  pay  a  visit  in  another  part  of  the 
city.  Everywhere,  by  the  side  of  ugly  huts,  were 
sumptuous  palaces,  inhabited  by  the  Galitzins,  the 
Dolgoroukis,  and  other  families  with  historic  names — 
great  noblemen  who  consoled  themselves  by  the 
luxury  in  which  they  lived  for  the  vexations  and  dis- 
appointments they  had  experienced  at  Court.  In  the 
midst  of  this  vast  city  was  the  Kremlin,  a  sort  of 
fortress  surrounded  by  a  crenelated  wall,  outside 
which  the  tradesmen  had  their  principal  shops  in  a 
series  of  bazaars.  The  ancient  residence  of  the 
Muscovite  Grand-Dukes,  full  of  old  associations,  was 
the  place  where  the  ceremony  of  coronation  was  to  be 
performed.  It  lasted  several  days.  Paul  had  stopped 
for  the  night  outside  the  barriers  of  the  town,  and 
made  his  solemn  entry  into  the  Kremlin  on  the  follow- 
ing day,  with  an  immense  suite.  He  first  went  to  the 
cathedral,  where  Plato,  Archbishop  of  Moscow,  who 
was  regarded  as  the  ablest  and  most  learned  prelate  of 
the  Russian  Church,  complimented  the  Emperor  in 
biblical  language.  Then  took  place  the  coronation, 
the  return  to  the  palace  with  the  same  solemnity,  and 
finally  the  Imperial  banquet,  at  which  the  sovereigns 
and  their  families  were  served  on  a  raised  platform  and 
under  a  magnificent  canopy  by  the  high  officers  of  the 
Crown.  Various  minor  ceremonies  took  place  during 
the  following  days.  The  Emperor  appeared  in  them 
all ;  he  was  passionately  fond  of  display,  and  was 
proud  of  his  figure  and  his  grace.  Whenever  he 
appeared  in  public  he  walked  with  a  measured  step, 


THE  EMPEROR'S  CORONATION  AT  MOSCOW      159 

and  tried  to  look  tall  and  majestic,  though  he  was  really 
short;  it  was  only  when  he  entered  his  apartments  that 
he  showed  the  fatigue  which  his  efforts  had  cost  him. 
Each  ceremony  was  preceded  by  a  dress  rehearsal,  in 
order  that  everybody  should  know  where  to  place 
himself  and  what  to  do.  My  brother  and  myself  of 
course  had  to  take  part  in  the  ceremonies  as  aides-de- 
camp to  the  Grand-Dukes.  The  Emperor  was  as 
active  and  busy  as  a  stage  manager,  and  looked  after 
the  smallest  details  of  costume  and  decoration.  He 
liked  to  appear  to  the  best  advantage  before  the 
ladies,  and  once  he  stood  at  the  head  of  his  favourite 
battalion  of  the  Guard  with  a  halbert,  to  do  honour 
to  the  Empress,  whom  he  had  crowned  with  his  own 
hand. 

Paul  ordered  the  King  of  Poland  to  follow  him  to 
Moscow,  and  insisted  on  his  being  present  at  all  the 
solemnities  of  the  coronation.  He  had  to  join  the 
brilliant  suite  which  surrounded  the  Emperor  and  his 
family — a  sad  part  for  a  King  to  play.  During 
divine  service  and  the  ceremonies  which  preceded  the 
coronation,  and  were  very  long  and  tedious,  Stanislas 
Augustus  was  so  tired  out  that  he  sat  down  in  the 
tribune  which  had  been  assigned  to  him.  Paul  at 
once  remarked  this,  and  sent  a  messenger  to  tell  him 
to  stand  up  so  long  as  they  remained  in  the  church  ; 
and  the  poor  King  had  no  alternative  but  to  submit. 

When  the  ceremonies  were  over,  the  Emperor  and 
his  family  left  the  Kremlin  to  go  to  a  more  spacious 
residence,  called  the  Petrovski  Palace,  in  another 
quarter  of  the  town.  He  gave  up  the  rest  of  his  time 
at  Moscow  to  fetes,  parades,  and  military  exercises. 


1 60       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

There  were  fireworks  and  public  banquets  both  at 
Moscow  and  at  St  Petersburg,  and  the  nobility  gave 
the  Emperor  a  ball  in  a  vast  hall  where  they  usually 
met.  These  fetes  were  somewhat  tedious,  and  did 
not  give  satisfaction  either  to  Paul  or  to  his  hosts. 
Numerous  deputations  from  all  the  provinces  of  the 
empire  were  ordered  to  salute  the  Emperor  and 
present  addresses  of  submission.  The  delegates  from 
the  Polish  provinces  had  an  air  of  great  constraint 
and  depression.  All  of  them  had  been  citizens  of  an 
independent  Poland  ;  all  had  distinguished  themselves 
either  in  their  palatinates,  at  the  last  Diet,  or  in 
appointments  of  State.  They  saw  their  King 
relegated  to  a  side  gallery,  and  had  to  pass  him  to 
kneel  before  a  foreign  prince  and  declare  themselves 
his  subjects.  I  met  several  of  my  acquaintances,  but 
could  not  feel  any  pleasure  at  seeing  them  again  under 
such  circumstances.  I  was  struck  by  the  change  in 
their  appearance ;  they  looked  confused  and  humili- 
ated. Among  the  delegates  from  Lithuania  was 
Bukaty,  who  had  for  several  years  occupied  the  post  of 
Polish  Minister  in  England.  He  was  a  man  of  simple 
manners  and  great  good  sense,  and  had  acquired  the 
esteem  of  the  English  people  and  their  Government. 
Several  of  his  English  friends  gave  as  a  token  of  their 
friendship  their  names  to  his  children  at  their 
christening.  I  had  often  dined  with  him  in  London 
with  my  mother.  He  was  at  that  time  stout,  in  good 
health,  and  in  excellent  spirits.  He  was  now  thin, 
his  face  was  pale  and  haggard,  his  clothes,  which  in 
England  fitted  tight  to  his  body,  now  hung  about  him 
in  loose  folds ;  he  walked  with  bent  head  and  an 


PRINCE  ADAM'S  RELATIONS  WITH  ALEXANDER     161 

uncertain  step — he  was  a  picture  of  what  Poland  had 
become.  No  satisfactory  or  consoling  word  came 
from  his  mouth.  Soon  after  his  return  to  his  home 
at  Minsk  he  died. 

The  death  of  Catherine  and  the  accession  of  Paul, 
which  brought  Alexander  nearer  to  the  throne,  had  so 
far  in  no  way  changed  the  latter's  political  opinions  ; 
on  the  contrary,  all  that  had  happened  since  these 
events  seemed  to  confirm  him  in  his  views,  and  the 
resolutions  he  thought  he  could  execute.  When  he 
had  a  few  moments  of  leisure  after  his  military 
labours,  to  which  he  devoted  himself  with  zeal  and 
with  a  desire  to  carry  out  the  wishes  of  his  father,  he 
always  spoke  of  his  plans  and  the  future  he  wished  to 
prepare  for  Russia.  The  despotism  of  his  father — 
sometimes  eccentric,  terrible,  and  even  cruel — and  its 
immediate  and  probable  effects,  produced  a  lively  and 
painful  impression  on  Alexander's  generous  mind, 
which  was  full  of  ideas  of  liberty  and  justice.  He  was 
at  the  same  time  appalled  at  the  extent  of  the  diffi- 
culties which  awaited  him  and  were  rapidly  advancing 
upon  him.  The  ceremonies  of  the  coronation,  which 
he  would  have  to  undergo  some  day,  and  which  were 
totally  opposed  to  his  principles  and  his  natural  tastes, 
contributed  to  strengthen  him  in  his  views. 

My  brother  and  myself  having  obtained  three 
months'  leave  to  see  our  parents  in  Poland,  Alexander 
was  uneasy  at  the  prospect  of  remaining  without  any 
one  who  could  understand  him  or  in  whom  he  could 
confide.  His  anxiety  increased  as  the  time  for  our 
departure  arrived.  He  asked  me  to.  leave  him  a  draft 
proclamation  expressing  his  resolutions,  in  case  he 
VOL.  i.  L 


62       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

should  be  called  to  the  throne  during  our  absence. 
In  spite  of  my  objections  he  insisted  upon  my  doing 
this,  arid  I  ultimately  complied  to  quiet  him.  My 
draft  set  forth  the  evils  of  the  regime  under  which 
Russia  had  up  to  that  time  existed,  and  the  benefits  of 
the  one  which  Alexander  proposed  to  introduce  ;  the 
blessings  of  liberty  and  justice  which  Russia  would 
enjoy  after  the  obstacles  to  her  prosperity  had  been 
removed  ;  and  his  resolution  to  abdicate  after  having 
accomplished  this  task,  in  order  that  some  one  more 
worthy  than  himself  to  be  in  power  should  be  called 
upon  to  consolidate  and  perfect  the  great  work  which 
he  had  inaugurated. 

I   need  not  say  how  little  all  these  reasonings  and 
fine  phrases,  which  I  endeavoured  to  bring  into  con- 
nection as  much  as  possible,  were  applicable  to  the 
true  state  of  affairs.     Alexander  was  delighted  at  my 
work,  which  satisfied  his  fancy  of  the  moment — a  very 
noble,  but  at  bottom  a  very  selfish  one,  as  while  wish- 
ing to  secure  his  country's  happiness  as  he  then  saw 
it,  he  at  the  same  time  desired  to  be  free  to  withdraw 
from  a  position  which  he  feared  and  disliked,  and  to 
live  quietly  in  retirement  where  he  would  enjoy  at  a 
distance  the  good  he  had  done.     Alexander  put  the 
paper  in  his  pocket  with  great  satisfaction  and  thanked 
me  effusively  for  my  work.     It  reassured  him  as  to  his 
future.     He  thought  that  with  this  paper  in  his  desk 
he  would  be  prepared  for  the  events  which  fate  might 
suddenly  bring  :  a  strange  and  almost  incredible  effect 
of  the  dreams  and  illusions  which   youth   cherishes 
even  in  circumstances  where  experience  soonest  chills 
the   heart !     I    do   not   know    what   became   of    the 


COUNT  STROGONOFF  AND  M.  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF    163 

paper.  I  believe  Alexander  did  not  show  it  to  any- 
body, and  he  never  spoke  to  me  about  it  again.  I 
hope  he  burnt  it,  seeing  how  unreasonable  was  what 
he  had  asked  me  to  write — which  indeed  I  never 
doubted. 

While  we  were  talking  about  these  chimeras  a 
new  incident  gave  a  more  practical  character  to 
Alexander's  intentions.  Since  my  arrival  at  St 
Petersburg,  one  of  the  houses  which  I  most  visited 
was  that  of  Count  Strogonoff.  I  had  become,  so  to 
say,  part  of  his  family.  The  friendship,  indeed  the 
affection  shown  to  me  by  the  old  Count  has  left  nie 
recollections  which  will  be  always  dear  to  me,  and 
which  fill  me  with  gratitude.  I  was  on  intimate 
terms  with  his  son  Paul  and  his  friend  M.  de 
Novosiltzoff,  said  to  be  a  distant  relation  of  the 
family,  both  of  whom  were  of  about  the  same  age  as 
myself.  The  young  Countess  was  a  lady  of  much 
distinction,  good,  amiable  and  witty ;  without  being 
exactly  beautiful,  she  had  more  than  beauty,  the  gift 
of  pleasing  and  charming  all  who  came  near  her. 
The  old  Count  had  long  lived  in  Paris  under  Louis 
XV ;  like  most  Russian  noblemen,  he  wished  his  son 
to  be  brought  up  by  a  Frenchman.  He  even  sent 
him  to  France  with  his  tutor,  M.  Rename,  a  man  of 
ability,  and,  as  I  was  assured,  of  high  principle,  but 
an  enthusiastic  admirer  of  Rousseau.  He  proposed 
to  make  an  Emile  of  his  pupil,  a  plan  which  did  not 
displease  the  old  Count,  whose  generous  propensities 
and  loving  heart  had  inclined  him  to  some  of  the 
doctrines  of  the  philosopher  of  Geneva.  Count  Paul 
was  accordingly  placed  in  M.  Romrne's  charge,  and 


164       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  latter  made  him  go  on  walking  tours  and  en- 
deavoured to  give  him  an  education  in  which  Rous- 
seau's precepts  were  followed  and  perhaps  too  closely 
imitated.  When  the  French  Revolution  broke  out, 
and  the  revolutionists  boasted  that  they  were  follow- 
ing Rousseau's  teaching,  M.  Ronime  strongly  sympa- 
thised with  it,  and  wished  to  combine  what  he  regarded 
as  his  duties  as  a  citizen  with  those  which  he  had 
undertaken  with  his  pupil.  Frequent  occasions  pre- 
sented themselves  of  showing  him  in  practice  the 
principles  M.  Romme  had  inculcated  in  theory.  Both 
master  and  pupil  eagerly  took  part  in  the  revolutionary 
scenes  which  were  then  succeeding  each  other  in  France 
with  alarming  rapidity,  and  joined  the  Jacobin  club, 
whose  meetings  they  regularly  attended.  Count 
Strogonoff  was  informed  of  this  by  the  Russian 
embassy,  which  had  not  yet  left  Paris,  and  also,  I 
believe,  by  the  letters  of  M.  Romme  himself,  who 
thought  he  could  not  complete  the  education  of 
Count  Paul  more  effectively  than  by  making  him  take 
part  in  a  practical  course  of  his  teacher's  doctrines. 

M.  de  Novosiltzoff  was  then  sent  to  Paris  to  with- 
draw his  young  friend  from  the  charge  of  a  tutor 
whose  zeal  had  become  so  dangerous,  and  he  acquitted 
himself  of  his  commission  with  great  skill.  He 
managed  to  overcome  the  resistance  of  M.  Romme, 

o 

and  his  regret  at  the  separation  of,  as  he  said,  two 
friends  who  understood  each  other  so  well.  Notwith- 
standing the  attachment  of  the  young  Count  for  his 
tutor,  he  was  persuaded  to  return  to  St  Petersburg, 
where  he  was  soon  made  to  perceive  the  danger  to 
which  he  had  been  exposed.  His  opinions  changed 


COUNT  STROGOSOFF  AND  M,  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF    165 

entirely,  but  he  always  retained  in  his  character  and 
his  principles  of  action  some  traits  of  his  first  educa- 
tion. 

The  general  tone  of  conversation  in  Count 
StrogonofFs  house  had  always  been,  so  to  say,  liberal 
and  somewhat  critical ;  the  doings  of  the  Court  were 
a  favourite  topic.  Yet  the  old  Count  was  always  on 
good  terms  with  the  Empress  Catherine.  She  liked 
to  see  in  him  a  man  who  had  known  her  old  friends 
the  encyclopaedists,  and  who  was  not  a  stranger  to 
any  of  the  doctrines  or  sayings  of  that  sect.  This 
permitted  him  sometimes  to  speak  frankly  even  to 
herself  or  in  her  presence.  He  has  often  told  rne 
that  being  admitted  to  the  Empress's  toilet,  a  privi- 
lege granted  only  to  the  most  distinguished  noblemen 
of  the  Court,  he  was  once  there  when  she  was  prepar- 
ing to  give  an  audience  to  a  deputation  from  the 
Confederation  of  Targowitza,  which  had  come  to  thank 
her  for  the  '  signal  benefits '  she  had  conferred  upon 
Poland  (in  depriving  her  of  the  constitution  of  the 
3rd  of  May,*  and  soon  after  taking  her  finest  pro- 
vinces at  the  second  partition).  When  it  was 
announced  that  the  deputation  had  arrived,  and  that 
the  Empress  was  about  to  enter  the  throne-room  to 
listen  to  the  false  speeches  which  were  to  be  addressed 
to  her,  Count  Strogonoff  laughed  and  said  :  '  Your 
Majesty  will  not  have  any  difficulty  in  replying  to 
the  eloquent  thanks  of  these  gentlemen  ;  all  you  can 
say  is  that  really  they  have  nothing  to  thank  you  for.' 
This  remark  did  not  please  the  Empress.  She  took 
it  in  cold  silence,  and  went  out  to  receive  homages 

*  See  page  52. 


1 66       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSK1 

the  absurdity  of  which  she  probably  felt.  Despotic 
sovereigns  should  spare  those  whom  they  oppress  the 
necessity  of  telling  them  falsehoods  by  which  nobody 
is  deceived. 

The  service  rendered  by  M.  de  Novosiltzoff  to  the 
Strogonoif  family,  by  bringing  back  the  young  Count 
to  Russia,  had  strengthened  the  friendship  for  him 
both  of  the  father  and  the  son.  He  became  the 
adviser  of  the  family  in  all  circumstances,  and  took  a 
pride  in  having  an  independent  character,  in  acting 
according  to  fixed  principles,  and  in  not  tolerating  any 
unjust  constraint.  He  had  been  attached  as  aide-de- 
camp to  the  Prince  of  Nassau  when  he  was  charged 
with  the  command  of  the  Russian  fleet  against  the 
Swedes,  and  he  had  also  accompanied  him  at  the  siege 
of  Warsaw  in  1794.  He  thought  he  had  deserved 
the  military  cross,  and  he  indignantly  refused  the  civil 
cross  of  Vladimir  with  which  the  Empress  wished 
to  decorate  him.  He  insisted  on  sending  it  back,  and 
it  was  only  with  great  difficulty  that  he  was  appeased 
on  being  shown  the  risks  he  would  run  by  taking  such 
a  step.  He  finally  consented  to  wear  the  cross,  when 
a  knot  of  ribbon  wTas  added  to  it,  signifying  that  it 
was  the  reward  of  military  prowess. 

M.  de  Novosiltzoff  had  wit,  penetration,  and  great 
aptitude  for  work,  but  an  extreme  love  of  pleasure 
and  sensual  enjoyments ;  this  had  prevented  him  from 
reading  many  books,  and  from  acquiring  any  sound 
knowledge  of  law,  of  legislation,  or  of  political  economy, 
though  he  had  studied  all  these  subjects.  He  had  a 
facile  philosophy  which  strove  to  be  free  from  all  pre- 
judice, but  which  did  not  seem  to  impair  the  clear  and 


COUNT  STBOGONOFF  AND  M.  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF    167 

decided  qualities  of  his  mind.  These  qualities  were 
reflected  as  in  a  glass  in  the  young  Count  Strogonoff. 
The  opinions  and  feelings  of  these  two  young  men  had 
a  spirit  of  justice,  of  sincerity,  of  European  enlighten- 
ment which  at  that  time  was  scarcely  ever  to  be 
found  in  Russia,  and  which  was  the  foundation  of  the 
intimate  friendship  and  reciprocal  confidence  between 
us  of  which  I  have  spoken.  They  often  asked  me 
questions  about  Alexander  ;  and  I  thought  that  while 
maintaining  a  certain  reserve,  I  could  without  indis- 
cretion communicate  to  them  some  of  the  statements 
he  had  made  to  me,  and  the  generous  projects  which 
he  entertained.  They  fully  appreciated  the  extreme 
importance  of  what  I  told  them. 

I  spoke  of  my  two  friends  to  Alexander ;  he  had 
already  remarked  Count  Paul,  and  I  told  him  that 
their  convictions  resembled  his  own,  that  he  could 
rely  on  their  sentiments  and  their  discretion,  and  that 
they  wished  to  see  him  in  private,  to  offer  him  their 
services,  and  to  ascertain  what  would  have  to  be  done 
to  carry  out  his  noble  impulses.  Alexander  consented 
to  their  being  informed  of  his  secret  plans  and 
associated  in  his  designs.  I  spoke  to  them  on  the 
subject  at  St  Petersburg,  immediately  after  Paul's 
accession,  but  the  arrangement  was  not  finally  com- 
pleted until  after  the  coronation  at  Moscow.  It  was 
agreed  that  we  should  meet  on  a  certain  day  and 
hour  in  a  retired  spot,  and  that  Alexander  should 
join  us.  Novosiltzoff  prepared  himself  for  the  con- 
ference by  translating  into  Russian  a  fragment  of  a 
French  work  whose  title  I  do  not  remember,  which 
related  to  advice  given  to  a  young  prince  about  to 


1 68       ME  MO  IRS- OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

ascend  the  throne,  and  desirous  of  making  his  country 
happy  and  of  knowing  how  to  set  about  it.  The 
portion  which  Novosiltzoff  translated  was  only  the 
introduction,  where  the  subject  was  treated  generally, 
each  special  branch  of  Government  being  dealt  with 
in  detail  in  the  body  of  the  work.  He  was  to  trans- 
late the  rest  of  the  book,  but  he  never  did  so.  The 
succinct  review,  however,  of  the  obligations  of  the 
head  of  a  State  and  the  labours  which  should  occupy 
him  was  listened  to  by  Alexander  with  much  attention 
and  satisfaction.  It  contained  well-chosen  views  and 
general  deductions  as  to  the  foundations  of  national 
prosperity,  with  a  scheme  of  the  measures  necessary 
for  promoting  it.  The  author  had  introduced  some 
eloquent  passages  which  went  straight  to  the  young 
prince's  generous  and  patriotic  heart.  Novosiltzoff 
wrote  .Russian  with  elegance  ;  his  style  was  clear  and 
seemed  to  me  harmonious.  Alexander  praised  him 
highly,  and  assured  both  him  and  Count  Paul  that 
he  adopted  the  principles  expressed  in  the  work, 
which  were  indeed  his  own.  He  urged  Novosiltzoff 
to  complete  the  translation  and  then  forward  it  to 
him,  in  order  that  he  might  be  able  more  maturely 
to  consider  its  contents  and  some  day  put  its  theories 
into  practice.  From  that  day  the  young  Count 
Strogonoffand  Novosiltzoff  shared  in  the  confidence 
which  Alexander  had  bestowed  upon  me,  and  were 
admitted  to  our  understanding,  so  long  kept  a  secret. 
This  afterwards  produced  serious  results,  and  the 
admission  of  two  zealous  Russian  patriots  to  Alex- 
ander's confidence,  naturally  began  to  dissipate  the 
illusions  of  our  first  dreams — so  attractive  to  me  as 


COUNT  STROGONOFF  AND  M.  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF    169 

holding  out  the  prospect  of  the  independence  of  my 
country,  and  to  Alexander  as  leading  him  to  believe 
in  the  possibility  of  tranquil  retirement  from  State 
affairs.  These  dreams  were  not,  however,  at  once 
abandoned ;  we  adhered  to  them  in  spite  of  hard 
facts  which  gradually  destroyed  them.  Alexander  con- 
stantly reverted  to  his  plans,  seeking  in  them  con- 
solation for  a  near  future  whose  approach  and  whose 
burthens  he  already  felt.  He  could  not  make  up  his 
mind  to  lose  the  hope  of  another  future,  more  distant 
and  more  in  conformity  with  his  wishes ;  his  imagina- 
tion presented  it  to  him  under  such  attractive  colours, 
that  it  was  even  after  the  conversation  which  I  have 
described  that  he  insisted  upon  having  the  draft 
proclamation  which  I  mentioned  above. 

Alexander's  new  friends  perceived  his  inclination 
for  a  quiet  life,  relieved  of  the  cares  which  the  Crown 
would  impose  upon  him ;  they  said  with  justice  that 
this  could  neither  promote  his  fame  nor  the  happiness 
of  his  country,  which  should  be  his  sole  object.  They 
took  every  occasion  of  opposing  these  egotistical 
leanings,  while  pretending  riot  to  know  of  them.  I 
understood  Alexander's  views,  and  I  could  not  entirely 
condemn  them,  though  I  did  not  conceal  from  him  my 
belief  that  they  were  impracticable.  The  consequence 
was  that  his  confidence  in  me  grew  stronger.  It 
continued,  after  many  vicissitudes,  for  a  considerable 
time,  and  did  not  cease  until  after  I  had  left  St 
Petersburg. 

At  the  conference  which  took  place  during  the 
coronation  it  was  decided  that  Novosiltzoff,  who  was 
in  bad  odour  on  account  of  the  opinions  he  was  sup- 


170 

posed  to  hold  and  his  known  independent  spirit, 
should  leave  Russia  until  it  should  be  possible  to 
recall  him,  and  that  he  should  pass  the  interval  in 
England.  Alexander  obtained  a  passport  for  him 
through  Rostopchin,  the  Minister  for  War,  who  was 
beginning  to  be  in  high  favour  with  the  Emperor. 
This  Minister  had  been  one  of  his  most  assiduous 
courtiers  at  Gatchina  and  Pavlovsk  before  his  accession 
to  the  throne.  He  was,  I  think,  the  only  able  man 
who  had  attached  himself  to  Paul's  person  before  he 
became  Emperor.  Alexander,  who  during  Catherine's 
reign  was  devoted  to  his  father,  had  remarked 
Rostopchin,  and  had  felt  great  esteem  and  friendship 
for  him.  These  relations  were  afterwards  converted 
by  Court  intrigues  into  coldness  and  opposition  ;  but 
at  that  time  they  still  existed,  and  Rostopchin  was 
also  on  friendly  terms  with  Novosiltzoff,  for  both  had 
found  fault  with  the  Government.  Although,  how- 
ever, he  had  promised  Novosiltzoff  a  passport,  he  did 
not  at  once  carry  out  his  promise,  and  when  I  re- 
minded him  of  it,  he  expressed  impatience  and  sus- 
picion at  the  political  importance  which  he  said 
appeared  to  be  attached  to  this  journey.  The  pass- 
port came  at  last,  and  Novosiltzoff  proceeded  to  St 
Petersburg  and  thence  to  England,  where  he  remained 
during  the  whole  of  the  period  of  Paul's  reign.  He 
completed  his  studies  there,  and  entered  into  relations 
with  English  statesmen  which  were  afterwards  very 
useful  to  him. 

Our  leave  having  been  granted,  my  brother  and 
myself,  accompanied  by  Gorski,  left  for  Pulawy,  where 
our  parents  were  impatiently  expecting  us  after  an 


PROPOSED  A  U STRIA  N  A  NNEXA  TION  OF  GA  LICIA     \  7 1 

absence  of  two  years  which  had  given  them  much 
anxiety  and  care.  The  time  we  passed  with  them,  in 
the  place  where  we  had  lived  in  our  happy  youth,  was 
one  of  great  joy  to  us,  though  it  was  somewhat 
marred  by  the  prospect  of  having  soon  to  go  back 
again  to  St  Petersburg,  where  we  knew  that  fresh 
trials  and  troubles  were  awaiting  us.  We  talked  of 
nothing  but  Alexander's  good  qualities  arid  the  hopes 
we  had  of  him.  Our  parents  listened  with  astonish- 
ment, anxiety,  and  doubt.  I  received  at  Pulawy 
several  letters  from  Alexander  full  of  friendly 
expressions ;  they  were  brought  by  various  persons, 
among  others  by  the  Archduke  Palatine,  who  had 
just  married  the  Grand-Duchess  Alexandra.  This 
obtained  for  me  a  friendly  reception  from  the  Arch- 
duko  when  I  passed  through  Pesth  in  1812. 

My  mother  was  anxious  for  our  safety.  She  feared 
lest  we  should  be  denounced  and  the  object  of  our 
relations  with  Alexander  be  betrayed.  This  was  the 
topic  of  all  our  conversations. 

The  Governor  of  Galicia,  Count  Erdody,  came  at 
this  time  to  pay  my  father  a  visit.*  A  Hungarian  by 
birth,  he  was  preoccupied  with  an  idea  which  he  was 
constantly  talking  about.  He  wished  to  prove  to  the 
Poles  that  the  best  thing  that  could  happen  to  them 
would  be  to  be  united  to  Hungary ;  for,  he  said,  the 
Emperor  of  Austria  had  only  put  forward  his  claims 
to  Galicia  as  King  of  Hungary.  This  language  on 
the  part  of  a  high  Austrian  functionary  proved  how 
much  strength  the  Magyar  element  still  possessed. 

*  Pulawy  then   formed  part  of  Austria,  together  with  Lublin,  Sandomir,  and 
Cracow. 


The  annexation  of  Galicia  to  Hungary,  if  it  had  been 
possible,  would  doubtless  have  brought  great  material 
advantages  to  Galicia,  would  have  conferred  upon  her 
a  free  government,  and  would  especially  have  pro- 
tected her  againsb  the  many  evils  which  she  suffered 
during  the  fifty  years  which  preceded  the  year  1848. 
What  would  have  been  the  immediate  result  of  such 
an  annexation  at  that  period  it  is  difficult  to  guess. 
In  any  case  the  Poles  would  have  gladly  fraternised 
with  the  Hungarians ;  yet  public  opinion  and  the 
Polish  national  spirit  would  probably  have  been 
opposed  to  such  a  measure,  besides  which  I  do  not 
think  the  Austrian  Government  of  that  time  would 
ever  have  agreed  to  it. 

Pulawy  was  just  then  recovering  from  a  two-fold 
pillage  to  which  it  had  been  subjected  during  the 
war  of  Kosciuszko.  The  first  occurred  under  the 
command  of  Count  Bibikoff,  and  its  results  were  long 
felt  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  village ;  the  second, 
which  was  chiefly  directed  against  the  Palace,  was 
carried  out  by  the  advanced  guard  of  a  corps  under 
the  orders  of  Count  Valerian  Zuboff.  The  Palace 
was  completely  sacked.  All  the  ornaments  were 
broken  and  destroyed.  Valuable  pictures  were  cut 
in  pieces ;  the  books  of  the  library  were  stolen  and 
dispersed  in  various  parts  of  the  Empire,  and  the 
only  room  that  was  spared  was  one  which,  as  it  had 
gilt  wainscots  and  pictures  by  Boucher  over  the 
doors,  the  Cossacks  thought  was  a  chapel.  All 
the  provisions  in  the  house — oil,  wine,  sugar,  coffee, 
spirits,  preserved  meats,  &c. — were  thrown  pell-mell 
into  a  basin  in  the  middle  of  the  courtyard,  which 


PULAWT  173 

was  then  used  by  the  Cossacks  as  a  bath.  When  we 
arrived,  people  were  still  employed  in  cleaning  the 
ruins,  rebuilding  damaged  walls  or  partitions,  and 
repairing  the  library.  In  the  middle  of  the  vast 
courtyard  before  the  Palace  there  was  a  little  hill, 
a  sort  of  Monte  Testacio,  composed  of  debris  covered 
with  earth.  When  our  parents  returned  to  their 
home  they  had  some  difficulty  in  finding  rooms  fit  to 
live  in,  and  the  works  of  restoration  were  not  com- 
pleted when  we  left. 

About  this  time  we  lost  our  friend  Gorski,  who 
died  of  an  apoplectic  stroke.  I  found  him  one  morn- 
ing complaining  of  pains  in  the  head  and  difficulty  of 
speech ;  a  surgeon  was  called  to  bleed  him,  and  he 
was  put  to  bed.  Dr  Goltz,  who  was  absent  at  the 
time,  came  too  late  to  save  him.  Gorski  remained 
unconscious,  talked  incoherently,  and  only  complained 
of  the  pain  in  his  head.  He  recognised  me  and  I 
remember  his  smile  with  gratitude.  I  did  not  leave 
him  ;  he  died  on  the  same  day  late  in  the  evening, 
without  pain.  I  felt  his  loss  deeply.  He  was  a 
true  man,  with  nothing  but  justice  and  sincerity 
in  his  heart.  He  had  often  expressed  a  desire 
for  a  good  and  short  life :  his  wish  was  accom- 
plished. 

Our  three  months'  leave  had  now  expired,  and  we 
returned  to  St  Petersburg.  We  were  sorry  to  leave 
our  parents  and  our  home,  but  we  were  anxious  to  see 
Alexander  again  and  resume  our  relations  with  him. 
The  letters  I  had  received  from  him  during  our  stay 
at  Pulawy  proved  to  me,  if  I  had  had  any  doubt  on 
the  subject,  that  he  had  not  changed.  We  found  him 


i74       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  same  as  before,  both  as  regards  his  feelings  and 
his  opinions. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  year  1797,  the  follies  and 
eccentricities  which  had  agitated  the  Court  of  the 
Emperor  Paul  were  succeeded  by  a  period  of  compara- 
tive calm,  which  looked  as  if  it  were  likely  to  last. 
When  he  was  Grand-Duke  he  had,  during  his  stay  at 
Pavlovsk  and  Gatchina,  conceived  a  passion  for  Mdlle. 
Nelidoff,  rnaid-of-honour  to  his  wife.  This  sentiment, 
which  was  entirely  platonic,  had  continued  to  exist 
since  his  accession.  Mdlle.  Nelidoff  had  remarkable 
qualities  of  heart  and  mind,  and  had  captivated  the 
affection  and  confidence  of  the  Empress.  The  latter 
thought  she  had  nothing  to  fear  from  her  rivalry,  as 
she  was  tall,  fair  and  handsome,  while  Mdlle.  Nelidoif  s 
figure,  complexion,  and  features  were  in  no  way 
attractive ;  her  only  charms  were  her  sparkling  smile 
and  her  animated  conversation.  The  two  women  had 
a  perfect  understanding  with  each  other,  and  the  result 
was  that  the  Emperor's  conduct,  his  selection  of  high 
officials,  and  even  his  policy,  became  less  changeable  and 
confused,  and  more  consequent,  than  they  had  been 
before.  Unfortunately  this  salutary  influence  did  not 
last  long.  On  the  return  of  the  Court  from  the  corona- 
tion, it  went  to  Gatchina,  where  Paul  liked  to  pass  the 
autumn.  His  presence  added  to  the  naturally  depress- 
ing effect  produced  by  this  season  of  the  year  in  Russia, 
as  it  is  foggy  and  rainy,  and  the  cold,  though  less 
intense,  is  more  disagreeable  than  in  winter.  The 
friendship  and  the  extreme  confidence  shown  to  us  by 
Alexander,  and  the  familiarity  which  he  and  his 
brother  allowed  us  to  use  in  our  relations  with  them, 


THE  GRAND-DUKE  CONSTANTINE  175 

amply  compensated,  however,  for  the  tediousness  and 
melancholy  of  the  Court,  and  we  did  not  complain.  I 
recollect  having  had  some  very  warm  disputes  with 
the  Grand-Duke  Constantine,  in  which  I  did  not  give 
way  to  him  either  in  words  or  in  gestures,  and  one 
day  I  had  a  struggle  with  him  in  which  we  both  fell 
to  the  ground.  I  think  it  was  the  recollection  of 
these  familiarities  of  our  youth  that  impelled 
Constantino  to  treat  me  with  consideration  even  at 
times  when  he  was  all-powerful  in  Poland,  and  deeply 
irritated  at  my  opposition.  He  attempted  to  cultivate 
similar  relations  with  my  brother  to  those  which 
existed  between  Alexander  and  myself;  but  his 
intolerable  temper  made  his  company  much  less 
agreeable  than  that  of  Alexander,  though  it  had  the 
advantage  of  keeping  my  brother  and  myself  together. 
While  we  were  at  Gatchina  we  made  the  acquaintance 
of  Baron  Wintzingerode,  a  young  officer  of  much 
nobility  of  character,  a  protege  of  the  princes  of  Saxe- 
Coburg,  whom  Constantine  had  made  his  aide-de-camp. 
Our  friendship  with  him  never  varied,  and  lasted 
until  his  death. 

At  the  end  of  the  autumn,  the  Court  returned  to 
St  Petersburg  for  the  winter.  (I  may  mention  here 
that  during  the  years  I  passed  in  Russia  the  only 
interesting  events  that  I  witnessed  happened  in  Court 
circles,  and  I  am  therefore  obliged  to  be  always 
speaking  of  the  Court).  Our  King  Stanislas  Augustus 
was,  I  believe,  located  with  his  suite  at  the  house 
known  as  the  Marble  Palace,  and  lived  magnificently 
at  the  expense  of  the  Government.  His  niece,  the 
Countess  Mniszek,  was  attached  to  his  suite  with  her 


176       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

husband.  He  also  had  a  certain  number  of  chamber- 
lains, among  whom  was  Trembecki  the  poet.  We 
often  went  to  present  our  respects  to  his  Majesty,  who 
received  us  with  pleasure  at  all  times.  I  have  often 
seen  him  in  the  morning  in  his  dressing  grown,  writing 
what  I  was  afterwards  told  were  his  memoirs.  I 
never  could  learn  what  had  become  of  this  work,  which 
must  have  been  very  voluminous.  All  I  could 
recover  was  the  first  volume,  which  only  contained  an 
account  of  his  embassy  to  Russia  at  the  time  of 
Augustus  III ;  the  other  volumes,  which  must  have 
been  much  more  interesting,  were  either  destroyed  or 
so  well  concealed,  that  so  far  as  I  know  no  trace  of 
them  has  been  found.* 

This  unfortunate  prince  seemed  to  me  to  accept 
his  position  too  patiently.  He  strove  to  make  himself 
agreeable  to  his  masters  who  had  dispossessed  him, 
and  to  indulge  the  capricious  fancies  of  the  Emperor, 
who  pretty  frequently  came  with  the  Imperial  family 
to  dine  with  him.  His  dinners  were  exquisite  and 
served  to  perfection,  thanks  to  the  skill  of  his  famous 
maitre  d'  hotel,  Fremeau,  who  alone  reminded  him  of 
his  past  existence.  The  King  and  his  suite,  in  order 
to  vary  the  entertainments  he  was  able  to  offer  to  the 
Emperor  and  Empress,  were  preparing  a  soiree  with 
private  theatricals,  when  he  was  struck  down  by  an 
attack  of  apoplexy  on  the  2nd  of  February,  1793. 
The  news  at  once  spread  through  the  town,  and  we 
hastened  to  the  palace.  Dr  Bekler  had  bled  the 
patient  and  employed  all  the  resources  of  "*is  art,  but 

*  They  have  since  been  published  at  Poseu  (in  1862)  under  the  title  '  Memoires 
de  Stanislas  Auguste  Poniatowski  et  sa  correspondance  avec  Catherine  II.' 


DEATH  OF  STANISLAS  AUGUSTUS  177 

in  vain.  The  King  lay  on  his  bed  unconscious,  the 
persons  of  his  suite  stood  round  him  in  tears,  and 
Trembecki,  who  had  come  to  have  a  last  look  at  his 
sovereign,  fled  into  his  room  with  a  gesture  of  despair. 
The  Emperor  also  came  with  the  Imperial  family. 
Baciarelli  has  painted  this  sad  scene  in  a  picture  in 
which  he  has  represented  with  remarkable  talent  the 
likenesses  of  all  those  who  were  present.  The  King 
was  buried  with  suitable  pomp  in  the  Roman  Catholic 
Church  of  the  Dominicans  at  St  Petersburg. 

o 

Stanislas  Augustus  was  only  mourned  by  those 
whose  existence  depended  on  his  own ;  and  he  had 
no  cause  to  regret  life  so  far  as  his  happiness  was 
concerned.  His  conduct  as  a  King  had  been  such 
that  no  one  looked  upon  him  as  a  representative  of 
Poland,  and  his  end  made  no  change  either  in  her 

'  O 

destinies  or  her  hopes.*  There  were  some  people 
who,  in  view  of  the  great  expense  which  he  had  caused 
to  the  Imperial  Treasury,  thought  his  death  had  been 
accelerated  for  reasons  of  State.  This  no  doubt  is 
possible,  but  none  of  the  circumstances  of  his  illness 
seem  to  confirm  such  a  suspicion,  which,  unhappily 
for  Russia,  always  arises  at  the  death  of  any  illustri- 
ous personage  in  that  country. 

*  Stanislas  Augustus  Poniatowski,  the  son  of  the  famous  statesman  and  soldier 
who  twice  saved  the  life  of  Charles  XII  and  with  the  two  Czartoryskis  governed 
Poland  during  the  reign  of  Augustus  III,  went  with  the  English  Minister  Sir  Hanbury 
Williams  to  St  Petersburg  in  1755  and  there  became  the  favourite  of  the  Empress 
Catherine,  then  Grand-Duchess  of  Eussia.  Through  the  influence  of  the  Russian 
Government,  which  had  concluded  a  secret  alliance  with  Prussia  (21st  April  1764) 
pledging  the  two  powers  to  prevent  '  by  force  of  arms,  if  necessary,'  the  establish- 
ment of  hereditary  monarchy  in  Poland,  Stanislas  Augustus  was,  on  the  death  of 
Augustus  III,  ele<  !M  King  (7th  September  1764).  Although  at  first  be  endeavoured 
to  act  independently  of  Russia,  he  was  easily  outwitted  by  the  superior  abilities  and 
greater  force  of  character  of  the  Muscovite  diplomatists,  and  after  Poland  had  been 
thrice  partitioned,  he  was  held  in  confinement  by  the  Russians  at  Grodno,  and  after- 
wards at  St  Petersburg,  where  he  died  as  above  described  (see  Chapter  I.) 

VOL.  I,  M 


178       MEMOIRS  OF  PRIXCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Things  now  seemed  to  be  settling  down :  the 
Emperor's  manias  had  diminished  under  the  com- 
bined influence  of  the  Empress  and  her  friend,  and 
the  public  also  had  become  accustomed  to  Paul's 
way  of  acting  by  fits  and  starts.  The  life  we  led  at 
Gatchina  or  at  St  Petersburg  would  have  been  well 
adapted  for  study,  if  we  had  known  how  to  profit  by 
it.  Our  time  was  regulated,  and  there  was  only  one 
indispensable  occupation  during  the  day — the  mili- 
tary parade ;  after  passing  an  hour  or  two  in  this 
duty  every  morning,  we  had  the  whole  day  at  our 
disposal  except  Sundays  and  holidays,  when  certain 
Court  functions  had  to  be  performed.  These 
wrere  regarded  as  so  important,  that  they  liber- 
ated us  from  all  social  conventions  arid  duties, 
so  that  there  was  plenty  of  time  for  other  occupa- 
tions, but  unfortunately  I  did  riot  avail  myself  of 
the  leisure  thus  afforded  me.  Being  attached  to 
Alexander's  person  as  aide-de-camp,  my  service 
obliged  me  to  attend  him  at  military  parades,  and 
I  used  to  go  to  his  apartments  every  afternoon  to 
take  his  orders ;  this  was  our  time  for  intimate  con- 
versation. It  is  also  from  that  period  that  dates  my 
acquaintance  with  Prince  Peter  Volkonski,  adjutant 
of  the  Semenofsky  regiment  of  the  Guards,  of  which 
Alexander  was  colonel.  His  position  placed  Prince 
Peter  on  a  footing  of  familiarity  with  Alexander,  and 
he  afterwards  became  his  aide-de-camp,  then  major- 
general,  and  finally  grand  chamberlain,  which  post  he 
continued  to  occupy  under  the  Emperor  Nicholas. 
Without  possessing  brilliant  or  very  superior  faculties, 
Volkonski  was  very  systematic  and  persistent  in  his 


PRINCE  VOLKONSKI  I79 

duties,  and  fulfilled  them  to  the  Emperor's  entire 
satisfaction  ;  he  also  acquired  information  indispens- 
able to  an  officer  of  high  military  rank.  He  was  good- 
tempered,  his  advice  was  always  sensible,  and  he  did 
not  hesitate  to  give  it  even  when  it  caused  dis- 
pleasure ;  moreover,  he  was  always  ready  and  willing 
to  do  a  service.  We  passed  much  time  together,  and 
I  constantly  received  from  him  proofs  of  good-will  to 
which  I  gladly  bear  testimony  after  an  interval  of 
more  than  half-a-century,  when  our  relations  have 
been  interrupted  by  forty  years  of  separation  and  by 
revolutions  and  other  events. 

His  wife,  the  Princess  Sophia,  who  belonged  to 
another  branch  of  the  Volkonski  family  that  had  been 
more  favoured  by  fortune,  had  a  quicker  temper  and 
a  more  generous  heart,  and  she  often  showed  herself 
a  true  friend  to  me,  even  since  my  total  withdrawal 
from  the  Russian  service — for  which  I  am  sincerely 
grateful  to  her.  She  never  pardoned  the  Emperor 
Nicholas  for  having  kept  her  brother  for  thirty 
years  in  the  mines  of  Siberia  ;  he  became  old  there, 
and  was  not  restored  to  his  sister  and  his  family  until 
the  coronation  of  Alexander  II.  Her  sorrow  had 
separated  the  Princess  Sophia  from  the  Russian 
Court  during  the  whole  of  Nicholas's  reign. 

Among  the  young  men  of  the  Court  there  was 
only  one  who  was  received  into  Alexander's  intimacy  : 
this  was  Prince  Alexander  Galitzin,  one  of  the 
Gentlemen  of  the  Chamber.  He  was  called  '  Little 
Galitzin '  on  account  of  his  short  stature,  and  pleased 
Alexander  by  his  amusing  gossip  and  his  wonderful 
powers  of  mimicry,  which  enabled  him  closely  to 


i8o      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

imitate  the  appearance  and  the  voice  of  every  member 
of  the  Court.  When  we  were  alone  without 
Alexander,  he  used  to  imitate  the  Emperor  Paul 
with  such  accuracy  that  we  feared  lest  he  should  be 
arrested  and  punished.  He  had  been  a  passionate 
admirer  of  the  Empress  Catherine,  and  notwithstand- 
ing her  advanced  age  he  would  have  gladly  become 
one  of  her  favourites.  When  I  knew  him  he  was  a 
thorough  epicurean,  devoting  much  calculation  and 
reflection  to  all  possible  enjoyments  of  every  kind  ; 
but  after  Alexander's  accession  he  determined  to 
enter  on  a  more  serious  mode  of  life,  and,  encouraged 
by  the  Emperor,  became  Procurator  to  the  Senate. 
Afterwards,  probably  under  the  inspiration  of  Alex- 
ander's piety,  he  became  very  devout,  saw  visions 
with  M.  de  Kocheleff,  and  was  finally  appointed 
Minister  of  Public  Instruction,  a  post  which  I  should 
never  have  thought  him  qualified  to  fill.  His  appoint- 
ment did  not  take  place,  I  think,  until  the  year  1822, 
when  I  was  still  Curator  of  the  University  of  Wilna. 
Remembering  '  Little  Galitzin  '  as  I  had  known  him, 
I  could  not  picture  him  to  myself  as  a  Minister 
directing  the  public  instruction  of  the  Empire,  as  he 
did  not  seem  to  possess  any  talent  but  that  of  amusing 
people  and  making  them  laugh.  He  was  totally 
without  personal  animosity — which  did  not,  however, 
prevent  crying  abuses  from  occurring  at  Wilna  while 
he  was  Minister,  the  result  of  which  was  that  I  was 
obliged  to  resign  my  post  of  Curator. 

There  were  sometimes  select  balls  at  Court,  at 
which  the  etiquette  was  not  so  strict  as  usual.  The 
Emperor  appeared  at  one  of  these  balls  in  a  dresscoat, 


AN  IMPERIAL  PROGRESS  TO  KAZAN  181 

which  he  never  wore  on  other  occasions  ;  it  was  of  dark 
red  velvet  and  of  an  old-fashioned  shape.  He  danced 
that  evening  with  Mdlle.  Nelidoff.  It  was  a  curious 
sight,  which  stills  dwells  in  my  memory.  The  Emperor 
Paul,  short,  with  very  large  shoes,  placed  himself  in 
the  third  position,  rounded  his  arms,  and  bent  his  body 
in  the  manner  then  taught  by  dancing  masters,  while 
opposite  him  was  a  lady  of  equally  short  stature,  who 
thought  it  her  duty  to  respond  to  the  would-be  grace- 
ful airs  and  harmonious  movements  of  her  partner. 

In  May,  1798,  the  Court  proceeded  to  Pavlovsk, 
the  property  and  creation  of  the  Empress  Maria, 
which,  considering  the  general  appearance  of  the 
environs  of  St  Petersburg,  was  a  pleasant  and  gay 
place.  The  buildings  arid  gardens  had  been  enlarged 
under  the  superintendence  of  the  Empress.  She 
attempted  to  entertain  her  guests  by  assembling  them 
after  dinner  to  listen  to  a  reading  of  a  French  trans- 
lation of  Thomson's  '  Seasons.'  The  Emperor  did  not 
assist  at  these  readings,  and  the  idea  was  not  a 
success  ;  everyone  tried  to  escape  what  was  generally 
voted  to  be  a  dull  and  somniferous  entertainment. 

The  Emperor  Paul  wished  this  year  to  make  a 
progress  through  part  of  his  Empire.  The  Grand- 
Dukes  took  part  in  the  journey,  and  my  brother  and 
myself  accompanied  them.  The  Emperor  visited  the 
Canal  which  joins  the  Volga  to  the  Neva,  thereby 
establishing  a  communication  between  the  Caspian 
Sea  and  the  Baltic.  This  work  of  Peter  the  Great, 
which  does  great  credit  to  his  genius  and  activity, 
passes  in  a  diagonal  line  through  the  whole  of  the 
interior  of  Russia.  Paul  went  to  see  the  fleet  of  boats 


T82       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

on  the  canal,  some  of  which  started  for  St  Petersburg 
and  others  for  Astrakhan.  M.  de  Sivers,  notorious  for 
the  odious  manner  in  which  he  carried  out  the  second 
partition  of  Poland,  was  charged  with  the  Works  De- 
partment. Being  on  a  so-called  tour  of  inspection,  he 
went  to  meet  the  Emperor.  He  looked  old,  thin,  pale, 
and  depressed,  without  any  energy  or  distinction.  The 
very  cold  reception  accorded  to  him  by  the  Emperor 
showed  him  that  he  would  not  long  remain  at  his  post. 
We  passed  by  Tver  on  our  way  out,  and  on  our 
return  by  Yaroslav  and  Vladimir.  These  provinces 
are  rich  and  populous,  with  an  air  of  abundance  and 
prosperity  which  strikes  all  who  travel  through  them. 
It  is  in  the  interior  of  Russia  that  her  true  strength 
lies ;  if  it  were  well  administered  by  a  government 
concentrated  within  reasonable  limits,  this  region 

'  O 

should  by  its  resources  and  prosperity  disgust  the 
Russians  with  the  task  of  being  the  tormentors  and 
gaolers  of  neighbouring  countries. 

At  Moscow,  which  was  the  first  place  to  which 
the  Emperor  went,  there  was  a  considerable  assem- 
blage of  troops,  which  he  reviewed  and  ordered  to 
perform  some  manoauvres.  They  were  regiments  of 
the  line  which  had  not  been  trained  like  the  Guards, 
and  had  not  had  time  to  obtain  instruction  in  the  new 
system.  The  infantry  was  divided  into  two  lines 
which  marched  in  two  columns,  at  the  head  of  each  of 
which  was  placed  one  of  the  Grand-Dukes.  They 
were  to  deploy  at  a  given  signal,  and  I  remember  with 
pleasure  the  activity  with  which  we  executed  this 
movement,  which  was  successful  beyond  our  hopes, 
without  any  crowding  or  spreading  out  of  the  lines, 


AN  IMPERIAL  PROGRESS  TO  KAZAN  183 

each  of  which  was  composed  of  from  twelve  to  fifteen 
battalions.  The  Emperor  was  highly  satisfied  at  the 
order  in  which  the  troops  marched,  and  liberally 
distributed  rewards  among  the  officers. 

From  Moscow  we  went  by  way  of  Nijni  Novgorod 
to  Kazan.  The  country  between  these  places  is  fine, 
and  might  be  rich  through  the  fertility  of  its  soil  and 
the  navigable  streams  which  cross  it  in  all  directions, 
but  it  is  little  inhabited.  Some  of  the  inhabitants 
are  still  half-savage  tribes,  apparently  of  the  Finnish 
race — Tchouvasches  and  Tcheremisses  who  have  pre- 
served their  odd  national  costumes.  I  made  sketches 
of  them,  which  I  gave  to  my  old  friend  M.  Wiesi- 
olowski.  At  Kazan  there  are  still  many  Tartars  who 
have  also  preserved  their  ancient  dress  arid  customs, 
but  I  do  not  think  they  have  any  strong  national 
spirit,  any  more  than  our  Tartars  of  Lithuania.  It  is 
only  further  east,  among  the  Nogais  and  the  popula- 
tions adjoining  the  steppes  of  Great  Tartary  or  the 
slopes  of  the  Caucasus,  that  this  spirit  shows  itself 
and  is  accompanied  by  a  warlike  disposition. 

The  journey  was  performed  with  a  rapidity  which 
deprived  it  of  the  practical  advantage  that  might  have 
been  gained  if  the  Emperor  had  seen  with  his  own 
eyes  what  was  going  on  in  the  country.  We  returned 
without  passing  through  Moscow,  and  our  last  stage 
was  Schlusselburg,  the  fortress  which  was  rendered 
famous  by  the  catastrophe  of  the  unhappy  Ivan.* 
Paul  embarked  on  the  Lake  of  Ladoga,  and  while  we 
were  on  the  boat  he  called  my  brother  and  myself 

*  Ivan  VI,  killed  in  1764  in  attempting  to  escape  from  the  fortress  of  Schlussel- 
burg, where  he  had  been  confined  since  1741. 


184       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

and  decorated  us  with  the  Order  of  St  Anne  of  the 
second  class  as  a  reward  for  our  services  during  the 
journey.  This  was  the  only  honourable  distinction 
I  ever  received  in  Russia. 

We  passed  the  remainder  of  the  summer  at 
Pavlovsk,  and  then  moved  to  Gatchina  for  the 
autumn.  This  palace,  which  had  recently  been  en- 
larged, looked  like  a  prison  ;  it  is  built  on  a  perfectly 
level  plain,  without  trees  or  fields.  The  park  had  a 
sombre  and  melancholy  air ;  the  sun  seldom  shines 
there,  and  it  was  so  cold  and  rainy  that  we  had  no 
temptation  to  walk.  Military  parades  or  manoeuvres 
in  the  morning,  and  the  French  or  Italian  theatre  in 
the  evening,  did  but  little  to  relieve  the  prevailing 
dulness.  This  latter  part  of  the  year  1798,  and  the 
beginning  of  1799,  brought  much  trouble  and  unex- 
pected change  into  the  situation  of  the  persons  who 
composed  the  Russian  Court. 

At  the  time  of  the  capture  of  Kutaysk  and  the 
massacre  of  its  inhabitants,  a  Turkish  child,  after- 
wards named  Kutayschoff,  who  had  escaped  with  his 
life,  was  adopted  by  Paul,  who  had  him  educated, 
and  then  made  hirn  first  his  barber,  and  afterwards 
his  principal  valet.  At  the  beginning  of  Paul's  reign 
I  saw  Kutayschoff  bring  some  broth  to  his  master 
at  the  training  school,  where  the  infantry  and  cavalry 
drilled  during  the  winter.  He  was  in  his  barber's 
dress,  of  middle  size,  a  little  stout,  but  alert  and  quick 
in  his  movements,  very  dark,  always  smiling,  with 
Eastern  eyes  and  a  countenance  displaying  a  sensual 
joviality.  In  this  costume  he  looked  a  sort  of 
Figaro ;  but  he  was  already  the  object  of  obsequious 


A  PALACE  PLOT  185 

salutations  and  hand-shakings  on  the  part  of  most  of 
the  generals  and  other  persons  who  took  part  in 
the  drill.  Soon  his  influence  with  his  master  made 
him  a  dignitary  of  the  Empire  and  an  all-powerful 
favourite.  This  metamorphosis  was  accomplished  by 
the  autocratic  wand  of  Czarism.  In  less  than  a  year 
he  rose  from  a  barber  and  a  valet  to  be  Grand-Equerry, 
and  astonished  the  Russians  by  appearing  successively 
with  the  Orders  of  St  Anne,  St  Alexander,  and  St 
Andrew,  accompanied  by  extensive  grants  of  land 
and  money.  He  was  not,  however,  promoted  to 
these  honours  all  at  once,  and  he  would  not  have 
got  them  so  rapidly  if  the  Empress  and  Mdlle. 
de  Nelidoff  had  continued  to  retain  their  influence 
over  the  Emperor's  mind.  It  was  difficult,  sometimes 
impossible,  for  aspiring  officials  to  get  what  they 
wanted  so  long  as  the  influence  of  the  Empress 
and  her  friend  was  preponderant,  and  this  was  the 
principal  cause  of  their  defeat.  Ambitious  people 
now  made  overtures  to  the  favourite  valet  in  order 
to  advise  him  and  take  advantage  of  the  almost 
magnetic  power  which  he  was  able  to  exercise  over 
his  master.  The  instigator  and  prime  mover  of  this 
plot  was  Count  Rostopchin.  He  had  been  removed 
from  the  post  of  Minister  for  War,  succeeded  by  M. 
Nelidoff,  the  nephew  of  the  demoiselle  d  portrait,* 
and  even  banished  to  Moscow,  for  Paul  always  acted 
in  extremes  both  with  regard  to  people  whom  he  liked 
and  those  who  no  longer  enjoyed  his  favour.  Ros- 
topchin  was  not  the  man  to  forgive  such  a  slight, 
and,  determined  to  have  his  revenge  upon  those  who 

*  See  page  132. 


1 86       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

had  caused  his  fall,  allied  himself  with  Kutayschoff. 
In  order  to  divert  Paul  from  his  attachment  to 
Mdlle.  Nelidoff,  and  to  make  him  quarrel  with 
his  wife,  it  was  insinuated  that  he  was  in  leading- 
strings,  and  that  all  Russia  was  convinced  that  the 
two  women  reigned  in  his  name.  The  plotters 
brought  him  a  younger  and  prettier  woman  than 
Mdlle.  Nelidoff,  without  her  decided  character. 
She  was  the  daughter  of  Lapoukin,  who  had  been 
Director  of  Police  at  Moscow  under  Catherine  ;  Paul 
made  her  his  mistress,  and  rewarded  her  father  for 
his  complaisance  by  making  him  a  Prince  and  giving 
him  the  blue  ribbon.  Rostopchin  was  then  appointed 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  and  all  the  high  function- 
aries who  belonged  to  the  Empress's  party— the 
Princes  Kourakin  and  their  relatives,  the  chief  of 
whom  was  the  old  Prince  Repnin — lost  their  places 
and  were  banished  to  Moscow.  The  break-up  of  the 
party  was  complete  ;  it  was  enough  for  any  one  to  be 
suspected  by  the  Emperor  of  having  been  protected 
or  liked  by  the  Empress  to  ensure  his  dismissal  and 
banishment  from  the  Court. 

Paul  now  became  more  suspicious  than  ever.  He 
thought  his  sons  were  not  sufficiently  devoted  to  his 
interests,  and  that  his  wife  wanted  to  reign  in  his 
place.  All  who  approached  the  Court  were  in  constant 
fear  and  uncertainty,  being  exposed  at  any  moment  to 
be  addressed  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  Court  by 
the  Court-Marshal  with  some  insulting  message  from 
the  Emperor,  and  then  to  be  sent  into  exile.  It  was 
like  the  Reign  of  Terror.  The  balls  and  Court  festivals 
were  arenas  where  each  man  risked  his  position  and 


A  PALACE  PLOT  187 

his  liberty.  The  Emperor  constantly  fancied  that 
sufficient  respect  was  not  shown  to  some  person  who 
was  the  object  of  his  favour,  or  to  the  relations  of 
that  person,  and  that  this  neglect  was  inspired  by  the 
Empress,  and  in  such  cases  he  at  once  ordered  the 
supposed  culprit  to  be  dismissed  from  the  Court. 
His  fancies  and  his  decisions  were  equally  sudden,  and 
were  at  once  carried  out. 

Other  sovereigns,  after  a  fit  of  anger  or  extreme 
rigour,  sometimes  become  calm  and  strive  to  soften 
the  effects  of  their  first  decisions.  This  was  not  the 
case  with  the  Emperor  Paul.  Usually,  after  giving  a 
severe  order  with  regard  to  a  man  who  had  displeased 
him,  the  punishment  did  not,  after  reflection,  seem  to 
him  sufficient,  and  he  often  augmented  it.  All  who 
belonged  to  the  Court  or  came  before  the  Emperor 
wei-o  thus  in  a  state  of  continual  fear.  No  one  was 
sure  that  he  would  remain  in  his  place  at  the  end  of 
the  day,  and  in  going  to  bed  it  was  quite  uncertain 
whether  during  the  night  or  in  the  early  morning  some 
policeman  would  not  come  with  a  kibitka  to  drive  you 
off  at  once  to  Siberia.  This  state  of  affairs  began  with 
the  disgrace  of  Mdlle.  Nelidoff,  and  continued  with 

O  7 

increasing  aggravation  during  the  remainder  of  Paul's 
reign.  Mdlle.  Nelidoff  behaved  with  much  pride  and 
dignity.  She  left  the  Court,  showed  no  desire  to 
remain  there,  and  did  not  attempt  to  return.  She 
said  with  marked  disdain  to  all  who  would  listen  to 
her,  that  nothing  was  more  tedious  than  a  Court  life, 
and  that  she  was  glad  at  last  to  have  left  it. 

Paul  had  a  new  hobby  which  sometimes  diverted 
him  from  his  fanciful  suspicions  and  the  rigours  which 


i88      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

followed  them.  He  wanted  to  become  Grand  Master 
of  Malta.*  Political  considerations  had  probably  con- 
tributed to  this  wish,  as  of  all  the  Powers  that  might 
have  protected  or  possessed  Malta,  England,  who  had 
taken  it,  was  the  one  that  Europe  liked  least.  Paul 
was  at  that  time  in  intimate  relations  with  the  British 
Cabinet,  which  attached  great  importance  to  the 
active  co-operation  of  Russia  against  France,  and  he 
may  have  thought  that  under  these  circumstances 
England  would  perhaps  not  refuse  to  cede  to  him  a 
territory  which  she  had  only  provisionally  occupied 
with  the  express  promise  to  return  it  to  the  Order  of 
St  John,  to  whom  it  belonged,  and  to  place  it  under 
the  protection  of  a  power  which  should  be  designated 
by  Europe.  Paul  was  full  of  the  idea  of  himself 
becoming  Grand  Master  of  Malta,  and  of  uniting  in 
his  person  both  a  title  so  famous  in  history  and  the 
power  necessary  for  the  protection  of  the  independence 
of  so  important  a  station  in  the  Mediterranean.  Politi- 
cal considerations  were  less  concerned  in  this  idea  than 
the  vanity  of  posing  as  a  hero  of  chivalry  before  the 
Princess  Lapoukin.  Being  the  supreme  chief  and 
defender  of  the  Russian  Church,  he  saw  no  difficulty  in 
placing  himself  at  the  head  of  the  principal  Order  of 
the  Roman  Catholic  Church.  The  combined  Cabinets, 
with  the  exception  of  England,  carefully  abstained 

*  The  Order  of  St  John,  which  had  obtained  possession  of  Malta  in  1530  from 
the  Emperor  Charles  V,  was  divided  into  eight  'languages,'  each  of  which  had  its 
prior.  The  first  Russian  Knight  of  Malta  was  Sheremetieff,  who  was  sent  to  the 
island  in  16'JS  by  Peter  the  Great  to  learn  naval  warfare,  and  diplomatic  relations 
were  then  opened  by  the  Order  with  the  Court  of  St  Petersburg.  In  1774,  a  new 
priory  of  the  Order  was  established  in  Poland,  with  six  commanderships,  each  of 
which  was  to  be  held  by  a  Pole.  The  property  of  the  Order  in  Poland  was  trans- 
ferred to  Russia  at  the  second  partition,  and  this  led  to  the  selection  by  the  Grand 
Master,  Rohan,  of  M.  de  Litta  as  plenipotentiary  to  arrange  with  the  Russian 
Government  as  to  the  disposal  of  this  property. 


RUSSIA,  ENGLAND,  AND  MALTA  189 

from  contradicting  him.  Count  Litta  and  his  brother, 
the  Papal  Nuncio  at  St  Petersburg,  who  afterwards 
became  a  Cardinal,  readily  fell  in  with  the  Emperor's 
plan  and  encouraged  him  in  it.  In  Poland  there 
were  still  some  commanderships  of  the  Order,  notwith- 
standing the  bad  repute  into  which  it  had  fallen  among 
us  by  Prince  Poninski  having  trafficked  in  its  property 
and  been  condemned  by  the  Diet  after  the  first  parti- 
tion ;  and  Paul  created  other  commanderships  in 
Russia  without  troubling  himself  about  differences  of 
creed  Count  Litta  framed,  in  accordance  with  the 
ancient  rite,  the  ceremonial  of  a  Grand  Chapter  of  the 
Order,  in  which  the  new  Grand  Master  was  to  enter 
on  his  dignities.  The  Emperor  appeared  several 
times  on  his  throne  in  the  costume  of  Grand  Master, 
with  the  cross  of  the  Order,  which  had  been  sent  him 
from  Rome.  Paul  was  passionately  fond  of  cere- 
monies ;  he  wished  that  people  taking  part  in  them 
should  preserve  an  imperturbable  gravity  and  should 
attach  great  importance  to  them.  My  brother  and 
myself  were  appointed  Commanders  of  the  Order,  and 
had  to  put  on  the  ancient  costume,  consisting  of  long 
cloaks  of  black  velvet,  with  belts  and  embroidered 
crosses.  There  had  been  some  rehearsals  of  the  cere- 
mony of  offering  the  Grand  Mastership  to  the  Emperor, 
and  the  whole  business  had  an  appearance  of  theatrical 
masquerading  which  made  the  spectators  and  even  the 
performers  smile,  with  the  single  exception  of  the 
Emperor,  who  was  thoroughly  identified  with  his 
part.  The  secretary  to  the  Chapter  was  an  old 
acquaintance  of  ours,  M.  de  Maisonneuve,  a  French- 
man who  when  young  had  sought  his  fortune  in 


1 9o       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYXKI 

Poland,  had  had  some  success  with  the  ladies,  and 
had  obtained  through  them  rank  in  the  army  and  the 
Cross  of  Malta.  He  came  to  Russia  in  his  old  age  to 
restore  his  fortune,  which  he  had  squandered  twice 
over.  Count  Litta  appointed  him  his  secretary,  and 
in  this  capacity  M.  de  Maisonrieuve  gave  entire  satis- 
faction, as  he  wrote  fluently  and  was  well  acquainted 
with  legal  and  diplomatic  phraseology. 

This  hobby  of  the  Emperor's  produced  a  quarrel 
with  England,  who,  without  giving  any  definitive 
reply,  refused  under  various  pretexts  to  give  up 
Malta.  The  only  result  of  his  assuming  the  rank  of 
Grand  Master  was  the  marriage  of  Count  Litta,  who 
was  relieved  from  his  vow  of  chastity  by  the  Pope, 
and  became  the  husband  of  the  Countess  Skovronsky, 
the  favourite  niece  of  Prince  Potemkin,  still  a  hand- 
some woman,  though  not  in  her  first  youth,  who  when 
Alexander  became  Emperor  procured  for  her  husband 
a  large  fortune  and  the  important  position  of  Grand 
Chamberlain,  which  he  held  until  his  death.  Her 
daughter-in-law  was  the  Princess  Bagration,  whose 
estates  Count  Litta  administered  with  much  regularity 
arid  zeal. 

During  these  continual  changes  shameful  and  petty 
intrigues  were  as  usual  mixed  up  with  the  events  of 
the  day.  While  the  Emperor  believed  himself  to 
have  broken  the  chains  which  he  fancied  had  bound 
him,  Kutayschoff  entered  into  relations  with  Madame 
Chevalier,  a  handsome  woman  and  a  charming  actress 
engaged  at  the  Court  Theatre,  who  was  the  object  of 
the  assiduous  attentions  of  M.  Bignon,  the  French 
Minister  at  Cassel,  but  had  abandoned  him  on  receiving 


PITT  AND  ItOSTOPCinX  191 

more  sumptuous  offers  from  Paul's  valet.  These  amor- 
ous intrigues  led  to  mutual  confidences  which  added 
piquancy  to  the  moments  which  the  Emperor  passed 
with  his  servant,  and  augmented  the  latter's  influence. 
Paul's  nervous  excitement  was  increased  by  political 
events.  Austria  obtained  the  alliance  and  help  of 
Russia,  and  Count  Rostopchin,  since  his  recall  to  the 
Court,  had  infused  a  spirit  of  firmness  into  the  Foreign 
Office,  which  he  directed  with  much  activity  and  an 
ability  all  his  own.  The  whole  credit  of  the  new 
coalition  *  and  of  its  first  successes  was  attributed  to 
him,  and  his  friends  used  to  say'with  complacency  that 
the  two  great  men  of  the  age  were  Pitt  and  Rostopchin. 
Marshal  Souvaroff  also  was  recalled;  he  had  been  since 
Paul's  accession  in  exile  on  his  estates  and  under  close 
surveillance  as  a  partisan  of  Catherine.  Very  cen- 
sorious remarks  of  his  were  quoted  about  the  Govern- 
ment of  the  Emperor  Paul,  and  he  made  some  rather 
unseemly  jokes  on  the  new  organisation  and  uniforms 
of  the  army.  But  as  soon  as  the  Emperor  waiuoJ. 
him  he  loaded  him  with  honours  and  compliments. 
Souvaroff  took  the  command  of  the  army,  and  had 
some  astonishing  successes  over  the  French,  who 
were  no  longer  led  by  Buonaparte.  During  the  year 
1796  and  the  following  years  we  had  rejoiced  at 
Buonaparte's  extraordinary  victories,  hoping  that  they 
might  lead  to  the  reconstruction  of  Poland.  We  used 
to  call  him  'the  friend'  in  order  not  to  compromise 
ourselves  by  mentioning  his  name ;  and  now  every 
victory  gained  over  the  French  seemed  to  us  a  stab 
in  the  body  of  our  country. 

*  Russia,  Turkey,  England,  Austria,  and  Naples  were  then  allied  against  France. 


1 92       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

When  SouvarofFs  first  successes  became  known,  the 
Court  was  at  Pavlovsk.  The  old  Cossack  General 
Denisoff  was  also  there ;  he  had  been  beaten  by 
Kosciuszko  at  Raclavice.  He  took  a  malicious 
pleasure  in  examining  our  faces  each  time  that  the 
news  of  a  victory  was  brought  from  Italy.  He  used 
to  say  to  us  :  'I  told  you  the  French  would  be  beaten ; 
it  could  not  be  otherwise.  Russia  will  beat  her 
enemies  always  and  everywhere.  She  is  invincible.' 
Te  Dawns  were  continually  sung  in  the  churches, 
while  the  Emperor  still  mingled  thoughts  of  his 
mistress  with  those  of  politics,  war,  and  piety,  and 
placed  at  her  feet  the  trophies  of  the  victories  gained 
by  his  armies.  One  day  she  praised  an  undecided  tint 
known  as  chamois,  and  he  at  once  ordered  everything 
to  be  coloured  with  this  tint.  He  ordered  chivalrous 
plays  to  be  performed  in  which  he  imagined  himself 
to  be  the  hero ;  sometimes  he  was  a  Bayard,  at  others 
a  Nemours.  He  also  published  in  the  papers  a 
challenge  to  any  sovereign  who  differed  from  him  to 
settle  the  difference  by  single-handed  combat.  This 
was  addressed  especially  to  the  King  of  Prussia,  who 
had  refused  to  join  the  coalition.  Paul  would  have 
been  in  a  great  difficulty  if  the  challenge  had  been 
accepted,  as  he  had  not  much  personal  courage,  and 
was  very  timid  on  horseback,  so  much  so  that  when 
he  was  in  front  of  cavalry  he  never  would  allow  them 
to  charge. 

My  brother  and  I  suffered  with  the  rest  from  the 
Emperor's  abrupt  changes  of  temper.  The  fact  that 
we  were  Poles,  and  the  antecedents  of  our  family — • 
perhaps  also  charges  made  against  us  or  casual 


PAUL'S  ECCENTRICITIES  193 

remarks  uttered  with  or  without  intention — had  led 
Paul  to  suppose  that  we  were  liberals,  or  even 
Jacobins  in  disguise.  Yet  he  had  treated  us  with 
some  kindness  on  various  occasions  at  Court  assem- 
blages where  we  were  near  him.  He  especially 
seemed  to  like  my  brother,  and  he  sometimes  joked 
with  him.  When  he  was  in  a  good  humour  Paul  was 
continually  saying  and  doing  things  which  he  thought 
witty.  Once  he  told  my  brother  to  make  a  coarse 
and  insulting  remark  to  one  of  the  persons  present. 
My  brother  objected,  but  the  Emperor  repeated  his 
order  with  such  a  menacing  air  that  he  had  no  alter- 
native but  to  obey.  On  another  occasion  when 
Paul  met  my  brother  he  put  out  his  tongue  at  him  ; 
and  during  our  stay  at  Peterhoff,  seeing  my  brother 
in  one  of  the  alleys  of  the  garden  leading  to  the 
rooms  of  the  Countess  Schouvaloff,  who  had  a  very 
pretty  chambermaid,  Paul  took  him  by  the  shoulders 
and  told  him  to  go  away,  adding  '  That  bird  is  not 
for  you.'  He  also  asked  him  to  tell  him  his  adven- 
tures, and  promised  not  to  betray  his  secrets  to  any 
one.  The  Grand-Duke  Constantino  was  Governor  of 
Peterhoff,  and  was  responsible  for  the  military 
service  of  the  palace.  One  day  the  Bavarian  Minister 
passed  out  of  the  gates,  and  the  officer  in  command 
of  the  guard  having  omitted  to  report  the  circum- 
stance, Paul  sent  him  through  my  brother  the  usual 
message  that  he  was  a  fool.  The  Grand-Duke  was 
much  disturbed  at  this  incident,  but  the  officer  simply 
replied  that  the  message  did  not  produce  the  slightest 
effect  upon  him,  as  it  came  from  a  madman.  This 
shows  the  impression  which  was  already  generally 
VOL.  i.  N 


1 9  4       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  A  DA  M  CZA  R  TOR  YSKI 

produced  by  the  Emperor's  conduct ;  and  although 
he  had  been  kind  to  us,  he  gradually  became  irritated 
at  seeing  us  on  such  intimate  terms  with  his  sons. 
Prince  Bezborodko,  who  afterwards  died  suddenly — 
which  perhaps  saved  him  from  a  disgrace  which  he 
would  certainly  have  experienced  sooner  or  later,  as 
Paul  looked  upon  him  as  a  censor  and  an  inconvenient 
obstacle  to  his  caprices — had  advised  Paul  to  send  us 
to  the  Austrian  army  with  letters,  but  nothing  came 
of  this  proposal.  The  Emperor  still  suspected  us, 
and  expressed  his  suspicions  to  General  Levaschoff. 
This  old  general  had  in  his  youth  been  a  gambler  and 
a  creature  of  Potemkin's,  but  he  was  very  jovial  and 
good-natured,  and  liked  to  render  people  a  service. 
He  hardly  knew  us,  but  he  spoke  in  our  favour. 
Suddenly  the  Emperor  turned  upon  him  and  said  : 
'  Will  you  answer  for  them  ? ' — '  Yes,  Sire,'  was  the 
reply.  '  With  your  head  ?  Mind  what  you  say.' 
The  General  stopped  for  a  moment ;  but  to  hesitate 
was  to  ruin  us.  He  then  said  deliberately  :  '  Yes,  I 
will  answer  for  them  with  my  head.'  This  reassured 
the  Emperor  for  some  time.  I  had  the  story  from 
Levaschoff  himself.  Our  turn  for  promotion  by 
seniority  to  the  rank  of  Lieutenant-General  having 
arrived,  and  this  rank  being  incompatible  with  the 
appointment  of  aide-de-camp  to  the  Grand-Dukes, 
the  Emperor  decided  to  make  me  Court-Marshal  to 
the  Grand-Duchess  Helena,  who  shortly  after  married 
the  Grand-Duke  of  Mecklenburg,  and  my  brother 
Equerry  to  the  Grand-Duchess  Maria,  who  was 
betrothed  to  the  hereditary  Prince  of  Weimar.  These 
places  gave  us  the  effective  rank  of  Lieutenant- 


HOSTILITY  TO  FRANCE  I95 

General,  but  I  was  sorry  not  to  be  officially  attached 
any  longer  to  the  Grand -Duke  Alexander  nor  to  be 
able  to  accompany  him  in  his  military  duties.  The 
change,  however,  did  not  in  any  way  alter  our 
relations. 

Soon  after  I  had  to  separate  from  my  brother. 
Our  parents  had  settled  in  Galicia,  and  wanted  one  of 
us  to  go  to  them  and  become  an  Austrian  subject. 
The  family  decided  that  this  should  be  my  brother. 
He  addressed  a  very  respectful  letter  to  the  Emperor, 
in  which  he  explained  that  in  order  to  satisfy  the 
requirements  of  the  Austrian  Government  and  the 
demand  of  his  parents,  he  found  it  necessary  to  ask 
permission  to  join  them  in  Galicia.  Paul  was 
indignant  at  this  very  natural  step,  which  was  amply 
justified,  and  his  irritation  was  perhaps  the  greater  as 
he  had  shown  some  special  kindness  to  my  brother. 
He  was  so  angry  that  his  first  impulse  was  to  send 
him  to  Siberia.  Fortunately  Kutayschoff,  who  liked 
my  brother,  and  who  had  been  spoken  to  on  the 
subject  by  the  Grand-Duke  Alexander,  succeeded  in 
calming  the  Emperor's  anger.  My  brother  not  only 
got  permission  to  go,  but  was  decorated  with  the 
order  of  St  Anne  of  the  first  class.  After  he  had  left 
I  felt  very  solitary,  and  gave  myself  up  to  sad  reflec- 
tions. About  this  time  a  messenger  came  from  the 
army  who  was  asked  how  the  French  officers  dressed. 
He  said  among  other,  things  that  they  wore  large 
whiskers.  When  the  Emperor  heard  this,  he  at  once 
ordered  every  man  at  the  Court  to  shave  off  his 
whiskers,  and  the  order  was  executed  an  hour  after- 
wards. At  the  ball  in  the  evening  there  were  a 


196      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

number  of,  so  to  say,  new  faces,  with  blank  spaces  on 
their  cheeks,  showing  where  they  had  shaved.  People 
laughed  as  they  met  each  other.  The  order  was  con- 
veyed by  the  Court-Marshal,  Naryshkin,  who  himself 
saw  that  it  was  at  once  carried  out. 

After  dinner  there  were  cavalcades  at  Pavlovsk  in 
which    the    Grand-Duchesses    managed    their    horses 
with  much  grace  and  dexterity.     The  Empress,  who 
was  ordered  to  ride  by  her  physicians,  sat  astride  on 
her  horse  like  a  man,  and  only  went  at  a  foot  pace. 
The  summer  was  finer  than  usual.     I  was  quartered 
in  a  solitary  house  at  the  entrance  to  a  wood  at  the 
end  of  the  Park.     Here  I   was   more  isolated,  and 
could   fill   up  my  day   with  some   useful  occupation. 
One  morning  I  suddenly  received  a  letter  from  Count 
Rostopchin,  informing  me  that  I  had  been  appointed 
Russian  Minister  to   the   Court  of  Sardinia,   that   I 
must  at  once  go  to  St  Petersburg  to  get  my  instruc- 
tions, and  that  then  I  should  have  to  leave  in  eight 
days  for  Italy.     This  was  a  disgrace  in  the  guise  of  a 
favour. '     The  order  saddened  and  displeased  me  ;   it 
was  painful  to   me  to  leave  the  Grand-Duke  Alex- 
ander, to  whom  I  was  sincerely  attached,  and  several 
other  friends  who  by  their  affection  had  mitigated  the 
disagreeables  of  my  stay  in  Russia.     I  left  Pavlovsk 
next  day,  and  Alexander  expressed  to  me  his  sorrow 
at  my  departure.     On  recalling  his  words  to  me  on 
that  occasion,  it  seems  to  me  that  he  was  no  longer 
the  same  as  when  I  left  him  after  the  coronation  of 
his  father  at  Moscow.     He  had  already  looked  more 
closely   into   the   realities    of  things,   and   they   had 
produced  their  effect.      Some  of  his  dreams — those 


MISSION  TO  THE  COURT  OF  SARDINIA  197 

especially  which  related  to  himself  personally,  and  of 
which  we  had  not  again  spoken  for  a  long  time — had 
vanished.  Moreover,  Alexander  had  not  been  able 
to  resist  entirely  the  temptation  to  do  as  the  people 
round  him  did,  arid  he  had  sought  to  divert  his 
thoughts  by  paying  court  to  the  most  celebrated 
beauties  of  the  capital.  He  heartily  bade  me  farewell, 
and  promised  to  write  to  me  as  soon  as  he  could.  I 
asked  the  Minister  to  allow  me  to  stop  a  few  days 
with  my  parents  on  my  road  to  Italy.  He  refused  ; 
but  as  my  road  passed  in  the  vicinity  of  Pulawy,  I 
hoped  to  see  them,  if  only  for  a  few  moments. 


CHAPTER  X 

1798-9 

STAY  AT    VIENNA. THE    GRAND-DUKE  .  CONSTANTINE. POZZO    DI  BORGO 

AND      THE     BRITISH     GOVERNMENT. THE      KING     OP     SARDINIA.— 

ALFIERI. — QUARREL  BETWEEN  RUSSIA  AND  AUSTRIA. RAPPROCHE- 
MENT    WITH     FRANCE.  THE     NEAPOLITAN     COURT. A     RUSSIAN 

LOTHARIO. 

I  REGRETTED  the  more  my  forced  departure  as  I  had 
made  arrangements  for  employing  my  leisure  in 
literary  work,  for  which  purpose  the  solitary  house  I 
occupied  at  the  entrance  to  the  forest  of  Pavlovsk  was 
eminently  suited.  This  was  a  pleasant  illusion.  One 
fancies  that  one  can  create  something,  but  it  is  only 
when  one  sets  to  work  that  one  becomes  convinced 
that  hard  labour  and  more  information  are  necessary 
to  give  adequate  expression  to  a  favourite  idea,  and 
that  talent  and  perseverance  are  often  wanting.  On 
arriving  at  St  Petersburg  I  proceeded  to  the  Foreign 
Office  as  directed,  but  the  documents  I  found  in  its 
archives  gave  me  only  a  general  idea  of  the  duties  of 
my  post,  and  no  instructions  whatever  were  furnished 
me  as  to  the  special  mission  with  which  I  had  been 
entrusted.  I  passed  eight  days  in  preparing  for  my 
journey,  and  then  left  St  Petersburg.  At  Mien- 
drzyrzec  I  found  my  eldest  sister,  who  had  come  to 
tell  me  news  of  our  parents.  We  passed  part  of  the 


STAY  AT  VIENNA  I99 

night  and  the  following  morning  in  relating  our  joys 
and  sorrows.  Prudence  did  not  allow  me  to  stop  any 
longer  or  to  go  to  see  my  parents.  We  parted  in 
the  hope  of  meeting  again  at  Vienna,  where  my 
young  sister  Zamoyska  was  already  staying,  and 
where  the  eldest  also  soon  arrived. 

Four  years  had  elapsed  since  my  brother  and  I 
left  Vienna.  I  was  then  proceeding  to  Russia  to  ask 
as  a  favour  that  which  was  only  justice — the  restitu- 
tion of  our  property* ;  while  now  I  came  to  Vienna  as 
the  representative  of  the  Russian  Government.  This 
change  in  my  situation  produced  an  immense  impres- 
sion on  Viennese  society,  and  especially  on  the 
Government  functionaries.  The  few  months  I  passed 
here  with  my  sisters  were  among  the  happiest  of  my 
life.  My  aunt,  the  Princess  Lubomirska,  also  lived  at 
Vienna  in  the  winter ;  she  had  a  house  on  the  Bastei 
(the  old  fortifications)  and  received  all  the  most  distin- 
guished people  in  Viennese  society,  which  was  com- 
posed of  women  celebrated  for  their  beauty  and  wit, 
and  of  foreign  travellers,  who  came  there  in  crowds, 
as  France  and  Paris,  closed  to  Europe,  were  just  now 
detested  by  the  wealthier  classes  in  all  countries. 

Vienna  was,  so  to  say,  the  capital  of  the  Con- 
tinental States  which  were  allied  with  England 
against  the  horrors  of  the  French  revolution.  In  the 
midst  of  this  select  society,  which  was  less  Austrian 
than  European,  my  two  sisters  had  a  most  amiable 
and  flattering  reception.  My  younger  sister  was 
then  at  the  climax  of  her  beauty,  and  my  elder  sister, 
who  also  was  beautiful,  was  especially  distinguished 
by  the  qualities  of  her  mind.  An  accidental  circum- 


2oo      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

stance  doubled  the  prestige  which  they  exercised  at 
Vienna.  By  the  order  of  the  Emperor  Paul,  the 
Grand-Duke  Constantine  was  to  join  the  army  of 
Souvaroff,  which  was  then  pursuing  its  victories  in 
Italy,  and  was  to  stop  at  Vienna  on  his  way.  My 
sister,  the  Princess  of  Wiirtemberg,  who  had  just  been 
divorced  from  the  Grand-Duke's  uncle,*  was  under 
these  circumstances  in  a  difficult  position.  She  was 
the  intimate  friend  of  the  Countess  Razumovska, 
•nee  Thun,  wife  of  the  Russian  Ambassador,  and  the 
eldest  of  three  sisters  who  by  their  beauty,  their 
grace,  their  wit,  and  their  noble  sentiments,  were  the 
ornaments  of  Viennese  society.  The  youngest,  after- 
wards Lady  Guildford,  was  at  one  time  engaged  to 
Prince  Joseph  Poniatowski,  and  always  loved  him  as 
a  brother.  The  Countess  Razumovska,  though  the 
wife  of  the  Russian  Ambassador,  detested  the  Russians 
in  general  as  much  as  her  two  sisters  did.  But  the 
Ambassador,  not  knowing  how  the  Grand-Duke  would 
treat  my  sister,  already  began  to  avoid  her  company, 
and  though  he  had  professed  to  be  her  friend,  did  not 
dare  to  give  her  any  advice.  When  Constantine 
arrived,  there  was  a  meeting  of  Russians  at  the 
embassy,  and  as  my  sister  used  to  go  there  every  day, 
and  she  did  not  want  to  make  any  demonstration 
which  might  be  prejudicial  to  me,  she  also  was 
present ;  but  being  received  with  evident  embarrass- 
ment by  the  rest  of  the  company,  she  remained 
alone  in  a  corner  of  the  room.  When,  however, 
Razumovski  began  to  present  to  Constantine  the 
ladies  who  had  come  to  meet  him,  the  Grand-Duke 

*  See  page  40. 


POZZO  Dl  BORGO  AND  ENGLAND  201 

asked  for  my  sister,  went  to  her,  addressed  her  as  his 
aunt,  and  conversed  with  her  for  some  time  and  with 
much  amiability  about  her  two  brothers  whom  he 
used  to  see  daily  at  St  Petersburg.  When  he  left, 
all  those  who  had  held  aloof  from  my  sister  were  as 
eager  in  their  protestations  of  friendship  as  they  had 
been  distant  before.  Next  day  Constantine  came  to 
her  house,  having  announced  his  visit  beforehand. 
Prince  Esterhazy  and  several  Austrian  generals  had 
to  wait  in  the  ante-room,  and  my  sister,  who  was 
much  vexed  at  this,  begged  him  to  allow  them  to 
come  in ;  but  he  took  a  pleasure  in  tormenting  them 
for  more  than  an  hour,  talking  and  laughing  without 
intermission.  It  amused  him  to  keep  them  waiting  ; 
this,  indeed,  was  his  usual  custom  both  in  Austria 
and  elsewhere.  He  always  treated  in  this  way 
strangers  who  wished  to  do  him  honour. 

It  was  during  my  stay  at  Vienna  this  year  that 
I  made  the  acquaintance  of  M.  Pozzo  di  Borgo,  and 
he  owed  to  our  meeting  the  high  position  and  im- 
mense fortune  which  he  afterwards  obtained.  Pozzo 
was  at  that  time  a  young  man  who  rightly  or  wrongly 
imagined  himself  a  martyr  to  patriotism.  General 
Paoli,  who  had  become  celebrated  in  the  seventeenth 
century  for  having  defended  the  independence  of  Corsica 
against  the  armies  of  Louis  XV,  had  been  compelled 
to  take  refuge  in  England,  where  I  often  met  him  in 
1790  at  the  house  of  the  beautiful  Mrs  Cosway,  an 
artist  who  used  to  receive  the  most  distinguished 
people  in  London.  In  that  year  the  English  seized 
Corsica,  and  made  Paoli  the  head  of  the  Government ; 
the  latter  appointed  Pozzo  his  secretary  of  state, 


202       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

which  shows  that  he  was  already  known  as  a  man  of 
ability ;  and  although  he  was  at  first  a  zealous  advo- 
cate of  the  French  Revolution,  in  Corsica  he  belonged 
to  the  opposite  party.  The  influence  of  England  in 
Corsica  did  not,  however,  last  long.  After  the 
capture  of  Toulon,  the  French  republican  and  revolu- 
tionary party  gained  the  upper  hand,  turned  out  the 
English  and  their  Government,  and  took  possession 
of  the  island.  Pozzo  thus  became  a  refugee ;  and, 
passionate  and  vindictive  like  a  true  Corsican,  he 
vowed  eternal  hatred  to  France  and  Buonaparte.  He 
received  a  pension  from  England,  though  he  had  no 
employment  or  mission,  and  strange  to  say  he  never 
inspired  the  slightest  confidence  in  the  British 
Government,  which,  after  giving  him  a  pension,  took 
no  further  notice  of  him.  He  now  exerted  himself  to 
the  utmost  in  all  directions  to  satisfy  his  ambition. 
As  the  protege  of  Lord  Minto,  the  British  Ambassador, 
father  of  the  ex-Minister,  and  known  for  his  diplo- 
matic travels  in  Italy  in  1848,  Pozzo  was  received  in 
the  salons  of  my  sisters  and  of  Madame  Lanckoronska, 
a  lady  who  was  universally  respected,  and  thus  formed 
part  of  the  Polish  coterie,  which  at  that  time  enjoyed  a 
high  reputation  in  Vienna.  This  gave  him  the  entree 
to  the  best  society  and  the  protection  of  the  ladies 
who  were  its  chiefs.  Though  still  young  and  generally 
liked,  there  was  something  so  underhanded  and 
mysterious  in  his  conduct  that  he  had  not  a  single 
friend  or  person  who  could  say  he  was  intimate  with 
him.  This  at  least  was  the  impression  he  produced 
upon  me  when  I  first  made  his  acquaintance.  He 
had  a  cultivated  mind,  and  sometimes  he  seemed 


POZZO  DI  BORGO  AND  ENGLAND  203 

inclined  to  cast  a  tinge  of  poetr}^  over  his  life  and  to 
work  at  history,  moral  philosophy,  and  politics ;  but 
his  face  belied  his  words,  and  his  only  thought  was 
how  to  obtain  wealth  and  a  high  position.  Although 
circumstances  sometimes  forced  him  to  enter  the 
sphere  of  sentiment,  he  never  swerved  from  this 
dominant  idea.  Yet  he  was  regarded  at  Vienna  as 
an  interesting  man,  as  sincere,  and  as  worthy  of  true 
friendship.  The  praises  which  were  generally  lavished 
upon  him  almost  persuaded  me  that  I  had  formed  a 
mistaken  impression  of  his  character. 

When  I  was  at  Vienna  in  1790  Kaunitz  was  still 
living.  His  place  was  occupied  by  Thugut,  whom  I 
had  known  at  Brussels,  and  who  was  now  all  powerful. 
He  professed  to  be  a  friend  of  my  father's,  and  when 
he  was  Ambassador  at  Warsaw  he  held  his  own 
against  adverse  pretensions  so  firmly,  that  he  even 
offended  the  King.  He  was  of  humble  birth,  and 
that  he  should  have  been  placed  at  the  head  of  the 
Government  was  astonishing  in  a  country  like  Austria. 
Thugut  was  an  unshaken  partisan  of  war,  and  gave  up 
his  portfolio  after  the  Battle  of  Hohenlinden,  to  the 
Emperor  Francis's  great  regret,  as  he  possessed  his 
entire  confidence.  He  had  extraordinary  firmness  of 
character,  perseverance,  and  power  of  work.  While 
he  was  Minister  he  scarcely  ever  went  out,  ate  no 
meat,  and  lived  entirely  on  fish  and  vegetables. 
When  I  afterwards  saw  him  in  1820,  his  sole  occupa- 
tion was  to  go  every  evening  to  the  Kasperle  theatre, 
and  his  faithful  friend,  Count  Ossolinski,  was  the  only 
one  that  did  not  abandon  him. 

On   my  journey  to    Sardinia    I   was    particularly 


204       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

struck  by  the  miserable  appearance  of  the  villages  of 
Northern  Italy  as  far  as  Verona.  I  paid  a  hurried 
visit  to  the  principal  buildings  of  Verona,  Venice,  and 
Mantua,  having  but  little  time  to  give  myself  up  to 
the  meditations  to  which  those  celebrated  cities  have 
always  given  rise  in  my  mind.  It  is  impossible  for 
one  who  knows  something  of  the  arts  and  literature 
of  antiquity  not  to  feel  their  influence.  In  passing  by 
these  cities  and  their  fields  festooned  by  vines,  my 
thoughts  were  full  of  Virgil  and  Shakespeare,  of 
Othello  and  Romeo  and  Juliet.  The  country  was  in 
a  pitiable  state  ;  it  had  been  the  theatre  of  war,  and 
had  passed  from  one  conqueror  to  another.  Its  in- 
habitants, who  were  formerly  citizens  of  the  Cisalpine 
Republic,  were  accustomed  to  French  successes  and 
reckoned  upon  them  ;  now  that  the  French  had  been 
defeated,  they  were  despondent  and  helpless.  It  was 
a  melancholy  season  of  the  year,  and  the  roads  were 
almost  impracticable.  At  the  first  stage  beyond 
Mantua  my  carriage  stuck  in  the  mud,  and  we  had 
to  get  oxen  to  extricate  us.  On  arriving  at  Bene- 
detto, an  inhabitant  of  the  place  offered  me  supper, 
saying  that  he  had  shot  a  bird  which  was  unknown 
in  that  country.  He  at  the  same  time  complained  of 
the  hardness  of  the  times,  watching  me,  like  the  rest 
of  his  countrymen,  as  he  spoke,  to  find  out  what  party 
I  belonged  to,  and  what  opinions  it  would  be  safe  for 
him  to  express.  He  gave  me  some  excellent  soup, 
but  the  bird  was  thin,  black,  and  with  an  enormous 
head  and  beak  ;  I  think  it  must  have  been  a  crow.  I 
passed  twenty-four  hours  under  his  roof,  and  this 
Lombard,  who  in  his  heart  sympathised  with  the 


THE  KING  OF  SARDINIA  205 

French,  but  feared  the  Austrians.  made  a  strong 
impression  upon  me.  The  King  of  Sardinia,  who, 
expelled  from  the  Italian  Peninsula  by  the  French, 
had  been  forced  to  take  refuge  in  the  Island  of 
Sardinia,  had  taken  advantage  of  Souvaroff s  victories 
to  return  and  establish  himself  at  Florence ;  he  was 
encouraged  to  do  this  by  the  Court  of  St  Petersburg, 

«/  o " 

which  had  taken  him  under  its  protection.  He  could 
not  yet  venture  as  far  as  Piedmont,  where  the  armies 
were  standing  opposite  each  other.  The  Battle  of 
Novi  had  been  fought,  but  Buonaparte  was  already 
coming  back  from  Egypt,  and  Massena  had  shut 
himself  up  in  Genoa.  The  Court  of  Vienna,  too,  was 
doing  its  utmost  to  prevent  the  King  of  Sardinia 
from  returning  to  his  dominions.  At  first  it  feared 
that  his  presence  might  interfere  with  its  military  and 
political  plans,  and  the  two  Courts  had  long  been 
estranged.  Austria  did  not  care  for  anybody  but 
herself.  Selfishness  is  no  doubt  common  both  among 
States  and  individuals,  but  Austria  was  more  passion- 
ately and  evidently  selfish  than  any  other  Power,  and 
this  exclusive  sentiment  prevented  her  from  having 
any  generous  impulse,  or  a  friendly  and  sincere,  or 
even  honest  policy  towards  others. 

I  arrived  at  Florence  in  the  winter  of  1798-9. 
On  the  night  of  my  arrival  there  was  a  terrible  storm, 
accompanied  by  thunder  arid  lightning,  which  re- 
minded me  of  other  similar  natural  phenomena  that 
preceded  some  of  the  gravest  events  of  my  life.  My 
diplomatic  occupations  as  the  Russian  Minister  at  the 
Court  of  King  Emmanuel,  which  consisted  only  of  a 
few  faithful  partisans,  were  not  very  arduous,  My 


206      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

task  was  to  restore  courage  to  this  unfortunate  prince 
by  assuring  him  of  the  friendly  sentiments  and  the 
protection  of  the  Emperor  Paul,  and  to  send  to  my 
Cabinet  at  least  once  a  month  a  report,  which  it  was 
difficult  to  make  very  interesting,  as  other  Ministers 
were  posted  nearer  to  the  places  where  great  events 
were  occurring  than  I  was.  I  was  limited  to  a  certain 
kind  of  news,  and  yet  I  was  expected  to  invest  it  with 
interest.  The  task  was  especially  difficult  to  me,  as 
since  my  arrival  in  Russia,  I  had  felt  nothing  but 
indifference  with  regard  to  all  I  was  required  to  do. 
This  indifference  enabled  me  to  bear  numerous  trials 
with  firmness  and  equanimity,  and  it  was  especially 
necessary  in  my  new  appointment,  as  I  had  to  regard 
as  a  success  what  I  could  only  consider  a  calamity.  I 
had  to  keep  up  a  correspondence  with  Souvaroff  and 
forget  the  massacre  of  Praga,*  and  I  had  to  write  at 
the  end  of  each  of  my  despatches  to  the  Emperor : 
'Your  faithful  subject  and  slave  (rab),'  according  to 
the  formula  then  laid  down  by  him. 

The  King  of  Sardinia  reminded  one  a  good  deal — 
theological  erudition  apart — of  James  I  of  England  as 
he  has  been  described  in  history,  and  especially  by 
Scott.  The  branch  of  Savoy,  descended  from  an 
English  princess,  the  daughter,  if  I  am  not  mistaken, 
of  James  I,  was  the  oldest  of  the  branches  of  the 
Hanoverian  line.  The  King  did  not  like  business, 
and  though  very  pious,  was  fond  of  telling  good 
stories,  for,  like  his  predecessor  James,  he  had  a 
turn  for  buffoonery.  His  wife,  Queen  Clotilda,  was 
one  of  the  sisters  of  Louis  XVI ;  she  used  to  be 

*  See  page  73. 


THE  KING  OF  SARDINIA  207 

called  at  Versailles  le  gros  Madame,  on  account  of 
her  enormous  size,  but  when  I  was  presented  to  her, 
she  was  extremely  thin.  Her  eyes  were  still  very 
beautiful,  and  her  face  and  the  sound  of  her  voice 
had  an  expression  of  sweetness  and  melancholy. 

The  diplomatic  body  of  which  I  formed  part  was 
composed  of  myself  and  Mr  Wyndham,  brother  to 
Lord  Wyndham,  a  celebrated  member  of  the  House 
of  Lords ;  he  was  a  stout  Englishman  who  looked 
more  like  a  brewer  or  butcher  than  a  diplomatist. 
We  both  used  to  go  to  the  King's  residence  on  every 
Sunday  and  holiday.  He  occupied  one  of  the  palaces 
of  the  Grand-Duke  of  Tuscany ;  it  was  outside  the 
town,  and  afterwards  became  one  of  his  most  splendid 
residences.  We  were  always  introduced  by  Count 
Chalembert,  who  was  the  so-called  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs.  The  Count  presented  us  to  the  King 
and  Queen,  the  conversation  usually  turned  on  insig- 
nificant subjects,  and  it  did  not  last  longer  than  twenty 
minutes.  After  some  jocular  remarks  the  King  would 
dismiss  us,  sometimes  imitating  the  person  of  whom 
he  had  been  speaking,  which  he  did  in  a  very  comic 
way.  The  Queen  used  to  bow  to  us  with  a  melan- 
choly smile.  There  was  also  a  hungry  subordinate 
diplomatist  who  did  not  go  to  Court ;  his  name  was 
Winterhalter,  and  he  was  Charge  d' Affaires  of  Prussia. 
This  poor  wretch  was  so  badly  paid  that  he  hardly 
had  enough  for  his  living ;  but  though  his  clothes 
were  threadbare,  he  was  constantly  moving  about  and 
insinuating  himself  everywhere.  He  chatted  inces- 
santly, and  in  order  not  to  lose  his  wretched  pay  he 
doubtless  filled  his  daily  report  with  endless  gossip. 


208       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Though  almost  destitute,  he  had  a  big  stomach  and  a 
face  like  a  full  moon,  and  he  was  not  devoid  of 
political  ability. 

Only  a  few  Piedmontese  families  had  followed 
their  sovereign  ;  they  lived  in  complete  isolation  and 
did  not  see  or  receive  anybody.  M.  Bailly  de  Saint- 
Germain,  formerly  tutor  to  the  King,  was  supposed 
to  be  the  Court  Chamberlain,  but  no  one  ever  saw 
him  or  did  business  with  him.  He  once  gave  a  dinner, 
and  this  was  the  only  official  function  he  performed. 
M.  Dunoyer,  Count  Chalembert's  right  hand ;  M. 
de  Lamarmora  (uncle,  I  believe,  of  the  General  of 
that  name)  ;  M.  de  la  Tour,  Governor  of  Piedmont 
at  the  time  of  the  Austrian  occupation  ;  and  a  noble- 
man from  Sardinia,  completed  the  number  of  the  re- 
presentatives of  Piedmont.  Among  the  Florentines 
only  the  Marquis  Corsi  used  to  visit  the  Piedmontese, 
and  he  also  called  upon  me.  Another  house  which 
was  an  exception  to  the  general  rule  was  that  of 
Madame  d' Albany,  who  had  been  divorced  from  the 
Pretender,  and  was  now  the  wife  of  Alfieri.  She 
often  gave  dinners  to  which  strangers  were  invited. 
The  painter  Fabre  was  frequently  at  her  house  ;  I 
knew  him  long  after  at  Montpellier,  his  native 
town,  where  he  had  established  a  museum  of 
pictures  and  curiosities  collected  by  Alfieri  and  left 
by  the  latter  to  the  Countess  of  Albany,  who  gave 
them  to  Fabre  and,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  married 
him. 

While  I  was  staying  at  Florence  Alfieri  enjoyed 
robust  health,  and  occupied  the  greater  part  of  his 
time  in  Ions:  walks.  While  he  was  walking  he  used 

o  >  o 


ALFIEKI 


209 


to  declaim  aloud  verses  from  his  tragedies  without 
paying  the  slightest  attention  to  passers-by  or  to  the 
objects  which  surrounded  him.  In  the  evening  he 
looked  tired  and  exhausted,  and  directly  he  returned 
from  his  rambles  he  used  to  sit  down  to  a  game  of 
chess.  His  youth  had  been,  as  he  himself  says  in  his 
memoirs,  a  very  stormy  one.  It  was  Madame 
d' Albany,  to  whom  he  was  warmly  attached,  who  had 
advised  him  to  write  the  tragedies  and  other  works 
which  even  during  his  lifetime  had  rained  him  a 

c>  o 

great  reputation.  Some  years  before  I  had  met  him 
in  Paris.  At  first  he  was  an  ardent  admirer  of  the 
principles  of  the  French  Revolution,  but  afterwards, 
disgusted  by  its  excesses,  he  looked  upon  France  with 
horror,  and  devoted  all  his  zeal  to  the  cause  of  King 
Emmanuel,  strongly  blaming  himself  for  not  having 
been  constantly  faithful  to  it.  When  some  years  later 
a  sudden  illness  had  deprived  him  of  the  means  of  con- 
tinuing his  usual  walks,  he  concluded  that  he  would 
soon  die,  and  he  passed  away  in  a  few  days.  He  was 
a  man  of  great  merit,  and  looked  upon  events  from  a 
truly  elevated  point  of  view  ;  but  he  was  the  slave  of 
an  exalted  imagination,  and  was  subject  to  illusions. 

The  inertia  into  which  the  Sardinian  Court  and 
the  society  of  Florence  were  plunged,  was  too 
monotonous  to  be  interesting  ;  the  days  followed  each 
other  without  bringing  anything  new.  Under  these 
circumstances  I  decided  to  go  to  Pisa  to  see  M. 
Francis  Rzewuski,  formerly  Marshal  of  the  Polish 
Court.  He  was  a  friend  of  my  parents,  and  I  and 
my  mother  had  lived  in  his  house  during  our  stay  in 
Paris.  He  received  me  with  great  cordiality,  though 
VOL.  i.  o 


210       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

he  was  in  pain  ;  he  had  already  been  attacked  by  the 
malady    which    ended    in    his   death.       He  was  very 
impatient  as  regards  suffering,  and  always  relieved  it 
by  taking  opium.     He  did  this  with  the  approval  of 
a  physician  who  was  a  professor  in  the  university  of 
Pisa ;  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  by  taking  so  much 
opium  he  hastened  his  end,  and  that  it  did  not  prevent 
him   from   suffering    horribly.     We    had    known    and 
loved   M.    Rzewuski    since    we    were    children.       He 
always  had  some  sweets  for  us,  and  we  used  often  to 
go  from  Powonski  to  his  house  at  Marimont,  which 
he  had  fitted  up   with   much   luxury  and  taste.     He 
was  a  man  full  of  good  qualities — amiable,  beneficent, 
scrupulously  honest,   but  too  fond   of  ease ;   he   was 
generous  and  a  great  nobleman  in  the  true  sense  of 
the  word,  of  a  race  which  is  now  extinct.     Sometimes 
he  would  not  show  himself  to  his  guests,  though  he 
treated  them  with  munificent  hospitality.     When  he 
was  in  good  health  he  liked  to  come  down  to  his  meals, 
and  was  very  fond  of  conversation,  which  he  made  very 
interesting  by  relating  a  number  of  anecdotes.     One 
of  these  referred  to  his  stay  at  St  Petersburg.     He 
had  been  sent  there  by  the  King  after  his  accession, 
and  was   on   very  friendly  terms  with  Count  Pariin, 
Chancellor  of  the  Empire,  and  tutor  to  the  Grand- 
Duke  Paul.     Being  one  day  at  the  Count's  house  he 
took  the  young  prince  on  his  knees,  when  the  latter 
had  a  fit.     'I  was  never  so  frightened  in  my  life,'  he 
said,  '  and   I  took  good  care  not  to  play  again  with 
this  sickly  child,  who  might  have  died  in  my  arms.' 
He  knew  all  the  scandalous  gossip  of  Warsaw  and  St 
Petersburg  by  heart,  and  was  much  attached  to   the 


ROME 


211 


King,  though  after  being  for  a  long  time  his  Minister 
he  at  once  abandoned  the  Court  when  he  perceived 
that  the  King  was  not  faithful  to  his  engagements. 

I  profited  by  my  leisure  at  Florence  in  visiting  the 
masterpieces  of  art  in  the  galleries,  and  in  studying 
the  Italian  language.  I  read  Dante  with  a  priest 
who  was  remarkable  for  his  extreme  cowardice,  and 
was  constantly  repeating  the  expression  '  ho  paura/ 
which  at  that  time  people  were  not  ashamed  to  use. 
The  Italians  have  greatly  changed  since  then. 

This  tranquil  and  monotonous  existence  lasted  all 
the  winter ;  in  the  spring  people's  faces  began  to 
lengthen,  they  talked  in  whispers,  and  signs  of  great 
anxiety  followed  the  placid  security  of  the  previous 
months.  At  length  we  all  had  the  news  of  the  cross- 
ing of  the  Alps  by  Buonaparte  and  of  the  battle  of 
Marengo  and  its  results.  Sommariva  disappeared 
with  his  troops,  and  the  King  of  Sardinia  with  all  his 
Court,  myself  included,  hastily  packed  our  things  to 
go  to  Rome. 

o 

The  impression  produced  by  the  sight  of  Rome, 
when  one  comes  there  for  the  first  time,  is  indefinable. 
One  gathers  together  all  one's  recollections,  one 

O  O  ' 

strives  to  remember  all  one  has  learnt,  read,  and 
heard  of  this  ancient  capital  of  the  world,  and  to  com- 
bine all  these  echoes  of  the  soul  to  make  them  more 
sonorous.  It  is  difficult  to  realise  the  idea  that  you 
are  really  at  the  spot  where  such  great  events  have 
occurred,  that  you  tread  the  soil  trodden  by  such 
great  men.  At  the  age  especially  when  one  has  just 
completed  the  study  of  the  classic  writers  who  tell 
you  what  has  passed  and  give  you  the  names  of  those 


212       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

who  have  lived  at  Rome,  the  very  name  of  the  Holy 
City  raises  up  a  multitude  of  thoughts.  You  do  not 
see  things  as  they  really  are,  but  by  a  magical  effect 
of  imagination  you  see  them  as  they  were  formerly ; 
the  present  puts  on  the  pomp  and  the  colours  of  the 
past.  Directly  I  had  alighted  from  my  carriage  I 
hurried  to  the  Capitol  and  the  Palatine  Hill.  I  could 
not  subdue  my  impatience — I  could  not  sufficiently 
occupy  my  eyes  and  my  imagination  with  the  sight  of 
the  places  which  had  witnessed  such  great  actions. 
1  Is  it  possible,'  I  said  to  myself,  '  that  it  was  here 
that  lived  the  Scipios,  the  Catos,  the  Gracchi,  the 
CaBsars,  that  it  was  here  that  Cicero  thundered  and 
that  Horace  sang  ? '  and  I  recalled  to  my  memory  all 
that  had  since  my  infancy  been  the  object  of  my 
admiration  and  my  sympathies,  all  that  history  and 
the  poets  had  taught  me.  I  regret  much  that  at  the 
time  of  which  I  am  speaking  the  Christian  antiquities 
of  Rome  did  not  interest  me  as  greatly  as  they  do  now  ; 
all  my  dreams  were  only  of  heroic  but  pagan  Rome. 

Penetrated  with  these  grandeurs  of  the  past,  I 
thought  of  nothing  else  during  my  stay  in  the  Holy 
City.  I  determined  to  visit  every  trace  of  its  antiquity, 
and  by  examining  the  ruins  and  studying  all  that  had 
been  written  on  the  streets  and  buildings  of  ancient 
Rome,  to  construct  the  plan  of  the  city  as  it  appeared 
at  different  epochs.  My  idea  was  to  make  not  only 
general  plans,  but  a  series  of  drawings  of  portions  of 
Rome,  such  as  the  Tiber,  the  seven  hills,  arid  the 
edifices  built  upon  them,  so  far  as  imagination  can 
picture  them — beginning  with  the  first  foundation  of 
Rome  on  the  Palatine  hill  and  the  Capitol,  then  show- 


BO  ME  213 

ing  her  as  she  was  under  the  Kings  and  in  the  various 
phases  of  the  Republic,  when  she  was  still  built  of 
brick,  and  finally  under  Augustus,  when  she  became  a 
city  of  marble.  Each  of  these  drawings  was  to  repre- 
sent something  characteristic  of  the  epoch.  The  above 
plan,  which  to  me  was  new,  had  been  conceived  by 
others,  but  it  has  never  been  thoroughly  executed. 
The  drawings  representing  the  open  spaces,  the 
temples,  and  the  forts  of  the  city  divided  into  seventeen 
districts  (regioni)  occupied  me  during  the  whole  period 
of  my  stay.  I  wished  my  work  to  be  exact  and  con- 
scientious, and  to  make  it  so  required  much  time, 
expense,  and  research.  It  was  necessary  to  consult  a 
multitude  of  authors,  to  check  their  statements,  to 
employ  antiquaries,  architects  and  draughtsmen.  I 
did  not  finish  the  work ;  all  I  could  do  was  to  begin 
it.  I  had  a  very  good  plan  and  two  water-colour 
drawings  made  of  the  city.  One  represented  the 
Forum  as  it  was  at  the  time  of  the  Republic,  with  a 
crowd  of  people  opposite  the  Palatine  hill,  as  was 
usual  in  stormy  times ;  an  orator  above  the  rostra ; 
and  the  via  sacra  with  the  edifice  where  the  voting 
was  to  take  place.  The  other  drawing,  which  was  of 
large  size,  also  represented  the  Forum,  but  on  the  side 
opposite  the  Capitol.  The  subject  was  the  triumph 
of  Germanicus.  All  the  temples  on  the  slope  of  the 
Capitoline  hill  were  there,  and  Tiberius,  his  face  dis- 
torted with  hatred  and  rage,  was  represented  as 
coming  out  of  one  of  them  accompanied  by  the 
members  of  the  Senate.  A  third  drawing,  which  I 
ordered  to  be  made  during  my  absence,  was  to  repre- 
sent the  grottoes  on  the  Tiber  near  the  Palatine  hill 


214      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

during  the  first  period  after  the  foundation  of  Rome  ; 
but  it  did  not  in  any  way  carry  out  my  idea. 

My  enforced  absence  from  my  country,  my  family, 
and  my  friends,  and  the  fact  that  my  position  was  un- 
congenial and  without  aim,  plunged  me  into  a  sort  of 
lethargy  similar  to  that  which  had  oppressed  me  on 
my  first  arrival  at  St  Petersburg,  and  the  gravest  and 
most  unexpected  events  could  not  rouse  me.  During 
the  whole  of  my  life  the  sole  motive  of  my  actions 
has  always  been  one  exclusive  and  dominating  senti- 
ment— the  love  of  my  country.  That  which  did  not 
in  some  way  promote  the  welfare  of  my  fatherland  or 
of  my  fellow-countrymen  had  no  value  in  my  eyes, 
while  the  most  futile  matters  relating  to  Poland 
interested  me.  Thus  at  Warsaw  there  was  a  good 
French  theatre  and  a  very  indifferent  Polish  one  ;  yet 
I  went  to  the  latter  much  oftener  than  to  the  former. 

The  period  of  my  stay  in  Rome  was,  however,  by 
no  means  barren  of  events.  Pius  VI,  who  had  been 
elected  Pope  at  Venice,  entered  the  Holy  City  while 
it  was  still  suffering  from  the  excesses  committed  by 
the  French  troops.  I  recollect  that  at  a  reception  of 
Romans  and  foreigners  at  the  house  of  Monsignor 
Consalvi,  who  had  just  been  promoted  cardinal,  the 
Russian  Consul,  wishing  to  pay  him  a  compliment, 
awkwardly  predicted  that  he  would  become  Pope,  and 
that  Consalvi  very  sincerely  protested  against  the 
idea.  I  may  say  in  passing  that  in  my  official  reports 
I  did  not  hesitate  to  censure  the  French  for  their 
conduct.  This  seemed  greatly  to  astonish  M. 
Karpoff,  the  first  secretary  of  the  legation,  an  old 
Russian  official  who  had  probably  been  instructed  to 


QUARREL  BETWEEN  RUSSIA  AND  AUSTRIA     215 

watch  my  movements.  Knowing  the  sympathy 
generally  felt  by  the  Poles  for  France,  he  almost 
reproached  me  for  my  severity  ;  but  I  replied  that  if 
the  French  behaved  badly  I  could  not  speak  well  of 
them.  All  men,  whether  French  or  not,  lose  on  a 
nearer  view  much  of  the  prestige  and  enthusiasm 
which  they  inspire  at  a  distance. 

The  friendly  relations  which  had  existed  between 
the  Emperor  Paul  and  Austria  began  about  this  time 
to  grow  cool.  There  were  various  reasons  for  this  ; 
I  will  give  some  which  are  not  generally  known. 
The  Grand-Duchess  Alexandra,  the  eldest  of  Paul's 
daughters,  who,  as  I  stated  in  a  previous  chapter,  was 
intended  by  Catherine  to  marry  the  King  of  Sweden, 
became  the  wife  of  the  Archduke  Joseph,  Prince 
Palatine  of  Hungary.  This  union  was  contracted  at 
a  period  when  the  Courts  of  St  Petersburg  and 
Vienna  were  on  the  best  terms  with  each  other, 
and  at  the  time  when  Souvaroff  had  gained  his  vic- 
tories in  Italy.  The  Archduchess  was  of  uncommon 
beauty ;  her  features  resembled  those  of  her  brother 
Alexander,  she  was  most  graceful,  and  she  possessed 
all  the  moral  qualities  which  are  the  highest  orna- 
ments of  her  sex.  When  she  came  to  Vienna,  she 
inspired  universal  admiration,  respect,  and  enthusiasm, 
without  in  any  way  seeking  it.  Her  popularity  ex- 
tended from  the  highest  classes  of  the  capital  to  the 
most  populous  districts  of  Vienna.  This  displeased 
the  Neapolitan  wife  of  the  Emperor  Francis  II,  a 
woman  of  jealous  and  eccentric  character  and  of  ex- 
traordinary habits.  She  loved  monsters,  and  filled 
her  gardens  with  burlesque  statues.  There  was 


something  underhand  and  cunning  in  her  manner, 
and  she  never  looked  one  straight  in  the  face.  The 
only  persons  with  whom  she  was  intimate  were  her 
servants,  who  never  ventured  to  rival  her  in  beauty 
or  wit ;  she  gave  them  bizarre  banquets  and  private 
theatricals  in  which  she  played  herself,  and  her 
husband,  whose  mind  was  also  not  very  brilliant  or 
suited  to  a  more  distinguished  society,  used  to  take 
part  in  these  entertainments,  of  which  singular  stories 
were  related  at  Vienna.  The  Archduke  Joseph's 
beautiful  and  amiable  wife  was  regarded  by  the 
Austrian  Empress  as  a  rival,  and  she  rendered  the 
Archduchess's  life  so  intolerable  that  the  latter 
had  to  withdraw  with  her  husband  to  Ofen.  She 
was  Paul's  favourite  child,  and  when  he  learnt 
how  she  had  been  treated  he  flew  into  a  rage, 
demanded  that  she  should  be  sent  back  to  St 
Petersburg,  and  even  threatened  war.  Her  death, 
which  happened  almost  simultaneously  with  that  of 
her  father,  rendered  any  further  action  useless,  but  it 
plunged  the  whole  of  St  Petersburg  in  deep  mourn- 
ing, while  Austria,  having  re-established  herself 
in  Italy,  had  begun  to  treat  the  Russian  Cabinet 
with  less  deference.  The  Austrians  had  sent  away 
SouvarofF  with  little  ceremony,  and  thinking  them- 
selves already  masters  of  the  country,  they  were 
glad  to  rid  themselves  of  an  inconvenient  and 
haughty  ally.  Then  came  the  defeats  of  the 
Russians  in  Holland  and  Switzerland,  which  con- 
tributed still  further  to  estrange  Paul  from  Austria. 
Buonaparte,  taking  advantage  of  this  change,  hastened 
to  send  back  to  Paul  all  the  Russian  prisoners,  clothed 


RAPPROCHEMENT  WITH  FRANCE  217 

in  new  uniforms  and  well  provided  in  every  respect. 
This  friendly  step  on  the  part  of  the  First  Consul  gained 
the  Emperor's  heart,  and  he  declared  to  his  Ministers 
and  the  people  with  whom  he  was  intimate  that 
Russia  had  been  too  lavish  of  her  blood  and  money 
for  Austria,  who  only  repaid  her  by  ingratitude. 
He  enlarged  on  Buonaparte's  '  noble  conduct,'  and 
interpreted  it  as  a  sign  that  he  sincerely  wished  for 
the  alliance  of  Russia  ;  he  had,  Paul  said,  suppressed 
anarchy  and  the  demagogues,  and  there  was  no  good 
reason  why  Russia  should  not  come  to  an  under- 
standing with  him.  Paul  accordingly  sent  General 
Levaschoff  to  Naples  to  mediate  between  the  French 
Government  and  that  of  the  two  Sicilies.  In  passing 
through  Rome  the  General  gave  me  a  letter  from 
Count  Rostopchin,  the  Foreign  Minister — the  first  I 
had  received  from  him — introducing  General  Levas- 
chofF  to  me  and  instructing  me  to  give  him  my 
services.  I  did  this  readily,  for  the  General  was  not 
only  a  good  companion,  but  was  very  friendly.  Soon 
after  I  received  a  second  missive  from  Count  Rostop- 
chin informing  me  that  the  Emperor,  not  being 
satisfied  with  the  conduct  of  the  Sardinian  Court, 
wished  me  to  leave  it  under  the  pretext  of  visiting 
Naples. 

I  was  delighted  at  this  order,  and  left  for  Naples 
at  once.  The  Court  was  not  there  ;  its  only  repre- 
sentative was  the  Chevalier  Acton,  an  all-powerful 
Minister,  who  had  left  Sicily  to  govern  the  kingdom. 
Though  Naples,  thanks  to  its  brilliant  sun  and  its 
unequalled  position,  cannot  be  otherwise  than  beauti- 
ful, it  had  at  that  time  a  very  melancholy  appearance. 


218      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

M.  Italinsky,  afterwards  envoy  at  Constantinople 
and  then  at  Rome,  a  Ruthenian  and  formerly  a 
surgeon,  had  for  some  years  been  at  Naples  on  a 
diplomatic  mission.  He  was,  or  at  least  he  tried  to 
be,  a  learned  man.  He  studied  archaeology  and 
physics,  and  knowing  how  to  do  his  own  business 
people  concluded  that  he  would  also  know  how  to  do 
that  of  others.  In  ordinary  matters  he  certainly 
acquitted  himself  very  well,  but  he  was  never  very 
successful,  either  from  want  of  capacity  or  of  good 
fortune,  in  dealing  with  affairs  of  greater  importance. 
He  owed  his  favour  with  Catherine  to  some  letters 
on  the  eruptions  of  Mount  Vesuvius,  and  he  always 
stated  at  the  end  of  his  despatches  that  he  had  blotted 
them  with  some  of  the  volcanic  ash  that  had  fallen 
upon  Pompeii  eighteen  centuries  before.  He  was 
also  helped  in  his  career  by  his  ill-health.  He  suffered 
from  a  sort  of  aneurism  which  obliged  him  to  lead  a 
very  regular  life,  but  it  lasted  many  years. 

The  Court  of  Naples  sought  to  take  advantage 
of  the  friendly  relations  which  had  been  established 
between  Paul  and  Buonaparte.  It  solicited  the 
Emperor's  intervention  against  the  advance  of  the 
French,  which  people  thought  would,  after  Marengo, 
be  continued  to  the  most  southerly  point  of  the 
peninsula.  Italinsky  proceeded,  at  the  instigation 
of  the  Chevalier  Acton,  to  Florence,  where  Murat 
then  was,  to  obtain  some  favourable  conditions  for 
Naples ;  but  his  efforts  produced  no  result.  He 
started  before  my  departure  from  Rome,  and  M. 
Karpoff,  my  first  secretary,  being  jealous  of  Italinsky, 
and  wishing  to  revenge  himself  for  his  sarcasms, 


THE  NEAPOLITAN  COURT  219 

called  this  fruitless  journey  'The  Italinsky  Pilgrim- 
age.' 

On  my  arrival  at  Naples  I  requested  Italinsky 
to  present  me  to  the  Chevalier  Acton.  We  found 
him  at  a  table  covered  with  papers.  He  was  a  thin, 
sickly-looking  man,  with  a  gaunt  and  sallow  counten- 
ance and  black  eyes.  His  demeanour  showed  at  every 
movement  the  ravages  of  time  ;  he  walked  with  a 
stoop,  and  constantly  groaned  under  the  weight  of 
his  labours  and  misfortunes.  Yet  he  was  said  to  be 
the  favourite  lover  of  the  Queen  Caroline,  who  was 
the  absolute  mistress  of  her  husband  and  the  kingdom. 

O 

Nothing  was  done  except  by  her  will,  and  even  official 
letters  bore  her  signature  by  the  side  of  the  King's, 
to  show  that  they  governed  together.  She  had  all 
the  activity  of  her  brother,  the  Emperor  Joseph  ;  this 
was  sufficiently  proved  by  her  sparkling  glance,  her 
quick  movements,  and  her  shrill  voice.  I  saw  her 
at  Leghorn  when  she  was  disembarking  with  her 
daughters,  one  of  whom,  the  Princess  Amelie,  after- 
wards married  Louis-Philippe.  Maria  Theresa  had 
fashioned  her  daughter's  mind  to.  domination  long 
before  she  was  married  to  King  Ferdinand.  This 
habit  of  governing  afterwards  became  her  passion. 
She  also  had  a  succession  of  favourites  ;  her  tiery 
temperament  was  stimulated  by  the  Neapolitan 
climate,  and  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  believe 
her  boast  that  she  had  never  had  a  child  of  whom 
Ferdinand  was  not  the  father,  if  there  were  not  an 
unfortunate  likeness  between  them  and  Ferdinand — 
not  only  as  regards  personal  appearance,  which,  in  his 
case,  was  anything  but  attractive,  but  also  as  to 


220       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

character  and  mind.  Queen  Amelie  was  the  only 
exception  to  this  ;  her  rare  moral  qualities  were  in 
strong  contrast  to  the  characteristics  of  Caroline's 
other  children. 

The  Russian  army  corps  which  then  occupied 
Naples  was  under  the  command  of  General  Borozdin, 
the  eldest  of  three  brothers.  There  was  at  one  time 
some  idea  of  pushing  on  the  combined  forces  as  far  as 
Rome  in  order  to  check  the  French  advance,  and  the 
General  had  himself  gone  to  Rome  with  this  object. 
But  he  could  not  come  to  an  understanding  with 
General  Roger  de  Damas,  the  commander  of  the 
Neapolitan  troops,  as  to  who  was  to  have  the  general 
command,  and  the  plan  was  dropped,  fortunately  for 
the  two  generals,  who  would  otherwise  have  inevitably 
been  defeated.  General  Borozdin  was  a  dandy  of  the 
time  of  Catherine ;  he  was  very  amiable  in  society, 
but  his  military  talents  were  doubtful.  Being  in  the 
most  voluptuous  of  climates  and  furnished  with  ample 
means, by  the  Neapolitan  Government,  which  reckoned 
on  the  Russian  troops  more  than  on  its  own,  Borozdin 
had  all  a  Russian  can  desire — display  and  enjoyment. 
To  complete  his  pleasures,  fortune  had  also  placed  in 
his  hands  a  conquest  which  he  valued  more  highly 
than  any  other.  A  British  Consul  who  had  married  a 
young  and  charming  lady  had  thought  fit  to  escape 
from  Naples  directly  he  heard  of  the  defeat  of  the 
Austrians  at  Marengo  and  the  victorious  march  of 
the  French  towards  Florence  and  the  south.  In 
order  not  to  expose  his  young  wife  to  the  dangers  of 
a  precipitous  journey,  he  determined  to  place  her  in 
the  charge  of  General  Borozdin,  with  whom  he  was 


A  RUSSIAN  LOTHARIO  221 

on  intimate  terms.  The  worthy  Englishman  doubtless 
thought  he  had  deposited  his  treasure  in  safe  hands, 
but  the  temptation  was  too  strong.  The  lady  was 
like  a  rosebud,  and  Borozdin  had  with  the  husband's 
permission  located  her  in  the  house  where  he  himself 
lived,  on  the  plea  that  he  would  thereby  be  able  to 
take  better  care  of  her.  The  result  may  be  imagined. 
When  the  panic  of  a  French  invasion  was  over,  the 
Consul  returned,  took  back  his  wife,  and  could  not 
sufficiently  express  his  gratitude  to  his  friend  for  the 
service  he  had  rendered  him.  Shortly  after,  when  I 
left  Naples  to  go  back  to  Rome,  the  General  accom- 
panied me.  He  was  in  very  good  spirits,  and  did  not 
speak  any  more  about  the  Consul's  wife,  whom  he  had 
doubtless  soon  forgotten. 


,     CHAPTER  XI 

1801 

ASSASSINATION    OP    THE    EMPEROR    PAUL. 

THE  news  of  the  death  of  the  Emperor  Paul  suddenly 
fell  upon  us  like  a  clap  of  thunder  in  a  summer  sky. 
The  first  result  of  the  unexpected  news  was  astonish- 
ment accompanied  by  a  sort  of  fear,  but  these  senti- 
ments were  soon  followed  by  others  of  joy  and  relief. 
Paul  had  never  been  loved  even  by  those  whom  he 
had  benefited.  He  was  too  fantastic  and  capricious ; 
no  one  could  ever  rely  upon  him.  The  messenger 
who  brought  the  news  to  the  legation  looked  as  if  he 
were  deaf  and  dumb  ;  he  did  not  answer  any  questions, 
and  merely  uttered  unintelligible  sounds.  He  was 
terrified,  and  had  been  ordered  to  keep  silence.  All 
he  did  was  to  convey  to  me  a  few  words  from  the 
Emperor  Alexander,  who  asked  me  to  come  to 
St  Petersburg  at  once. 

[The    following    is   a   translation    of    Alexander's 

letter :— 

March  17  tk  1801. 

YQU  have  already  heard,  dear  friend,  that  owing 
to  the  death  of  my  father,  I  am  at  the  head  of  affairs. 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL        223 

I  do  not  mention  any  details,  as  I  wish  to  give  them 
to  you  by  word  of  mouth.  I  write  to  ask  you  at  once 
to  hand  over  all  the  affairs  of  your  mission  to  the 
next  senior  member  of  it,  and  to  proceed  to  St 
Petersburg.  I  need  not  tell  you  with  what  impatience 
I  am  waiting  for  you.  I  hope  heaven  will  watch 
over  you  during  your  journey  and  bring  you  here 
safe.  Adieu,  dear  friend,  I  cannot  say  more.  I 
enclose  a  passport  for  you  to  show  at  the  frontier. 

ALEXANDER.] 

This  order  gave  me  immense  pleasure.  Italy  is 
undoubtedly  a  delicious  country,  full  of  interest, 
especially  for  those  who  have  leisure  to  study  it.  The 
wars  which  had  ravaged  it  had  at  this  period  deprived 
.it  of  some  of  its  charms,  though  the  ravages  were  in 
themselves  not  without  interest.  But  I  was  far  from 
my  country,  my  family,  and  all  I  loved  ;  I  was  sad 
and  solitary  ;  I  was  never  quick  to  make  acquaint- 
ances ;  much  time  and  peculiar  circumstances  were 
necessary  to  break  the  ice  which  separated  me  even 
from  people  whom  I  saw  often.  My  old  friendships, 
though  not  numerous,  are  dear  to  me,  and  I  do  not 

O  '  ' 

feel  inclined  to  contract  new  ones.  It  was  with 
inexpressible  pleasure,  therefore,  that  I  made  my 
preparations  for  departure ;  but  I  could  not  leave 
Naples  without  visiting  Vesuvius,  Herculaneum, 
Pompeii  and  Portici.  As  I  was  ascending  Mount 
Vesuvius,  I  stumbled  and  began  to  slip  down  towards 
the  crater,  when  the  guide  ran  up,  gave  me  his  hand, 
plunged  his  iron-shod  staff  into  the  moving  debris, 
and  thus  saved  my  life.  The  idea  of  death  was  at 


224      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORY8KI 

that  moment  very  painful  to  me ;  I  was  about  to 
return  to  my  people,  and  to  exchange  a  passive  for  an 
active  existence.  I  felt  that  I  was  more  attached  to 
life  than  ever,  as  radiant  visions  of  hope,  not  yet  dis- 
pelled by  experience,  were  floating  before  my  eyes. 

On  the  day  following  that  on  which  the  news  of 
the  death  of  the  Emperor  Paul  was  communicated  to 
us,  the  messenger  sent  from  St  Petersburg  by  the 
Neapolitan  Ambassador  brought  us  a  circumstantial 
account  of  the  catastrophe.  It  did  not  astonish  me, 
as  I  saw  before  my  departure  that  the  whole  of  the 
Court  was  planning  a  conspiracy  against  the  Emperor. 
At  Naples  the  general  impression  was  one  of  joy 
almost  exceeding  the  bounds  of  decency.  On  the 
second  day  after  the  messenger's  arrival,  General 
Borozdin  gave  a  ball  to  which  he  invited  the  best 
society  of  the  town.  The  dancing  was  kept  up  all 
night,  and  the  General  encouraged  by  his  example 
public  demonstrations  of  a  gaiety  which,  to  say  the 
least,  was  ill-timed.  The  wife  of  the  British  Consul 
was  conspicuous  at  this  fete  in  a  pink  dress. 

My  companion  on  the  journey  from  Rome  to 
Florence  was  General  Levaschoff;  he  was  very 
amiable  and  full  of  anecdote.  He  had  been  sent  to 
Naples  with  the  secret  intention  of  negotiating  an 
armistice  between  the  belligerents.  The  Emperor 
Paul,  who  had  withdrawn  from  the  coalition,  wished 
by  this  means  to  avoid  all  reproach  ;  and  General 
Levaschoff  had  been  despatched  immediately  after  the 
defeats  in  Holland  and  Switzerland  on  the  pretext  of 
visiting  Italy  for  his  pleasure.  His  instructions  were 
drawn  up  by  Count  Rostopchin,  then  Foreign 


MURAT 


225 


Minister,  who  was  shortly  after  deprived  of  his  port- 
folio and  retired  to  Moscow,  upon  which  Paul  broke 
off  his  relations  with  Austria,  declared  war  against 
England,  and  prepared  to  enter  into  a  cordial  alliance 
with  Buonaparte.  All  this  happened  during  my 
absence,  and  although  I  was  on  good  terms  with 

O  cj 

Kutaysehoff,*  I  never  could  learn  the  exact  details 
either  of  Levaschoft's  mission  or  of  Rostopchin's 
dismissal.  LevaschofFs  negotiations,  which  he  was 
authorised  by  the  Cabinet  to  continue  after  Paul's 
death,  were  not  successful.  The  French  negotiators 
at  once  suspected  that  Alexander  would  not  be  so 
easy  to  manage  as  Paul  had  been.  This  was  doubtless 
also  Murat's  opinion,  for,  without  waiting  for  instruc- 
tions from  Paris,  he  occupied  the  whole  of  Tuscany, 
and  continued  his  advance.  The  more  he  suspected, 
however,  the  more  loudly  he  proclaimed  his  belief  in 
the  maintenance  of  a  friendly  understanding  between 
France  and  Russia.  He  occupied  the  palace  of  the 
Duke  of  Tuscany,  where  he  gave  me  and  General 
Levaschoff  a  splendid  dinner  to  which  all  the  generals 
and  the  principal  people  of  Florence,  comprising  some 
sixty  persons,  were  invited.  We  sat  on  each  side 
of  Madame  Murat,  who  was  very  slim  and  pretty. 
Murat,  who  sat  opposite,  paid  us  constant  attention, 
and  was  more  amiable  than  his  wife.  He  proposed 
the  health  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  and  afterwards 
drank  the  health  of  both  of  us.  When  the  General 
went  to  see  him  in  his  box  at  the  play  he  observed 
that  above  his  head  were  the  Russian  and  French 
flags  crossing  each  other. 

*  The  Emperor's  barber.     See  page  184. 
VOL.   I  P 


226       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Before  leaving  Italy  I  went  to  Leghorn  to  bid 
farewell  to  Marshal  Rzewuski,  whom  I  found  very 
ill.  I  met  at  his  house  several  of  my  countrymen  ; 
among  them  was  Sokolnicki,  a  very  active  officer  of 
engineers  whom  I  had  known  in  Lithuania  during  our 
campaign  of  1792,*  and  Rozniecki,  who  was  with  me 
in  the  camp  of  Golomb  and  in  the  skirmish  at  Granno. 
Both  heartily  shook  me  by  the  hand,  recalling  with 
emotion  the  events  we  had  witnessed  together. 
Rozniecki  told  me  that  he  had  introduced  into  the 
Polish  legions  the  system  of  drill  practised  at  Golomb, 
which  made  the  Polish  cavalry  of  the  republican  army 
superior  in  rapidity  of  movement  to  the  French 
cavalry.  I  left  Rzewuski  with  a  heavy  heart,  and 
this  illustrious  man,  proved  friend,  and  worthy  citizen 
passed  away  soon  afterwards.  He  is  buried  in  the 
Campo  Santo  at  Pisa.  His  family  intended  to  erect 
a  monument  to  his  memory,  but  I  believe  they  did 
not  carry  out  their  intention. 

After  staying  two  days  at  Vienna,  I  went  on  to 
Pulawy,  where  I  found  the  whole  of  my  family ;  but 
much  as  they  wished  me  to  stay,  they  felt  that  it  was 
necessary  I  should  go  on  at  once.  I  travelled  day 
and  night  until  I  reached  St  Petersburg,  where  my 
brother  joined  rne  soon  after. 

I  approached  the  Russian  capital  with  mixed 
feelings  of  joyful  impatience  to  see  the  persons  to 
whom  I  was  attached,  and  of  uncertainty  as  to  the 
changes  which  time  and  new  circumstances  mio-ht 

o  o 

have  produced  in  them.     A  messenger  met   me   at 
Riga  with  a  friendly  note  from  the  Emperor  and   a 

*  See  page  53. 


RETURN  TO  ST  PETERSBURG  22 j 

written  order  for  post-horses  to  accelerate  my  journey. 
The  note  was  addressed  to  me  in  the  Emperor's  own 
hand,  and  gave  me  the  title  of  Privy  Councillor, 
which  gives  the  rank  of  General.  I  was  surprised  at 
this  rapid  promotion,  which  I  decided  not  to  accept. 
When  I  arrived  at  St  Petersburg  I  showed  Alex- 
ander the  envelope,  and  he  admitted  that  he  had 
given  me  the  title  in  a  moment  of  forgetfulness,  but  I 
could  have  taken  advantage  of  the  mistake  had  I 
wished  to  do  so.  I  never  received  any  rank  or 
honorary  distinction  in  Russia  than  that  which  had 
been  conferred  upon  me  by  the  Emperor  Paul. 

The  first  impression  produced  upon  me  by  the 
Emperor  Alexander  confirmed  my  presentiments. 
He  had  just  come  back  from,  parade,  and  was  pale 
and  tired.  He  received  me  cordially,  but  with  a  sad 
and  depressed  air,  as  if  he  were  under  a  feeling  of 
constraint.  Now  he  was  the  master,  I  thought  I 
observed  in  him — perhaps  wrongly — a  tinge  of  re- 
serve and  embarrassment  which  pained  me.  He  took 
me  into  his  room.  '  You  have  done  well  to  come/ 
he  said  ;  '  our  people  expect  you  with  impatience ' — 
alluding  to  some  persons  who  he  thought  were  more 
enlightened  and  liberal  than  the  rest,  whom  he  re- 
garded as  his  particular  friends,  and  in  whom  he 
placed  entire  confidence.  '  If  you  had  been  here/ 
he  added,  '  things  would  not  have  turned  out  as  they 
did ;  I  should  never  have  been  led  away  if  I  had 
had  you  by  my  side.'  Then  he  spoke  to  me  of  his 
father's  death  with  inexpressible  grief  and  remorse. 
We  often  returned  to  this  subject,  and  Alexander 
gave  me  full  details  of  it  which  I  shall  repeat  below, 


228       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

together  with  information  communicated  to  me  by 
other  actors  in  the  tragedy.  As  regards  the  matters 
which  had  formerly  absorbed  our  attention,  and  as 
to  which  I  wished  to  ascertain  how  far  his  feelings 
had  been  changed  by  his  sudden  elevation  to  the 
throne,  I  found  him  much  as  I  expected ;  not  quite 
aroused  from  his  past  dreams,  to  which  he  still  always 
returned,  but  already  in  the  iron  hands  of  reality ; 
yielding  to  force,  and  not  yet  knowing  the  extent  of 
his  power  or  how  to  use  it. 

Alexander  told  me  that  the  first  man  who  spoke 

to  him  about  the  plans  of  the  conspirators  was  Count 

Panin,  and   he  never  forgave  him.     This  personage 

seemed  destined   more  than   anyone  else  to  play  an 

important  part  in  the  affairs  of  the  Empire,  and  he 

had   all  that  was  wanted   for  such  an  undertaking ; 

a    celebrated    name,    uncommon    talents,    and    much 

ambition.     While  still  young  he  had  made  a  brilliant 

career.       He    was    appointed    Russian    Minister    at 

Berlin,    from    which    post   he   was    recalled    by   the 

Emperor  Paul  to  be  a  member    of  the    Council    of 

Foreign  Affairs  under  the  orders  of  Prince  Alexander 

Kourakin,    his    maternal    uncle    and    Paul's    faithful 

friend,  the  companion  of  his  infancy  and  youth,  who 

alone  of  the  leading  men  at  the  Imperial  Court  had 

escaped  the  Emperor's  caprices  and  remained  steadily 

in     favour.       Besides     his     relationship     to     Prince 

Kourakin,  Count  Panin  was  the  son  of  the  eminent 

General  of  that  name,  and  the  nephew  of  the  Minister 

who  had  been  the  Grand-Duke  Paul's  tutor.     These 

antecedents   gave  Count  Panin  a   certain    assurance 

and  air  of  importance.     He  was  a  tall,  reserved-looking 


COUNTS  PANIN  AND  PAHLEN  229 

'man,  and  wrote  in  excellent  French;  his  despatches 
were  perfect  in  every  respect  both  as  regards  matter 
and  style.  He  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  man  of 
great  talent,  energy,  and  good  sense,  but  of  dry  and 
imperious  character.  After  remaining  for  some 
months  in  the  Foreign  Office,  he  displeased  the 
Emperor,  who  deprived  him  of  his  appointment  and 
sent  him  back  to  Moscow.  As  will  be  seen  further 
on,  Panin  was  one  of  the  chief  leaders  of  the  con- 
spiracy which  brought  about  Paul's  death,  though  he 
did  not  actually  take  part  in  it.  During  my  previous 
stay  in  the  Russian  capital  I  had  never  met  him,  for 
having  entered  the  diplomatic  career  at  an  early  age, 
he  scarcely  ever  came  there.  His  wife,  a  Countess 
Orloff,  did  not  follow  him  abroad ;  she  was  good  and 
amiable,  and  had  been  very  kind  to  me.  When  I 
returned  to  St  Petersburg  she  insisted  on  bringing 
me  and  her  husband  together,  and  did  everything 
in  her  power  to  make  us  friends,  but  without  success. 
Apart  from  other  reasons,  the  Count's  exterior  would, 
I  think,  almost  have  alone  been  sufficient  to  make 
this  impossible.  I  have  often  been  struck  by  his 
icy  expression ;  his  impassive  countenance,  on  a  body 
as  straight  as  a  spike,  did  not  induce  one  to  address 
him.  I  saw  him  but  little,  however,  and  my  judgment 
of  his  character  might  have  been  erroneous  and  even 
unjust. 

The  two  Counts  Panin  and  Pahlen  were  at  that 
time  the  strongest  heads  of  the  Empire.  They  saw 
further  and  more  clearly  than  the  other  members  of 
Paul's  Council,  to  which  both  of  them  belonged ;  and 
they  agreed  to  initiate  Alexander  into  their  plans. 


230      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

It  would  not  have  been  prudent  to  attempt  anything 
without  being:  assured  of  the  consent  of  the  heir 'to 

c5 

the  crown.  Devoted  fanatics  or  enthusiasts  might  no 
doubt  have  acted  otherwise.  By  not  implicating  the 
son  in  the  dethronement  of  his  father,  by  exposing 
themselves  to  a  certain  death,  they  would  have  better 
served  both  Russia  and  the  prince  who  was  to  be 
called  upon  to  govern  her  ;  but  such  a  course  would 
have  been  almost  impracticable,  and  it  would  have 
demanded  an  audacity  and  antique  virtue  which  in 
these  days  very  few  men  possess.  Pahlen,  as 
Governor  of  St  Petersburg,  had  easy  means  of  access 
to  the  Grand-Duke,  and  obtained  from  him  a  secret 
audience  for  Panin ;  their  first  interview  took  place 
in  a  bath.  Panin  represented  to  Alexander  the  evils 
from  which  Russia  was  suffering  and  would  continue 
to  suffer  if  Paul  continued  to  reign.  He  said  that 
Alexander's  most  sacred  duty  was  to  his  country,  and 
that  he  must  not  sacrifice  millions  of  people  to  the 
extravagant  caprices  and  follies  of  a  single  man,  even 
if  that  man  was  his  father ;  that  the  life,  or  at  least 
the  liberty,  of  his  mother,  of  himself,  and  of  the  whole 
of  the  Imperial  family  was  threatened  by  Paul's 
inconceivable  aversion  for  his  wife,  from  whom  he  was 
entirely  separated  ;  that  this  aversion  increased  from 
day  to  day,  and  might  prompt  him  to  the  most  out- 
rageous acts ;  and  that  it  was  therefore  necessary  to 
save  Russia,  whose  fate  was  in  Alexander's  hands,  by 
deposing  Paul,  which  would  be  the  only  means  of 
preventing  him  from  inflicting  greater  calamities  on. 
his  country  and  his  family,  and  securing  to  him  a 
quieter  and  more  happy  life.  This  speech  produced 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL         231 

a  great  impression  on  Alexander,  but  it  did  not  con- 
vince him.  It  required  more  than  six  months  to 
enable  his  tempters  to  obtain  his  consent  to  their 
plans.  Pahlen  had  at  first  left  all  the  speaking  to 
Panin,  who  was  an  adept  at  specious  arguments ;  but 
when  the  latter  was  sent  to  Moscow,  Pahlen  completed 
the  work  of  his  colleague  by  hints  and  allusions,  in- 
telligible only  to  Alexander  himself,  which  were  so 
skilfully  introduced,  with  a  military  frankness  which 
he  made  almost  as  effective  as  eloquence,  that  Alex- 
ander became  more  and  more  persuaded  that  the 
aims  of  the  conspiracy  were  just  and  good.* 

It  was  a  thousand  pities  that  a  prince  so  anxious 
and  so  well  qualified  to  be  a  benefactor  to  his  country 
did  not  hold  entirely  aloof  from  a  conspiracy  which 
resulted  almost  inevitably  in  his  father's  assassination. 
Russia  certainly  suffered  much  under  the  almost 
maniacal  Government  of  Paul,  and  there  are  no  means 
in  that  country  of  restraining  or  confining  a  mad 
sovereign ;  but  Alexander  felt  and  exaggerated  in  his 
own  mind  all  his  life  the  sombre  reflection  of  the 
crime  committed  on  his  father,  which  had  fallen  on 
himself,  and  which  he  thought  he  could  never  wipe 
out.  This  ineffaceable  stain,  although  it  was  brought 
about  solely  by  his  inexperience  and  his  total  and 
innocent  ignorance  of  Russian  affairs  and  the  Russian 
people,  settled  like  a  vulture  on  his  conscience, 
paralysed  his  best  faculties  at  the  commencement  of 

*  Pahlen  had  the  reputation  of  being  one  of  the  most  astute  men  in  Russia. 
There  was  no  one  like  him  to  get  out  of  a  difficulty,  and  to  advance  his  interests  in 
spite  of  all  obstacles.  He  fell,  however,  just  at  the  moment  when  he  seemed  to  have 
nothing  to  fear.  He  came  from  Livonia,  where  they  used  to  say  of  him  :  '  Er  hat  die 
Fiffologie  studiert '  (he  was  a  student  of  Fiffology— from  the  German  word,  fiffig 
cunning). 


232       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

his  reign,  and  plunged  him  into  a  mysticism  some- 
times degenerating  into  superstition  at  its  close. 

At  the  same  time  it  must  be  admitted  that  the 
Emperor  Paul  was  precipitating  his  country  into 
incalculable  disasters  and  into  a  complete  disorganisa- 
tion and  deterioration  of  the  Government  machine. 
Paul  governed  intermittently,  without  troubling  him- 
self about  the  consequences,  like  a  man  who  acts 
without  reflection  according  to  the  impulse  of  the 
moment.  The  higher  classes,  the  principal  officials, 
the  generals  and  other  officers  of  rank — all,  in  a 
word,  who  thought  and  acted  in  Russia — were  more 

'  O 

or  less  convinced  that  the  Emperor  had  fits  of 
mental  alienation.  His  reign  became  a  rule  of  terror. 
He  was  hated  even  for  his  good  qualities,  for  at 
bottom  he  desired  justice,  and  this  impulse  sometimes 
led  him  to  do  a  just  thing  in  his  outburst  of  rage ; 
but  his  feeling  of  justice  was  blind,  and  struck 
at  all  without  discrimination  of  circumstances  ;  always 
passionate,  often  capricious  and  cruel,  his  decrees 
were  constantly  suspended  over  the  heads  of  the 
military  and  civil  officers,  and  made  them  detest  the 
man  who  thus  filled  their  lives  with  uncertainty  and 
terror.  The  conspiracy  had  the  sympathy  of  all,  for 
it  promised  to  put  an  end  to  a  regime  which  had 
become  intolerable.  A  sovereign  may  commit  grave 
mistakes,  bring  evils  on  his  country,  cause  its  wealth 
or  its  power  to  decline,  without  exposing  himself  to 
death  as  a  punishment  for  his  misdeeds.  But  when 
the  sovereign  authority  weighs  at  every  moment  on 
each  individual  in  the  State,  and  continually  disturbs 
like  a  fever  the  peace  of  families  in  the  ordinary 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL        233 

relations  of  life,  passions  are  excited  which  are  much 
more  formidable  than  those  produced  by  evils  which, 
though  affecting  the  entire  community,  are  little  felt 
by  individuals.  This  was  the  real  motive  of  Paul's 
assassination.  I  utterly  disbelieve  the  story  that 
English  money  contributed  to  this  event.  For  even 
supposing — and  I  am  sincerely  convinced  there  is  no 
foundation  for  such  a  belief — that  the  English 

o 

Government  of  that  day  was  devoid  of  all  feelings  of 
morality,  such  an  expenditure  would  have  been 
totally  unnecessary.  The  deposition,  if  not  the 
murder,  of  Paul  had  become  inevitable  in  the  natural 
course  of  events.  Even  before  my  departure  from  St 
Petersburg  it  was  the  fashion  among  the  young  men 
of  the  Court  to  talk  freely  on  this  subject,  to  make 
satirical  epigrams  on  Paul's  eccentricities,  and  to 
suggest  all  kinds  of  absurd  plans  for  getting  rid  of  him. 
The  universal  aversion  to  his  rule  was  shown,  often 
without  any  attempt  at  concealment,  on  every  possible 
occasion  ;  it  was  a  State  secret  which  was  confided  to 
all,  and  which  no  one  betrayed,  though  the  people 
lived  under  the  most  redoubted  and  the  most  suspicious 
of  sovereigns,  who  encouraged  espionage,  and  spared 
no  means  of  obtaining  exact  information  not  only 
of  the  actions,  but  of  the  thoughts  and  intentions 
of  his  subjects.  The  wish  to  get  rid  of  the  Emperor 
Paul  showed  itself  more  strongly  the  nearer  one 
approached  the  Court  and  the  capital,  but  it  did  not 
really  become  active  until  almost  at  the  moment  of 
its  execution.  Notwithstanding  the  extreme  favour 
with  which  the  conspiracy  was  regarded  in  the  most 
distinguished  society  of  the  Empire,  it  could  not  have 


234       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

attained  its  objects,  and  would  probably  have  been 
discovered,  if  the  appointment  of  Governor-General 
of  St  Petersburg,  which  placed  at  his  disposal  the 
garrison  and  the  police,  had  not  been  in  the  hands  of 
the  chief  promoter  of  the  enterprise. 

One  day  the  Emperor  said,  with  a  scrutinizing 
glance  at  Pahlen :  '  I  hear  a  conspiracy  is  being 
formed  against  me.'  '  Such  a  thing  is  impossible, 
Sire/  replied  the  General  with  his  frank  and  good- 
natured  smile ;  '  it  cannot  be  formed  unless  I  belong 
to  it.'  This  reassured  Paul,  though  it  is  said  that  his 
suspicions  were  aroused  by  anonymous  letters,  and 
that  on  the  eve  of  his  death  he  had  sent  for  General 
Araktcheyeff  to  give  him  the  place  of  Governor- 
General  of  St  Petersburg,  after  dismissing  Pahlen. 
If  Araktcheyeff  had  come  in  time  St  Petersburg 
would  have  been  the  scene  of  many  tragic  events ;  he 
was  a  man  imbued  with  a  strong  sentiment  of  order 
and  with  an  energy  which  sometimes  grew  into 
ferocity.  His  return  would  probably  have  been  fol- 
lowed by  that  of  Count  E-ostopchin,  and  Paul  might 
then  have  been  saved.  He  had  dismissed  so  many  of 
his  Ministers  that  he  was  surrounded  by  incapable 
men  to  whom  he  had  given  the  highest  offices  of 
State.  Prince  Kourakin  continued  to  direct  Foreign 
Affairs  with  much  kindness  of  heart  and  little  wisdom, 
while  an  insignificant  man  named  Obalianinoff  held 
the  important  post  of  Procurator-General,  involving 
the  direction  of  the  police  and  the  whole  administra- 
tion of  the  Empire,  solely  because  he  had  formerly 
been  steward  of  the  Gatchina  estate.  Kutayschoff 
was  still  the  man  in  whom  Paul  most  trusted.  When 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL         235 

he  was  arrested  on  the  day  after  his  master's  death, 
letters  were  found  in  his  pocket  revealing  the  objects 
of  the  conspiracy,  the  time  when  it  was  to  be  executed, 
and  the  names  of  the  conspirators.  But  he  never 
opened  his  letters  directly  he  received  them.  His 
favourite  saying  was  '  business  to-morrow/  and  he  put 
these  important  letters  in  his  pocket  in  order  not  to 
interrupt  his  pleasures  that  evening. 

Paul  had  just  finished  the  construction  at  immense 
expense  of  the  palace  of  St  Michael.*  This  building 
was  erected  after  his  own  designs,  and  was  a  sort  of 
fortified  castle  where  the  Emperor  thought  his  life 
would  be  safe.  'I  never  felt  happier  or  more  at  ease/ 
he  said  when  he  took  up  his  residence  in  this  palace, 
and  he  became  more  self-indulgent  and  -autocratic 
than  ever. 

Although  everybody  sympathised  with  the  con- 
spiracy, nothing  was  done  until  Alexander  had  given 
his  consent  to  his  father's  deposition.  The  men  who 
undertook  to  carry  out  the  plan  were  Pahlen  arid  the 
two  Zuboffs,  whom  Paul  had  recalled  from  exile  and 
loaded  with  favours,  thinking  he  had  nothing  to  fear 
from  them  now  he  was  in  his  new  castle.  Their  first 
step  was  to  induce  a  number  of  Generals  and  other 
officers  of  rank  who  were  their  friends  to  come  under 
various  pretexts  to  St  Petersburg ;  and  this  was 
rendered  more  easy  by  the  fact  that  Paul  himself  had 
invited  many  high  functionaries  and  Generals  to  be 

*  The  swindling  which  took  place  at  the  erection  of  this  building  is  almost 
incredible.  The  chief  architect,  B  .  .  .,  was  an  Italian  foreman,  whom  Count 
Stanislas  Potocki  had  brought  from  Italy,  and  who  passed  from  Warsaw  to  the 
service  of  the  Grand-Duke  Paul  at  Gatchina.  B  .  .  .  's  commissions  on  the  work 
he  performed  were  enormous,  and  he  left  a  large  fortune  to  his  daughter's  husband 
and  their  children,  who  became  Russian  diplomatists. 


236      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

present  at  the  fetes  he  was  about  to  give  on  the 
marriage  of  one  of  his  daughters.  Pahlen  and  the 
Zuboffs  took  steps  to  enlist  the  services  of  some  of 
the  more  eminent  of  the  Generals,  without  stating 
positively  what  they  intended  to  do.  But  it  was 
necessary  to  act  at  once,  for  the  slightest  imprudence 
or  revelation  might  place  the  Emperor  in  possession 
of  their  secret,  and  he  was  already  so  suspicious  that 
he  might  at  any  moment  take  some  step  which  would 
be  their  ruin.  It  was  not  known  whether  he  had 
already  sent  for  Araktcheyeff  and  Rostopchin.  The 
former  lived  at  twenty-four  hours'  journey  from  St 
Petersburg  and  might  come  at  any  moment.  Doubt- 
less he  and  Rostopchin  would  endeavour  to  moderate 
the  Emperor's  excesses,  but  their  influence  would 
probably  not  be  sufficient  to  put  a  stop  to  the  severities 
he  wished  to  exercise  with  regard  to  several  members 
of  the  Imperial  family.  It  was  evident  that  any 
further  delay  or  vacillation  would  be  most  dangerous, 
and' miff ht  be  the  cause  of  incalculable  calamities; 

*  O 

and  the  conspirators  accordingly  decided  to  strike 
the  blow  on  the  3rd  of  March,  1801. 

On  that  evening  Plato  Zuboff  gave  a  grand 
supper,  to  which  were  invited  all  the  Generals  and 
other  officers  of  rank  who  were  supposed  to  approve  of 
the  objects  of  the  conspiracy.  These  were  only  now 
clearly  explained  to  them,  as  the  only  way  to  secure 
the  enterprise  against  accidents  was  for  two  or  three 
leaders  to  prepare  it,  and  not  to  announce  it  to  the 
others  who  were  to  take  part  in  it  until  the  moment 
for  its  execution  should  arrive. 

Zuboff    represented    to    his    guests    the    deplor- 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL         237 

able    condition  in    which  Russia  was   placed   by  the 
insanity  of  her  sovereign,  the  dangers  to  which  both 
the   State   and  each  individual  citizen  were   exposed, 
and   the   probability  that   new  and   more   outrageous 
excesses    might   at   any   moment   be    expected.      He 
pointed   out  that  the   insane  act  of  a  rupture  with 
England  was  contrary  to  the  essential  interests  of  the 
Russian   nation,  dried   up  the  sources  of  its  wealth, 
and  exposed  the   Baltic  ports,  and  the  capital  itself, 
to  the  gravest  disasters;  and  that  none  of  those  whom 
he  addressed  could  be  sure  of  their  fate  on  the  morrow. 
He    enlarged    on   the    virtues    of    the    Grand-Duke 
Alexander,  and    on  the  brilliant  destinies  of  Russia 
under  the  sceptre  of  a  young  Prince  of  such  promise, 
whom  the   Empress  Catherine,   of  glorious  memory, 
had   regarded  as  her  successor,  and  had  intended,  if 
she  had  not  been  prevented  by  her  death,  to  place 
on   the   throne.       He    concluded    by   declaring    that 
Alexander,  rendered  desperate  by  the  misfortunes  of 
his  country,  had  decided  to  save  it,  and  that  all  that 
was  now  necessary  was  to  depose  the  Emperor  Paul, 
to  oblige  him  to  sign  a  deed  of  abdication,  and,  by 
proclaiming  Alexander  Emperor,  to  prevent  his  father 
from  ruining  both  himself  and  his  Empire.     Pahlen 
and  both  the  Zuboffs  repeated  to  the  assembled  guests 
the  assurance  that  the   Grand-Duke  Alexander  ap- 
proved of  their  plan.     They  were  careful  not  to  say 
how  much  time  it  took  them  to  persuade  him,  and 
with  what    extreme    difficulty  and   with    how   many 
restrictions  and  modifications  his  consent  was  finally 
obtained.     The  last  point  was  left  vague,  and  every- 
one probably  explained  it  after  his  own  fashion. 


238       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

When  the  company  had  been  made  to  understand 
that  Alexander's  consent  had  been  given,  there  was 
no  further  hesitation.  Meanwhile  champagne  was 
drunk  freely  and  there  was  general  excitement. 
Pahlen,  who  had  gone  away  for  a  short  time  on1 
business  connected  with  his  functions  as  Governor- 
General,  came  back  from  the  Court  and  announced 
that  the  Emperor  did  not  seem  to  suspect  anything, 
and  had  said  good-night  to  the  Empress  and  the 
Grand-Dukes  as  usual.  Those  who  had  been  at 
supper  in  the  palace  afterwards  said  they  recollected 
that  Alexander,  when  he  took  leave  of  his  father, 
did  not  change  countenance  or  show  that  he  was 
conscious  of  the  scene  which  was  preparing.  Pro^ 
bably  they  did  not  look  at  him,  for  he  has  often  told 
me  how  agitated  he  was,  and  certainly  the  risks  he 
ran  not  only  for  himself,  but  for  his  mother,  his 
family,  and  many  others  were  enough  to  make  him 
sad  and  anxious.  The  Grand-Dukes  were  always 
obliged  to  maintain  an  attitude  of  strict  reserve 
before  their  father,  and  this  constant  habit  of  con- 
cealing their  emotions  and  thoughts  may  explain  why 
at  this  grave  and  supreme  moment  no  one  perceived 
in  Alexander's  countenance  what  was  passing  in  his 
mind. 

At  the  Zuboffs'  house  the  guests  had  become  so 
convivial  that  time  went  fast.  At  midnight  the  con- 
spirators set  out  for  the  Emperor's  palace.  The 
leaders  had  drunk  but  moderately,  wishing  to  keep 
their  heads  clear,  but  the  majority  of  those  who  fol- 
lowed them  were  more  or  less  intoxicated ;  some 
could  even  hardly  keep  their  legs.  They  were  divided 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL         239 

into  two  bands,  each  composed  of  some  sixty  Generals 
and  other  officers.  The  two  Zuboffs  and  General 
Bennigsen  were  at  the  head  of  the  first  band, 
which  was  to  go  to  the  palace  direct ;  the  second 
was  to  enter  through  the  garden,  and  was  under 
the  command  of  Pahlen.  The  aide-de-camp  in  waiting, 
who  knew  all  the  doors  and  passages  of  the  palace, 
as  he  was  daily  on  duty  there,  guided  the  first  band 
with  a  dark  lantern  to  the  entrance  of  the  Emperor's 
dressing-room,  which  adjoined  his  bedroom.  A 
young  valet  who  was  on  duty  stopped  the  con- 
spirators and  cried  out  that  rebels  were  coming  to 
murder  the  Emperor.  He  was  wounded  in  the 
struggle  which  ensued,  and  rendered  incapable  of 
further  resistance.  His  cries  waked  the  Emperor, 
who  ofot  out  of  bed  and  ran  to  a  door  which  communi- 

O 

cated  with  the  Empress's  apartments  and  was  hidden 
by  a  large  curtain.  Unfortunately,  in  one  of  his  fits 
of  dislike  for  his  wife,  he  had  ordered  the  door  to  be 
locked  ;  and  the  key  was  not  in  the  lock,  either  because 
Paul  had  ordered  it  to  be  taken  away  or  because  his 
favourites,  who  were  opposed  to  the  Empress,  had 
done  so,  fearing  lest  he  should  some  day  have  a  fancy 
to  return  to  her.  Meanwhile  the  conspirators  were 
confused  and  terrified  at  the  cries  of  Paul's  faithful 
defender,  the  only  one  he  had  at  a  moment  of  supreme 
danger  when  he  believed  in  his  omnipotence  more 
than  ever  and  was  surrounded  by  a  triple  line  of  walls 
and  guards.  Zuboff,  the  chief  of  the  band,  lost  heart 
and  proposed  to  retire  at  once,  but  General  Bennigsen 
(from  whom  I  obtained  some  of  these  details)  seized 
him  by  the  arm  and  protested  against  such  a  dangerous 


24o      MEMOIRS  OF  PRIXCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

step.  '  What  ? '  he  said,  '  You  have  brought  us  so 
far,  and  now  you  want  to  withdraw  ?  We  are  too  far 
advanced  to  follow  your  advice,  which  would  ruin  us 
all.  The  wine  is  drawn,  it  must  be  drunk.  Let  us 
inarch  on.' 

It  was  this  Hanoverian  that  decided  the  Emperor's 
fate  ;  he  was  one  of  those  who  had  only  that  evening 
been  informed  of  the  conspiracy.  He  placed  himself 
at  the  head  of  the  band,  and  those  who  had  most 
courage,  or  most  hatred  for  Paul,  were  the  first  to 
follow  him.  They  entered  the  Emperor's  bedroom, 
went  straight  to  his  bed,  and  were  much  alarmed  at 
not  finding  him  there.  They  searched  the  room  with 
a  light,  and  at  last  discovered  the  unfortunate  Paul 
hiding  behind  the  folds  of  the  curtain.  They  dragged 
him  out  in  his  shirt  more  dead  than  alive ;  the  terror 
he  had  inspired  was  now  repaid  to  him  with  usury. 
Fear  had  paralysed  his  senses  and  had  deprived  him  of 
speech ;  his  whole  body  shivered.  He  was  placed  on 
a  chair  before  a  desk.  The  long,  thin,  pale,  and 
angular  form  of  General  Bennigsen,  with  his  hat  on 
his  head  and  a  drawn  sword  in  his  hand,  must  have 
seemed  to  him  a  terrible  spectre.  *  Sire,'  said  the 
General,  '  you  are  my  prisoner,  and  have  ceased  to 
reign ;  you  will  now  at  once  write  and  sign  a  deed  of 
abdication  in  favour  of  the  Grand-Duke  Alexander.' 
Paul  was  still  unable  to  speak,  and  a  pen  was 
put  in  his  hand.  Trembling  and  almost  unconscious, 
he  was  about  to  obey,  when  more  cries  were  heard. 
General  Bennigsen  then  left  the  room,  as  he  has  often 
assured  me,  to  ascertain  what  these  cries  meant, 
and  to  take  steps  for  securing  the  safety  of  the 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL         241 

palace  and  of  the  Imperial  family.  He  had  only  just 
gone  out  at  the  door  when  a  terrible  scene  began. 
The  unfortunate  Paul  remained  alone  with  men  who 
were  maddened  by  a  furious  hatred  of  him,  owing 
to  the  numerous  acts  of  persecution  and  injustice 
they  had  suifered  at  his  hands,  and  it  appears  that 
several  of  them  had  decided  to  assassinate  him,  per- 
haps without  the  knowledge  of  the  leaders  or  at  least 
without  their  formal  consent.  The  catastrophe,  which 
in  such  a  case  was,  in  a  country  like  Russia,  almost 
inevitable,  was  doubtless  hastened  by  the  cries  above 
referred  to,  which  alarmed  the  conspirators  for  their 
own  safety.  Count  Nicholas  Zuboff,  a  man  of  her- 
culean proportions,  was  said  to  be  the  first  that  placed 
his  hand  on  his  sovereign,  and  thereby  broke  the  spell 
of  imperial  authority  which  still  surrounded  him. 
The  others  now  saw  in  Paul  nothing  but  a  monster,  a 
tyrant,  an  implacable  enemy— and  his  abject  sub- 
mission, instead  of  disarming  them,  rendered  him 
despicable  and  ridiculous  as  well  as  odious  in  their 
eyes. 

One  of  the  conspirators  took  off  his  official  scarf 
and  tied  it  round  the  Emperor's  throat.  Paul 
struggled,  the  approach  of  death  restoring  him  to 
strength  and  speech.  He  set  free  one  of  his  hands 
and  thrust  it  between  the  scarf  and  his  throat,  crying 
out  for  air.  Just  then  he  perceived  a  red  uniform, 
which  was  at  that  time  worn  by  the  officers  of  the 
cavalry  guard,  and  thinking  that  one  of  the  assassins 
was  his  son  Constantine,  who  was  a  colonel  of  that 
regiment,  he  exclaimed  :  '  Mercy,  your  Highness, 
mercy !  Some  air,  for  God's  sake  ! '  But  the  con- 
VOL.  i.  Q 


242       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

spirators  seized  the  hand  with  which  he  was  striving 
to  prolong  his  life,  and  furiously  tugged  at  both  ends 
of  the  scarf.  The  unhappy  Emperor  had  already 
breathed  his  last,  and  yet  they  tightened  the  knot 
and  dragged  along  the  dead  body,  striking  it  with 
their  hands  and  feet.  The  cowards  who  until  then 
had  held  aloof,  surpassed  in  atrocity  those  who  had 
done  the  deed.  Just  at  that  time  General  Bennigsen 

O 

returned.  I  do  not  know  whether  he  was  sincerely 
grieved  at  what  had  happened  in  his  absence  ;  all 
he  did  was  to  stop  the  further  desecration  of  the 
Emperor's  body. 

Meanwhile  the  cry  '  Paul  is  dead  ! '  was  heard  by 
the  other  conspirators,  and  filled  them  with  a  joy 
that  deprived  them  of  all  sentiment  of  decency  and 
dignity.  They  wandered  tumultuously  about  the 
corridors  and  rooms  of  the  palace,  boasting  to  each 
other  of  their  prowess ;  many  of  them  found  means 
of  adding  to  the  intoxication  of  the  supper  by  break- 
ing into  the  wine  cellars  and  drinking  to  the  Emperor's 
death. 

Pahlen,  who  seems  to  have  lost  his  way  in  the 
garden,  came  to  the  palace  with  his  band  imme- 
diately after  the  deed  had  been  consummated.  It  is 
said  that  he  had  delayed  his  arrival  on  purpose,  so  as 
to  be  able  to  profess  to  have  come  to  the  Emperor's 
assistance  in  case  his  colleagues  should  have  failed. 
Be  this  as  it  may,  he  was  extremely  active  directly 
he  arrived,  giving  the  necessary  orders  during  the 
rest  of  the  night,  and  omitting  nothing  which  could 
give  him  a  claim  to  reward  as  the  prime  mover  and 
commander  of  the  enterprise. 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL         2^3 

It  will  be  seen  from  the  above  narrative  how  easy 
it  would  have  been  for  the  undertaking  to  have  been 
foiled  by  an  accident,  notwithstanding  the  precautions 
\vhich  had  been  taken  to  ensure  its  success.  The 
conspiracy  had  the  sympathies  of  the  higher  classes 
and  most  of  the  officers ;  but  not  of  the  lower  ranks 
of  the  army.  The  persons  who  suffered  from  Paul's 
insane  fits  of  rage  and  severity  were  usually  the 
higher  military  and  civil  officials ;  his  caprices  very 
seldom  affected  men  of  the  lower  ranks,  who,  more- 
over, were  continually  receiving  extra  pay  and  rations 
of  bread,  wine,  and  brandy  when  they  were  on  drill 
or  on  a  parade.  The  punishments  to  which  the 
officers  were  exposed  did  not  therefore  produce  any 
unpleasant  impression  on  the  common  soldier ;  on  the 
contrary,  they  were  a  sort  of  satisfaction  to  him  for 
the  blows  and  ill-treatment  he  constantly  had  to 
endure.  Moreover,  his  pride  was  flattered  by  the 
great  importance  attached  to  his  calling,  for  to  Paul 
nothing  could  be  more  important  than  a  foot  raised 
too  soon  on  the  march,  or  a  coat  badly  buttoned  on 
parade.  It  amused  and  pleased  the  soldiers  to  see 
their  Emperor  dispensing  endless  punishments  and 
severities  among  the  officers,  while  he  took  every 
opportunity  to  afford  to  the  men  ample  compensation 
for  the  work  and  trouble  that  was  required  of  them. 
The  soldiers  of  the  Guard,  many  of  whom  were 
married,  lived  with  their  families  almost  in  opulence, 
and  both  they  and  those  of  the  other  regiments 
were  satisfied  with  and  attached  to  their  Emperor. 
General  Talyzin,  one  of  the  principal  conspirators, 
who  was  very  popular  among  the  soldiers,  had  under- 


244      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

taken  to  bring  to  the  palace  one  of  the  battalions  of 
the  first  regiment  of  the  Guard  which  was  under  his 
command.  He  assembled  the  men  after  leaving 
Zuboffs  supper,  and  began  to  tell  them  that  their 
fatigues  were  about  to  cease,  and  that  the}'  would 
now  have  an  indulgent  and  kind  sovereign  who 
would  not  impose  upon  them  the  rigorous  duties 
they  had  hitherto  had  to  perform.  He  soon  per- 
ceived, however,  that  his  words  were  not  listened  to 
with  favour ;  the  soldiers  preserved  a  gloomy  silence, 
their  faces  had  a  sombre  expression,  and  some  mur- 
murs were  heard.  The  General  cut  short  his  speech, 
uttered  in  a  sharp  tone  of  command  the  words  '  Right 
wheel — march,'  and  the  battalion,  which  had  now 
again  become  a  machine,  marched  to  the  palace,  all 
the  outlets  from  which  it  occupied. 

Count  Valerian  Zuboff,  having  lost  a  leg  in  the 
Polish  War,  could  not  belong  to  either  of  the  bands 
of  the  conspirators.  He  entered  the  palace  soon 
after  the  death  of  the  Emperor  became  known,  and 
then  went  to  the  guard-room  to  sound  the  opinions 
of  the  soldiers.  He  congratulated  them  on  having  a 
new  and  a  young  Emperor ;  but  this  compliment  was 
ill  received,  and  he  was  obliged  to  leave  the  room 
hastily  to  avoid  disagreeable  manifestations.  All  this 
shows  how  easy  it  would  have  been  for  Paul  to  crush 
the  conspirators  if  he  had  been  able  to  escape  them 
for  a  moment  and  to  show  himself  to  the  guards  in 
the  courtyard.  It  also  shows  how  illusory  and 
impracticable  was  Alexander's  plan  of  keeping  his 
father  in  confinement.  If  Paul's  life  had  been  saved, 
blood  would  have  flowed  on  the  scaffold,  Siberia 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL         245 

would  have  been  crowded  with  exiles,  and  his  venge- 
ance would  probably  have  extended  to  his  sons. 

I  will  now.  describe  what  happened  during  this 
terrible  night  in  the  part  of  the  palace  which  was 
inhabited  by  the  Imperial  family.  The  Grand-Duke 
Alexander  knew  that  his  father  would  in  a  few  hours 
be  called  upon  to  abdicate,  and  without  undressing  he 
threw  himself  on  his  bed  full  of  anxiety  and  doubt. 
About  one  o'clock  he  heard  a  knock  at  his  door,  and 
saw  Count  Nicholas  Zuboff,  his  dress  in  disorder,  and 
his  face  flushed  with  wine  and  the  excitement  of  the 
murder  which  had  just  been  committed.  He  came  up 
to  Alexander,  who  was  sitting  on  his  bed,  and  said 
in  a  hoarse  voice:  '  All  is  over.'  'What  is  over?' 
asked  Alexander  in  consternation.  He  was  some- 
what deaf,  and  perhaps  he  feared  to  misunderstand 
what  was  being  said  to  him,  while  Zuboff  on  his  side 
feared  to  state  exactly  what  had  been  done.  This 
somewhat  prolonged  the  conversation;  Alexander  had 
not  the  least  idea  that  his  father  was  dead,  and  did 
not  therefore  admit  the  possibility  of  such  a  thing. 
At  length  he  perceived  that  Zuboff,  without  clearly 
explaining  himself,  repeatedly  addressed  him  as 
'  Sire '  and  '  Your  Majesty,'  while  Alexander  thought 
he  was  merely  Regent.  This  led  to  further  question- 
ing, and  he  then  learnt  the  truth.  Alexander  was 
prostrated  with  grief  and  despair.  This  was  not 
surprising,  for  even  ambitious  men  cannot  commit  a 
crime  or  believe  themselves  the  cause  of  one  without 
repulsion,  while  Alexander  was  not  at  all  ambitious. 
The  idea  of  having  caused  the  death  of  his  father 
filled  him  with  horror,  and  he  felt  that  his  reputation 


246       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

had  received  a  stain  which  could  never  be  effaced. 
As  for  the  Empress,  directly  the  news  reached  her  she 
dressed  hastily  and  rushed  out  of  her  apartments  with 
cries  of  despair  and  rage.  Perceiving  some  grenadiers, 
she  said  to  them  repeatedly  :  '  As  your  Emperor  has 
died  a  victim  to  treason,  I  am  your  Empress,  I  alone 
am  your  legitimate  sovereign  ;  follow  me  and  protect 
me.'  General  Bennigsen  and  Count  Pahlen,  who  had 
just  brought  a  detachment  of  men  whom  they  could 
trust  to  the  palace  to  restore  order,  strove  to  calm 
her  and  forced  her  with  difficulty  to  return  to  her 
room.  She  had  scarcely  entered  it,  however,  than 
she  wished  to  go  out  again,  although  guards  had  been 
placed  at  her  door.  At  first  she  seemed  determined 
at  all  risks  to  seize  the  reins  of  government  and 
avenge  her  husband's  murder.  But  though  she  was 
generally  respected,  she  was  not  capable  df  inspiring 
those  feelings  of  enthusiastic  devotion  which  cause  men 
to  act  impulsively  and  without  weighing  the  conse- 
quences. Her  appeals  to  the  soldiers  (which  were 
perhaps  rendered  somewhat  ridiculous  by  her  German 
accent)  produced  no  effect,  and  she  retired  in  con- 
fusion, vexed  at  having  uselessly  disclosed  her 
ambitious  views. 

I  never  heard  any  details  of  the  first  interview 
between  the  Empress  and  her  son  after  Paul's 
assassination.  Subsequently  they  came  to  an  under- 
standing with  each  other ;  but  during  the  first 
terrible  moments  Alexander  was  so  absorbed  by  his 
remorse  that  he  seemed  incapable  of  saying  a  word 
or  thinking  of  anybody.  His  mother,  on  the  other 
hand,  was  in  a  passion  of  grief  and  animosity  ;  the 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL        247 

only  member  of  the  Imperial  family  that  retained  her 
presence  of  mind  was  the  young  Empress.  She  did 
her  utmost  to  console  Alexander  and  give  him  courage 
and  self-reliance.  She  did  not  leave  him  during  the 
whole  of  the  night,  except  when  she  went  for  a  few 
moments  to  calm  her  mother-in-law  and  persuade 
her  to  stop  in  her  room  and  not  expose  herself  to  the 
fury  of  the  conspirators.  While  in  this  night  of 
trouble  and  horror  some  were  intoxicated  with  triumph 
and  others  plunged  in  grief  and  despair,  the  Empress 
Elizabeth  alone  exercised  a  mediatory  influence 
between  her  husband,  her  mother-in-law,  and  the 
conspirators. 

During  the  first  years  of  his  reign,  Alexander's 
position  with  regard  to  his  father's  murderers  was  an 
extremely  difficult  and  painful  one.  For  a  few 
months  he  believed  himself  to  be  at  their  mercy,  but 
it  was  chiefly  his  conscience  and  a  feeling  of  natural 
equity  which  prevented  him  from  giving  up  to  justice 
the  most  guilty  of  the  conspirators.  He  knew  that 
there  was  a  general  sympathy  for  the  objects  of  the 
conspiracy,  and  that  those  who  had  personally  taken 
part  in  their  realisation  had  only  decided  to  do  so 
when  they  were  assured  of  his  consent.  It  would 
have  been  difficult  under  these  circumstances  to  dis- 
tinguish between  degrees  of  guilt ;  every  member  of 
the  society  of  St  Petersburg  was  more  or  less  an 
accomplice  in  the  fatal  deed,  for  those  who  wished 
Paul  to  be  deposed  must  have  known  that  his  de- 
position, if  resisted,  might  have  involved  his  death. 
If  the  assassins  alone  had  been  brought  to  trial,  they 
would  certainly  have  accused  the  other  conspirators 


248      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

and  have  referred  to  Alexander's  consent  in  justifica- 
tion of  their  action,  though  the  crime  had  been  com- 
mitted against  his  express  wish.  Moreover,  he  did 
not  for  many  years  know  who  they  were,  as  all  the 
conspirators  were  interested  in  keeping  the  secret. 
The  assassins  all  perished  miserably,  including  Count 
Nicholas  Zuboff,  who,  not  daring  to  show  himself  at 
Court,  died  in  retirement,  consumed  by  illness,  by 
remorse,  and  by  disappointed  ambition. 

Although  Alexander's  mother  continually  urged 
him  to  proceed  against  his  father's  murderers,  it  was 
not  possible  for  him  to  do  so  by  the  ordinary  and 
public  legal  means.  He  looked  with  horror  upon 
those  who  had  led  him  to  give  his  consent  to  the 
conspiracy,  and  he  used  every  other  means  in  his  power 
to  discover  and  punish  the  assassins.  General 
Bennigsen  was  removed  from  his  post  of  Governor- 
General  of  Lithuania,  which  was  given  to  General 
Kutuzoft',  and  it  was  not  until  the  year  1806  that 
Bennigsen's  military  reputation  compelled  Alex- 
ander to  place  him  at  the  head  of  the  army  which 
fought  at  Eylau  and  Friedland.  Prince  Plato  ZubofF, 
the  ostensible  chief  of  the  conspiracy,  failed,  notwith- 
standing all  his  efforts,  to  obtain  any  appointment, 
and  feeling  that  his  presence  was  disagreeable  to  the 
Emperor,  he  retired  to  his  estates,  married  a  hand- 
some Polish  woman,  and  then  went  abroad.  His 
bad  reputation,  however,  everywhere  preceded  him, 
and  he  died  obscure  and  unregretted. 

As  for  General  Pahlen,  he  at  first  thought  himself 
strong  enough  to  maintain  his  position  without 
support.  It  was  he  who  took  the  external  and 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL         249 

internal  measures  which  had  become  urgently 
necessary  by  the  probability  of  the  British  fleet 
entering  the  waters  of  Riga,  Revel,  and  Cronstadt, 
after  the  battle  of  Copenhagen.  Nelson  had  won 
this  battle  shortly  after  the  Emperor  Paul  was 
assassinated.*  The  news  did  not  become  public  for 
some  days,  and  in  the  trouble  and  confusion  which 
followed,  Pahlen  took  into  his  own  hands  the  reins 
of  State,  wishing  to  add  to  his  important  functions 
as  Governor-General  of  St  Petersburg  the  still  more 
important  ones  of  Secretary  of  State  for  Foreign 
Affairs.  The  proclamations  issued  at  that  time  were 
all  signed  by  him ;  nothing  could  be  done  except 
through  him  and  with  his  consent ;  he  affected  to 
protect  the  young  Emperor,  and  scolded  him  when 
he  did  not  do  what  he  wished,  or  rather  ordered. 
Alexander,  overcome  with  sadness  and  despair,  seemed 
to  be  in  the  power  of  the  conspirators  ;  he  thought 
it  necessary  to  treat  them  with  consideration  and 
bend  his  will  to  theirs. 

Just  at  this  time  the  important  post  of  Procurator- 
General,  which  combined  the  direction  of  all  the 
administrative  departments  of  the  Empire,  became 
vacant  by  the  dismissal  of  one  of  Paul's  favourites 
who  had  occupied  it.  Alexander  had  the  happy  idea 
of  selecting  for  this  place  General  Beklescheff,  who 
had  been  summoned  by  Paul  to  St  Petersburg 
perhaps  with  the  same  object.  He  was  a  Russian  of 
the  old  school,  with  coarse  and  abrupt  manners, 
ignorant  of  the  French  language  or  barely  under- 

*  Paul  was  assassinated  on  the  night  of  the  23rd  of  March  1801 ;  the  battle  of 
Copenhagen  was  fought  on  the  2nd  of  April,  1801. 


250      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

standing  it,  but  firm,  straightforward,  and  compassion- 
ate for  other  people's  misfortunes.  His  reputation  as 
a  man  of  high  character  was  generally  established, 
and  he  had  even  preserved  it  while  he  was  Governor- 
General  of  the  Polish  provinces  of  the  South,  where 
he  showed  himself  just  to  the  people  he  governed  and 
severe  to  his  subordinates.  He  had  done  his  best  to 
prevent  robbery  and  falsehood,  and  did  not  permit  the 
officials  to  sell  justice  by  auction  as  other  Russian 
governors  did.  When  he  left  he  was  followed  by  the 
gratitude  of  the  people  whom  he  had  ruled.  No  more 
difficult  task  can  be  given  to  a  high  Russian  official, 
and  not  many  have  acquitted  themselves  so  well.  He 
knew  nothing  of  what  was  going  on  beyond  the 
frontier,  but  he  was  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the 
ukases  and  the  routine  of 'Russian  administration  ;  he 
executed  them  with  rigour,  but  with  all  the  justice  of 
which  they  were  capable.  He  had  been  a  complete 
stranger  to  the  conspiracy,  and  Alexander  complained 
to  him  of  Pahlen's  dictatorial  wrays.  Beklescheff, 
with  his  usual  abruptness,  expressed  surprise  at  a 
Russian  autocrat  complaining  that  he  did  not  do  as 
he  pleased.  '  When  flies  annoy  me,'  he  said,  '  I 
drive  them  away.'  The  Emperor  took  the  hint,  and 
signed  an  order  directing  Pahlen  at  once  to  leave  St 
Petersburg  and  proceed  to  his  country  house. 
Beklescheff,  who  was  an  old  friend  of  Pahlen's,  under- 
took as  Procurator-General  to  take  this  order  to  him 
and  make  him  leave  within  twenty-four  hours.  He 
came  to  Pahlen  early  on  the  following  morning,  and 
the  latter  at  once  obeyed  the  Emperor's  decree.  This 
event  made  much  noise  at  St  Petersburg,  and  Alex- 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL        251 

ander  was  accused  of  duplicity  because  on  the  day 
before  Pahlen  was  banished  he  had  behaved  to  him  as 
usual  when  he  received  his  daily  report.  He  could, 
however,  hardly  have  done  otherwise,  and  the  fact  is 
that  this  act  of  absolute  sovereignty  on  the  part  of 
the  young  Emperor  displeased  and  alarmed  the  leaders 
of  the  conspiracy. 

The  views  of  the  Zuboffs  as  to  the  conspiracy  were 
communicated  to  me  by  Count  Valerian  Zuboff  a  few 
days  after  my  return  to  St  Petersburg.  He  com- 
plained that  the  Emperor  did  not  declare  himself  for 
his  true  friends,  who  had  placed  him  on  the  throne 
and  had  not  feared  any  danger  they  had  incurred  in 
his  service.  The  Empress  Catherine  had  acted  other- 
wise ;  she  had  always  supported  those  who  had 
helped  her,  and  had  not  hesitated  to  maintain  them 
in  power.  By  this  wise  and  sagacious  conduct,  said 
Zuboff,  she  had  been  able  always  to  reckon  on  their 
devotion.  No  one  hesitated  to  make  a  sacrifice  for 
her,  as  such  sacrifices  were  always  rewarded ;  but 
Alexander  was  exposing  himself  by  his  vacillating 
conduct  to  the  most  serious  consequences,  and  was 
discouraging  his  best  friends.  Zuboff  added  that  the 
Empress  Catherine  had  expressly  enjoined  him  and  his 
brother  to  look  upon  Alexander  as  their  only  legiti- 
mate sovereign,  and  to  serve  him  alone  with  unshaken 
zeal  and  fidelity.  This  they  had  done,  and  what  was 
their  reward  ?  He  said  this  to  exculpate  his  brother 
and  himself  in  the  eyes  of  the  young  Emperor  with 
regard  to  the  assassination  of  his  father,  and  to  prove 
to  him  that  their  conduct  was  the  .necessary  result  of 
the  engagements  Catherine  had  demanded  of  them  as 


252       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

to  her  grandson.  But  they  did  not  know  that 
Alexander,  and  even  his  brother  Constantine,  by  no 
means  regarded  their  grandmother's  memory  with 
veneration  or  attachment.  During  this  conversation, 
which  lasted  more  than  an  hour,  I  several  times 
interrupted  the  Count  to  explain  the  young  Emperor's 
conduct.  It  was  evident  that  the  Zuboffs  wished  me 
to  communicate  their  views  to  the  Emperor,  and 
though  I  did  not  promise,  I  considered  it  my  duty  to 
do  so.  Their  statements  produced  but  little  impres- 
sion on  Alexander,  but  they  showed  that  the  con- 
spirators were  still  very  proud  of  their  achievement, 
and  that  they  felt  convinced  they  had  done  a  great 
service  to  Russia,  had  a  right  to  Alexander's 
gratitude  and  confidence,  and  were  necessary  to  the 
security  and  prosperity  of  the  new  reign.  They  even 
hinted  that  their  discontent  might  be  dangerous  to 
him.  Alexander,  however,  wTas  deaf  both  to  their 
arguments  and  their  threats.  He  could  not  look  with 
favour  on  his  father's  murderers,  or  give  himself  up 
into  their  hands.  Moreover,  he  had  already  dismissed 
Pahlen,  who  was  perhaps  the  only  one  of  the  con- 
spirators who  by  his  ability,  his  connections,  his 
boldness,  and  his  ambition,  could  inspire  serious  fear 
or  become  really  dangerous.  Alexander  also  dismissed 
other  leaders  of  the  conspiracy  who  were  not 
dangerous,  but  the  sight  of  whom  was  odious  and 
disagreeable  to  him.  The  only  leader  wrho  remained 
at  St  Petersburg  was  Count  Valerian  ZubofF,  who 
was  a  member  of  the  Imperial  Council.  His 
amiability  and  frankness  pleased  Alexander  and 
inspired  him  with  confidence ;  and  this  feeling  was 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL         253 

confirmed  by  the  attachment  which  the  Count  pro- 
fessed (I  think  sincerely)  to  have  for  the  Emperor 
personally,  and  also  by  his  indolence,  his  unwillingness 
to  take  appointments  to  which  onerous  duties  were 
attached,  and  especially  by  his  amours,  which  occupied 
nearly  the  whole  of  his  time. 

The  punishment  of  Pahlen  and  .the  other  leaders 
of  the  conspiracy  was  the  most  painful  that  could  have 
been  inflicted  on  them,  and  Alexander  punished  him- 
self with  more  severity  than  the  others.  His  grief 
and  the  remorse  which  he  was  continually  reviving 
in  his  heart  were  inexpressibly  deep  and  touching. 
In  the  midst  of  the  pomp  and  the  festivals  of  the 
coronation,  the  young  Emperor  was  reminded  of  the 
similar  ceremonies  which  had  been  passed  through 
by  his  father,  and  he  saw  in  imagination  Paul's 
mutilated  and  blood-stained  body  on  the  steps 
of  the  throne  which  he  was  now  himself  to  ascend. 
This  brilliant  display  of  supreme  power,  instead 
of  rousing  his  ambition  or  flattering  his  vanity, 
increased  his  mental  tortures,  and  he  was  never, 
I  think,  more  unhappy.  He  remained  alone  for 
hours,  sitting  in  silence  with  fixed  and  haggard 

/  O  oo 

looks. 

With  me,  as  the  confidant  of  his  secret  thoughts 
and  troubles,  he  was  most  at  his  ease,  and  I  sometimes 
entered  his  room  when  he  had  been  too  long  under 
the  painful  influence  of  these  fits  of  despair  and 
remorse.  I  tried  to  recall  him  to  his  duties ;  he 
acknowledged  that  a  painful  task  was  before  him, 
but  the  severity  of  his  condemnation  of  his  own 
conduct  deprived  him  of  all  energy.  He  replied  to 


254       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

all  my  exhortations  and  words  of  encouragement  and 
hope :  '  No,  it  is  impossible,  there  is  no  remedy.  I 
must  suffer.  How  can  I  cease  to  suffer  ?  This  can- 
not change.' 

Those  who  approached  him  often  feared  that  his 
mind  would  be  affected,  and  as  I  was  then  the  only 
person  who  could  speak  to  him  freely  I  was  constantly 
urged  to  do  so.  I  think  I  was  of  some  use  in  pre- 
venting Alexander  from  succumbing  under  the  weight 
of  the  terrible  thought  that  pursued  him.  Some 
years  later,  the  great  events  in  which  he  took  a 
leading  and  glorious  part  gave  him  some  consolation 
and  for  a  time,  perhaps,  absorbed  all  his  faculties  ;  but 
I  am  certain  that  towards  the  end  of  his  life  it  was 
the  same  terrible  thought  that  so  depressed  him, 
filling  him  with  a  disgust  of  life  and  a  piety  which 
was  perhaps  exaggerated,  but  which  is  the  sole 
possible  and  real  support  in  the  most  poignant  grief. 
When  we  returned  to  this  sad  topic,  Alexander  often 
repeated  to  me  the  details  of  the  plan  he  had  formed 
to  establish  his  father  in  the  Palace  of  St  Michael  and 
afterwards  to  enable  him  as  much  as  possible  to  reside 
in  the  Imperial  Palaces  in  the  country.  '  The  Palace 
of  St  Michael,'  he  said,  '  was  his  favourite  residence, 
and  he  would  have  been  happy  there.  He  would 
have  had  the  whole  of  the  winter  garden  to  walk  and 
ride  in.'  Alexander  intended  to  attach  a  riding- 
school  and  a  theatre  to  the  palace,  so  as  to  bring 
together  within  its  precincts  everything  that  could 
have  amused  the  Emperor  Paul  and  made  his  life 
happy.  He  judged  of  his  father  by  himself.  There 
was  always  in  his  noble  character  a  feminine  ele- 


ASSASSINATION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  PAUL        255 

merit,  with  its  strength  and  weakness.  He  often 
used  to  make  plans  which  could  not  be  realised,  and 
on  this  idealistic  foundation  he  raised  complete  struc- 
tures which  he  made  as  perfect  as  possible.  Nothing 
was  more  impracticable — especially  in  Russia — than 
the  romantic  means  which  Alexander  had  devised  of 
rendering  his  father  happy,  while  depriving  him  of 
his  crown  and  of  the  possibility  of  tormenting  and 
ruining  the  country.  Alexander  was  not  only  young 
and  inexperienced ;  he  had  almost  the  blind  and  con- 
fiding inexperience  of  childhood,  and  this  characteristic 
remained  with  him  for  some  years  until  it  was  de- 
stroyed by  the  realities  of  life. 

I  have  not  concealed  anything  in  regard  to  the 
catastrophe  which  inaugurated  his  reign,  •  for  this 
was  the  best  way  of  doing  him  justice.  The  complete 
truth,  without  any  restriction,  exculpates  him  up  to 
a  certain  point  from  an  odious  accusation,  and  explains 
how  he  was  led  into  an  action  which  he  abhorred  and 
why  he  seemed  not  to  have  punished  the  assassins 
with  sufficient  rigour.  I  have  shown  how  inexperi- 
enced and  unambitious  he  was,  and  what  were  the 
plausible  and  even  honourable  motives  by  which  he 
was  actuated.  We  may  pity  Alexander,  but  we 
must  hesitate  to  condemn  him.* 

*  M.  de  Langeron's  account  of  the  assassination  of  the  Emperor  Paul  is  true, 
but  it  does  not  give  the  whole  truth,  as  it  does  not  explain  how  Alexander  was 
induced  to  give  his  consent  to  his  father's  deposition  and  why  he  did  not  bring  the 
conspirators  to  trial.  (Note  by  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski,) 


CHAPTER  XII 

1801-2 


MY  RELATIONS  WITH  ALEXANDER. THE  SECRET  COUNCIL. EUROPEAN 

COALITION  AGAINST  ENGLAND. THE  DON  COSSACKS  MARCH  UPON 

INDIA. — NELSON'S    BOMBARDMENT   OF    COPENHAGEN. — ARRANGE- 
MENT BETWEEN  RUSSIA   AND  ENGLAND. MISSION    FROM  NAPOLEON 

TO      ALEXANDER. ALEXANDER'S      CORONATION.  —  INTERVIEW      BE- 
TWEEN ALEXANDER  AND  FREDERICK  WILLIAM  III  AT  MEMEL. THE 

STROGONOFFS. THE      VORONTZOFFS. PLANS       OF       REFORM. MY 

APPOINTMENT  AS  ASSISTANT  FOREIGN  MINISTER  OF  RUSSIA. STATE 

OF  EDUCATION  IN  RUSSIA. 


THE  opinions  and  sentiments  which  had  seemed  to 
me  so  admirable  in  Alexander  when  he  was  Grand  - 
Duke  did  not  change  when  he  became  Emperor ; 
they  were  somewhat  modified  by  the  possession  of 
absolute  power,  but  they  remained  the  foundation 
of  all  his  principles  and  thoughts.  They  were  for 
many  years  like  a  secret  passion  which  one  dares  not 
acknowledge  before  a  world  incapable  of  compre- 
hending it,  but  which  constantly  dominates  us  and 
colours  our  actions  whenever  its  influence  can  make 
itself  felt.  I  shall  often  have  occasion  to  return  to 
this  important  subject  in  explanation  of  Alexander's 
character,  for  at  other  times  the  Emperor,  being 
thoroughly  aware  of  his  power  and  the  obligations  it 
imposed  upon  him,  might  have  been  compared  to  a 


THE  SECRET  COUNCIL  257 

man  who  still  likes  to  amuse  himself  with  the  toys 
of  his  childhood,  and  leaves  his  favourite  recreation 
with  regret  in  order  to  return  to  the  occupations  and 
duties  of  real  life. 

There  was  no  longer  any  question  of  the  old 
reveries  of  extreme  liberalism ;  the  Emperor  ceased 
to  speak  to  me  of  his  plan  of  giving  up  the 
throne,  or  of  the  document  he  had  made  me  write. 
But  he  was  constantly  thinking  of  more  practical 
matters,  such  as  the  administration  of  justice,  the 
emancipation  of  the  masses,  equitable  reforms, 
and  liberal  institutions ;  this  was  his  diversion  when 
he  was  alone  with  me.  He  understood  the  often 
insurmountable  obstacles  which  the  most  elemen- 
tary reforms  would  meet  with  in  Russia ;  but 
he  wished  to  prove  to  those  with  whom  he  was 
intimate  that  the  sentiments  he  had  expressed  to 
them  were  still  the  same,  notwithstanding  the 
change  in  his  position.  It  was  necessary,  however, 
not  to  disclose  them,  and  still  less  to  take  a  pride  in 
them,  in  the  presence  of  a  public  which  was  at  that 
time  so  little  prepared  to  appreciate  them,  and 
would  have  regarded  them  with  surprise  and  horror. 
Meanwhile  the  government  machine  continued  to 
work  according  to  the  old  routine,  and  the  Emperor 
was  obliged  to  take  part  in  its  management.  In 
order  to  remedy  the  discrepancy  between  Alexander's 
opinions  and  his  acts,  he  established  a  Secret  Council 
composed  of  persons  whom  he  regarded  as  his  friends 
and  believed  to  be  animated  by  sentiments  and 
opinions  in  conformity  with  his  own.  The  first 
nucleus  of  this  Council  was  formed  by  the  young 

VOL.  I.  K 


258      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Count  Paul  Strogonoff,  M.  de  Novosiltzoff,  and  myself. 
We  had  long  been  in  near  relations  with  each  other, 
and  these  now  became  more  serious.  The  necessity 
of  rallying  round  the  Emperor  and  not  leaving  him 
alone  in  his  desire  of  reform  drew  us  more  closely 
together.  We  were  regarded  for  some  years  as  models 
of  intimate  and  unshakeable  friendship.  To  be 
superior  to  every  personal  interest,  and  not  to  accept 
either  presents  or  distinctions,  was  the  principle  of 
our  alliance.  Such  a  principle  could  not  take  root  in 
Russia,  but  it  was  in  accordance  with  the  ideas  of 
Alexander's  youth  and  inspired  him  with  special 
esteem  for  his  friends.  I  was  the  sole  author  of  the 
principle,  which  indeed  was  specially  suited  to  my 
peculiar  position.  It  was  not  always  liked  by  my 
companions,  and  the  Emperor  himself  afterwards 
grew  tired  of  servants  who  wished  to  distinguish 
themselves  by  refusing  to  accept  rewards  which  were 
so  eagerly  sought  by  everyone  else. 

The  understanding  between  us  had,  as  I  have 
shown,  begun  at  the  coronation  of  the  Emperor  Paul 
at  Moscow,  and  we  had  for  a  long  time  been  on 
intimate  terms,  as  we  met  daily  at  Count  Strogonoff  s. 
The  fourth  member  admitted  by  the  Emperor  to  the 
Secret  Council  was  Count  Kotchoubey.  Being  the 
nephew  of  Count  Bezborodko,  a  Minister  who  had 
been  held  in  high  esteem  by  the  Empress  Catherine, 
he  was  sent  when  still  very  young  to  the  embassy  at 
Constantinople,  and  was  recalled  under  the  Emperor 
Paul  to  give  place  to  M.  Tarnara.  While  at  Constanti- 
nople he  conducted  himself  to  the  satisfaction  of  his 
Government,  and  was  perhaps  the  only  Russian  who 


THE  SECRET  COUNCIL  259 

was  well  treated  in  the  capital.  This  was  at  the 
time  of  our  grand  Diet,*  and  during  the  reign  of 
Leopold,  when  Russians  used  to  be  received  by  ladies 
in  drawing-rooms  in  a  manner  anything  but  flattering. 
I  remember  the  Countess  Caroline,  afterwards  Lady 
Guildford,  being  asked  by  Count  Tchernitcheff  to  insult 
him  in  order  to  enable  him  to  gain  a  wager,  upon 
which  she  said  :  '  You  are  a  Russian.'  But  to  return 
to  Count  Kotchoubey.  He  had  acquired  a  certain 
European  varnish  and  grand  manners  which  made 
him  a  favourite  in  society.  Vanity,  a  general  defect 
among  men,  and  especially  among  Russians  and  Slavs 
of  all  kinds,  exposed  Kotchoubey  to  sarcasms  from 
other  vain  people,  but  he  was  too  good-natured  to 
resent  them.  He  was  also  accustomed  to  business, 
but  he  had  not  much  knowledge ;  his  intelligence  was 
clear,  but  not  deep,  and  he  had  more  good-nature  and 
sincerity  than  are  usually  found  in  Russians.  This 
did  not  save  him  from  certain  weaknesses  characteris- 
tic of  his  nation — a  great  wish  for  place,  for  dis- 
tinction, and  especially  for  a  fortune  to  cover  his 
expenses  and  those  of  his  family,  which  had  become 
very  numerous.  He  showed  an  extreme  readiness 
to  adopt  any  opinion  that  might  be  in  fashion  and  to 
follow  any  lead  imposed  upon  him  by  a  superior  will 
or  by  the  conventions  of  society.  When  he  was  with 
us  he  professed  liberalism,  though  with  a  certain 
reserve,  as  it  was  not  to  be  reconciled  with  his  real 
opinions.  His  vanity  was  such  that  it  betrayed  it- 
self when  he  strove  most  to  conceal  it,  which  ex- 

*  The  Diet  which  passed  the  Constitution  of  the  3rd  of  May,  1791.     It  sat  for 
four  years,  from  1788  to  1792.     (See  page  52). 


260       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

posed  him  to  the  satire  of  iny  two  colleagues.  I  did 
not  join  in  their  jokes,  as  he  had  estimable  qualities 
and  showed  me  much  friendly  feeling,  of  which  I  had 
strong  evidence  some  years  later. 

We  were  privileged  to  dine  with  the  Emperor 
without  a  previous  invitation,  and  we  used  to  meet 
two  or  three  times  a  week.  After  coffee  and  a  little 
conversation,  the  Emperor  used  to  retire,  and  while 
the  other  guests  left  the  palace,  the  four  members  of 
the  Secret  Council  entered  through  a  corridor  into  a 
little  dressing-room,  which  was  in  direct  communica- 
tion with  the  private  rooms  of  their  Majesties,  and 
there  met  the  Emperor.  Various  plans  of  reform 
were  debated ;  each  member  brought  his  ideas,  and 
sometimes  his  work,  and  information  which  he  had 
obtained  as  to  what  was  passing  in  the  existing 
administration  and  the  abuses  which  he  had  ob- 
served. The  Emperor  freely  expressed  his  thoughts 
and  sentiments,  and  although  the  discussions  at  these 
meetings  for  a  long  time  had  no  practical  result,  no 
useful  reform  was  tried  or  carried  out  during  Alex- 
ander's reign  which  did  not  originate  in  them.  Mean- 
while the  Official  Council,  namely,  the  Senate  and  the 
Ministers,  governed  the  country  in  the  old  way. 
Directly  the  Emperor  left  his  dressing-room  he  came 
under  the  influence  of  the  old  Ministers,  and  could 
do  nothing  of  what  had  been  decided  upon  in  the 
Secret  Council ;  it  was  like  a  masonic  lodge  from 
which  one  entered  the  practical  world. 

This  mysterious  Council,  which  was  not  long  con- 
cealed from  the  suspicions,  or  ultimately  from  the 
knowledge,  of  the  Court,  and  was  designated  '  the 


26l 

young  men's  party,'  grew  impatient  at  not  obtaining 
any  result  whatever  from  its  deliberations  ;  it  pressed 
the  Emperor  to  carry  out  the  views  he  had  expressed 
to  us  and  the  proposals  he  considered  desirable  and 
necessary.  Once  or  twice  an  attempt  was  made  to 
induce  him  to  adopt  energetic  resolutions,  to  give 
orders  and  make  himself  obeyed,  to  dismiss  certain 
superannuated  officials  who  were  a  constant  obstacle 
to  every  reform  and  to  put  young  men  in  their  place. 
But  the  Emperor's  character  inclined  him  to  attain 
his  end  by  compromises  and  concessions,  and  more- 
over he  did  not  yet  feel  sufficiently  master  of  the 
position  to  risk  measures  which  he  thought  too 
violent.  In  our  Council  Strogonoff  was  the  most 
ardent,  Novosiltzoff  the  most  prudent,  Kotchoubey 
the  most  time-serving,  and  I  the  most  disinterested, 
always  striving  to  curb  undue  impatience.  Those 
who  urged  the  Emperor  to  take  immediate  and 
severe  measures  did  not  know  him.  Such  a  pro- 
posal always  made  him  draw  back,  and  was  of  a 
nature  to  diminish  his  confidence.  But  as  he  com- 
plained of  his  Ministers  and  did  not  like  any 
of  them,  an  attempt  was  made  in  the  Council, 
before  inducing  him  to  change  them,  to  discuss 
the  matter  in  a  practical  spirit,  apart  from  the 
abstract  considerations  of  reform  which  had  pre- 
viously occupied  us.  Strogonoff  accepted  the  post  of 
Procurator  of  the  First  Department  of  the  Senate  ; 
and  Novosiltzoff  was  appointed  one  of  the  Emperor's 
secretaries,  a  place  which  gave  him  many  advantages, 
as  every  letter  addressed  to  the  Emperor  passed 
through  his  hands,  and  he  had  a  right  to  publish  the 


262       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Emperor's  ukases.  His  special  department,  however, 
was  at  first  to  deal  with  promoters  of  public  under- 
takings, who  are  sometimes  men  of  talent,  but  more 
often  adventurers  of  very  doubtful  honesty  who  flock 
to  Russia  from  abroad  at  the  beginning  of  each 
new  reign.  This  was  a  duty  for  which  he  was 
qualified  by  his  varied  knowledge  in  matters  of 
finance  and  industry,  and  it  was  at  the  same  time 
a  school  which  did  much  to  form  his  character. 
I  must  not  here  forget  the  fifth  member  of  the 
Secret  Council,  M.  de  la  Harpe,  Alexander's  tutor, 
who  had  come  on  a  visit  to  his  former  pupil.  He  did 
not  take  part  in  the  after  dinner  meetings,  but  he 
used  to  have  private  conversations  with  the  Emperor, 
and  frequently  handed  to  him  memoranda  reviewing 
all  the  branches  of  the  administration.  These  memo- 
randa were  first  read  at  the  secret  sittings,  and 
afterwards  passed  on  from  one  member  of  the  Council 
to  the  other  to  be  considered  at  leisure,  as  they  were 
interminably  long.  M.  de  la  Harpe  was  at  that 
time  about  forty-four  years  of  age ;  he  had  been  a 
member  of  the  Swiss  Director}7,  and  always  wore  the 
uniform  of  that  appointment,  with  a  large  sword  fastened 
to  an  embroidered  belt  outside  his  coat.  We  were 
all  of  opinion  that  he  did  not  merit  his  high  reputation 
and  the  esteem  in  which  Alexander  held  him.  He 
belonged  to  the  generation  of  men  nourished  with  the 
illusions  of  the  last  part  of  the  eighteenth  century, 
who  thought  their  doctrine  a  sort  of  philosopher's 
stone,  or  universal  remedy  which  removed  all 
difficulties  to  the  regeneration  of  society.  M.  de  la 
Harpe  had  his  own  particular  panacea  for  Russia,  and 


THE  SECRET  COUNCIL  263 

he  explained  it  in  such  diffuse  papers  that  Alexander 
himself  had  not  the  courage  to  read  them.  One  of 
his  favourite  phrases  was  organisation  reglementaire  • 
an  important  idea  no  doubt,  but  he  used  to  repeat  it 
so  often  and  with  such  emphasis  that  it  was  at  last 
attached  to  him  as  a  sort  of  nickname. 

The  Emperor,  perhaps  without  admitting  it  to 
himself,  began  to  think  less  of  the  capacity  of  his 
former  tutor,  though  he  was  always  seeking  reasons 
for  raising  him  in  our  esteem  ;  his  character  he  always 
continued  to  value  highly.  He  did  not  like  us  to  cast 
ridicule  on  the  inanity  of  M.  de  la  Harpe's  papers, 
and  he  was  always  much  pleased  when  we  praised 
any  of  his  former  tutor's  suggestions.  But  in  truth 
M.  de  la  Harpe  had  little  or  no  influence  on  the 
reforms  which  Alexander  afterwards  introduced.  He 
had  the  good  sense  to  hold  aloof  from  our  meetings, 
and  the  Emperor  himself  preferred  this,  in  order,  I 
suppose,  to  avoid  the  scandal  which  might  have  been 
produced  by  an  ex-director  of  the  Swiss  Republic 
and  a  recognised  revolutionist  preparing  reforms  for 
the  Russian  Empire.  He  was,  however,  recognised 
as  one  of  our  colleagues ;  there  was  always  a  chair 
ready  for  him  at  our  meetings,  and  when  he  left  St 
Petersburg  he  assured  us  that  he  would  still  in  spirit 
take  part  in  our  deliberations. 

Immediately  after  the  Emperor's  accession  the 
Margravine  of  Baden,  mother  of  the  Empress 
Elizabeth,  hastened  to  St  Petersburg,  being  happy 
and  impatient  to  see  again  a  beloved  daughter  from 
whom  she  had  been  separated  for  seven  years.  She 
was  accompanied  by  the  Margrave  of  Baden,  her 


264      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

husband,  son  of  the  reigning  Grand-Duke,  arid  the 
Princess  Amelia,  the  eldest  of  their  children.  These 
visitors  represented  an  influence  totally  opposed  to 
the  principles  which  were  at  that  moment  being 
advocated  by  M.  de  la  Harpe  at  St  Petersburg.  The 
Margravine  was  the  sister  of  the  first  wife  of  the 
Emperor  Paul,*  who  died  in  Russia  while  still  young 
and  beautiful,  and  was  more  regretted  by  the 
Empress  Catherine,  her  family,  and  the  whole  Court 
than  by  her  husband,  who  discovered  after  her  death 
from  some  letters  which  she  had  imprudently  kept 
that  he  was  not  the  sole  possessor  of  her  heart.! 

The  Margravine  was  tall,  with  a  grand  air  and 
much  dignity  in  her  movements,  and  it  was  evident  that 
in  her  youth  she  must  have  been  beautiful.  She  had 
justly  obtained  a  high  reputation  for  wisdom,  pru- 
dence, and  wit,  which  placed  her  far  above  the 
generality  of  German  princesses  of  similar  rank.  The 
Empress  Dowager,  instead  of  rejoicing  at  the  prospect 
of  the  Margravine's  influence  counteracting  that  of 
M.  de  la  Harpe,  took  umbrage  at  it ;  the  two 
princesses  were  too  unlike  each  other  to  agree. 
Moreover,  the  Margravine  had  brought  about  the 
marriage  of  her  youngest  daughter  with  the  King  of 
Sweden,  who  had  refused  the  Grand-Duchess  Alex- 
andra.! This  marriage,  which  at  that  time  was 

*  A  third  sister  was  married  to  the  Grand-Duke  of  Saxe-Weimar ;  she  had  a 
daughter  who  was  married  to  the  Duke  of  Mecklenburg,  and  became  the  mother  of 
the  Duchess  of  Orleans.  I  recollect  that  when  the  Duchess  of  Orleans  arrived  in 
Paris  I  was  struck  by  her  likeness  to  the  members  of  her  family  whom  I  had  known 
in  Russia.  (Note  by  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski.) 

t  The  gentleman  who  had  attracted  the  Grand-Duchess's  attention  was  Count 
Andrew  Razumovski,  then  young  and  strikingly  handsome.  He  made  so  many 
conquests  among  the  ladies  of  St  Petersburg  that  he  was  sent  as  ambassador  to  Stock- 
holm, and  afterwards  to  Naples,  where  he  gained  the  favour  of  the  Queen.  (Note  by 
Prince  Adam  Czartoryski.)  t  See  page  135. 


THE  MARGRAVINE  OF  BADEN  265 

regarded    as    the    most   brilliant   in    Europe,    was    a 
triumph  of  which  the   Margravine   was  very  proud, 
and    did    not   contribute    to    reconcile   her   with   the 
Empress    Dowager,   especially  as   the    eldest   of  the 
daughters  of  the  House  of  Baden,  the  twin  sister  of 
the  Princess  Amelia,  had  married  the   Elector,  who 
afterwards  became  King  of  Bavaria,  while  none  of  the 
Russian   Grand-Duchesses  had   attained  so  elevated 
a  position.     On  the  other  hand,  the  Margravine  was 
disappointed  to  see  that  the  Empress  Dowager  re- 
tained   all   the    advantages    of  a   reigning    sovereign 
and  had  not  given  up  any  of  them  to  her  daughter- 
in-law.     When  Alexander  ascended  the  throne,  being 
desirous  above  all   to   appease  the  continual  regrets 
of  his  mother  since  the  catastrophe  which  had  made 
him    Emperor,  he    left  her   the  dower   of  a    million 
roubles  which  Paul  had  assigned  to  her  at  the  begin- 
ning of  his  reign,  and  added  nothing  to  the  moderate 
allowance  of  which  his  wife  was  in  receipt  as  a  Grand- 
Duchess.     The  latter  readily  and  graciously  accepted 
this  arrangement,  which  afterwards  placed  her  in  a 
painful   position,  and   deprived   her   of  the   means  of 
responding  to  the  numerous  applications  for  assistance 
which  were  addressed  to  her.     The  Empress  Dowager 
continued  to  have  the  sole  direction  of  various  char- 
itable, educational,  and  even  manufacturing,  establish- 
ments with  which  she  had  been  charged  during  the 
preceding  reign,  while  the   Margravine  would    have 
liked  her  daughter   to   take    a   more    active    part  in 
affairs    and    to    be    in    a    position    to    distribute    the 
largesses  and  benefits  which  one  has  a  right  to  ex- 
pect from  the  wife  of  the  sovereign. 


266      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

I  was  very  amiably  received  by  the  Margravine, 
and  afterwards  she  honoured  rne  for  many  years  with 
marks  of  her  kindness.  She  often  spoke  to  me  about 
the  Emperor  with  the  most  lively  interest.  She 
feared  that  the  reforms  he  was  contemplating  would 
prove  ill-timed,  hurtful,  and  dangerous,  and  wished 
him  to  be  dissuaded  from  introducing  them  ;  she 
did  not  approve  his  tendency  to  diminish  the 
ceremonial  and  the  splendour  of  the  Court,  and 
she  especially  objected  to  his  assumed  simplicity  of 
manner,  which,  she  said,  made  those  who  approached 
him  and  whose  duty  was  to  obey  him  too  familiar, 
thereby  giving  his  Court  an  appearance  ill-suited  to 
the  greatness  of  the  Empire.  She  pointed  to  the 
example  of  Buonaparte,  who,  she  said,  was  better 
acquainted  with  mankind  and  with  what  was  neces- 
sary to  obtain  its  respect,  its  obedience,  and  its 
admiration ;  who  surrounded  himself  by  pomp  and 
magnificence,  and  neglected  nothing  that  could  aug- 
ment the  prestige  without  which  supreme  authority 
cannot  be  maintained.  She  wished  to  rouse  Alex- 
ander's ambition,  to  make  him  profit  by  the  lessons 
which  so  great  a  genius  was  then  giving  to  the  world, 
and  to  induce  him  to  become  Napoleon's  rival  without 
being  his  enemy,  so  that  the  acts  of  his  Government, 
like  those  of  the  First  Consul,  should  be  continual 
proofs  of  greatness,  of  strength,  and  of  decided  will. 
The  Russians,  she  said,  want  such  a  Government  quite 
as  much  as  the  French.  I  communicated  these  conver- 
sations to  the  Emperor  ;  I  thought  some  of  the  things 
said  by  the  Margravine  were  just  and  true,  and  that 
they  might  strike  him  and  be  of  use  to  him.  But  they 


THE  SECRET  COUNCIL  267 

made  no  impression  whatever.  He  admired  Napoleon, 
but  did  not  think  himself  capable  of  imitating  him. 
They  were  two  opposite  natures,  and  their  lines  of  action 
were  different.  It  was  not  till  many  years  after  that 
a  supreme  danger,  the  boundless  ambition  of  the  ruler 
of  France,  and  his  incredible  blunders,  gave  Alex- 
ander an  opportunity  of  showing  great  though  always 
defensive  qualities,  which  enabled  him  to  conquer  his 
rival.  After  some  months'  stay,  the  Baden  family  left 
St  Petersburg  to  visit  the  Queen  of  Sweden,  the 
youngest  sister  of  the  Empress  Elizabeth,  at  Stock- 
holm. During  this  journey  a  great  misfortune  hap- 
pened: the  Margrave  died  in  consequence  of  a  carriage 
accident.  This  made  it  impossible  for  the  Margravine 
to  reign  over  the  Grand-Duchy,  and  had  fatal  con- 
sequences for  her  family. 

During  the  summer  of  1801  the  Secret  Council 
continued  to  meet.  The  only  measure  it  decided  upon 
before  the  coronation  was  the  dismissal  of  Count 
Panin,  whose  participation  in  the  conspiracy  which 
brought  about  the  death  of  Paul  filled  Alexander 
with  dislike  and  suspicion.  After  much  discussion  it 
was  resolved  that  Panin  should  be  succeeded  as 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  by  Count  Kotchoubey, 
but  should  be  allowed  to  remain  at  St  Petersburg. 
The  Emperor,  wishing  to  avoid  disagreeable  scenes, 
treated  Panin  as  a  Minister  up  to  the  last  moment, 
and  this  again  was  interpreted  as  a  sign  of  duplicity. 
The  Emperor's  will  was  notified  to  Panin  by  letter, 
and  Kotchoubey  entered  upon  his  duties  to  the  great 
satisfaction  of  Alexander  and  of  our  council. 

So  long  as  Panin  remained  at  St  Petersburg  he 


268       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

was  surrounded  by  spies,  and  the  Emperor  every  day 
received  reports  from  the  secret  police  stating  in  detail 
all  that  Panin  had  done  from  the  morning  till  the 
evening,  where  he  had  been,  whom  he  had  spoken  to 
in  the  street,  how  many  hours  he  had  passed  out  of 
doors,  who  had  visited  him,  and  as  far  as  possible 
what  he  had  said.  These  reports  were  read  in  the 
Secret  Council,  and  were  drawn  up  in  the  mysterious 
style  affected  by  police  agents  to  give  a  certain 
interest  to  the  most  insignificant  circumstances. 
They  did  not  really  contain  anything  remarkable, 
but  the  Emperor  was  extremely  anxious,  and  was 
always  suspecting  Panin  of  new  plots.  He  had  no 
peace  till  Panin  had  left  St  Petersburg,  which  he  did 
soon  after,  knowing  that  he  was  everywhere  pursued 
by  spies,  and  that  his  presence  was  disagreeable  to 
the  Emperor.  He  subsequently  received  orders 
never  to  show  himself  in  any  town  where  the 
Emperor  might  be  staying,  and  passed  the  rest  of  his 
life  in  retirement  at  Moscow  or  in  the  country. 

In  this  way  three  of  '  ours,'  as  the  members  of  the 
Secret  Council  were  called  by  the  Emperor,  were 
placed  in  the  sphere  of  practical  affairs,  and  obtained 
experience  of  the  difficulties  and  obstacles  which  are 
met  with  directly  one  becomes  a  wheel  in  the  govern- 
ment machine.  As  for  me,  I  had  no  ambition  to 
serve  Russia ;  I  was  there  merely  by  accident,  like  an 
exotic  plant  in  a  foreign  land,  with  sentiments  which 
could  not,  as  regards  their  full  scope,  be  brought  into 
entire  accord  even  with  the  intimate  opinions  of  the 
friends  whom  accidental  and  quite  ordinary  circum- 
stances had  given  me ;  and  I  remained  the  only 


THE  SECRET  COUNCIL  269 

member  of  the  Secret  Council  that  had  held  aloof 
from  practical  life,  and  was  glad  not  to  enter  it.  I 
was  often  tired  of  my  position,  and  yearned  after 
my  country  and  my  parents  ;  I  wished  for  nothing 
so  much  as  to  go  back  to  them,  and  the  only  thing 
that  retained  me  was  my  personal  attachment  to  the 
Emperor  and  the  wish  to  be  able  to  serve  my  country 
through  my  influence  with  him.  But  this  hope  often 
seemed  entirely  to  disappear.  The  dreams  of  my 
early  youth  had  vanished  like  the  morning  mists 
before  the  sun's  rays,  and  whose  was  the  blame  ? 
Could  I  expect  of  men  more  than  they  can  or  know 
how  to  give  ?  Those  whose  pretensions  and  hopes  are 
in  advance  of  realities  and  possibilities  in  this  short 
life  of  ours  are  doomed  to  cruel  disappointment ;  but 
when  one's  illusions  have  gone,  one  hopes  at  least  not 
to  be  deprived  of  some  prospect  of  happiness,  and  this 
was  in  many  respects  denied  me.  I  accordingly  often 
thought  of  leaving  St  Petersburg.  The  Emperor 
spoke  to  me  of  Poland  at  more  and  more  prolonged 
intervals ;  when  he  found  me  anxious  and  discouraged, 
he  returned  to  the  subject,  but  no  longer  in  the  same 
way.  He  used  to  console  me  vaguely  or  keep  silence 
on  a  matter  with  which  he  found  it  more  and  more 
difficult  to  deal,  though  it  was  the  only  real  bond  of 
connection  between  us.  At  the  same  time,  while 
avoiding  precise  explanations,  he  wished  me  always 
to  believe  that  on  this  point  as  on  many  others  he 
had  not  changed  his  opinions  or  his  intentions.  But 
in  his  position  what  could  he  do  and  what  could  I 
reasonably  ask  for  ? 

On  my  return  to  St  Petersburg,  I  had  no  longer 


270       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

found  there  Buonaparte's  aide-de-camp,  Duroc,  who 
had  come  with  another  officer  to  compliment  Alex- 
ander on  his  accession.  Paul's  death  was  a  severe 
blow  to  the  First  Consul ;  he  had  hoped  much  from  a 
sovereign  who  would  never  admit  that  what  he  ordered 
was  impossible.  Fortune  had  favoured  Buonaparte  in 
his  efforts  to  gain  the  good-will  of  the  Emperor  Paul. 
The  news  of  the  Russian  prisoners  who  had  been  clothed 
and  sent  back  to  their  country  by  France,  and  that 
of  other  advances  skilfully  made  to  Russia,  had 
arrived  at  St  Petersburg  at  the  moment  when  Paul 
was  in  a  violent  rage  with  Austria  and  England, 
partly  on  account  of  the  defeat  of  the  Russian  armies 
in  Switzerland  and  Holland,  which  Paul  attributed  to 
the  lukewarm  ness  of  the  allies,  and  partly  because  of 
the  capture  of  Malta,  which  Buonaparte  had  offered 
Paul,  and  which  the  English,  now  masters  of  the 
island,  had  refused  to  give  up  to  him,  although  he 
had  already  been  appointed  Grand-Master  of  the 
Order.  Under  these  circumstances,  Paul,  always 
passionate  and  impulsive,  took  a  violent  fancy  to 
Napoleon  and  the  French  Government,  whom  he  had 
detested,  and  an  equally  violent  dislike  for  the  allies, 
who  had  been  the  particular  objects  of  his  affection 
and  zealous  support.  As  usual  with  him,  his  likes  and 
dislikes  became  stronger  as  time  went  on.  After  the 
chivalrous  challenge  which  I  have  already  mentioned,* 
he  concluded  a  maritime  alliance  with  Denmark  and 
Sweden  with  trie  object  of  closing  the  Baltic  to  the 
English,  and  maintaining  the  inviolability  of  neutral 
flags.  France,  Spain,  and  Holland  were  to  join  their 

*  See  page  192. 


EUROPEAN  COALITION  AGAINST  ENGLAND      271 

fleets  to  those  of  the  Northern  powers  in  order  to 
destroy  the  maritime  supremacy  of  England.  Paul 
had  ordered  the  whole  of  the  Don  Cossacks  to  march 
at  once  to  India  under  the  command  of  their  attaman 
Platoff;  and  although  this  order  had  spread  consterna- 
tion among  the  Cossacks,  and  their  chief  did  not  know 
how  to  execute  it,  he  was  preparing  to  obey  it. 

What  would  have  happened  if  Paul  had  continued 
to  reign  it  is  not  easy  to  say.  Nelson's  expedition  to 
Copenhagen  had  certainly  foiled  the  plan  of  a  naval 
combination  against  England,  but  its  success  had  been 
almost  entirely  due  to  Nelson's  boldness  and  good 
fortune.  If  the  Danes  had  had  the  courage  to  persevere, 
this  rash  enterprise  might  have  ended  very  differently. 
So  great,  however,  was  the  terror  inspired  by  Paul 
that  the  Danes  adhered  to  his  alliance  in  spite  of 
their  defeat.  He  had  ordered  his  coasts  and  his 
harbours  to  be  placed  in  a  state  of  defence,  and  I 
doubt  whether  the  British  fleet  could  without  con- 
siderable reinforcements  have  attempted  an  attack 
upon  Cronstadt  or  Revel ;  if  not,  time  would  have 
been  given  for  reforming  and  strengthening  the 
alliance  of  the  naval  powers. 

Paul's  sudden  death  at  once  dissipated  all  the 
difficulties  of  the  coalition,  and  created  new  ones  for 
Napoleon,  as  it  lost  him  a  powerful  friend.  In  his 
infatuation  for  the  First  Consul,  Paul  had  persuaded 
himself  that  it  did  not  matter  whether  the  ruler  of 
France  were  legitimate  or  not,  so  long  as  he  could 
make  himself  obeyed.  He  had  accordingly  expelled 
Louis  XVIII  from  his  dominions,*  and  encouraged 

*  Louis  returned  to  Russia  after  Paul's  death. 


272       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Napoleon  in  his  ambition  to  become  Emperor  of 
France.  His  death  changed  everything.  The  naval 
alliance  lost  its  strength  and  value,  there  was  no 
further  necessity  for  fortifying  the  coasts  and 
harbours,  and  trade,  which  had  been  suspended  in 
Russia  to  the  great  detriment  of  the  proprietors  of 
mines  and  land,  resumed  its  ordinary  course,  while 
the  Don  Cossacks,  who  had  already  proceeded  on  a 
day's  march  towards  the  Caucasus,  turned  their 
horses'  heads  homewards  and  crossed  themselves  in 
gratitude  for  the  abandonment  of  Paul's  insane  enter- 
prise. 

The  immediate  result  of  Paul's  death,  so  far  as 
European  politics  were  concerned,  was  an  arrange- 
ment between  Russia  and  England.  The  state  of 
war  which  Paul  had  maintained  against  that  power — 
which  had  long  been  Russia's  best  customer  for  iron, 
corn,  wood  for  building,  sulphur,  and  hemp — was  one 
of  the  principal  grievances  of  the  Russian  people 
against  their  Emperor,  and  immediately  after  his 
death  the  Government  hastened  to  effect  an  arrange- 
ment with  England  which  showed  how  eager  Russia 
was  to  effect  a  reconciliation  at  any  price.  The 
interests  of  her  maritime  allies  were  not  sufficiently 
considered,  and  essential  points  on  the  question  of 
the  neutral  flag  were  either  passed  over  in  silence  or 
left  in  doubt.  The  cessation  of  hostilities  was  the 
great  object  aimed  at.  Alexander  had  in  reality 
no  great  sympathy  for  England.  His  education  had 
given  him  ideas  and  inclinations  totally  different 
from  those  of  the  policy  of  Pitt ;  and  Napoleon's  aide- 
de-camp  Duroc  was  accordingly  received  by  him  with 


MISSION  FROM  NAPOLEON  TO  ALEXANDER      273 

a  sincere  cordiality  which  was  hardly  to  be  expected 
in  a  moment  of  reaction  against  Paul's  infatuation  for 
the  First  Consul.  Duroc's  reception  was,  indeed,  the 
result  of  Alexander's  secret  and  personal  sympathy 
for  the  principles  of  1789,  which  had  been  inspired  in 
him  by  M.  de  la  Harpe.  Alexander  was  glad  to  see 
at  last  Frenchmen  of  the  famous  Revolution,  who  he 
supposed  were  still  Republicans  ;  he  regarded  them 
with  curiosity  and  interest,  having  talked  and  thought 
so  much  about  them.  Both  he  and  the  Grand- 
Duke  Constantine  took  great  pleasure  in  addressing 
them  as  '  citizens,'  thinking  that  the  title  was  one  they 
were  proud  of.  This  was  a  great  mistake,  and 
Napoleon's  envoys  had  repeatedly  to  point  out  that 
the  term  had  gone  out  of  fashion  in  France  before 
Alexander  and  his  brother  ceased  to  use  it.  Napoleon's 
chief  motive  in  sending  his  confidential  aide-de-camp 
to  St  Petersburg  was  to  sound  the  young  Emperor  as 
to  his  feelings  with  regard  to  a  French  alliance.  I 
was  told  that  Duroc  wrote  to  Napoleon  that  there 
was  no  cause  for  either  hope  or  fear  ;  this  statement 
was  at  the  time  perfectly  accurate,  and  was  founded 
on  an  exact  knowledge  of  Alexander's  character  at 
the  beginning  of  his  reign  ;  but  later  on  it  was  belied 
by  events. 

Count  Panin,  who  was  then  Foreign  Minister,  had 
concluded  a  convention  with  Duroc  which  did  not 
mention  any  of  the  difficulties  that  had  long  sown 
discord  between  the  two  countries,  and  had  prevented 
them  from  being  at  peace  with  each  other.  In  this 
convention  there  was  only  one  remarkable  article, 
and  it  was  directed  against  Poland  and  the  Poles. 
VOL.  i.  s 


274       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Russia  and  France  engaged  reciprocally  not  to  protect 
political  refugees,  and  not  to  help  them  in  their  efforts 
against  the  order  of  things  established  in  their 
respective  countries.  This  article  was  aimed  by 
France  against  the  Legitimists,  and  by  Russia  against 
the  Poles.  Thus  Alexander's  first  public  act  was  an 
abandonment  of  the  sentiments  which  had  united  us. 
He  did  not  tell  me  anything  of  it,  and  it  was  doubt- 
less a  very  natural  arrangement  to  make  between  two 
countries  that  wished  to  be  on  good  terms  with  each 
other ;  it  was  the  necessary  consequence  of  an  agree- 
ment between  Russia  and  France,  which  must  be 
always  fatal  to  the  Poles.  I  made  this  remark  with 
some  sadness  to  the  Emperor,  who  answered  with 
embarrassment  that  the  article  had  no  real  signifi- 
cance, that  he  could  not  avoid  accepting  it,  as  it  had 
been  proposed  by  France  and  agreed  to  by  Count 
Panin,  that  it  was  a  mere  formality  which  ought  not 
to  cause  me  any  anxiety,  and  that  the  destinies  of 
Poland  were  as  dear  to  him  as  ever.  The  best  and 
most  powerful  man  can  do  nothing  if  circumstances 
do  not  permit  him  to  act  and  to  keep  his  promises ; 
and  it  may  safely  be  asserted  that  Alexander  was  the 
only  sovereign  of  that  time  who,  without  publicly 
admitting  it,  still  remembered  and  busied  himself 
about  the  future  of  Poland.  She  had  for  the  moment 
been  forgotten  by  all  Europe,  with  France  at  its  head. 
Since  the  treaty  of  Luneville  there  had  not  been  any 
Polish  troops  in  France ;  the  legions  were  either 
broken  up  or  sent  to  St  Domingo  never  to  return.* 

*  The  Polish  legions  were  formed  in  Italy  by  Dombrovski  in  1797,  with  the 
object  of  restoring  Poland  to  her  former  independence.  They  rendered  great  services 
to  France  in  her  Italian  campaigns,  but  were  afterwards  abandoned  by  Napoleon, 
who  did  not  wish  to  offend  the  partitioning  powers. 


MISSION  FROM  NAPOLEON  TO  ALEXANDER      275 

Our  patriots,  having  lost  all  hope  for  their  country, 
had  retired  from  the  French  service,  and  the  glorious 
fall  of  Kosciuszko  and  the  massacre  of  Praga  had 
been  effaced  by  the  misfortunes  we  had  suffered  in 
other  countries.  No  one  thought  of  us,  and  it  is  not 
surprising  that  this  general  oblivion  should  have  had 
some  influence  on  Alexander's  disposition  in  our 
behalf. 

Not  having  any  wish  to  take  a  prominent  part  in 
Russian  affairs,  and  often  losing  the  hope  which  had 
sustained  me   of  being  able  to  serve  my  country,    I 
continually  had  fits  of  depression  and  did  not  conceal 
my  wish  to  go  back  to  my  parents.     The  Emperor, 
to  fulfil  his  old  promises  and  prove  to  me  that  he  had 
not  changed,  generously  determined  of  his  own  initia- 
tive to  give  the  inhabitants  of  the  Polish  provinces  he 
governed   proofs    of  his   good-will.     This    sometimes 
raised  my  spirits  and  consoled  me  for  the  impossibility 
of    realising    brighter    hopes    whose    disappointment 
became  the  regret  and  torment  of  my  life.     In  the 
two    first    years    of    Alexander's   reign    I    had   the 
happiness    of    rendering    services     to    many   of    my 
countrymen  who  had  been  sent  to  Siberia  either  by 
Catherine  or  by  Paul,  and  had  been  forgotten  in  their 
banishment ;    these    were  restored    by  Alexander   to 
their   liberty   and    their    families.      Their   sentences 
were  cancelled,  their  confiscated  estates  were  given 
back  to  them,  either  in   land  or  in  money,  and  the 
refugees  who  had  served  in  France  or  in  the  legions 
were   allowed  to   come   back   without  any  difficulty. 
The  Emperor  also  interfered   on  behalf  of  the  Poles 
confined  in  the  fortress  of  Spielberg  and  other  foreign 


276      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

prisons,  and  his  wishes  were  zealously  carried  out  by 
Kotchoubey,  Panin's  successor  at  the  Russian  Foreign 
Office.  The  abbe  Kollontay,  who  was  regarded  as 
the  most  revolutionary  of  the  Poles,  was  set  free 
and  came  to  live  and  die  in  the  part  of  Poland  which 
was  under  Alexander's  rule.  Count  Oginski  and 
several  others  were  also  invited  to  return  ;  they  were 
received  with  distinction  and  were  given  back  their 
fortunes,  which  were  in  several  cases  considerable. 
The  days  of  persecution,  of  political  trials  and  en- 
quiries, of  suspicious  precautions,  had  gone  by,  and 
for  some  time  the  Poles  were  trusted  and  left  at 
peace  by  their  Russian  rulers. 

The  Emperor  also  wished  to  improve  the  admin- 
istration and  regularise  the  course  of  justice  in  the 
Polish  provinces.  He  looked  for  Poles  capable  of 
filling  the  principal  posts,  which  had  previously 
been  occupied  by  Russians.  Trials  were  expedited 
and  made  more  equitable,  both  on  the  spot  and  in 
the  third  department  of  the  Senate  of  St  Petersburg, 
which  was  the  final  Court  of  Appeal  charged 
with  cases  arising  in  the  Polish  provinces.  These 
acts  deserved  our  gratitude,  but  could  not  com- 
pensate us  for  the  loss  of  our  national  existence,  and 
they  were  far  from  realising  the  hopes  expressed  in 
the  conversations  of  our  youth.  While  consoled  from 
time  to  time  by  the  advantages  which  were  granted 
to  my  countrymen,  I  could  not  see  what  more  I  could 
obtain  for  my  country.  My  life  was  one  continuous 
struggle  between  the  consolation  of  having  done  some 
good  and  the  regret — not  to  say  the  self-reproach — of 
never  being  able  to  reach  the  object  of  my  wishes  and 


ALEXANDERS  CORONATION  277 

hopes.  When  I  felt  that  the  realisation  of  the  noble 
sentiments  Alexander  had  expressed  for  my  country 
was  indefinitely  postponed,  I  was  utterly  discouraged, 
and  felt  invincible  disgust  for  the  Court  and  all  its 
members.  Although  on  intimate  terms  with  my 
colleagues  of  the  Secret  Council,  I  could  not  entirely 
confide  in  them  ;  their  Russian  thoughts  and  feelings, 
which  they  often  expressed,  were  too  incompatible 
with  my  hopes.  It  was  to  Alexander  only  that  I 
could  freely  disclose  my  sadness  and  its  cause.  Our 
old  intimacy,  though  it  was  more  restricted,  had  not 
ceased,  and  while  my  position  with  regard  to  current 
affairs  was  insignificant,  I  still  possessed  the  Emperor's 
confidence  more  than  any  one  else ;  when  he  was  with 
me  he  was  more  confiding  and  more  at  his  ease  than 
with  the  others ;  I  understood  him  better,  and  could 
more  freely  tell  him  the  truth  about  men  and  things, 
and  even  about  himself. 

Our  secret  interviews  were  interrupted  by  the 
coronation  at  Moscow.  The  recollection  of  this 
ceremony,  to  which  I  have  already  alluded,  left  me  a 
painful  impression.  I  know  nothing  more  disagree- 
able than  these  occasions,  when  everything  is  thrust 
out  of  its  accustomed  order.  Festivals  generally  give 
me  a  feeling  of  emptiness  and  melancholy  ;  there  is  an 
inflated  and  exaggerated  spirit  about  them  which 
causes  fatigue  and  is  typical  of  the  vanity  of  human 
things.  The  gaiety  whichuwould  be  naturally;  elicited 
by  the  occasion  disappears  directly  it  becomes  obliga- 
tory. One  gets  tired  of  the  long  periods  of  waiting, 
during  which  one  has  ample  time  to  think  of  the 
nullity  of  such  pleasures ;  and  while  surfeited  with 


278      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

inaction,  one  is  incapable  of  action.  In  Russia  these 
festivals  are  very  sumptuous,  and  comprise  innumer- 
able masked  balls,  banquets,  illuminations,  fireworks, 
and  popular  amusements  of  all  sorts.  I  have  seen  so 
many  of  them  that  I  look  upon  them  with  aversion, 
and  I  am  truly  glad  whenever  I  can  avoid  them. 

The  melancholy  shed  over  the  beginning  of 
Alexander's  reign  was  in  strong  contrast  to  the 
brilliancy  with  which  it  was  endeavoured  to  invest  his 
coronation.  The  father's  tragical  death  and  the  sou's 
remorse  deprived  these  fetes  of  the  vivacity  and  fresh- 
ness they  should  have  had,  and  the  joy  which  was  at 
first  felt  by  the  people  at  their  deliverance  from  the 
fantastic  tyranny  of  the  Emperor  Paul  was  followed 
by  the  exhaustion  produced  by  deceived  expectations, 
as  often  happens  at  the  beginning  of  a  new  reign, 
when  all  classes  imagine  their  hopes  will  be  realised, 
and  are  always  disappointed.  The  young  and  hand- 
some couple  who  were  to  be  crowned  did  not  look 
happy,  and  could  not  inspire  a  joy  or  satisfaction 
which  they  did  not  appear  to  feel  themselves. 
Alexander  had  not  the  art  of  influencing  and  con- 
tenting those  whom  he  wished  to  please  ;  this  faculty, 
so  necessary  to  a  sovereign,  was  absent  in  him, 
especially  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign. 

The  ceremony  of  the  coronation  increased  his 
sadness ;  he  had  never  more  strongly  felt  remorse  at 
having  contributed,  though  against  his  will,  to  his 
father's  death.  I  again  strove  to  pacify  him  by 
reminding  him  of  the  great  task  he  was  called  upon 
to  perform ;  these  exhortations  were  only  partially 
effectual,  but  they  contributed  to  rgive  him  sufficient 


ALEXANDER  AND  FREDERICK  WILLIAM  III    279 

self-command  not  to  betray  his  despair  in  public. 
The  recollection  of  that  time  is  one  of  the  saddest  of 
my  life,  and  I  cannot  recall  it  without  painful 
emotion. 

The    Court    returned   to    St  Petersburg:   for   the 

O 

winter,  and  our  after-dinner  meetings  were  resumed. 
They  were  soon  interrupted,  however,  by  the  meeting 
of  Alexander  and  the  King  of  Prussia  *  at  Memel  in 
the  spring  of  1802. 

The  Emperor  was  at  that  time  beginning  to  pay 
special  attention  to  foreign  affairs.  Kotchoubey,  the 
Foreign  Minister,  had  adopted  a  system  which  he 
believed  to  be  in  entire  conformity  with  the  Emperor's 
opinions  and  views,  and  at  the  same  time  with  his 
own.  This  was  to  hold  Russia  aloof  from  European 
affairs,  and  to  keep  on  good  terms  with  all  foreign 
Powers,  so  as  to  devote  all  her  time  and  attention  to 
internal  reforms.  Such  was  indeed  the  Emperor's 
wish  and  that  of  his  intimate  advisers,  but  none  of 
them  had  adopted  it  with  more  conviction,  or  main- 
tained it  with  more  persistence,  than  Kotchoubey. 
Russia,  he  used  to  say,  is  great  and  powerful 
enough  both  as  regards  population  and  extent  of 
territory,  and  geographical  position  ;  she  has  nothing 
to  fear  from  any  one  so  long  as  she  leaves  other 
Powers  in  peace  ;  and  she  has  too  often  mixed  herself 
Up  with  matters  which  did  not  directly  affect  her. 
Nothing  had  happened  in  Europe  but  she  claimed  to 
have  a  part  in  it ;  she  had  made  costly  and  useless 
wars.  The  Emperor  Alexander  was  now  in  such  a 
fortunate  position  that  he  could  remain  at  peace  with 

*  Frederick  William  III. 


8  o       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

all  the  world  and  devote  himself  to  internal  reforms. 
It  was  at  home,  not  abroad,  that  Russia  could  make 
immense  conquests,  by  establishing  order,  economy, 
and  justice  in  all  parts  of  her  vast  empire,  and  by 
making  agriculture,  commerce,  and  industry  flourish. 
European  affairs  and  European  wars  were  of  no 
advantage  whatever  to  the  numerous  inhabitants  of 
the  Russian  Empire ;  they  only  lost  their  lives  through 
them  or  had  to  furnish  new  recruits  and  taxes.  What 
was  necessary  to  their  prosperity  was  a  long  peace 
and  the  incessant  care  of  a  wise  and  pacific  adminis- 
tration— a  task  eminently  suited  to  the  Emperor, 
with  his  ideas  of  reform  and  liberal  government. 

This  system  was  somewhat  similar  to  that  advo- 
cated by  the  English  radicals.  The  idea  is  plausible 
and  not  without  a  basis  of  truth,  but  it  has  the 
disadvantage  of  reducing  to  insignificance  and  humi- 
liation the  State  which  follows  it  too  literally,  as  by 
so  doing  it  incurs  the  risk  of  becoming  the  vassal  and 
tool  of  more  enterprising  and  active  States.  More- 
over, a  consistent  adherence  to  such  a  system  would 
require  much  tact  and  firmness  to  avoid  damaging  com- 
promises, which,  in  the  then  existing  state  of  European 
relations,  would  have  become  almost  inevitable.  This 
is  what  happened  to  the  Emperor  Alexander  in  the 
case  of  the  Memel  interview. 

The  Prussian  and  Russian  sovereigns  had  both 
expressed  a  wish  to  meet  each  other.  The  former 
thought  this  would  be  a  means  of  facilitating  to  his 
advantage  the  question  of  indemnities  in  Germany, 
which  at  that  time  was  being  dealt  with  under  the 
influence  of  France,  while  Alexander's  sole  object  was 


ALEXANDER  AND  FREDERICK  WILLIAM  III    281 

to  become  personally  acquainted  with  his  neighbour 
and  relative.  He  had  a  liking  for  the  Prussians  and 
their  King  which  arose  from  his  military  education  at 
Gatchina,  and  he  looked  forward  to  seeing  the 
Prussian  troops,  of  whom  he  had  a  great  idea ;  he 
would,  moreover,  get  an  opportunity-  of  augmenting 
his  knowledge  of  drill,  uniform,  and  parades,  to  which 
he  attached  great  importance.  He  also  wished  to 
make  the  acquaintance  of  the  beautiful  Queen  of 
Prussia,  and  to  appear  before  her  and  her  Court  as 
the  Emperor  of  Russia.  For  all  these  reasons  he 
started  on  his  journey  with  much  anticipation  of 
pleasure,  and  he  was  accompanied  by  Kotchoubey  as 
Foreign  Minister,  Novosiltzoff  as  Secretary,  and 
Count  Tolstoi,  who  had  administered  the  affairs  of  his 
house  when  he  was  Grand-Duke,  as  Marshal.  Tolstoi 
was  sincerely  attached  to  the  Emperor,  and  was  very 
zealous  in  his  service ;  but  he  possessed  little  intelligence 
or  instruction,  and  was  often  laughed  at  by  Alexander, 
though  he  placed  implicit  trust  in  his  fidelity. 

At  Memel,  where  the  same  sovereigns  had  after- 
wards to  meet  in  very  different  circumstances,  there 
were  many  parades,  reviews,  and  balls.  The  Emperor 
contracted  a  personal  friendship  for  the  King  of 
Prussia  to  which  the  latter  afterwards  owed  the  pre- 
servation of  his  monarchy,  and  the  King  hastened  to 
take  advantage  of  the  good  impression  he  had  made 
on  Alexander  to  secure  his  consent  and  support  for 
the  arrangements  which  were  then  preparing  between 
Prussia  and  France  with  the  object  of  withdrawing 
Germany  from  the  influence  of  the  Church.  Kotch- 
oubey had  been  opposed  to  the  interview,  whose 


282       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

consequences  he  foresaw  ;  he  endeavoured  to  dissuade 
the  Emperor  from  going  to  Memel,  and  went  there 
himself  very  unwillingly.  To  interfere  in  the  affair 
of  the  indemnities  would  be  contrary  to  the  principle 
of  non-intervention  adopted  in  the  Secret  Council, 
and  would  be  playing  into  Prussia's  hands.  What 
especially  displeased  Kotchoubey  in  the  proposed 
arrangements,  and  made  him  wish  not  to  take  part 
in  them,  was  that  the  disposal  of  the  indemnities 
was  left  entirely  to  Napoleon's  good  pleasure,  and 
that  the  latter  might  consequently  be  regarded  as  the 
prime  mover  in  the  whole  business.  But  the  two 
sovereigns  settled  the  matter  personally,  without  con- 
sulting their  Ministers — a  bad  way  of  dealing  with 
political  affairs,  as  it  necessarily  makes  dupes  of  those 
who  are  straightforward,  disinterested,  and  generous. 

It  was  also  at  this  first  interview  at  Memel  that 
began  the  Platonic  coquetry  between  the  Emperor  of 
Russia  and  the  Queen  of  Prussia — a  sort  of  connection 
which  was  especially  pleasing  to  Alexander  and  to 
which  he  was  always  ready  to  sacrifice  much  time. 
It  very  seldom  happened  that  the  virtue  of  the  ladies 
to  whom  Alexander  paid  his  attentions  was  really  in 
danger.  The  Queen  was  always  accompanied  by  her 
favourite  sister,  the  Princess  of  Sal  in,  now  Duchess 
of  Cumberland,*  about  whom  there  was  much  scandal- 
ous gossip.  She  relaxed  the  Court  etiquette,  made 
conversation  more  merry,  and  introduced  more 
familiarity  into  intimate  society.  She  was  thoroughly 
informed  of  her  sister's  secret  thoughts,  and  would 
have  been  of  her  secret  actions  if  there  had  been  any. 

*  Afterwards  Queen  of  Hanover. 


ALEXANDER  AND  FREDERICK  WILLIAM  III    283 

After  one  of  his  interviews  the  Emperor,  who  then 
had  transferred  his  affections  to  some  one  else,  told  me 
he  was  seriously  alarmed  at  the  distribution  of  the 
rooms  which  communicated  with  his,  and  that  at 
night  he  used  carefully  to  lock  his  bedroom  door  to 
prevent  his  being  surprised  arid  led  into  dangerous 
temptations  which  he  wished  to  avoid.  He  even  said 
this  plainly,  with  more  frankness  than  gallantry,  to 
the  Queen  of  Prussia  and  her  sister. 

On  returning  from  Memel,  the  Emperor  made  a 
tour  in  Lithuania,  and  showed  that  he  took  an  in- 
terest in  the  Poles  by  distributing  some  favours  and 
repairing  some  acts  of  injustice,  and  at  the  same  time 
holding  out  the  prospect  of  further  benefits.  All  this 
was  very  hurriedly  done,  as  is  usually  the  case  during 
the  tour  of  a  sovereign  in  his  dominions.  When  he 
arrived  at  St  Petersburg,  the  treaty  relative  to  the 
indemnities  was  made  public,  and  it  turned  out  to  be 
a  general  distribution  of  ecclesiastical  property  in 
which  Prussia  had  the  largest  share.  In  Paris  the 
property  was  sold  by  auction  :  the  First  Consul  took 
the  leading  part  in  the  arrangements,  but  Talleyrand 
was  entrusted  with  the  details  of  the  distribution, 
and  as  a]  rule  the  highest  bidder  got  the  property. 
Right  had  little  chance  unless  it  had  money  to  back 
it.  Germany  was  parcelled  out  for  the  advantage  of 
Prussia — whose  favour  the  First  Consul  wished  to 
gain — and  of  the  distributors  in  Paris.  The  import- 
ance of  France  was  sensibly  increased,  while  that  of 
Russia  was  greatly  diminished ;  she  played  a  second- 
ary part  and  was  led  into  giving  her  assent  to  an 
arrangement  which  was  far  from  honourable  in  its 


284       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

origin  and  the  results  of  which  she  could  hardly  ap- 
prove. Kotchoubey  was  much  distressed,  and  in  the 
salons  people  talked  of  the  insignificant  part  Russia 
had  been  made  to  play.  France,  on  the  other  hand, 
boasted  of  her  triumph,  and  the  Prussian  Ministers 
were  delighted.  In  order  to  gild  the  pill  for  Russia, 
Napoleon  offered  sonic  advantages  to  the  houses  of 
Wiirteinberg  and  Baden,  which  were  allied  with  her ; 
but  these  States  felt  that  their  fate  must  ultimately 
depend  on  the  good-will  of  France,  and  not  on  the 
power  of  Russia.  "  As  for  the  Duke  of  Oldenburg, 
the  Empress  Dowager's  son-in-law,  he  complained  of 
the  prejudicial  effect  of  the  treaty  upon  his  estates, 
but  he  could  not  obtain  any  redress  :  Napoleon  had 
been  offended  by  his  strong  German  feeling  and  his 
stiff  manners. 

The  meetings  of  the  Secret  Council  were  now 
resumed,  and  they  had  become  the  more  important  as 
three  of  its  members — Kotchoubey,  Novosiltzoff,  and 
Strogonoff — were  now  in  the  service  of  the  State. 
Novosiltzoff's  ante-chamber  began  to  fill ;  men  with 
new  ideas  sought  and  obtained  employment.  Many 
matters  passed  through  his  hands  and  were  influenced 
by  his  liberal  leanings.  The  Emperor  found  him 
useful  for  giving  Russian  forms  to  his  European 
aspirations.  We  were  also  supported  by  some  of  the 
older  and  more  distinguished  functionaries  of  the 

O 

Empire.  One  of  these  was  the  father  of  Count  Paul 
Strogonoff,  who  had  passed  the  greater  part  of  his 
life  in  Paris  at  the  time  of  Louis  XV.  He  had  been 
in  the  society  of  Grimm,  d'Holbach,  and  d'Alembert ; 
he  had  been  a  frequent  visitor  in  the  salons  of 


THE  STROGONOFFS  285 

celebrated  women,  where  the  greatest  noblemen  used 
to  meet  men  of  letters ;  his  conversation  was  full  of 
the  anecdotes  and  good  sayings  of  that  day,  and  he 
had  in  many  things  adopted  its  opinions.  He  was 
very  impulsive  and  enthusiastic,  but  the  slightest 
obstacle  sufficed  to  cool  his  enthusiasm.  He  was  a 
singular  mixture  of  the  encyclopaedist  and  the  old 
Russian  boyard.  His  mind  and  his  language  were 
French,  his  manners  and  customs  Russian ;  he  had  a 
great  fortune  and  many  debts,  a  large  elegantly 
furnished  house,  a  good  picture  gallery,  of  which  he 
had  himself  drawn  up  a  catalogue,  and  an  immense 
number  of  servants  (including  some  French  valets) 
whom  he  treated  as  slaves,  though  with  great  kind- 
ness. He  was  surrounded  by  disorder,  and  his 
servants  robbed  him ;  but  he  did  not  care.  He  kept 
open  house,  and  anybody  could  come  to  meals  on 
certain  days  in  the  week.  The  society  was  less  mixed, 
and  included  more  learned  men  and  artists,  than  at 
the  house  of  the  Grand  Equerry  Narishkin,  and  the 
complete  absence  of  etiquette,  together  with  the 
Count's  extreme  amiability,  made  his  house  very 
pleasant.  He  had  taken  a  great  liking  to  me,  and 
was  angry  when  I  did  not  come  to  his  dinners ;  he 
treated  me  as  one  of  the  family. 

By  natural  inclination  and  by  his  French  training 
the  Count  was  liberal  so  far  as  his  words  and  desires 
were  concerned.  He  wished  to  give  happiness  and 
liberty  to  everybody ;  but  at  the  same  time  he  was  a 
thorough  courtier,  and  the  favour  and  consideration  of 
his  sovereign  was  to  him  a  necessity.  He  was  not 
ambitious  or  desirous  of  place  ;  but  a  cold  reception  or 


286      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

a  frown  from  the  Emperor  made  him  unhappy  and 
deprived  him  of  all  energy  and  rest.  He  had  been 
liked  by  Catherine,  by  Paul,  and  by  the  Empress 
Maria,  and  he  was  especially  so  by  Alexander.  The 
latter  was  his  son's  friend,  and  was  very  fond  of  the 
young  Countess,  who  by  her  amiable  character  had 
obtained  a  great  influence  over  him.  At  the  old 
Count's  he  felt  in  his  element,  for  he  used  to  meet 
people  who  understood  and  appreciated  those  modern 
and  liberal  ideas  which  were  at  that  time  Alexander's 
secret  passion. 

The  special  favour  enjoyed  by  the  Strogonoff 
family  at  the  beginning  of  Alexander's  reign  gave  the 
old  Count  more  weight  than  he  had  ever  had  before, 
and  as  he  was  a  senator,  and  his  Russian  manners  had 
gained  him  much  popularity  among  the  nobility  of  the 
district  of  which  he  was  Marshal,  his  enthusiastic 
approval  of  the  new  ideas  which  were  supposed  to  be 
entertained  by  Alexander  and  the  members  of  the 
Secret  Council  was  very  valuable  to  the  latter.  An 
even  more  important  supporter  was  Count  Alexander 
Vorontzoff,  who  was  regarded  in  Russia  as  one  of  her 
ablest  statesmen.  He  and  Count  Zavadovsky  had 
been  Count  Bezborodko's  friends ;  they  used  to  come 
to  see  him  to  talk  about  public  affairs,  and  it  is  said 
that  when  they  left  Bezborodko  used  to  have  the 
doors  and  windows  opened,  and  to  wander  about  the 
rooms  panting,  fanning  himself,  and  saying,  '  Thank 
God,  the  pedagogues  have  gone,'  as  they  were  con- 
stantly reproaching  him  for  his  indolence  and  his 
yielding  temper.  They  were,  however,  true  friends. 
I  do  not  know  what  induced  Count  Vorontzoff  to 


THE   VORONTZOFFS  287 

withdraw  from  public  affairs  during  the  reign  of 
Catherine.  He  used  to  have  fits  of  bad  temper,  and 
his  ambition  was  riot  easily  satisfied.  While  Paul 
was  on  the  throne  the  Count  had  the  good  sense 
to  remain  in  retirement,  although  Paul  was  very  well 
disposed  towards  the  Vorontzoff  family  on  account  of 
the  liaison  of  Peter  III  with  one  of  their  sisters.  It 
was  only  at  the  time  of  the  new  Emperor's  accession 
that  Vorontzoff  reappeared  at  St  Petersburg,  with 
the  reputation  he  had  enjoyed  during  the  reign  of 
Catherine  still  further  increased  by  his  having  so 
long  and  so  wisely  remained  in  retirement.  He  did 
not  join  the  old  Ministers,  most  of  whom  were  in- 
ferior to  him  in  knowledge  and  judgment,  and  whom 
it  would  have  been  necessary  to  dismiss  in  order  to  find 
a  place  for  him.  The  position  he  assumed  was  a  more 
elevated  one  ;  he  undertook  the  task  of  reconciling 
the  Emperor's  ideas  with  those  of  the  old  Russian 
routine,  of  moderating  the  changes  which  he  foresaw 
might  arise  from  Alexander's  inclinations.  It  was 
easy  to  adopt  and  at  the  same  time  to  guide  them, 
and  thereby  to  gain  favour  and  power.  Vorontzoff 
accordingly  entered  the  '  young  men's  party,'  feel- 
ing that  in  order  to  rise  it  was  necessary  to  free  one's 
self  from  the  old  traditions,  and  that  in  any  new 
arrangement  the  first  place  would  be  secured  to 
him. 

VorontzofFs  brother  Simon  had  also  arrived  at  St 
Petersburg  after  a  long  absence.  He  had  very  fixed 
opinions  and  sentiments,  and  was  always  a  blind  and 
passionate  partisan  of  any  idea  he  adopted,  or  any 
man  he  chose  as  his  idol.  During  the  revolution 


288      MEMOIRS  OF  PRIXCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

which  placed  Catherine  II  on  the  throne  he  was  a 
subaltern  officer  in  the  grenadiers,  and  loudly  declared 
himself  in  favour  of  the  unfortunate  Peter  III,  which 
did  not  prevent  him  from  being  afterwards  employed 
by  Catherine  and  appointed  Ambassador  in  London. 
It  is  known  that  one  of  VorontzofFs  sisters  was  Peter 
Ill's  mistress,  while  another  was  a  confidante  of  the 
Empress  Catherine.  The  zeal  he  had  shown  in  his 
youth  for  Peter  III,  induced  the  Emperor  Paul  to 
recall  him  from  London  to  St  Petersburg,  and  offer 
him  the  first  posts  in  the  Empire,  but  he  refused 
them  all  and  asked  to  be  left  in  London.  He  had 
acquired  friends  in  England  by  his  noble,  frank,  and 
determined  character,  and  had,  so  to  say,  taken  root 
in  the  country.  England  had  quite  fascinated  him  ; 
he  loved  her  more  than  the  most  bigoted  of  Tories, 
and  he  adored  Pitt  to  such  an  extent  that  he  looked 
upon  the  slightest  criticism  or  even  doubt  as  to  his 
policy  and  doctrines  as  simple  nonsense,  and  as  show- 
ing an  inexcusable  perversion  of  mind  or  heart.  Be- 
sides his  worship  of  England  and  Pitt,  he  cultivated 
another  which  was  more  natural  and  of  older  date- 
that  of  his  elder  brother.  He  considered  him  the 
ablest  and  most  virtuous  man  in  Russia,  and  his 
decisions  were  to  him  oracles.  His  devotion  to  his 
brother  was  indeed  touching,  for  it  was  quite  spon- 
taneous and  sincere.  The  two  brothers  were  so 
united  that  they  did  not  even  divide  the  property  left 
them  by  their  father.  Alexander,  who  managed  the 
property,  gave  his  brother  his  share,  and  there  was 
never  the  slightest  altercation  between  them  on  the 
subject. 


THE  VORONTZOFFS  289 

Novosiltzoff,  during  the  years  he  had  passed  in 
England  while  Paul  was  on  the  throne,  had  been  a 
frequent  visitor  to  Simon  Vorontzoff  s  house,  to  which 
he  had  been  introduced  by  Count  Strogonoff;  he  had 
gained  his  intimacy  and  confidence,  and  thus  became  a 
sort  of  bond  between  Alexander  Vorontzoff  and  the 
'young  men's  party.'  Simon's  arrival  at  St  Peters- 
burg1 made  these  relations  more  intimate  and  effec- 

o 

tive.  His  Tory  opinions  were  regarded  in  Russia  as 
extremely  Liberal,  and  they  had  considerable  influence 
on  his  brother,  through  whom  they  were  transmitted 
to  the  Emperor,  who  was  already  elaborating  a  plan 
of  reform.  Alexander  Vorontzoff  was  in  no  way 
opposed  to  certain  Liberal  ideas ;  on  the  contrary,  he 
was  inclined  to  adopt  and  support  them,  and  this 
inclination  was  fostered  by  the  traditions  of  the  old 
Russian  aristocracy  which  had  wished  to  limit  the 
power  of  the  Empress  Anne  when  she  was  called  to 
the  throne.  He  once  told  me  that  in  passing  through 
Warsaw  in  his  youth,  during  the  reign  of  Augustus 
III,  to  make  a  tour  in  Europe,  he  had  thought  that 
nothing  could  have  been  better  or  more  fortunate  for 

o 

himself  and  his  country  than  that  he  should  be  a  great 
nobleman  like  those  of  Poland,  with  the  same  rights 
and  privileges.  The  Russian  aristocratic  spirit  of 
one  of  the  brothers  and  the  pure  Toryism  of  the  other 
both  looked  to  the  Senate  for  a  solution  of  the  problem. 
The  basis  and  the  source  of  all  reforms  should,  they 
thought,  be  found  in  the  Senate ;  by  that  body  alone 
could  they  be  carried  out  without  danger.  Yet,  though 
various  plans  were  discussed  in  the  Secret  Council, 
nothing  was  done.  This  discontented  the  Vorontzoffs, 
VOL.  i.  T 


2 9o       MEMOIRS  OF  PR1SCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

and  they  agreed  with  the  '  young  men's  party  '  to  take 
a  decided  step  to  draw  the  Emperor  out  of  the  timid 
inertia  in  which  he  had  entrenched  himself. 

The    country  house  of  Kamienny  Ostrog,  where 
the    Emperor   then    lived,    was    separated  from    that 
of  Count   Strogonoff  by  the  river  Neva,  over  which 
there  was  a  bridge.     The  Emperor  and  Empress  went 
to  dine  at   Count   StrogonofFs,  and   the   Vorontzofts 
were  also  there.     After  we  had  got  up   from  table, 
the    Emperor  walked  in    the    garden  and  went   into 
one  of  the    pavilions,   where  he  found    Novosiltzoff ; 
we  all  followed  him,  and   entered  into  conversation. 
Simon  Vorontzoif  had  been  chosen  as  the  speaker  on 
this  occasion,  as,  having  only  just  come  from  England, 
and    being   a   stranger   to    what   had    passed   at    St 
Petersburg,  he  had  a  right  to  be  regarded  as  impartial 
and  to  state  his  views  freely.     His  speech  was  not  as 
eloquent  as  we  had  expected  ;  the  Emperor,  who  was 
very  clever   in  raising  objections  and   difficulties,  re- 
peatedly disconcerted    both   Simon  and   his  brother. 
They  tried  to  prove  to  him  that  it  was  necessary  to 
do  something,  that  improvements  were  expected  of  a 
new  reign,  and  that  both  Russia  and  Europe  generally 
expected  them,  especially  of  him.     These  were  only 
vague  phrases ;  and  when  the   Emperor  asked  what 
line  the  improvements  should  take  and  how  he  was  to 
proceed,  the  Vorontzoffs  could  only  answer  that  if  the 
authority  of  the  Senate  were  re-established  all  diffi- 
culties would  be  removed.     They  held  that  this  body, 
if  restored  to  its  power  and  dignity,  would  possess  all 
the  safeguards  and  the   means  necessary  for  bringing 
about  the  projected  improvements.     Each  sentence  in 


PLANS  OF  REFORM  291 

Simon  VorontzofFs  speech  began  and  ended  with  the 
Senate,  and  when  he  did  not  know  what  to  say  or 
answer  he  simply  repeated  the  word.  This  affectation 
was  somewhat  awkward  and  ridiculous,  and  was  more 
likely  to  chill  the  Emperor  than  to  rouse  him.  The 
Senate  had  certainly  much  changed  since  its  establish- 
ment by  Peter  I,  and  it  could  no  longer  be  said  even 
to  have  the  power  it  enjoyed  in  the  reigns  which 
immediately  succeeded  that  of  the  founder  of  modern 
Russia.  In  all  difficult  questions  the  Senate  was 
al  ways  referred  to,  but  it  was  nothing  but  a  name ;  it 
was  composed  of  men  who  were  for  the  most  part 
incapable  and  without  energy,  selected  for  their  insig- 
nificance, and  it  could  not  therefore  act  as  a  mediator 
between  parties  or  be  of  any  weight  either  on  one 
side  or  the  other. 

At  length  the  Emperor's  vague  and  floating  ideas 
were  consolidated  into  a  practical  shape.  All  the 
eccentric  views  which  were  mere  fireworks  were 
abandoned,  and  Alexander  had  to  restrict  his  wishes 
to  the  realities  and  possibilities  of  the  moment.  He 
consoled  himself  by  indulging  in  his  hours  of 
leisure,  which  were  daily  becoming  more  rare,  in 
hopes  of  progress  which  enabled  him  not  to  give  up 
entirely  the  dreams  of  his  youth.  These  dreams 
seemed  to  me  like  a  tree  transplanted  into  a  dry  and 
arid  soil  and  deprived  of  its  exuberant  vegetation,  whose 
despoiled  trunk  puts  forth  a  few  weak  branches  and 
then  perishes.  The  Emperor's  first  step  was  to  issue 
an  ukase  or  manifesto  to  restore  the  authority  and 
dignity  of  the  Senate  ;  this  was  a  prudent  course,  cal- 
culated to  predispose  the  public  for  the  changes  which 


292       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

were  to  follow.  In  speaking  of  the  Senate  he  spoke 
a  language  which  the  Russians  understood  and  which 
flattered  the  nobility  ;  it  was  already  the  Supreme 
Court  of  Justice  and  Administration,  for  although  every 
order  of  the  Emperor,  whether  written  or  spoken, 
had  the  force  of  law,  they  had  (especially  those  relat- 
ing to  general  administration  and  the  civil  and 
criminal  law)  all  to  be  addressed  to  the  Senate,  which 
was  entrusted  with  the  task  of  publishing  them  and 
seeing  to  their  due  execution.  The  various  depart- 
ments of  the  Senate  were  charged  not  only  with 
trying  on  final  appeal  the  civil  and  criminal  cases  of 
the  empire,  but  also  with  punishing  contraventions 
of  the  administrative  regulations.  It  had  the  right 
of  issuing  ukases  of  its  own  founded  on  those  of  the 
Emperor,  and,  when  necessary,  explaining  and  develop- 
ing them  ;  and  it  presented  him  with  reports  for  his 
approval.  The  governors  and  financial  authorities  of 
the  provinces  were  under  its  direct  supervision,  and  it 
was  their  duty  to  send  to  the  Senate  regular  and 
formal  reports  upon  which  the  sovereign  gave  such 
orders  as  he  pleased.  It  was  accordingly  called  '  The 
Senate  administering  the  Empire.'  Its  vague  func- 
tions, partly  judicial  and  partly  executive,  were  not 
in  accordance  with  modern  ideas,  being  so  cumbrous 
in  form  that  they  retarded  and  might  even  em- 
barrass the  course  of  government ;  but  there  was  no 
way  of  touching  this  ancient  organisation  without 
exposing  internal  affairs  to  even  greater  confusion,  as 
the  institution  of  the  Senate  had  become  part  of  the 
routine  and  the  habits  of  the  government  machine. 
The  Senate  was  consequently  allowed  to  retain  its 


PLANS  OF  REFORM  293 

administrative  functions,  though  it  was  intended  to 
let  them  fall  by  degrees  into  desuetude.  All  its 
powers  were  confirmed  in  pompous  terms  of  which  the 
author  was  Vorontzoff,  and  to  them  was  added  the 
right  of  making  representations  on  the  Emperor's 
ukases.  It  was  at  the  same  time  laid  down  that  all 
the  Ministers  should  make  detailed  reports  of  their 
functions,  which  the  Emperor  would  send  to  the 
Senate  for  its  opinion. 

This,  it  was  hoped,  would  be  a  first  step  in  the 
direction  of  national  and  representative  government. 
The  idea  was  to  deprive  the  Senate  of  its  executive 
powers,  to  leave  it  those  of  a  Supreme  Court  of 
Justice,  and  gradually  to  convert  it  into  a  sort  of 
upper  chamber  to  which  would  afterwards  be  attached 
deputies  of  the  nobility  who,  either  as  part  of  the 
chamber  or  as  a  separate  body,  would,  for  the 
Emperor's  information,  state  their  views  on  the 
management  of  affairs  by  the  Ministers  and  on  the 
laws  which  were  in  existence  or  in  preparation.  This 
plan  was  never  carried  out,  and  what  really  happened 
was  very  different. 

Those  who  think  that  the  Senate  of  St  Petersburg 
can  ever  be  of  any  importance  for  the  destinies  of 
Russia  are  entirely  mistaken,  and  only  show  that  they 
do  not  know  Russia.  The  Russian  Senate  in  its 
present  form  is  less  able  than  any  political  body  in 
the  world  to  make  itself  respected  or  to  act  on  its  own 
initiative.  It  can  neither  give  an  impulse  nor  even 
receive  one  ;  it  is  a  marionette  which  one  can  move 
about  as  one  pleases,  but  which  has  no  motive  power 
of  its  own . 


294       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Those  who  are  tired  of  official  life  and  wish  to 
retire  and  live  quietly  in  idleness  are  the  sort  of 
people  who  seek  the  appointment  of  Senator.  The 
Senate  thus  becomes  a  receptacle  for  the  indolent  and 
the  superannuated ;  all  its  work  is  done  by  the  pro- 
curators and  the  secretaries,  who  decide  questions  at 
their  pleasure  and  then  take  the  decisions  to  the 
Senators,  who  as  a  rule  sign  them  without  reading 
them.  These  decrees  are  drawn  up  in  a  more  diffuse 
and  tedious  style  even  than  the  official  documents  of 
other  countries ;  the  minutes  in  each  case  fill  an 
immense  volume,  and  it  would  require  some  courage 
to  read  them.  One  or  two  Senators  who  do  read  the 
decrees  that  are  submitted  to  them  for  signature  are 
spoken  of  with  admiration  as  heroes.  It  is  evident 
that  such  a  political  body  is  incapable  of  undertaking 
or  following  up  any  reform. 

After  laying  the  first  stone  of  the  edifice  of  a  regu- 
lated legislative  power,  and  devising  a  limit  to  the 
autocratic  power,  the  Emperor  turned  his  attention  to 
the  organisation  of  his  government,  so  as  to  make  its 
action  more  enlightened,  more  just,  and  more  methodi- 
cal. The  government  machine  was  irregular  and 
intermittent  in  its  action,  and  the  administration  was 
a  chaos  in  which  nothing  was  regulated  or  clearly 
defined.  The  only  administrative  authorities  that 
were  recognised  were  the  Senate  and  the  Committees 
of  War,  of  the  Navy,  and  of  Foreign  Affairs.  These 
were  not  deliberative  or  consultative  bodies ;  one  of 
the  members  of  each  committee,  usually  the  president, 
brought  the  reports  of  the  committee  to  the  sovereign 
and  then  informed  it  of  his  decisions.  The  Procu- 


PLANS  OF  REFORM  295 

rator-General  united  in  his  person  the  offices  of 
Minister  of  the  Interior,  of  Police,  of  Finance,  and  of 
Justice  ;  but  sometimes  the  sovereign  created  separate 
departments,  and  the  Empress  Catherine  placed  the 
conquered  provinces  under  the  direction  of  one  of  her 
favourites,  such  as  Potemkin  or  Zuboff,  who  were 
independent  of  the  Senate  and  reported  direct  to  the 
sovereign.  Moreover,  when  the  reports  of  the  Senate 
and  the  various  committees  were  handed  to  the 
sovereign  by  the  Ministers  or  other  high  function- 
aries of  State,  they  were  often  put  away  in  a  drawer, 
and  after  some  time  had  elapsed  a  decision  totally 
opposed  to  the  one  suggested  was  issued.  Thus  there 
was  practically  no  bar  to  the  caprices  of  the  sovereign. 
Paul,  who  thought  he  was  a  great  general,  and  was 
especially  jealous  of  any  control  over  the  army  apart 
from  his  own,  appointed  one  of  his  aides-de-camp  in 
whom  he  had  confidence  to  examine  and  submit  to 
him  all  the  proposals  of  the  War  Committee,  and  all 
promotions  and  appointments.  The  direction  of 
Foreign  Affairs  was  nominally  entrusted  to  a  com- 
mittee of  three  members,  each  of  whom  worked  with 
the  sovereign  separately,  and  had  the  management  of 
some  particular  question  which  was  kept  a  secret  from 
his  colleagues.  This  post  was  much  sought  after, 
and  Catherine's  favourites  obtained  some  magnificent 
presents  from  foreign  powers  in  employing  for  a 
negotiation  with  which  they  had  been  charged  by  the 
Empress  one  of  the  members  of  the  Foreign  Affairs 
Committee  on  whose  complaisance  they  could  rely. 
This  was  the  case  with  Prince  Zuboff  and  Count 


296      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Markoff,  who  were  handsomely  rewarded  for  advoca- 
ting the  two  last  partitions  of  Poland. 

In  the  time  of  the  Emperor  Paul  foreign  affairs 
were  often  directed  by  his  favourite  aides-de-camp. 
The  Vice-Chancellor  or  the  eldest  of  the  members  of 
the  committee  only  had  the  direction  of  the  admin- 
istrative and  financial  branch,  and  of  the  current 
correspondence.  This  system  suited  an  able  sovereign 
like  the  Empress  Catherine,  who,  notwithstanding  its 
disadvantages  and  a  complete  absence  of  unity,  still 
ultimately  carried  out  a  consistent  policy.  Paul,  with 
his  incessant  caprices  and  changes  of  mind,  yet  had  a 
most  decided,  almost  furious,  will  which  all  the 
wheels  of  the  government  machine  had  at  once  to 
obey.  But  with  a  sovereign  of  vacillating  character 
it  is  evident  that  the  system  of  administration  above 
described  must  lead  to  serious  evils.  The  Emperor 
was  continually  exposed  to  making  mistakes,  to 
seeing  only  one  side  of  a  question ;  he  wras  liable  to 
be  confused  by  a  mass  of  opinions  from  persons  many 
of  whom  had  an  interest  in  not  letting  him  know  the 
whole  truth  ;  and  he  could  never  advance  towards  a 
definite  object.  Russia  therefore  had  reason  to  be 
grateful  to  the  Emperor  Alexander  and  those  whose 
advice  he  then  followed  for  having  sought  to  introduce 
more  order  and  method  in  the  Imperial  administration. 

The  object  of  the  reform  was  to  establish  a  system 
somewhat  similar  to  those  adopted  in  most  other 
European  States  by  separating  the  departments,  defin- 
ing their  limits,  assembling  in  each  department  matters 
of  the  same  kind,  centralising  their  management,  and 
thereby  augmenting  the  responsibility  of  the  principal 


PLANS  OF  REFORM  297 

functionaries  of  State.  It  was  hoped  among'  other 
things  that  this  would  be  an  efficacious  means  of 
checking  the  numberless  abuses  and  frauds  which  are 
the  curse  of  Russia.  The  Emperor  accordingly 
created  for  the  first  time  Ministries  of  the  Interior 
and  of  Police,  of  Finance,  of  Justice,  of  Public  In- 
struction, of  Commerce,  of  Foreign  Affairs,  of  War, 
and  of  the  Navy.  As  to  the  War  Department, 
Alexander  continued  the  system  adopted  by  his  father, 
insisting  that  everything  relating  to  the  army,  down 
to  the  smallest  appointment,  should  emanate  direct 
from  the  sovereign,  and  that  the  army  should  know 
it.  The  post  of  aide-de-camp  charged  with  the  man- 
agement of  the  personnel  of  the  army  became  gradually 
converted,  in  imitation  of  Napoleon,  into  that  of 
Major-General,  so  as  to  show  that  Russia  always 
considers  herself  in  a  state  of  war,  and  wishes  to  be 
in  a  position  to  make  war  at  any  moment.  In  the 
manifesto  establishing  the  changes  above  referred  to, 
it  was  stated  that  all  the  Emperor's  ukases  were  in 
future  to  be  countersigned  by  one  of  the  Ministers— 
an  attempt  to  introduce  the  principle  of  responsibility 
— and  the  Ministers  were  directed  to  meet  in  a 
council,  in  which  they  were  to  discuss  the  most 
important  questions  of  State.  This  was  a  new 
administrative  machine  superior  to  the  Senate,  which 
retained  all  its  functions  and  was  invested  with  new 
ones  ;  but  those  which  related  to  administration 
properly  so  called,  became  in  its  case  almost  purely 
formal.  By  the  creation  of  the  new  Ministers  the 
administrative  authority  of  the  Government  was 
concentrated,  while  hitherto  it  had  not  had  any  legal 


298       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

or  definite  status  except  in  the  person  of  the  sovereign. 
The  Council  of  State  also  was  not  changed,  although 
some  of  its  most  eminent  members  became  Ministers. 
The  Emperor  continued  occasionally  to  refer  to  this 
Council  various  disagreeable  or  complicated  questions, 
in  order  to  give  it  something  to  do,  and  not  let  it  die 
too  soon  ;  but  it  speedily  perished  through  its  insigni- 
ficance, and  Alexander  afterwards  created  another 
Imperial  Council  on  quite  a  different  and  much  more 
extensive  plan. 

These  changes,  which  elsewhere  would  seem  the 
very  A  B  C  of  politics,  seemed  at  that  time  to  the 
Russians  novel  and  immense.  The  manifesto  made 
much  noise  in  the  whole  Empire  and  especially  in  the 
salons  of  St  Petersburg  and  Moscow  ;  each  man  had 
his  own  opinion  of  it,  and  the  majority  judged  it  not 
by  its  intrinsic  merits  or  the  benefits  it  might  confer 
on  the  State,  but  by  the  effect  it  would  be  likely  to 
have  on  their  own  advancement.  Those  who  obtained 
places  approved  it,  while  those  who  remained  in  the 
cold  criticised  the  juvenile  infatuation  that  wished  to 
change  the  old  and  venerable  institutions  under  which 
Russia  had  become  great.  The  personages  high  in 
office  who  had  not  been  consulted,  and  did  riot  expect 
so  considerable  a  change,  were  taken  by  surprise, 
finding  themselves  eclipsed  by  those  who  during  the 
reign  of  Paul  and  the  beginning  of  that  of  Alexander 
had  held  aloof.  They  strove  to  vent  their  disappoint- 
ment by  smiling  with  pity  at  the  young  men  who 
were  trying  to  reform  the  Empire,  and  at  the  foolish- 
ness of  some  older  men  who  consented  to  be  the 
instruments  of  a  servile  and  awkward  imitation  of 


PLANS  OF  REFORM  299 

foreign  institutions.  The  easy  good-nature  of  the 
Emperor  encouraged  these  criticisms,  so  far  as  they 
were  possible  in  Kussia,  and  they  found  a  certain 
amount  of  support  in  the  Empress  Dowager,  who  was 
annoyed,  without  admitting  it,  at  not  having  been 
more  consulted  by  her  son  and  at  not  being  able  to 
influence  his  decisions.  She  perceived  in  all  these 
novelties  a  germ  of  liberalism  whose  development 
she  feared,  and  her  salon  became  a  centre  of  opposi- 
tion where  people  came  to  express  their  discon- 
tent. 

The   head  of  the   new  administration  was  Count 
Alexander  Vorontzoff,  who  was   made   Foreign  Min- 

o 

ister,  and  also  Chancellor — a  title  of  which  he  had 
long  been  ambitious,  and  which  had  not  been  given 
to  any  one  for  many  years.  Kotchoubey  left  the 
Foreign  Office  without  regret,  even  with  pleasure,  as 
he  thought  nothing  could  be  done  in  it  under  that 
system  of  impassiveness  which  he  considered  most 
suitable  to  Russia  and  most  in  conformity  with  the 
Emperor's  character  and  his  views  and  wishes  ;  he 
threw  himself  with  extreme  ardour  into  the  new 
sphere  of  action  opened  to  him  by  his  appointment 
as  Minister  of  the  Interior.  The  important  branches 
of  police  and  general  administration  of  which  this 
department  was  composed  had  until  then  been  buried 
in  the  mass  of  the  functions  attributed  to  the  Senate, 
to  the  Procurator-General,  and  occasionally  to  some 
of  the  sovereign's  secretaries.  Kotchoubey  had 
entirely  to  reorganise  an  administration  which  had 
been  long  neglected,  and  which  in  the  more  distant 
provinces  was  without  any  direction  or  supervision, 


3oo       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

and  given  up  to  all  the  abuses  arising  from  the  ig- 
norance and  cupidity  of  subordinate  officials.  It  was 
a  noble  and  arduous  task,  and  if  he  did  not  succeed 
as  well  as  he  had  wished,  it  was  not  for  want  of 
zeal  or  good-will.  He  began  by  organising  his  office, 
dividing  it  into  several  sections,  each  of  which 
had  to  deal  with  a  distinct  branch  of  the  vast  de- 
partment. He  invited  the  assistance  of  all  the  able 
and  experienced  officials  he  could  find,  and  en- 
deavoured to  raise  in  general  estimation  the  post  of 
Governor  of  a  province  by  appointing  in  that  capacity 
men  whose  character  and  position  afforded  guarantees 
of  integrity,  and  who,  though  inexperienced  in  official 
work,  were  likely  soon  to  obtain  the  necessary 
knowledge.  It  seemed  as  if  order  was  going  to  break 
through  the  chaos,  and  the  immediate  effects  of  the 
change  were  soon  felt  by  the  people.  One  of  the 
reforms  he  introduced  was  in  the  supply  of  salt,  which 
in  Russia  is  a  matter  of  great  importance.  This  was 
not  nominally  a  Government  monopoly,  but  the 
Government  alone  was  able  to  supply  salt  to  all  parts 
of  the  Empire  by  obtaining  it  from  the  salt  marshes 
or  distilling  it  from  sea-water.  Kotchoubey  took 
steps  to  reduce  the  cost  of  production  and  of  convey- 
ance to  the  lowest  possible  point,  so  as  to  enable  the 
people  to  buy  salt  more  cheaply,  and  the  Government 
to  be  repaid  its  expenses. 

The  new  Finance  Minister  was  Count  Vasilieff,  a 
capable  and  honest  official  who  had  in  financial 
matters  been  the  right  hand  of  Prince  Viaziemskoy, 
the  only  Procurator-General  who  had  been  mentioned 
with  praise  at  the  time  of  the  Empress  Catherine. 


PLANS  OF  REFORM  301 

In  the  various  changes  which  had  taken  place  since 
the  Prince's  death  in  1794,  M.  Vasilieff,  as  treasurer 
of  the  Empire,  had  been  indispensable ;  he  was  a 
steady  worker,  appreciated  new  ideas,  and  adopted 
them  when  he  thought  they  were  opportune.  All 
the  branches  of  the  public  revenue,  the  brandy  traffic, 
the  Imperial  Bank,  etc.,  were  comprised  in  this  depart- 
ment, to  which  was  added  the  mines  department, 
which  had  been  reorganised  on  a  larger  scale. 

The  functions  of  Minister  of  Justice  were  united 
to  those  of  Procurator-General  of  the  Senate. 
General  Beklescheff  did  not  wish  to  stop  in  this 
department,  as  it  had  been  deprived  of  the  greater 
part  of  its  functions  by  the  creation  of  the  Ministers 
of  the  Interior  and  of  Finance ;  and  he  was  succeeded 
by  the  Senator  Dzierzanin.  He  was  the  personal 
choice  of  the  Emperor,  without  communication  with 
the  Secret  Council.  A  worthy  man,  and  the  writer  of 
some  much  admired  lyrics  which  were  full  of  swing 
and  passion,  he  was  imperfectly  educated  and  knew 
no  language  but  Russian.  The  Emperor  had  been 
attracted  to  him  by  his  ardent  sentiments  and  poetic 
dreams,  not  being  able  to  resist  fine  phrases ;  the 
vaguer  they  were  the  better  they  pleased  him,  as  he 
could  then  easily  assimilate  them  to  his  hopes,  which 
also  were  not  very  clear.  He  liked  expressions  of 
energetic  liberalism,  and  was  especially  attracted  by 
admiration  of  himself  when  it  was  couched  in  the 
language  of  devotion  to  the  cause  of  humanity. 

The  Emperor  had  direct  and  special  relations  with 
certain  persons  whom  he  himself  introduced  at  our 
meetings ;  he  liked  to  patronise  them  and  defend 


3o2       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

them  against  objections  raised  sometimes  by  people 
who  knew  them  more  intimately.  It  gave  him 
pleasure  to  have  these  relations  without  the  know- 
ledge of  his  friends,  who  already  at  that  time  had 
begun  to  displease  him  because  they  were  so  united 
among  themselves.  Yet  it  was  absolutely  necessary 
to  introduce  members  of  '  the  young  men's  party ' 
into  the  administration,  for  all  Alexander's  hopes 
rested  upon  them  for  the  zealous  continuation  and 
accomplishment  of  the  reforms  he  had  at  heart. 
Kotchoubey  was  provided  for,  but  what  was  to  be 
done  with  the  others  ?  It  would  be  too  much  to 
make  them  Ministers,  and  it  was  accordingly  decided 
that  assistants  to  the  Ministers  should  be  appointed  ; 
in  this  way  the.  Emperor's  friends  would  be  able 
to  direct  their  chiefs  in  accordance  with  the  Emperor's 
views,  and  to  keep  him  fully  acquainted  with  what 
was  going  on. 

Count  Paul  Strogonoff  was  at  his  request  ap- 
pointed assistant  to  the  Minister  of  the  Interior,  and 
Novosiltzoff  obtained  the  post  of  assistant  to  the 
Minister  of  Justice,  retaining  his  former  appointment 
of  Secretary  to  the  Emperor.  This  gave  Novosiltzoff 
the  most  important  place  in  the  administration,  as  it 
was  through  him  that  the  Emperor  was  to  begin  the 
work  of  reforming  jurisprudence  and  the  existing 
laws.  He  was  well  qualified  for  the  task,  as  he  had 
studied  jurisprudence  and  political  economy  in  Eng- 
land, arid  had  made  good  use  of  the  opportunities 
thereby  afforded  him  of  becoming  conversant  with 
those  subjects.  No  one  in  Russia  was  at  that  time 
his  superior  in  that  administrative  knowledge  which 


PLANS  OF  ME  FORM  303 

was  then  only  to  be  obtained  by  reading  French  and 
English  works.     His  practical  mind  rejected  all  vain 
theories  ;    he   possessed  skill  and  tact  in  dealing  not 
only  with  individuals,  but  with   the   Russian  public, 
which   he   knew  thoroughly.     He   had  bad  qualities 
also  ;    but    these  had   not  yet  developed  themselves. 
One    of  his    greatest    merits   was    that   he    seconded 
Alexander's  wishes   as    to   the    improvement   of  the 
condition    of    the    peasants,    and    he    drew    up    the 
first  ukase   on   this    subject.     He   also   reconstituted 
the  commission  for  the  revision  of  the  law.     This  com- 
mission had  been  formed  by  the  Empress  Catherine, 
who   thereby    gained    the   flattering   appreciation    of 
Voltaire  and  the  Diderots  ;  but  the  only  result  was 
the  publication  of  the  philanthropic  and  philosophical 
instructions  addressed  by  Catherine  to  the  commission. 
It  was  dissolved  soon  after,  and  its  proceedings  were 
never  made  public.     The  new  commission  was  organ- 
ised by  Novosiltzoff  with  the  assistance  of  a  German 
jurist,   Baron  Rosenkampf,  on  a  vast  and  well-con- 
ceived plan.     It  was  directed  to  codify  all  the  exist- 
ing   Russian    laws,   which  were    very    numerous  and 
often  contradicted  each  other,  classifying  them  accord- 
ing to  subjects,  omitting  such   as  were  obsolete,  and 
adding  new  ones  when  necessary,  but  taking  care  to  re- 
tain in  the  new  codes  all  that  had  entered  for  many 
years  into  the  life  of  the  Russian  people,  even  if  not 
quite  reconcilable  with  the  ideas  of  modern  jurisprud- 
ence.    The  system  adopted  was  somewhat  similar  to 
that  of  Justinian  ;  but  the  task  of  the  Russian  codifiers 
was  far  more  difficult  than  that  of  the  Roman  ones. 
The  latter  merely  had  to  select  and  classify  out  of  a 


304       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

somewhat  confused  mass  of  laws,  most  of  which  were 
admirable  examples  of  wisdom  and  legislative  science, 
while  in  Russia  the  laws  were  not  only  confused,  but 
in  many  respects  defective  and  insufficient.  For  such 
a  work  not  only  jurists,  but  real  legislators  were 
wanted.  A  similar  code  was  to  be  prepared  for  the 
outlying  provinces  of  the  Empire,  such  as  Livonia, 
Esthonia,  Courland,  and  the  Polish  provinces  of 
Little  Russia,  each  of  which  had  its  own  particular 
language,  laws,  and  customs. 

This  great  undertaking  was  begun  methodically 
and  pursued  for  some  time  with  activity  ;  Novosiltzoff 
was  allowed  by  the  Minister  of  Justice  to  make  it  his 
exclusive  occupation.  The  classifications  were  pre- 
pared by  Baron  Rosenkampf,  and  so  long  as  they 
were  adhered  to  the  work  progressed ;  but  it  did  not 
produce  the  results  which  were  expected  of  it.  This, 
is  usually  the  case  in  Russia  ;  if  there  is  no  immediate 
result,  the  persons  entrusted  with  the  execution  of 
the  work  are  changed,  and  it  has  to  be  begun  over 
again. 

I  was  the  only  member  of  the  Secret  Council  who 
remained  without  employment.  Alexander  offered 
me,  with  Count  VorontzofFs  concurrence,  the  post  of 
assistant  to  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  and  all 
my  friends,  the  Emperor  especially,  pressed  me  to 
accept  the  offer.  I  hesitated  for  a  long  time,  feeling 
how  much  surprise  and  dissatisfaction  such  an  appoint- 
ment would  cause  in  Russia.  The  Emperor  observed 
that  during  my  mission  to  the  King  of  Sardinia  I 
had  made  myself  favourably  known  by  my  despatches, 
and  that  iny  nomination  to  the  Foreign  Office  ought 


APPOINTED  ASSISTANT  FOREIGN  MINISTER        305 

not  therefore  to  be  a  matter  of  astonishment, 
besides  which  Count  VorontzofF,  who  alone  had 
a  right  to  be  consulted  on  the  subject,  had  consented 
to  my  becoming  his  assistant.  I  replied  that  he 
(the  Emperor)  knew  more  than  anyone  my  feeling-s 
with  regard  to  my  country ;  that  they  could  never 
change,  and  that  I  had  some  reason  to  fear  that  they 
might  be  incompatible  with  the  duties  of  the  appoint- 
ment he  wished  to  give  me ;  the  safest  and  most 
proper  course,  therefore,  would  be  for  me  not  to  accept 
it.  To  this  Alexander  rejoined  that  he  did  not  at 
present  anticipate  any  such  contradiction  as  that 
which  I  feared ;  that  I  should  always  be  at  liberty  to 
give  up  my  post  if  such  a  contradiction  were  to  arise  ; 
and  that,  on  the  contrary,  he  thought  that  events 
would  occur  which  would  be  favourable  to  my  views. 
He  added  some  very  flattering  expressions  with  regard 
to  my  qualifications  for  the  post.  It  is  every  man's 
duty,  he  said,  to  pay  his  debt  to  humanity ;  when  one 
has  talents  one  must  not  refuse  to  employ  them  in  the 
most  useful  way.  I  still  declined,  but  Alexander  was 
bent  on  my  taking  the  appointment ;  this  was  one  of 
his  irresistible  fancies  which  nothing  could  induce  him 
to  abandon  until  they  were  satisfied.  His  persistence 
and  kindness  to  me  were  such  that  at  length  I 
yielded,  on  the  express  condition  that  I  should 
be  allowed  to  resign  the  appointment  directly 
its  functions  should  become  incompatible  with  my 
feelings  as  a  Pole.  My  chief  object  in  this  was,  by 
spending  some  years  in  the  Emperor's  service,  to 
prove  to  him  my  sincere  attachment  and  my  grati- 
tude for  his  friendship  and  confidence.  I  accepted 
VOL.  i.  u 


306       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSK1 

with  some  sadness,  as  by  so  doing  I  was  entering  on 
a  new  career  full  of  pitfalls  which  would  retain  me  at 
St  Petersburg,  where  I  was  always  like  an  exotic 
plant  which  could  not  take  root ;  I  felt  I  could  not 
enjoy  life  unless  I  were  with  my  own  people. 

I  will  not  pretend  that  I  had  more  foresight  and 
prudence  than  was  really  the  case.  In  accepting  the 
post  which  was  offered  me,  I  was  determined  not  to 
do  anything  which  might  exercise  an  injurious  in- 
fluence on  the  destinies  of  my  country ;  but  I  had 
no  clear  or  decided  idea  as  to  the  nature  of  the  ser- 
vices I  might  be  called  upon  to  render  to  Poland  in 
my  new  position.  In  this  respect,  a  substantial  bait 
was  offered  me  as  a  reward  for  having  at  length  yielded 
to  the  Emperor's  wishes.  He  entrusted  to  me  the 
direction  of  the  schools  in  the  eight  Polish  pro- 
vinces, which  at  that  time  constituted  the  whole 
of  that  portion  of  Poland  which  belonged  to  his 
dominions. 

The  creation  of  a  Ministry  of  Public  Instruction 
was  a  remarkable  innovation  in  Russia  which  was 
fruitful  of  great  and  salutary  results,  and  posterity 
will  owe  gratitude  both  to  Alexander  and  to  the 
young  men,  then  so  much  criticised,  who  supported 
him  in  his  plans  and  gave  them  practical  shape  by 
dividing  into  special  branches  the  confused  organisa- 
tion which  was  then  in  existence.  Nothing  could  be 
more  wretched  or  insufficient  than  public  instruction 
in  Russia  up  to  the  reign  of  Alexander.  There  was 
an  Academy  of  Sciences  at  St  Petersburg  which 
owed  its  only  celebrity  to  the  presence  of  some 
learned  men  whom  the  Government  had  brought  to 


STATE  OF  EDUCATION  IN  RUSSIA  307 

the  Russian  capital  from  abroad.  Euler  came  when 
he  was  already  an  old  man,  and  died  there  soon  after. 
The  transactions  of  this  Academy  were  for  the  most 
part  written  in  the  French  and  German  languages ; 
it  had  no  relations  whatever  with  the  country,  and 
exercised  no  influence  on  its  progress.  At  Moscow 
there  was  a  university  which  was  equally  isolated,  and 
was  attended  by  not  more  than  a  hundred  students 
maintained  at  the  expense  of  the  Government.  The 
only  other  educational  establishments  in  Russia  proper 
were  the  so-called  '  National  Schools.'  The  teaching 
in  these  schools  was  bad  and  extremely  meagre ;  the 
teachers  were  poor  wretches  whom  idleness  and  ennui 
had  rendered  drunkards,  and  no  respectable  person 
sent  his  children  to  them.  The  establishment  of 
the  Ministry  of  Public  Instruction  completely  changed 
all  this.  The  existing  universities  of  Moscow,  Wilna, 
and  Dorpat  were  better  endowed,  and  three  new 
ones  were  created — those  of  St  Petersburg,  Kharkoff, 
and  Kazan, — each  forming  an  educational  centre  for  a 
prescribed  district,  in  which  it  directed  all  the  educa- 
tional arrangements.  The  University  of  Wilna  was 
exclusively  Polish,  and  during  the  next  few  years  the 
whole  of  Russian  Poland  was  covered  with  schools  in 
which  Polish  feeling  freely  developed  itself.  This 
University,  to  which  I  appointed  the  njost  distin- 
guished literary  and  scientific  men  of  the  country,  and 
some  eminent  professors  from  abroad,  directed  the 
movement  with  admirable  zeal  and  intelligence,  and 
its  consequences,  which  the  Russians  afterwards 
deeply  regretted,  seemed  at  that  time  to  flow 
naturally  from  the  Emperor's  generous  intentions  with 


3o8       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

regard  to  the  Poles.  The  University  of  Kazan  was 
to  look  after  the  instruction  of  the  Tartars  and  of 
Siberia  generally.  Each  university  had  its  curator, 
and  the  curators  formed  a  council  of  public  instruction, 
the  President  of  which  was  the  Minister.  The 
persons  appointed  to  these  posts  by  the  Emperor  were 
such  as  to  give  a  hope  that  the  work  of  public  instruc- 
tion would  be  pushed  forward  with  zeal  and  success. 
General  Klinger,  commandant  of  one  of  the  cadet 
corps,  was  appointed  curator  of  Dorpat.  He  was  a 
distinguished  German  author,  with  liberal  opinions 
which  might  almost  be  called  Utopian,  although  he 
had  been  in  the  service  of  the  greatest  despots  ;  his 
intentions,  however,  were  good,  and  he  was  full  of 
zeal  for  the  advancement  of  science  and  instruction. 
His  eccentric  and  dreamy  views  were  expressed  with 
a  German  bluntness  which  gave  him  an  appearance  of 
frankness  and  energy,  and  all  this  had  gained  him 
Alexander's  favour.  Count  Severin  Potocki  was 
appointed  Curator  of  the  University  of  Kharkoff, 
which  was  the  centre  of  a  district  the  inhabitants  of 
which  were  strongly  desirous  of  obtaining  the  means 
of  instruction.  Count  Severin,  as  a  Pole,  had  been 
treated  with  great  consideration  by  Alexander  when 
he  was  Grand-Duke ;  he  had  been  admitted,  like  my 
brother  and  myself,  into  his  familiar  circle,  and  was 
one  of  his  most  enthusiastic  admirers.  The  Emperor 
appointed  him  not  only  curator  of  Kharkoff,  but  also 
senator  of  the  third  department  of  the  Senate,  which 
issued  decisions  on  appeals  against  measures  taken  by 
the  administrations  of  the  Polish  provinces.  Count 
Severin  obtained  some  celebrity  in  Russia  as  a  senator, 


STATE  OF  EDUCATION  IN  RUSSIA  309 

and  in  his  capacity  of  curator  he  showed  zeal  and 
perseverance. 

The  universities  which  were  most  progressive 
were  Wilna,  Dorpat,  and  Kharkoff.  The  nobility  of 
Livonia,  Esthonia,  and  Courland  did  not  look  with 
favour  upon  the  University  of  Dorpat,  which  had 
declared  itself  the  protector  of  the  peasants  and  the 
bourgeoisie.  One  of  the  professors  of  this  univer- 
sity was  named  Parot ;  he  was  a  worthy  man  who 
expressed  boundless  attachment  to  the  Emperor 
Alexander,  and  was  very  anxious  about  his  health. 
Once  Madame  Parot  sent  a  waistcoat,  woven 
by  herself,  which  she  said  would  preserve  the 
Emperor's  life.  Parot  begged  him  to  wear  it,  and 
by  such  manifestations  of  affection  he  gained  Alex- 
ander's favour,  and  had  private  conferences  with  him 
during  his  frequent  journeys  to  St  Petersburg.  The 
Curator  of  Moscow  was  M.  de  MouraviefF,  one  of  the 
gentlemen  formerly  attached  to  Alexander's  service 
when  he  was  Grand-Duke,  and  also  his  former  secre- 
tary. He  was  a  worthy  man,  but  excessively  timid 
and  quite  devoid  of  energy.  The  Emperor  appointed 
him  assistant  to  the  Minister  of  Instruction  in  order 
that  it  should  not  be  said  that  young  men  only  per- 
formed the  duties  of  assistant,  and  that  these  posts  were 
created  only  for  the  members  of  the  Secret  Council. 
NovosiltzofF  was  appointed  Curator  of  St  Petersburg. 
As  there  was  already  in  that  capital  a  faculty  of 
medicine  dependent  on  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior, 
and  a  faculty  of  law  could  not  be  established  before 
the  commission  for  the  revision  of  the  laws  had  ter- 
minated its  labours,  Novosiltzoff  for  the  present 


3io      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

confined  himself  to  establishing  a  faculty  of  philo- 
sophy, with  the  special  object  of  training  professors  of 
the  exact  sciences,  of  administration,  and  of  literature, 
This  faculty  began  brilliantly  by  turning  out  some 
distinguished  pupils,  but  they  did  not  afterwards 
realise  the  hopes  that  had  been  formed  of  them,  and 
the  institution  perished  without  leaving  any  durable 
results.  A  university  with  privileges  and  endow- 
ments would  have  better  maintained  itself,  as  was 
shown  by  the  universities  of  Moscow  and  Kharkoff, 
which,  though  they  declined,  were  still  active  in  the 
midst  of  the  indifference  and  oblivion  by  which  they 
were  long  surrounded. 

Count  Zavadovsky  was  appointed  Minister  of 
Public  Instruction.  He  had  been  secretary  to  Count 
Romantzoff  at  the  same  time  as  Prince  Bezborodko, 
and  they  had  remained  friends  ever  since.  Count 
Romantzoff  had  presented  them  both  as  secretaries 
to  the  Empress  Catherine,  and  this  was  the  origin  of 
their  brilliant  fortunes.  Bezborodko,  to  whom  I  have 
already  referred,  soon  rose  by  his  great  capacity  for 
work ;  he  enjoyed  the  confidence  of  his  sovereign  and 
attained  to  the  highest  dignities.  Zavadovsky's 
success  was  obtained  by  other  means.  The  Empress 
made  him  her  favourite ;  he  became  attached  to  her 
and  was  very  unhappy  when  after  six  months  had 
elapsed  he  was  dismissed.  His  friends  Bezborodko 
and  Vorontzoff  endeavoured  to  console  him,  and  the 
presents  which  Catherine  always  lavished  on  a  dis- 
missed favourite  were  in  his  case  richer  than  usual, 
as  she  recognised  in  him  other  merits  than  those 
which  had  merely  attracted  her  fancy.  He  after- 


STATE  OF  EDUCATION  IN  RUSSIA  311 

wards  married,  and  continued  to  be  well  received 
at  Court.  His  friendship  with  Vorontzoff,  and  the 
reputation  for  writing  pure  Russian  which  he  had 
gained  by  certain  manifestoes  that  he  had  written  for 
the  Empress  Catherine,  obtained  him  the  post  of 
Minister  of  Instruction.  He  was  a  man  of  just  and 
benevolent  character,  but  of  somewhat  stolid  mind. 
He  was  not  quick  of  intelligence,  and  did  not  perceive 
shades  of  meaning,  while  at  the  same  time  he  wished 
to  understand  new  ideas,  and  not  to  be  reckoned 
among  those  who  could  neither  learn  nor  forget  any- 
thing. Yet  he  possessed  in  a  high  degree  one  of 
the  most  marked  traits  of  a  Russian  administrator — 
profound  submission  to  everything  that  comes 
from  superior  authority.  He  was  enthusiastic  in 
his  admiration  of  classic  writers  and  was  fond  of 
quoting  the  passages  he  remembered.  The  literature 
of  his  own  country  also  greatly  interested  him.  By  a 
singular  accident  he  had  learnt  Latin  in  one  of  the 
Polish  schools  managed  by  the  Jesuits ;  he  had  not 
forgotten  his  Polish,  and  he  prided  himself  on  his 
knowledge  of  that  language,  speaking  with  much 
admiration  of  our  ancient  poet  John  Kochanowski,* 
some  fragments  of  whose  poems  he  knew  by  heart. 
All  this  gave  him  a  certain  predilection  for  Poland  and 
the  Poles ;  as  was  shown  even  at  his  dinners,  which 
always  consisted  of  Polish  dishes. 

While  the  other  curators  were  often  overruled  in 
their  projects  by  the  Minister,  who  was  not  always 
disposed  to  yield  to  ideas  of  reform  and  progress,  I 
never  had  to  complain  on  this  score.  Vorontzoff 

*  Born  1530.     Died  1584. 


3i2       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

always  trusted  me  implicitly,  and  he  was  always  most 
kind  in  supporting  every  proposal  I  made.  I  owe 
him  much  gratitude  for  the  condescension,  the  frank- 
ness, and  the  friendly  feeling  with  which  he  always 
treated  me. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

1803-4 

DIFFERENCES  WITH  SWEDEN. THE  CHANCELLOR  VORONTZOFF's    POLICY. 

— THE      FOREIGN      AMBASSADORS AUSTRIA,      PRUSSIA,      ENGLAND, 

FRANCE,     AND      SWEDEN. ALEXANDER'S      PROFESSED      LIBERALISM 

PUT   TO    THE    TEST. HIS     FOREIGN     POLICY   AND    THAT     OF    NAPO- 
LEON.  PRINCE    CZARTORYSKI    BECOMES    UNPOPULAR   AT    COURT. 

A     DUEL. THE     CHANCELLOR'S     ILLNESS. NAPOLEON      AND      THE 

RUSSIAN    AMBASSADOR. 

DIRECTLY  after  my  appointment  I  was  admitted  to  all 
the  Chancellor's  Conferences  with  the  Foreign  Min- 

O 

isters,  and  I  drew  up  the  protocols  which  he  took  to 
the  Emperor.  I  did  this  work  with  much  care,  and 
to  his  satisfaction.  A  well- written  protocol  often 
gives  precision  and  clearness  to  a  desultory  conversa- 
tion. Vorontzoff  was  satisfied  with  what  I  made  him 
say,  as  it  expressed  what  he  thought,  though  in  a  more 
complete  manner  than  he  had  himself  done  ;  I  had 
guessed  his  intentions,  and  this  greatly  pleased  him. 
The  practice  I  thus  gained  was  very  useful  to  me,  and 
the  conferences  at  which  I  was  present  enabled  me  to 
be  fully  informed  of  the  relations  of  Russia  with 
Foreign  Governments.  It  was  also  my  duty  to  draw 
up  the  despatches  which  resulted  from  these  confer- 
ences, and  the  Emperor's  rescripts  to  his  Ministers 


3i4      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

abroad.  Having  accepted  these  functions,  I  threw 
myself  heartily  into  the  work.  I  sometimes  wrote 
incessantly  for  eight  or  nine  hours  at  a  time.  This 
produced  a  sort  of  nervous  disorder  which  Dr  Roger- 
son  said  might  have  serious  consequences ;  but  I  was 
young,  and  did  not  pay  any  attention  to  his  counsels. 
Later  on  I  had  reason  to  regret  that  I  did  not  do  so. 

The  policy  of  Russia  was  in  essence  the  same 
under  VorontzofF  as  it  had  been  under  Kotchoubey ; 
but  it  became  stronger  and  more  dignified  in  form. 
Its  leading  principle,  which  was  well  adapted  to 
Alexander's  character  and  projects,  was  to  be  on 
good  terms  with  all  the  world,  and  not  to  interfere  in 
European  affairs,  in  order  to  avoid  being  carried  too 
far ;  in  a  word,  carefully  to  avoid  difficulties  without 
appearing  to  fear  them.  The  principle  was  not 
changed ;  it  was  only  the  way  of  carrying  it  out 
that  was  different.  The  Russian  Cabinet  assumed  a 
tone  of  hauteur  which  deceived  people  as  to  its 
true  policy,  and  somewhat  reminded  one  of  the 
spirit  of  Catherine's  diplomacy.  The  Chancellor  was 
very  careful  to  avoid  any  quarrel,  or  even  slight 
estrangement,  with  any  of  the  great  Powers  ;  but  he 
was  not  sorry  when  an  opportunity  presented  itself  to 
frighten  the  weak  ones  and  crush  them  under  the 
weight  of  Russian  power.  This  is  what  happened 
with  Sweden.  The  two  Governments  had  a  difference 
as  to  the  possession  of  a  wretched  little  island  in  a 
river  which  at  that  time  separated  Finland  proper 
from  the  Russian  province  of  that  name.  The  point 
at  issue  was  on  which  branch  of  the  river  was  to  be 
the  bridge  constituting  the  frontier.  This  question 


THE  CHANCELLOR  VORONTZOFFS  POLICY      315 

had  been  pending  for  some  time,  and  the  Chancellor 
resolved  to  cut  the  knot.  He  addressed  Sweden  in  a 
dry  and  imperious  tone,  and  I  was  very  glad  that  I 
was  not  asked  to  write  the  despatches  on  this  matter, 
which  were  in  Russian  ;  my  abstinence  afterwards 
obtained  for  me  proofs  of  confidence  on  the  part  of  the 
King  of  Sweden  and  his  Government.  At  the  same 
time  Russia  seemed  to  prepare  for  a  rupture,  and 
Russian  generals  were  sent  to  inspect  the  Swedish 
frontier.  The  Emperor  himself  went  there,  and  I 
accompanied  him  with  Strogonoff  and  Novosiltzoff. 

We  passed  along  the  greater  part  of  the  frontier 
on  horseback.  The  soil  mostly  consists  of  a  slight 
layer  of  earth  on  a  substratum  of  granite,  and  there 
is  some  extraordinary  scenery,  with  magnificent 
water-falls,  but  the  country  was  not  populous,  and  we 
often  had  to  sleep  in  thinly  scattered  villages,  at  the 
houses  of  the  clergy,  some  of  whom  knew  no  other 
language  than  the  Finnish.  The  villages  and  parson- 
ages were  surrounded  by  meadows,  but  the  general 
appearance  of  the  country  was  melancholy  and  arid. 
I  refer  here  only  to  the  portion  of  Finland  which  at 
that  time  belonged  to  Russia,  as  other  portions  are 
rich  and  abound  in  corn.  Beyond  the  town  of  Abo 
the  country  looked  more  cultivated,  and  the  people 
seemed  more  prosperous.  We  visited  the  disputed 
island,  and  the  fortress  and  harbour  in  its  vicinity, 
which  in  case  of  war  were  to  form  the  basis  of  our 
operations.  General  Suchtelen,  then  commander  of 
the  engineers,  and  afterwards  Russian  Minister  in 
Sweden,  was  having  some  works  constructed  in  this 
fortress  according  to  a  new  system  of  his  own  inven- 


3i6      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

tion ;  it  was  more  simple,  he  said,  than  those  of 
Vauban  and  Coehorn,  which  it  combined  and  made 
more  effective. 

The  King  of  Sweden  was  very  obstinate  in  his 
resistance  to  the  demands  we  had  made  in  so  imperious 
a  tone.  Count  Stedingk,  the  Swedish  Ambassador 
at  St  Petersburg,  often  expressed  to  me  his  astonish- 
ment on  this  subject,  and  shrugged  his  shoulders  in 
speaking  of  the  offensive  way  in  which  Russia  dealt 
with  a  matter  which  in  reality  was  quite  unimportant. 
Sweden  resisted  for  a  long  time,  and  we  continued 
preparations  for  war.  She  had  to  give  way  at  last, 
but  the  conditions  imposed  upon  her  were  insignificant, 
and  Sweden  could  not  be  mad  enough  to  make  war  on 
account  of  them.  The  Chancellor  was  very  proud 
of  his  victory,  but  it  might  easily  have  been  obtained 
without  humiliating  Sweden — which  I  think  would 
have  been  preferable.  The  conduct  of  Russia  left  a 
bitter  feeling  in  the  mind  of  a  neighbour  which  had 
already  been  often  ill-treated,  and  which,  notwith- 
standing its  relative  weakness,  might  on  occasion  do 
much  harm.  But  Vorontzoff  knew  Russia,  or  at  least 
those  who  spoke  in  her  name.  He  knew  that  every 
demonstration  of  power,  even  if  unjust,  pleases  the 
Russians ;  that  to  domineer,  to  command,  to  crush  is 
a  necessity  of  their  national  pride.  Not  being  able 
to  overcome  the  strong,  the  Chancellor  attacked  the 
weak,  hoping  thereby  to  bring  into  prominence 
the  }7oung  Emperor's  government.  I  am  con- 
vinced that  this  was  one  of  the  motives  which 
induced  him  loudly  to  proclaim  his  pretended  victory 
over  Sweden ;  but  the  Russian  public  was  not  de- 


THE  CHANCELLOR  VORONTZOFFS  POLICY      317 

ceived.  There  was  at  that  time  in  the  two  capitals 
among  the  civil  officials  and  in  the  army — the  class 
which  afterwards  formed  the  elements  of  public 
opinion — a  vague  desire  of  improvement,  or  rather  of 
events  which  should  be  more  interesting,  more  profit- 
able, and  especially  more  flattering  to  their  vanity. 
It  must  be  admitted  that  the  Emperor  Alexander  did 
not  at  that  time  have  public  opinion  on  his  side,  and 
this  was  indeed  but  seldom  the  case  during  the  whole 
of  his  reign.  At  that  period  especially  his  conduct 
was  too  natural,  his  views  too  pure  and  too  much  in 
conformity  with  the  welfare  of  the  great  majority  of 
his  subjects,  to  be  appreciated  by  a  country  whose 
upper  classes  had  tasted  of  a  corrupt  civilisation  and 
had  been  excessively  indulged  in  their  avidity  and 
vanity.  The  goodness,  the  kindness,  and  the  pure 
intentions  of  Alexander  as  he  then  was  did  not  suffice 
to  make  him  popular.  Notwithstanding  all  the 
Chancellor's  efforts,  no  great  satisfaction  was  expressed 
at  the  advantage  gained  by  him  over  an  adversary  of 
such  little  importance  as  Sweden  ;  on  the  contrary, 
the  old  Minister  was  reproached  for  attempting  to 
throw  dust  in  the  eyes  of  the  public  and  take  advan- 
tage of  its  vanity. 

Count  Sauvan  was  then  the  Austrian  Ambassador  ; 
he  used  always  to  come  to  the  Chancellor  in  full  dress, 
and  conferred  with  him  in  a  very  solemn  manner. 
The  policy  of  Austria  was  at  that  time  lachrymose 
and  sentimental.  The  peace  of  Luneville  had  only 
lately  been  signed,*  and  the  Vienna  Cabinet  sought 
for  consolation.  Russia  did  not  reject  its  mournful 

*  On  the  29th  of  February,  1801. 


3i8       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

representations,  but  only  replied  by  assurances  of 
interest  and  good-will  which  meant  nothing.  Prussia 
was  represented  by  Count  Goltz ;  the  only  qualities 
which  had  obtained  him  advancement  were  a  good 
memory,  a  knowledge  of  routine,  and  a  kind  heart, 
and  he  was  completely  under  the  domination  of  his 
wife,  remarkable  for  a  somewhat  noisy  and  brusque 
vivacity.  When  Prussia,  perfidiously  violating  the 
treaties  of  the  past  ten  years,  took  her  share  of  the 
plunder  of  Poland,  he  succeeded  M.  Lucchesini  as 
Ambassador  at  Vienna.  He  treated  me  with  a  defer- 
ence which  betrayed  a  feeling  of  regret,  almost  of  shame, 
at  the  conduct  of  his  Government  towards  my  country. 
His  predecessor  at  St  Petersburg  was  M.  Tauentzien, 
afterwards  known  as  one  of  the  ablest  of  the  Prussian 
generals.  While  my  mother  was  at  Berlin  on  the 
occasion  of  my  sister's  marriage  with  the  Prince  of 
Wiirtemberg,  he  was  an  officer  of  the  Guards,  and 
often  came  to  her  house,  wrhere  he  was  deeply  smitten 
by  Mdlle.  Constance  Narbutt  (afterwards  Madame 
Denbowska).  She  refused  his  offer  of  marriage,  but 
the  only  result  was  that  during  his  stay  at  St  Peters- 
burg he  often  asked  me  and  my  brother  to  dinner. 
The  relations  of  Russia  with  Prussia  were  purely 
personal  between  the  two  sovereigns,  as  there  was  no 
sympathy  between  the  Cabinets,  the  armies,  or  the 
people  of  the  two  States.  Prussia's  equivocal  conduct, 
her  base  submission  to  France,  and  the  acquisitions 
which  she  obtained  by  it,  were  much  disapproved  by  the 
Russians,  who  did  not  spare  their  sarcasms  on  the  sub- 
ject. The  Emperor,  however,  remained  faithful  to  his 
friendship  with  the  King,  and  to  the  high  opinion  he 


FOREIGN  AMBASSADORS  319 

had  formed  of  the  Prussian  army.  This  perseverance, 
which  was  often  blamed  at  St  Petersburg1,  was  never- 

O  ' 

theless  of  great  advantage  to  Russia,  as  she  managed 
thereby  to  attract  Prussia  to  her  side  and  make  her 
a  sort  of  satellite. 

England  had  just  concluded  the  peace  of  Amiens. 
Her  ambassador  at  St  Petersburg  was  Sir  John  Warren, 
an  excellent  admiral,  but  an  indifferent  diplomatist. 
He  was  a  perfect  representative  of  the  nullity  and 
incapacity  of  the  Addington  Ministry  which  had 
appointed  him.  In  those  days  the  English  Government 
was  seldom  happy  in  its  choice  of  ambassadors.  The 
diplomatic  service,  though  much  sought  after,  contained 
few  able  men  ;  the  most  important  posts  were  given 
by  favour  or  through  party  arrangements,  either  to 
satisfy  some  supporter  of  the  Ministry  or  to  obtain 
a  few  more  votes  in  the  House  of  Commons.  Other 
promotions  were  entirely  by  seniority  ;  want  of  know- 
ledge or  of  intelligence  was  no  disqualification.  It 
was  generally  remarked  at  that  time  that  there  was 
neither  ability  nor  zeal  among  the  great  majority  of 
English  diplomatists.  All  this  is  entirely  changed ; 
the  English  diplomatists  are  now  among  the  ablest 
in  Europe. 

General  Hedouville  represented  France.  He  had 
obtained  a  reputation  as  a  General  by  his  pacification 
of  La  Vendee,  but  he  did  not  seem  very  likely  to 
sustain  the  reputation  of  French  diplomacy,  whose 
cleverness  and  general  ability  seemed  even  to  increase 
under  the  Consulate  and  the  Ministry  of  Talleyrand. 
In  selecting  a  Minister  so  benevolent  and  quiet,  not 
to  say  tedious,  in  manner  and  conversation,  the  French 


320       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Government  probably  intended  to  reassure  and  tran- 
quillise  those  whose  friendship  it  wished  to  gain.  He 
represented  one  of  those  dead  calms  which  in 
diplomacy  follow  or  precede  a  storm. 

There  was  nothing  important  or  even  interesting 
in  the  relations  of  Russia  with  the  other  great 
Powers  ;  they  reduced  themselves,  so  far  as  I  re- 
member, to  an  exchange  of  rounded  phrases  the  drift 
of  which  was  :  '  Let  us  be  quiet  and  avoid  all  embar- 
rassments and  conflicts.'  This  feeling  was  shared 
even  by  the  Governments  which  had  suffered  from  the 
peace  ;  they  would  have  been  glad  to  strike  another 
blow  in  the  hope  of  regaining  what  they  had  lost,  but 
they  did  not  dare  to  confess  it.  Even  England  did 
not  expect  a  speedy  rupture.  Austria  groaned  only 
in  secret,  and  when  she  thought  she  could  complain 
without  compromising  herself;  while  Prussia  congratu- 
lated herself  on  her  constant  neutrality  and  looked 
upon  it  as  a  source  of  prosperity  and  progress. 
France,  too,  seemed  to  have  turned  all  her  attention 
to  internal  affairs.  The  First  Consul  was  organising 
the  administration  and  the  laws  of  the  country  ;  but 
all  eyes  were  still  turned  to  this  vigorous  sap  which 
could  not  long  be  satisfied  with  the  immense  terri- 
tories it  had  already  fertilised.  All  continental 
Europe  feared  France,  while  Russia,  although  she 
was  both  pacific  and  inoffensive,  assumed  a  tone  which 
denoted  a  consciousness  of  equal  power  and  a  feeling 
of  independence.  The  relations  of  the  Chancellor  with 
General  Hedouville  showed  a  friendliness  based  on 
mutual  consideration.  A  convention  of  no  great 
significance  was  concluded,  and  the  Chancellor  took 


THE  FOREIGN  AMBASSADORS  321 

the  opportunity  of  offering  to  the  French  Minister 
the  usual  present  of  4000  ducats  and  a  gold 
snuff  box  adorned  with  diamonds  and  the  Emperor's 
portrait.  The  Chancellor  was  ill,  and  received 
the  Ambassador  in  bed  while  the  ratifications  were 
being  exchanged.  The  presents  were  laid  out  on 
the  bed,  and  I  never  saw  a  face  so  beam  with  pleasure 
as  did  the  General's  when  he  saw  the  bags  of  ducats. 
Forgetting  all  decorum  and  the  little  speech  he  should 
have  delivered  on  the  Emperor's  portrait,  his  eyes 
were  fixed  on  the  money-bags,  and  he  carried  them 
away  with  an  expression  of  delight  which  was  quite 
comic.  He  was  a  very  worthy  man,  however,  and 
everyone  would  have  been  glad  to  see  him  so  happy 
if  he  had  been  a  little  more  dignified  in  showing  his 


Among  the  members  of  the  diplomatic  body  the 
most  remarkable  was  Baron  Stedingk,  the  Swedish 
Ambassador.  He  was  distinguished  both  by  his 
wisdom  and  by  his  noble  sentiments  ;  with  a  simple 
exterior,  his  conduct  also  was  marked  by  simplicity, 
by  tact,  and  by  perfect  loyalty,  and  was  strictly 
honourable  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  word.  He  had 
that  rare  perspicacity  which  always  appreciates  both 
men  and  events  at  their  true  value.  In  his  youth  he 
had  served  with  distinction  against  the  English  in  the 
American  war,  and  had  been  decorated  with  the  cross 
of  St  Louis,  which,  being  a  Protestant,  he  wore  with 
a  blue  ribbon.  Afterwards,  being  honoured  with  the 
confidence  of  Gustavus  III,  he  distinguished  himself 
at  the  head  of  the  army  corps  which  fought  the 
Russians  in  1789  and  1790.  When  peace  was  signed 

VOL.  i.  x 


322 

he  was  appointed  Ambassador  at  the  Court  of  St 
Petersburg,  where  he  was  already  known  by  his 
military  successes.  He  remained  at  this  post  during 
three  consecutive  reigns,  serving  his  country  in  the 
most  difficult  emergencies,  without  ever  losing  any  of 
the  high  consideration  he  had  acquired.  Of  all  the 
men  I  ever  met  he  seemed  to  me  one  of  the  best  and 
the  most  worthy  of  confidence  ;  he  was  a  man  whom 
one  could  not  help  liking,  and  whom  one  would  wish 
always  to  have  for  a  friend.  I  think  he  was  mine,  so 
far  as  he  could  be  in  view  of  our  different  positions, 
which  afterwards  entirely  separated  us.  As  second  in 
the  Ministry,  I  was  not  obliged  to  take  an  active  part 
in  the  difficulty  which  had  arisen  between  Russia  and 
Sweden,  and  the  Chancellor  wished  to  conduct  the 
matter  himself  in  order  to  gain  the  merit  of  having 
brought  it  to  a  triumphant  conclusion.  His  insulting 
affectation  of  superiority,  and  the  way  in  which  he 
deprived  a  weaker  power  of  a  worthless  island  which 
was  only  taken  to  humiliate  her,  inspired  me  with  pro- 
found repugnance,  and,  as  I  have  already  remarked, 
this  gained  for  me  marks  of  gratitude  and  confidence 
from  the  Swedes. 

The  progress  of  internal  reform  in  Russia  was 
abruptly  stopped  by  an  unexpected  incident.  Count 
Severin  Potocki,  who,  as  I  said  above,  was  a  great 
admirer  of  the  Emperor,  often  addressed  memoranda 
to  him  on  various  subjects.  The  Senate  had  received 
from  the  Emperor,  among  other  important  preroga- 
tives, the  right  of  making  representations  to  him,  but 
it  had  hitherto  not  made  any  use  of  this  right.  Count 
Severin  naturally  thought  the  Emperor  was  sincere 


ALEXANDERS  LIBERALISM  PUT  TO  THE  TEST     323 

in  his  liberal  opinions  ;  the  Emperor  himself  thought 
so ;  and  the  Count  therefore  imagined  it  would  be  a 
good  thing,  and  would  please  his  Imperial  master,  if 
the  Seriate  were  prompted  to  exercise  its  preroga- 
tives. For  this  an  opportunity  soon  presented  itself. 
Although  almost  every  noble  in  Russia  entered  the 
army,  he  was  not  obliged  to  do  so,  and  could  leave 
it  when  he  thought  proper.  This  double  privilege 
was  granted  by  Peter  III  in  an  ukase  for  which 
many  blessed  his  memory.  Alexander,  however, 
restricted  the  privilege  to  nobles  who  held  the  rank  of 
officer ;  those  below  that  rank  were  obliged  to  serve 
for  twelve  years.  This  was  looked  upon  as  an  attack 
on  the  guaranteed  rights  of  the  nobility,  and  pro- 
duced a  deep  and  painful  sensation.  The  Minister  of 
War,  an  old  military  bureaucrat  of  low  origin,  was  said 
to  be  the  author  of  the  new  ukase,  and  Count  Severin 
Potocki  proposed  to  the  Senate  that  it  should  address 
representations  to  the  Emperor  on  this  violation  of 
the  nobles'  charter.  His  proposal  was  read  to  the 
general  assembly  of  all  the  departments,  and  the 
senators,  seeing  that  one  of  the  confidential  advisers 
of  the  Court  was  taking  the  initiative  in  the  matter, 
and  that  his  opinion  was  warmly  supported  by  Count 
Strogonoff,  thought  they  could  safely  vote  in  its  favour. 
They  gladly  did  this,  under  the  impression  that  by  so 
doing  they  could  without  danger  assume  an  air  of 
independence  in  a  matter  to  which  it  was  believed  the 
Emperor  did  not  attach  any  serious  importance. 
Count  Severin's  proposal  was  adopted,  notwithstand- 
ing the  opposition  of  the  Procurator-General  (Minister 
of  Justice),  which  was  supposed  to  be  feigned  in  order 


324      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

to  give  more  appearance  of  reality  to  the  little  scene 
which  it  was  believed  had  been  got  up  for  the  occasion. 
Count  Strogonoff,  who  was  deputed  with   two  other 
senators  to  take  the  representations  of  the   Senate  to 
the  Emperor,  readily  set  out  on  his  mission  ;  but  the 
deputation   was  received  by  Alexander   very  coldly, 
and  Strogonoff,  disconcerted  and   not  knowing  what 
to  say,  withdrew.     The  Emperor  sharply  reprimanded 
the   Senate,   ordered   it   not   to    meddle  with  things 
which  did  not  concern  it,  and  directed  it  by  a  new 
decree  to  carry  out  the  very  ukase  against  which  it 
had   appealed.       To    my  great   astonishment   it  was 
Novosiltzoff  who  was   the   agent   of  the    Emperor's 
unjust  anger  in  this  matter.     This  failure  of  the  first 
move   of  the   Senate   in   the   direction    of  liberalism 
sufficed   to  discourage  people  whose  generous  aspira- 
tions  were    not,   it   must   be  admitted,  very  strong. 
The  Senate  did  not  again  attempt  any  independent 
action,  and  its  rights  became  a  dead  letter.     At  my 
first  interview  with  the  Emperor  after  this  incident,  I 
could   not   help    smiling   at    his    extreme    alarm     in 
presence    of  the   new  attitude    of  the   Senate.     My 
jocular  remarks   on    this  point  were   ill  received  by 
Alexander,   and    I   believe  they  left  in    his   mind   a 
certain    anxiety  as   to    my   liberal    tendencies   which 
afterwards  came  back  to  him.     This  was  an  indication 
of  Alexander's  true  character,  which  then  appeared  to 
ine  in  a  novel  and  unfortunately  too  real  light.    Grand 
ideas  of  the  general  good,  generous  sentiments,  and 
the  desire  to  sacrifice  to  them  part  of  the    Imperial 
authority,  and  resign  an  immense  and  arbitrary  power 
in  order  the  better  to  secure  the  future  happiness  of 


ALEXANDERS  LIBERALISM  PUT  TO  THE  TEST   325 

the  people,  had  really  occupied  the  Emperor's  rnind 
and  did  so  still,  but  they  were  rather  a  young  man's 
fancies  than  a  grown  man's  decided  will.  The 
Emperor  liked  forms  of  liberty  as  he  liked  the 
theatre ;  it  gave  him  pleasure  and  flattered  his  vanity 
to  see  the  appearances  of  free  government  in  his 
Empire  ;  but  all  he  wanted  in  this  respect  was  forms 
and  appearances ;  he  did  not  expect  them  to  become 
realities.  In  a  word,  he  would  willingly  have  agreed 
that  every  man  should  be  free,  on  the  condition  that 
he  should  voluntarily  do  only  what  the  Emperor 
wished. 

Alexander  never  forgot  Count  Severin's  indiscre- 
tion ;  he  was  still  received  at  Court  on  the  same 
footing  as  heretofore,  but  he  no  longer  shared  the 
confidence  and  favour  of  his  sovereign.  The  incident 
gained  him  great  credit  at  Moscow  and  in  the  ancient 
provinces  of  the  Empire,  where  he  was  regarded  as  a 
true  Russian  patriot  and  a  generous  defender  of  the 
immunities  of  the  nobility.  This  wave  of  popularity 
had  so  much  charm  for  the  Count  that  it  made  him 
forget  his  old  Polish  sentiments.  In  his  youth,  at 
the  diet  of  the  3rd  of  May,  he  had  been  an  ardent 
Polish  patriot ;  in  his  old  age  he  forgot  his  country, 
thought  only  of  augmenting  his  fortune  and  living 
pleasantly,  and  amused  himself  by  opposing  the 
Russian  Government.  He  got  into  the  habit  of  travel- 
ling continually  between  his  estates  and  the  Senate, 
reading  much  on  the  journey,  and  preparing  the 
speeches  which  he  made  every  year  either  at  Moscow 
or  at  St  Petersburg.  His  mind  tended  rather  towards 
doubt  than  action ;  he  seldom  expressed  any  positive 


326       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

opinion,  and  sentiment  did  not  in  any  way  affect  his 
decisions,  which  were  invariably  prompted  by  con- 
siderations of  personal  interest.  His  self-love  was 
greater  than  his  fear,  which  could  not  indeed  be  very 
great,  as  Alexander,  at  that  time  especially,  never 
persecuted  anybody,  and  his  displeasure  could  be  in- 
curred without  danger.  Count  Severin  retained  as 
long  as  he  liked  his  appointments  of  senator  and 
curator,  which  gave  him  a  circle  of  activity  that 
pleased  him.  He  was  able  and  well  informed,  but 
made  light  of  everything  except  what  touched  his 
material  interests,  and  had  no  religious  sentiments 
whatever.  Such  a  man  was  destined  to  end  his  days 
without  friends  or  sympathy.  I  did  not  see  him 
again.  Alexander  had  given  him  the  use  of  a  con- 
siderable estate  for  fifty  years ;  I  had  done  my  best 
to  arrange  the  matter,  and  later  on  I  did  some  service 
to  his  son  Leo.  All  this  established  a  reciprocity  of 
good  feeling  between  us  which  lasteM  as  long  as  I  was 
in  Russia,  and  afterwards  gradually  died  out. 

If  it  had  been  in  the  nature  of  man  to  be  satisfied 
with  what  is  practicable,  Alexander  ought  to  have 
satisfied  the  Russians,  for  he  gave  them  a  tranquillity, 
a  prosperity,  and  even  a  degree  of  liberty  which  were 
unknown  before  his  reign.  But  the  Russians  wanted 
something  else.  Like  the  gambler  who  seeks  violent 
emotions,  they  were  tired  of  the  monotony  of  their 
prosperity.  They  did  not  like  their  }Toung  Emperor : 
he  was  too  simple  in  his  manners,  too  averse  to  pomp, 
too  disdainful  of  etiquette.  The  Russians  regretted 
the  brilliant  Court  of  Catherine  and  its  abuses,  the 
opening  which  it  gave  to  so  many  passions,  struggles^ 


ALEXANDER'S  POLICY  AND  THAT  OF  NAPOLEON     327 

intrigues  and  successes.  They  regretted  the  days  of 
the  Imperial  favourites,  and  the  possibility  of  gaining 
colossal  positions  and  fortunes  like  those  of  Orloff  and 
Potemkin.  The  courtiers  had  no  ante-chambers  to  go 
to,  and  sought  in  vain  for  an  idol  before  which  they  could 
burn  their  incense ;  their  platitude  was  condemned 
to  inaction,  and  there  was  no  one  to  whom  they  could 
cringe  and  bow.  The  grumblers  at  Moscow,  too,  did 
not  like  the  Court  because  it  no  longer  afforded  food 
for  their  censure,  while  it  did  not  offer  them  any  of 
the  advantages  which  they  valued.  Their  liberalism, 
moreover,  was  very  different  from  that  of  the  Emperor 
Alexander ;  he  inclined  rather  to  the  democratic  and 
levelling  ideas  of  the  Emperor  Joseph  of  Austria, 
though  in  a  milder  form. 

Only  the  Empress  Dowager  attempted  to  main- 
tain the  customs  and  the  brilliancy  of  the  old  Court. 
Alexander's  Court  was  of  an  exaggerated  simplicity, 
totally  devoid  of  etiquette,  and  he  met  his  courtiers  only 
on  intimate  and  familiar  terms.  The  Emperor  and  his 
family  only  appeared  in  full  dress  on  Sundays  and 
holidays,  when  they  went  to  church.  Dinners  and 
soirees  were  mostly  given  in  the  private  apartments, 
and  were  quite  different  from  what  they  had  been  in  the 
preceding  reigns.  Later  on,  Alexander  became  more 
sumptuous  in  his  receptions,  but  at  the  beginning  of 
his  reign  he  was  not  sufficiently  so.  While  Napoleon 
surrounded  himself  with  a  pomp  and  ceremonial  re- 
vived from  the  times  of  the  monarchy,  Alexander 
liked  to  eclipse  himself  and  to  behave  like  an  ordinary 
citizen.  His  friends  found  fault  with  him  for  this — 
especially  the  Margravine  of  Baden,  his  mother-in- 


328      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

law,  who  wanted  to  give  the  young  Emperor  every 
possible  quality  and  success.  She  endeavoured  to 
stimulate  him  by  the  example  of  Napoleon,  but  in 
vain.  The  two  Emperors  went  in  opposite  directions 
in  everything ;  one  demolished,  while  the  other  re- 
stored, old  ideas ;  and  the  comparison  made  between 
them  was  not  to  Alexander's  advantage  in  the  eyes 
of  the  very  Russians  for  whom  he  was  working.  He 
was,  in  fact,  not  at  all  popular  during  the  first  few 
years  of  his  reign,  although  he  was  never  more  devoted 
than  he  was  then  to  the  good  of  his  country.  But 
men  want  to  be  dominated  and  fooled,  and  this  neces- 
sity is  nowhere  so  much  felt  as  in  Russia.  At  the 
beginning  of  his  reign,  Alexander  did  not  know  how 
to  do  this  ;  he  learnt  it  later,  but  even  then,  and 
notwithstanding  his  great  success,  he  never  attained 
the  popularity  and  the  moral  power  of  his  grand- 
mother, who  could  have  said  of  the  Russians,  as 
Buonaparte  said  of  the  French,  that  they  were  in  her 
pocket. 

The  Emperor  had  made  it  a  maxim  to  respect 
other  people's  opinions,  and  not  to  punish  anybody  for 
expressing  them,  so  that  no  great  courage  was  required 
to  criticise  the  sovereign  and  tell  him  unpleasant 
truths.  Full  advantage  was  taken  of  this  privilege, 
especially  in  the  salons  of  the  two  capitals.  Every- 
thing that  the  Government  did  was  found  fault  with, 
and  these  criticisms,  growing  like  the  waves  of  a 
heavy  sea,  used  in  the  same  way  to  subside  and  grow 
again  at  the  least  breath  of  wind.  Such  was  the 
constant  state  of  opinion  in  Russia  during  the  first 
year  of  Alexander's  reign.  The  old  courtiers  used  to 


THE  PRINCE  BECOMES  UNPOPULAR  AT  COURT    329 

say,  in  order  to  calm  the  anxiety  of  the  young  ones, 
that  all  new  reigns  began  in  the  same  way,  and  that 
the  first  years  of  the  reign  of  Catherine  were  marked 
by  the  same  pre-occupations.  What  people  most  ob- 
jected to,  however,  in  the  case  of  Alexander,  was 
my  presence  at  his  Court,  and  my  appointment  as 
assistant  to  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs.  ^A 

o 

merely  honorary  title  would  not  have  shocked  the 
Russians,  but  they  could  not  accustom  themselves  to 
see  me  at  the  head  of  the  department :  a  Pole  enjoying 
the  confidence  of  the  Emperor,  and  initiated  into  all  the 
secrets  of  State,  was  to  them  an  intolerable  innovation.* 
This  was  a  fertile  subject  of  suspicion  and  calumny 
in  the  Russian  salons.  My  parents  had  always  been 
averse  to  Russian  influence,  and  their  fortune  had 
been  confiscated  on  account  of  their  participation  in 
Polish  revolutions.  That  their  son,  who  had  never 
concealed  his  enthusiastic  devotion  to  his  country's 
cause,  who  had  often  loudly  proclaimed  it,  and  proved 
it  by  the  national  spirit  in  which  he  promoted  public 
instruction  in  the  Polish  provinces,  should  be  the 
intimate  and  confidential  adviser  of  the  sovereign,  was 
naturally  the  subject  of  much  comment.  It  was  easy 
to  imagine  that  I  betrayed  the  interests  of  Russia, 
and  that  I  would  at  any  moment  prove  false  to  my 
duties  as  a  Minister  and  a  friend  in  order  to  advance 
the  cause  of  Poland.  All  the  ambitious  men  who 
thought  themselves  more  worthy  of  the  Emperor's 
confidence  than  a  stranger — all  the  young  men  of 

*  '  Prince  Czartoryski, '  says  Lord  Whitworth  in  a  despatch  to  Lord  Hawkesbury 
(in  the  Record  Office),  dated  January  4,  1803,  'for  some  years  past  the  intimate  and 
most  confidential  friend  of  the  present  Emperor  of  Russia,  ...  is  now  second  in 
point  of  precedency,  but  perhaps  first  in  point  of  influence,  in  the  Foreign  Depart- 
ment.' 


330      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Alexander's  Court — were  agreed  on  this  point.  But 
their  suspicions  were  unfounded.  I  do  not  think  I 
have  ever  been  more  zealous  and  devoted  than  I  was 
in  the  Emperor's  service.  He  knew  better  than  any- 
one my  attachment  to  my  country,  and  it  was  this 
knowledge  which  was  the  first  basis  of  our  intimate 
relations  and  the  source  of  the  esteem  and  friendship 
with  which  he  honoured  me.  He  did  not  at  that 
time  think  that  the  welfare  of  Russia  was  really 
incompatible  with  that  of  Poland.  Perhaps  he  did 
not  have  a  very  clear  idea  of  that  grave  question,  and 
as  its  solution  appeared  distant,  he  did  not  think  it 
necessary  to  go  very  deeply  into  it.  Meanwhile  he 
accepted  the  services  which  I  cordially  rendered  him, 
and  he  thought  it  just  and  proper  to  reward  them  by 
giving  me  a  certain  liberty  of  action  in  regard  to  the 
Polish  provinces  under  his  rule.  I  of  course  availed 
myself  of  this  concession ;  I  reorganised  public  in- 
struction in  Poland  on  a  larger  and  more  national 
basis,  and  made  it  more  conformable  with  modern 
ideas.  The  Russians  could  not  understand  my  rela- 
tions with  Alexander,  and  indeed  they  were  only  to 
be  explained  by  the  fact  that  we  were  both  very  young 
and  had  become  friends  at  an  age  when  generous 
impulses  are  stronger  than  reflection.  The  Russians, 
however,  attributed  our  connection  to  personal  ambi- 
tion and  dissimulation  on  my  part  and  silly  good- 
nature on  that  of  Alexander.  They  imagined  that  I 
secretly  favoured  France,  and  that  I  wished  to  bring 
Alexander  under  the  fascination  of  Buonaparte's  genius. 
It  was  to  my  influence  that  they  ascribed  the  some- 
what colourless  policy  adopted  by  the  Emperor  in 


THE  PRINCE  BECOMES  UNPOPULAR  AT  COURT     331 

European  politics,  which  they  thought  arose  from  my 
connivance  with  France.  This  was  also  the  Empress 
Dowager's  opinion,  and  she  propagated  it  among  the 
young  officers  of  the  army. 

My  position  was  not  an  easy  one.  The  part 
played  by  Russia  was  certainly  not  so  brilliant  or 
preponderant  as  might  have  been  desirable,  and  was 
not  at  all  in  accordance  with  Russian  vanity  or 
Russian  pretensions.  Alexander  was  eclipsed  by 
Napoleon,  who,  at  the  pinnacle  of  military  glory, 
introduced  into  diplomacy,  hitherto  so  discreet,  that 
bluntness  and  rapidity  of  decision  which  were  the 
secrets  of  his  success  on  the  battlefield.  He  took  the 
initiative  in  every  European  question,  and  daily  gained 
ground,  increased  his  preponderance,  and  showed  that 
he  intended  to  become  the  arbiter  of  Europe.  I 
constantly  heard  Russians  complain  of  the  weakness 
and  want  of  dignity  of  their  Cabinet ;  and  if  I  had 
ascribed  these  faults  to  Alexander's  character  and 
opinions,  I  would  have  cast  the  whole  blame  upon  him. 
Among  the  most  active  and  ambitious  of  the  malcon- 
tents was  the  young  Prince  Dolgorouky.  He  was  the 
prime  mover  of  the  Russian  party,  and  his  passionate 
vexation  at  seeing  a  stranger  occupy  a  post  which  he 
considered  should  have  been  given  to  him  made  him 
witty,  much  to  the  surprise  of  his  friends.  Being 
one  of  the  Emperor's  aides-de-camp,  he  was  con- 
tinually at  Court,  and  I  often  met  him,  on  which 
occasions  he  used  to  pursue  me  with  reproaches  and 
sarcasms  on  the  indolence  of  the  Russian  Foreign 
Office.  He  provoked  me  so  far  that  I  once  told 
him  he  should  address  his  remarks  to  the  Chancellor, 


332       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

who  was  the  head  of  the  department.  He  replied 
that  he  knew  well  there  was  an  understanding 
between  the  Chancellor  and  myself  to  refer  matters 
from  one  to  the  other  in  order  to  avoid  the  diffi- 
culty of  a  precise  answer.  The  discussion  almost 
became  a  quarrel,  and  the  Emperor  had  to  interfere 
to  put  a  stop  to  Dolgorouky's  remarks.  We  no 
longer  spoke  to  each  other,  but  he  continued  his  in- 
trigues with  more  animosity  than  ever.  Under  the 
reign  of  Paul  we  had  been  on  very  good  terms,  and 
he  had  shown  me  much  confidence  in  an  affair  of 
honour  which  he  had  with  M.  de  Wintzingerode,  a 
worthy  German,  very  stiff  and  punctilious.  Having 
quarrelled  with  Dolgorouky,  he  challenged  him,  and 
both  agreed  to  take  me  as  the  only  witness  of  the 
duel.  The  scene  of  the  encounter  was  a  garden,  and 
I  loaded  the  pistols  and  placed  the  adversaries  in 
such  a  way  as  to  make  it  exceedingly  difficult  for 
them  to  hit  each  other.  The  result  was  that  both 
missed,  and  the  incident  was  closed  by  a  complete 
reconciliation. 

The  Chancellor's  health  now  began  to  break  down. 
He  was  several  times  seriously  ill,  and  he  often 
thought  of  temporarily  retiring  to  his  estates  near 
Moscow,  though  he  had  no  wish  to  withdraw  from 
political  life  altogether.  One  day  when  he  was  ill 
I  was  seated  by  his  bed ;  he  was  in  a  high  fever,  and 
speaking  with  much  animation,  though  somewhat 
delirious,  he  said  several  times :  '  These  young  men 
wish  to  govern  everything,  but  I  will  not  allow  it ;  I 
alone  will  remain  at  the  head  of  affairs.'  I  thought  it 
probable  that  some  one  had  led  him  to  suspect  those 


THE  CHANCELLORS  ILLNESS  333 

who  were  called  the  Emperor's  friends ;  perhaps  these 
suspicions  had  spontaneously  arisen  in  his  mind.  I 
am  convinced,  however,  that  he  never  distrusted  me, 
or  listened  to  the  insinuations  which  people  made 
against  me.  The  extreme  and  entire  confidence  which 
he  showed  me  lasted  to  the  end  of  his  life,  which  is 
surprising,  as  so  many  people  had  an  interest  in 
making  us  quarrel.  He  gave  his  confidence  and 
friendship  to  very  few  people ;  his  sentiments  were 
delicate  and  noble,  and  although  they  were  not  based 
on  strict  principle,  they  showed  that  he  was  kind- 
hearted  and  sensitive.  Always  inclined  to  render  a 
service,  he  judged  others  with  great  indulgence,  and 
even  at  times  when  he  spoke  his  mind  most  freely,  I 
have  never  detected  in  him  any  feeling  of  hatred  or 
desire  for  revenge.  The  Emperor,  however,  had  an 
invincible  dislike  for  him,  which  increased  every  day. 
His  somewhat  old-fashioned  manners,  his  voice,  his 
deliberate  way  of  speaking,  even  his  gestures,  were 
antipathetic  to  him.  During  his  frequent  attacks  of 
illness,  the  Chancellor  used  to  send  me  with  his  papers 
to  the  Emperor,  and  the  latter  expressed  his  joy  at 
not  being  obliged  to  see  him.  In  spite  of  all  I  said  in 
his  behalf,  he  used  to  ridicule  the  old  Minister,  and 
often  told  me  he  would  like  to  be  rid  of  him.  I  was 
at  this  time  in  high  favour  with  the  Emperor,  and  he 
spoke  with  marked  approval  of  my  drafts  of  despatches 
and  rescripts.  He  in  no  way  opposed  the  Chancellor's 
wish  for  rest ;  on  the  contrary,  he  encouraged  it  in 
every  way. 

The  friendly  relations  which  had  hitherto  existed 
between  Russia  and  France  began  about  this  time  to 


334       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

be  disturbed.  Count  Markoff,  supposed  to  be  the 
ablest  man  in  Russia,  and  the  prototype  and  almost 
the  last  living  representative  of  the  diplomacy  of 
Catherine,  had  been  sent  as  Ambassador  to  Paris. 
When  Paul  became  Emperor  Markoff  fell  into 
disgrace,  and  was  banished  to  Podolia,  on  one  of  my 
father's  confiscated  estates.  After  Alexander's  acces- 
sion he  hastened  back  to  the  capital,  and  Count 
Panin,  who  was  then  Foreign  Minister,  fearing  in 
him  a  dangerous  rival,  decided  to  send  him  on  a 
mission  abroad.  The  most  important  task  in  foreign 
affairs  was  at  that  time  the  renewal  of  friendly 
relations  with  France,  and  for  this  it  \vas  necessary 
to  send  Napoleon  an  Ambassador  capable  of  controlling 
and  restraining  his  policy,  and  sustaining  the  dignity 
of  Russia.  Markoff,  who  was  selected  for  this  post, 
accepted  it  with  eagerness,  for  he  knew  Alexander 
did  not  like  him,  and  he  was  pleased  at  the  idea  of 
playing  an  important  part  in  a  capital  where  Napoleon 
and  other  personages  already  celebrated  were  influenc- 
ing the  destinies  of  the  world.  He  did  not,  however, 
justify  his  reputation,*  which  had  already  been  impaired 
by  his  extraordinary  want  of  tact  in  the  affair  of  the 
proposed  marriage  of  the  King  of  Sweden  with  the 
Grand  Duchess  Alexandra,  which  was  the  cause  of 
Catherine's  death.  Notwithstanding  his  aversion  for 
Napoleon  and  his  Ministers,  Markoff  did  not  succeed 
in  preventing  the  dismemberment  of  Germany  to 
compensate  the  princes  who  had  lost  part  of  their 

*  Lord  Whitworth,  then  English  Ambassador  in  Paris,  says  of  him  :  '  He  has 
not  the  talent  of  inspiring  confidence,  and  indeed  his  conduct  here  is  such  as  to 
render  any  confidential  intercourse  with  him  extremely  dangerous. '  (Despatch  to 
Lord  Hawkesbury  of  November  1C,  1802,  in  the  Record  office). 


NAPOLEON  AND  THE  RUSSIAN  AMBASSADOR    335 

dominions,  and  to  indulge  the  avidity  of  Prussia.     The 
Convention  was  sent  to  the  Emperor  for  his  approval 
after  it  had  been  concluded,  and  when  it  was  too  late 
to  make  any  change  in  it.     A  more  favourable  result 
would    no    doubt   have  been  difficult  to  obtain,  but 
Markoff  did  not  even  attempt  to  do  so ;  he  did  not 
give   the   Cabinet   of  St   Petersburg   the    necessary 
time  to  state  and  defend  its  opinions,  and  compelled 
it  to  accept  the  Convention  like  a  child  forced  to  obey 
orders.     He  was  a  creature  of  the  Zuboffs,  and  he 
had  voted  with  them  for  the  partition  of  Poland  ;  he 
was  the  incarnation  of  an  unscrupulous   State  policy 
and  a  diplomacy  without  justice  or  pity ;  very  extra- 
vagant, he  was  inflexible  in  money  affairs,  and  though 
fond  of  presents,  he   would  not  take  them  if  by  so 
doing  his  pride  w^ould  suffer.     His  face,  seamed  with 
the  smallpox,  constantly  expressed  irony  and  scorn  ; 
his  round  eyes  and  his  mouth,  depressed  at  the  corners, 
resembled  those  of  a  tiger.     Though  he  had  adopted 
the   language   and   the   grand   airs  of  the   Court  of 
Versailles,  his  manners  were  haughty  and  rude.     He 
spoke,  excellent  French,  but  what  he  said  was  gener- 
ally harsh,  trenchant,  disagreeable,  and  totally  devoid 
of  feeling. 

Such  wras  the  pearl  of  Russian  diplomatists  sent 
to  Napoleon  by  Russia  in  evidence  of  her  desire 
to  be  on  good  terms  with  him.  He  was  at  first 
received  with  much  distinction,  and  he  satisfied  the 
First  Consul  by  his  complaisance  in  the  matter  of  the 
indemnities  ;  but  after  a  time  his  scornful  manner  and 
his  sarcasms  irritated  Napoleon  and  gave  rise  to 
violent  scenes.  One  evening  the  latter  looked  about 


336       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

for   a  Pole  to  give  him  an   opportunity  of   venting 
his  bile  on  the    Russian    Ambassador,   thinking  thia 
would  be   the   best   way  of  mortally   offending  him. 
Seeing  M.  Z.  .  .,  a  stupid   and  insignificant  person- 
age who  happened  to  be  present,  he  took  him  by  the 
button  of  his  coat,  moved  him  forward  into  the  middle 
of  the  room,  and  after  asking  him   whether  he  was  a 
Pole,  violently  condemned  the  partition  of  Poland  anc, 
the  Powers  which  had  committed  and  allowed  it,  aftei 
which  he  left  without  taking  any  notice  of  Markoff 
Shortly  after,  the  French  Government  sent  a  despatcl, 
to  St  Petersburg  complaining  of  MarkofFs  conduct , 
but  the  Chancellor,  feeling  the  necessity  of  demonstra 
tively  asserting  the  dignity  of  Russia,   proposed 
the  Emperor  that  Markoff  should  be  invested   wii 
the  ribbon  of  St  Andrew,  which  he  had  long  desire 
The  Emperor  entirely  approved  of  this  proposal,  an 
Markoff  appeared  at  his  next  audience  of  Napoleo 
decorated  with  the  order,  and  looking  more  proud  an 
satisfied  than  ever.     This  time  the  First  Consul  IK 
not  the  laugh  on  his  side ;  but  Markoff  did  not  thir 
it  right  to  remain  in  Paris  after  his  triumph,  and  r. 
was  recalled  at  his  own  request. 


END    OF    VOL.    I 


RETURN 

TO     "*• 


1    §1 1C 

si  WlO 


ilVJ  do 


i  =< 


53 


pK         I     =O 
I 


WCElfju 


\\\EUNIVER5/A 


< 

cc 

OQ 


