HANDBOUNO 
AT  THE 


UNIVF.RSITY  OF 
TORONfTO  PRESS 


CORRESPONDENCE, 
DESPATCHES,  AND  OTHER  PAPERS, 


OF 

VISCOUNT   CASTLEEEAGH, 

SECOND  MARQUESS  OF  LONDONDERRY. 
EDITED  BY 

HIS   BROTHER, 

CHAELES  WILLIAil  VANE,  MAEQUESS  OF  LONDONDEERY, 

G.C.B.,  G.C.H.,  G.B.E.,  ETC. 

SECOND  SERIES. 

MILITARY  AND  MISCELLANEOUS. 


IN  FOUR  VOLUMES 

VOL.  VII. 


LONDON 


WILLIAM  SHOBEEL,  PUBLISHER, 

20,  GREAT  MARLBOROUGH  STREET. 
1851. 


t.SFl3 


CONTENTS 

OF 

THE   SEVENTH    VOLUME. 


OPERATIONS  IN  SPAIN  AND  PORTUGAL. 

1808,  9.      (Continued.) 

1808.  PAGE 

Nov.  1.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  John  Stuart,  with  instruc- 
tions to  direct  his  disposable  force  to  Spain — Move- 
ments of  Sir  J.  Moore        .  .  .  .         1 

4.  Lord  Castlereagh  to    Sir  J.  Stuart,  acquainting  him 

with  the  departure  of  Bonaparte  for  Bayonne  .         3 

8.  Memorandum  on  Rank  between  the  Spanish  and  Eng- 
lish Officers  in  Spain.     By  Colonel  Gordon  .       ib, 

8.  General  Kellermann  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  on  his  release 
as  a  prisoner  of  war,  and  enclosing  a  Paper  on  the 
means  of  reconciling  the  belligerent  Powers  .         5 

10.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Right  Hon.  R.  Ryder,  Judge  Ad- 

vocate-General, relative  to  the  Court  of  Inquiry  re- 
specting the  Convention  of  Cintra,  with  Enclosures 
on  the  same  subject :  .  .  .  .8 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  David  Dundas        .  .      ib. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lieutenant- General  Sir  H.  Dal- 
rymple  .  .  .  .  .9 

11.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Chatham,  submitting  papers 

to  his  consideration,  and  adverting  to  operations  in 
Spain       .  .  .  .  .  .       ib. 

11.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Chatham,  requesting  a  state- 

ment of  all  supplies  furnished  for  Spain  and  Portugal       10 

12.  Sir  A.  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  with  a  letter  from 

General  Brenner,  claiming  the  release  of  the  French 
officers  taken  in  Portugal  .  .  .11 


V  CONTENTS. 

1808.  PAGE 

Nov.  14.  Sir  A.  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  on  his  participa- 
tion in  the  signing  of  the  Convention  of  Cintra,  and 
recommending  that,  if  he  has  thereby  forfeited  any 
intended  mark  of  the  King's  favour,  it  may  not  be 
withheld  from  General  Spencer       .  .  .12 

19.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lieutenant-General  Sir  J.  Cradock, 

with  instructions  respecting  Portugal  .  .14 

22.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  on  Militia  Volun- 
teering in  Ireland  .  ;  .  .       ib. 

25.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Chatham,  with  letters  and 

news  from  Spain  .  .  ,  .15 

26.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Chatham,  on  supplies  required 

by  the  troops  in  Spain  and  Portugal  .  .16 

Dec.  13.  Brigadier- General  the  Hon.  C.  Stewart  to  Lieutenant- 
General  the  Hon.  J.  Hope,  reporting  the  attack  of  a 
French  convoy  and  capture  of  cotton  .  .17 

14.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Chatham  —  Operations  in 

Spain       .  .  .  .  .  .18 

18.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sir  G.Smith — 

Brief  instructions  on  his  appointment  as  confidential 
agent  at  Cadiz       .  .  .  .  .19 

19.  Plan  for  the  Defence  of  Spain  and  Portugal.   By  General 

Dumouriez  .  .  .  .  .20 

31.  Right  Hon.  R.  Ryder  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  relative  to 

the  Board  of  Inquiry  .  .  .  .23 

1809. 

Jan.  4.  Mr.  Cooke  to  Colonel  Neville,  desiring  a  supply  of  ord- 
nance stores  for  a  detachment  embarking  for  Spain   .       24 
Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  Right  Hon.  R.  Ryder,  with  a 
letter  from  Sir  H.  Dalrymple  .  .  .      ib. 

9.  Sir  A.  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  respecting  his 

future  destination  .  .  .  .25 

1 1 .  Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King,  on  the  necessity  of  ob- 
taining from  the  Spanish  Government  a  declaration 
whether  they  will  accept  the  co-operation  of  British 
troops       .  .  .  .  .  ,      ib. 

13.  Sir  J.  Moore  to  Lord  Castlereagh — State  of  his  army    .       26 

14.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lieutenant-General  Sir  J.  Moore, 

announcing  the  embarkation  of  a  reinforcement,  and 
enclosing  instructions  to  Mr.  Frere  to  ascertain  the 


CONTENTS.  V 

1809.  P^^GE 

sentiments  of  the  Spanish  Government  respecting  co- 
operation .  .  .  .  .28 

Jan.  14.  Lord   Castlereagh   to   Sir  John  Moore,  respecting  the 
slaughter  of  British  stragglers,  as  reported  in  a  French 
bulletin     .  .  .  .  .  .29 

18.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  Duke  of  York,  signifying  the 
King's  commands,  in  consequence  of  the  proceedings  of 
the  Board  of  Inquiry  .  .  .  .30 

21.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King,  recommending  that  orders 
should  be  sent  to  Sir  .J.  Moore  with  respect  to  the 
disposal  of  his  army,  in  case  of  his  being  obliged  to 
re-embark  from  Gallicia     .  .  .  .      ib. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King,  on  the  death  of  Sir 
J.  Moore  .  .  .  .  .       ib. 

24.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lieutenant- General  Sir  D.  Baird, 

on  the  battle  of  Corunna  and  fall  of  Sir  J.  Moore      .       31 

24.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King,  with  the  despatches  from 

Corunna  .  .  .  .  .32 

25.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King,  on  the  delay  in  supplying 

provisions  for  the  troops  at  Corunna  .  .       33 

Feb.  8.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King,  respecting  three  boxes  of 
Spanish  books  sent  by  the  Bishop  of  Leon  for  his 
Majesty's  acceptance  ....       ib. 

15.  Lord  Castlereagh  toMajor-General  Beresford,  acquaint- 
ing him  with  his  appointment  to  the  command  of  the 
Portuguese  troops  .  .  .  .34 

15.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lieutenant-General  Sir  J.  Cra- 
dock,  informing  him  of  General  Beresford's  appoint- 
ment        .  .  .  .  .  .35 

24.  Major-General  Leith  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  communi- 
cating Memorandum  relative  to  Spain  .  .       ib. 

27.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  J.  Cradock,  with  instructions, 
in  consequence  of  the  refusal  of  co-operation  by  the 
Spanish  Government  .  .  .  .37 

March  7.  Memorandum  concerning  the  Defence  of  Portugal.     By 

Lord  Castlereagh  .  .  .  .39 

12.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Major-General  Hill,  conveying  the 
King's  commands  to  proceed  with  his  troops,  when 
embarked,  to  the  Tagus,  and  to  place  himself  under 
the  command  of  Sir  J.  Cradock       .  .  .42 


VI  CONTENTS. 

1809.  PAGE 

March  12.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Major- General  Hill,  directing  him 
to  join  Sir  J.  Cradock  wherever  he  should  be,  in  case 
of  his  having  been  obliged  to  evacuate  Portugal  .      42 

13.  The  Hon.  C.  Stewart  to  Major-General  Hill,  informing 
him  that  the  Admiralty  has  ordered  two  frigates  to 
the  Tagus  .  .  .  .  .       ib. 

26.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King,  recommending  that  Sir 
J.  Cradock  should  be  appointed  to  succeed  Sir  H.  Dal- 
rymple  in  the  command  at  Gibraltar,  and  that  the 
chief  command  in  Portugal  should  be  given  to  Sir  A. 
Wellesley  .  .  .  .  .43 

30.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  J.  Cradock,  communicating  the 
adoption  of  the  arrangements  proposed  in  the  pre- 
ceding letter  .  .  .  .  .44 
30.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  J.  Cradock,  to  the  same  purport 

as  the  foregoing  letter  .  .  .  .45 

April  2.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  conveying  instruc- 
tions for  his  proceedings,  and  a  statement  of  the  forces 
that  will  be  under  his  command       .  .  .46 

3.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  directing  him,  in 
case  the  Spanish  Government  should  consent  to  admit 
a  British  garrison  into  Cadiz,  to  detach  an  adequate 
force  for  that  purpose         .  .  .  .49 

5.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  transmitting  a 

list  of  transports  in  Portugal,  or  under  orders  .       50 

8.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King,  submitting  Instructions 

prepared  for  Sir  A.  Wellesley  .  .  .51 

10.  Sir  A.  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  mentioning  his 
detention  at  Portsmouth  by  an  order  from  the  Ad- 
miralty   .  .  .  .  .  .       ib* 

10.  Memorial  on  the  State  of  Spain,  by  a  Spanish  Officer   .      ib. 

11.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  conveying  in- 

structions .  .  .  .  .55 

11.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  relative  to  his 

disinclination  to  interfere  with  Sir  J.  Cradock's  com- 
mand in  Portugal  .  .  .  .56 

12.  Sir  A.  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  on  the  same  sub- 

ject as  the  foregoing  .  .  .  .57 

13.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  with  instructions 

in  reference  to  his  superseding  Cradock        .  .       58 


CONTENTS.  Vll 

1809.  PAGE 

April  14.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  directing  that, 
in  a  certain  case,  his  army  should  rendezvous  at 
Gibraltar  .  .  .  .  .59 

14.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  to  the  same  effect 

as  the  preceding     .  .  .  .  .60 

28.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  D.  Dundas,  urging  the  despatch 

of  a  corps  of  light  troops  to  the  army  in  Portugal      .       ib. 

29.  Sir  A.  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  complaining  of 

the  bad  state  of  the  artillery  horses  .  .61 

May  13.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  informing  him 
that  a  reinforcement  of  light  troops  is  under  orders 
for  embarkation     .  .  .  .  ,      ib. 

13.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  representing 
General  Beresford's  desire  to  have  more  British  officers 
in  his  Portuguese  army      .  .  .  .62 

13.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  respecting  the 
light  brigade,  and  additional  supply  of  pay  destined 
for  his  army,  his  brother's  appointment  to  the  Em- 
bassy in  Spain,  and  the  supplying  Beresford  with 
Officers     .  .  .  .  .  .63 

16.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  relative  to  a  pro- 
posal from  Captain  Argenton,  a  French  officer — 
French  squadron  in  West  Indies  blockaded  by  Ad- 
miral Cochrane      .  .  .  .  .64 

16.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  on  Argenton's 

plan  .  .  .  .  .  .65 

22.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley — Directions  re- 
specting the  tonnage  in  Portugal  .  .68 

22.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  announcing  the 

embarkation  of  reinforcements  destined  for  his  army .       69 

25.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King,  representing  the  necessity 

for  reinforcing  the  army  in  Portugal  .  .       70 

26.  His  Majesty's  answer,  approving  the  arrangement  pro- 

posed by  Lord  Castlereagh  .  .  .71 

25.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  authorizing  him 

to  extend  his  operations  beyond  the  Spanish  provinces 
adjacent  to  Portugal  .  .  .  .      ib, 

26.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  congratulating 

him  on  his  first  successes,  and  promising  his  own  best 
efforts  for  strengthening  him  .  .  .      ib. 


viii  CONTENTS. 

1809.  PAGE 

May  26.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  referring  to  his 
successful  commencement  of  the  campaign  against 
Soult       ......       72 

26.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  announcing  further 

reinforcements       .  .  .  .  .73 

June  2.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  J.  Cradock,  assenting  to  his 

wish  to  return  home  .  .  .  .74 

6.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  signifying  the 

King's  approbation  of  his  operations  .  .       75 

7.  Sir  A.  Wellesley  to  Sir  D.  Dundas,  relative  to  the  ap- 

pointment of  British  Oflficers  to  serve  in  the  Portu- 
guese army  .  .  .  .  .  ib. 
Marginal  Observations  on  Sir  A.  Wellesley's  Letter,  by 
Sir  D.  Dundas  .  .  .  .  .79 
9.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Major-General  Lightburne,  with 
instructions  to  send  several  Regiments  of  Foot  to 
proceed  from  Ireland  to  Portugal     .              .  .81 

10.  The  Hon.  F.  Robinson  to  Major-General  Lightburne, 

requesting  him  to  proceed  direct  with  the  troops  to 
Aveiro  and  Mondego  .  .  .  .82 

1 1 .  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley — State  of  reinforce  - 

ments  destined  for  him — Reference  to  Continental 
prospects,  and  battle  of  Aspem        .  .  .       ib. 

13.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  intimating  that 

orders  have  been  given  for  supplies  required  .       84 

17.  Sir  A.  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  referring  to  his 
correspondence  with  General  Cuesta,  and  the  state 
of  the  transports    .  .  .  .  .85 

17.  Sir  A.  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  lamenting  the 
state  of  discipline  of  the  army,  and  suggesting  means 
for  its  improvement  .  .  .  .86 

20.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  Chevalier  de  Souza  Couttinho, 
signifying  that  the  Commander-in-Chief  thinks  proper 
not  to  permit  any  additional  British  Officers  to  join 
the  Portuguese  army  .  .  .  ,89 

27.  Sir  A.  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh — Complains  of  the 
uncertainty  of  communications  in  Portugal,  and  re- 
fers to  the  strength  of  his  army  .  .90 

30.  Sir  A.  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  acknowledging 
the  receipt  of  reinforcements,  insisting  on  the  in- 


CONTENTS.  ix 

1809.  PAGE 

accuracy  of  the  returns  of  their  strength  sent  to 
him,  and  describing  the  state  of  the  army  of 
Portugal  .  .  .  .  .91 

June  30.  Sir  A.  Wellesley  to  the  Hon.  Admiral  Berkeley,  (enclosed 
in  the  preceding)  relative  to  sending  home  the  trans- 
ports from  the  Tagus  .  .  .  .94 
July  11.  Lord   Castlereagh  to   Sir  A.  Wellesley  —  Scarcity  of 

specie — Arrival  of  horse  transports  .  .       95 

17.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  remarking  upon 

his  letter  on  the  discipline  of  the  army  .  .       96 

Enclosure : 

Extract  of  a  Greneral  Order  of  the  Duke  of  York's 

in  1794  .  .  ,  .99 

Aug.  1.  Sir  A.  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  referring  to  his 
embarrassing  situation  after  the  battle  of  Talavera, 
and  the  inefficient  state  of  the  Spaniards       .  .100" 

12.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  signifying  the 
King's  entire  satisfaction  with  his  proceedings  and 
intentions  .  .  .  .  .101 

12.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  conveying  de- 
spatches from  Mr.  Canning  to  Marquess  Wellesley,  on 
the  state  of  the  war  and  the  campaign  in  the  Peninsula  102 
12.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  approving  his 
proceedings  with  Cuesta,  transmitting  the  latest  intel- 
ligence from  our  army  in  the  Scheldt,  and  reporting 
the  result  of  his  conference  with  the  Attorney- General 
and  Mr.  Ryder,  on  Martial  Law      .  .  .       ib. 

17.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King,  suggesting  the  propriety 

of  a  General  Order,  expressive  of  his  Majesty's  sense 
of  the  services  of  his  troops  in  Spain,  and  the  grant  of 
such  distinctions  as  were  conferred  after  the  battle  of 
Vimeira  .  .  .  .  .104 

18.  His  Majesty's  answer,  directing  the  issue  of  a  General 

Order,  and  the  grant  of  medals  to  the  commanding 
officers  of  corps  in  the  battle  of  Talavera      ,  .       ib. 

21.  Sir  A.  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  stating  the  situa- 
tion of  the  army,  the  disinclination  of  the  Spaniards  to 
affiard  assistance,  and  obstacles  to  the  accomplishment 
of  more  than  he  had  done  .  .  >       ib. 

21.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  referring  to  the 

a5 


C  CONTENTS. 

1809.  PAGE 

battle  of  Talavera,  and  notifying  his  Majesty's  com- 
mand to  signify  in  the  most  marked  manner  his 
gracious  sense  of  the  services  of  himself,  of  the  other 
officers,  and  of  the  whole  army         .  .  .106 

Aug.  25.  Sir  A.  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh — General  review 
of  the  force,  composition,  and  character,  of  the  Spanish 
and  Portuguese  armies        .  .  .  .108 

26.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Wellington,  informing  him 

that  the  King  has  elevated  him  to  the  Peerage  .     117 

Sept.  4.  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to   Lord   Castlereagh,    on  the 

garrisoning  of  Cadiz  ....      ib. 

12.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Wellington,  on  the  necessity 
of  keeping  a  sufficient  tonnage  in  the  Tagus  for  em- 
barking the  army,  in  case  of  emergency         .  '   .     118 

14.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Wellington,  requesting  him  to 
invest  Lieutenant- General  Sherbrooke  with  the  in- 
signia of  the  Order  of  the  Bath        .  .  .119 

14.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Wellington,  signifying  the 
King's  approbation  of  his  recent  operations,  and  of  his 
falling  back  to  the  frontier  of  Portugal  .  .       ib. 

14.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Wellington,  directing  him  to 
dismount  the  weakest  cavalry  regiments,  and  send  the 
men  to  England  .  .  .  .120 

14.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Wellington,  requesting  him  to 

furnish  a  full  report  on  the  defensibility  of  Portugal         ib. 

23.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Wellington,  acknowledging 
the  receipt  of  despatches  and  correspondence  with 
Lord  Wellesley     .  .  .  .  .121 

Remarks  on  the  Defence  of  Portugal  (from  the  Portu- 
guese)      .  .  .  .  .  .122 

Memorandum  upon  Operations  in   Spain.     By  Lord 
Castlereagh  .  .  .  .  .126 

SUPPLEMENT  TO  OPERATIONS  IN  PORTUGAL  AND  SPAIN. 

I.  Precis  of  Correspondence  from  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple,  re- 
lative to  Spanish  Affairs,  from  January  3  to  August 
26,  1808  ......     129-146 

IF.  Precis  of  Letters  from  Major-General  Spencer,  relative 
to  Spain  and  Portugal,  from  February  29  to  August  2, 
1808         ......     146-157 


CONTENTS.  XI 

1808.  PAGE 

III.  Precis  of  Despatches  from  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,  re- 

lative to  Spain  and  Portugal,  from  July  21  to  Au- 
gust 21,  1808         .....      157-167 

IV.  Precis  of  Letters  from  Brigadier-General  Decken,  on 

the  Affairs  of  Portugal,  from  August  18  to  Novem- 
ber 25,  1808  .....     167-177 
V.  Precis  of  Correspondence  from  Lord  Collingwood,  re- 
lating to  Spain  and  Portugal,  from  June  1 7  to  Au- 
gust 16,  1808         .....     177-190 
VI.  Precis  of  Despatches  from  Sir  Harry  Burrard,  from 

July  29  to  November  14,  1808        .  .  .     190-198 

VII.  Abstract  of  Papers  relative  to  Transactions  in  Portugal, 
previous  to  Sir  H.  Burrard's  departure,  and  trans- 
mitted by  him  to  Lord  Castlereagh  since  his  return  to 
England,  from  October  11  to  November  16,  1808     .     198-211 
VIII.  Precis  of  Despatches  from  Major- General  Broderick, 

from  August  28  to  December  31,  1808         .  .     211-219 

IX.  Precis  of  Letters  from  Major-General  Leith,  relative  to 

Spanish  Affairs,  from  August  3 1  to  December  1 0, 1 808     220-24 1 
X.  Abstract  of  Despatches  from  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  to  Lord 

Castlereagh,  from  September  3  to  December  23,  1808     241-256 

STATE  OF  THE  SPANISH  COLONIES  IN  AMERICA. 
1779—1809. 
Preliminary  Observations       ....     257 
Extracts  of  Letters  addressed  to  Lord  Loughborough, 

and  communicated  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  1779     .     260 
On  the  Liberation  of  South  America  from  the  Dominion 
of  Spain.     By  Sir  R.  Abercromby  .  .     269 

1799. 
Sept.  30.  General  Miranda  to  the  Right  Hon.   Henry  Dundas. 

Enclosing  Papers  just  received  by  him,  viz. :  .     273 

1.  Letter  from  Don  Manuel  Gual,  dated  July  12, 1799, 
with  two  Enclosures        ....     274 

2.  Memorial  of  Don  Manuel  Gual,  presented  to  the 
Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Windward  Islands, 
through  General  Picton,  Governor  of  Trinidad, 
dated  May  2,  1799  .  .  .  .     276 

Extracts  from  the  Proceedings  of  the  Audiencia  or 
Supreme  Tribunal  of  the  Caracas,  with  the  Opinion 


XU  CONTENTS. 

1799.  PAGE 

of  the  Audiencia  respecting  a  Proposal  for  recon- 
quering the  Island  of  Trinidad,  dated  May  10, 
1 797  ;  and  Representation  of  the  Audiencia  to  the 
King  of  Spain,  in  his  Supreme  Council  of  the 
Indies,  dated  August  12,  1797  .  .     279,  280 

Oct.  3.  Memorandum  submitted  to  the  consideration  of  the 
Cabinet  by  Mr.  Dundas,  on  the  subject  of  the  Spanish 
Colonies,  with  the  Opinions  of  some  of  the  Cabinet 
Ministers  .  .  .  .  .284 

Note  sent  in  circulation  in  September,  1801,  respecting 
South  America      .....     287 
1803. 
Nov.  26.  Secret  Paper  on  South  America,  sent  by  Sir  Home  Pop- 
ham  to  Mr.  Secretary  Yorke  .  .  .288 
1806. 
July  11.  On  the  Attack  of  Mexico  from  the  Eastern  side.     By 

William  Jacob       .  .  .  .  .293 

Aug.  1.  Private  Annotations  addressed  to  the  Minister  of  War, 
on  the  first  Arrival  of  the  English,  under  Major- 
General  Beresford,  at  Buenos  Ayres.     By  Don  Ber- 
nardo Velasquez,  Intendant  of  Paraguay       .  .     302 
1807. 

May  1.  Memorandum  for  the  Cabinet,  relative  to  South  Ame- 
rica.    By  Lord  Castlereagh  .  .  .314 
Memoir  of  the  Mosquito  Territory.     By  J.  Wright,  late 

Commander  H.M.S.  Swift  .  .  .324 

Memoir  on  Spanish  America,  and  the  Viceroyalty  of 

Mexico  in  particular.     By  the  Duke  of  Orleans        .     332 
On  the  Establishment  of  Naval  Stations,  and  General 
Survey  of  the  States  of  America.     By  General  Du- 
mouriez  .....     345 

June  2.  Mr.  Vansittart  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  transmitting  a 
letter  from  General  Miranda  to  him,  dated  March  9, 
urging  the  policy  of  aiding  the  Spanish  Colonies  to 
assert  their  independence  ....  371 
4.  General  Dumouriez  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  with  a  Note,  pro- 
posing the  mission  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans  to  Spanish 
America,  and  the  founding  of  a  kingdom  for  him  there  373 
12.  Note  on  Mexico,  by  General  Dumouriez,  adverting  to 
the  efforts   and  character  of  Miranda,  and   recora- 


CONTENTS.  Xlll 

1807.  PAGE 

mending  the  conversion  of  Mexico  into  a  Monarchy 
in  favour  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  with  Extract  of  a 
letter  to  Mr.  Windham,  proposing  such  a  measure  .  376 
Memorandum  relative  to  Spanish  America,  by  Lord 
Castlereagh,  with  estimates  of  the  disposable  force 
that  might  be  sent  thither  .  .  .     385 

June  26.  General  Dumouriez  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  advising  the 
evacuation  of  Alexandria,  and  the  emancipation  of 
Spanish  America  .  .  .  .390 

30.  General  Dumouriez  on  the  Declaration  of  Indepen- 
dence by  the  Provinces  of  Rio  de  la  Plata  .     391 
July  12.  Account  of  the  Second  Attack  of  Buenos  Ayres   by 
General  Whitelocke.     By  Don  Bernardo  Velasquez, 
Intendant  of  Paraguay       ....     396 
1808. 
Jan.  3.  General  Miranda  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  announcing  his 

arrival  in  England,  with  Enclosures :  .  .     403 

General    Hislop,  Governor    of   Trinidad,    to   Lord 

Castlereagh,  October  20,  1807     .  .  .       ib. 

The  Hon.  A.  Cochrane  Johnstone  to  Lord  Castle- 
reagh, November  15,  1807  .  .  .     405 
10.  General  Miranda  to  Lord  Castlereagh — A  narrative  of 
his  proceedings  and  efforts  for  the  emancipation  of 
Spanish  America                 ....       ib. 

To  which  are  annexed  as  Notes  : 
Note  delivered  to  Mr.  Pitt,  at  his  request,  desiring  to 
know  what  were  Don  Francisco  de  Miranda's  views, 
soon  after  the  Convention  with  Spain,  about  Nootka 
Sound,  dated  January  28,  1791  .  .     412 

General  Miranda  to  Right  Hon.  W.  Pitt,  dated 
June  13,  1805,  vindicating  his  character  against 
charges  alleged  against  it  .  .  .413 

Extracts  of  two  Letters,  dated  July  28,  and  Sep- 
tember 6,  1806,  from  Mr.  S.  G.  Ogden,  of  New 
York,  to  General  Miranda  .  .  .416 

Colonel  Smith,  of  New  York,  to  General  Miranda, 

dated  August  15,  1806  .  .  .418 

Rear- Admiral  Sir  A.  Cochrane  to  General  IMiranda, 
dated  June  9,  1806,  promising  him  support,  and  on 
what  conditions  .  .  .  .419 


XIV  CONTENTS. 

1808.  PAGE 

General  Miranda  to  Admiral  Sir  A.  Cochrane,  dated 

June  9,  1806,  agreeing  to  his  propositions  .     421 

Captain  G.  Dundas,  K.N.,  to  General  Mranda,  dated 
September  22, 1 806,  notifying  the  absolute  necessity 
of  his  immediately  quitting  Aruba  .  .       ib. 

Information  respecting  the  Provinces  of  the  River  la 
Plata,  statement  of  their  military  force,  and  instruc- 
tions for  an  attack  on  Buenos  Ay  res  .  .422 
Jan.  26.  Mr.  J.  I).  R.  Gordon  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  relating  par- 
ticulars of  his  residence  in  Mexico  and  imprisonment 
in  Spain,  enclosing :             .              .              .  .     426 
A  description  of  the  country  from  Vera  Cruz  to  Mexico, 
with  an  account  of  the  principal  towns,  military 
force,  points  of  defence,  manners  and  customs  of  the 
inhabitants,  &c.               .              .              .              .428 
May  16.  General  Miranda  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  deprecating  delay 
in  the  execution  of  the  plans  for  emancipating  Spanish 
America                 .              .              .              .              .441 
June  8.  Lord   Melville    to  Lord   Castlereagh,    respecting  the 

Spanish  Colonies  in  America  .  .  .     442 

Aug.  19.  General  Miranda  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  on  the  affairs  of 

South  America      .....     448 
Memorandum  of  the  produce  of  the  Mines  of  Spanish 
America  in  1806     .  .  .  .  .451 

1809. 

Feb.  7.  General  Miranda  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  enclosing  transla- 
tion of  a  letter  from  the  Havana      .  .  .     452 
Aug.  2.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  Right  Hon.  N.  Vansittart,  trans- 
mitting correspondence  from  Miranda           .              .     454 
7.  Right  Hon.  N.  Vansittart  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  relative  to 

Spanish  America,  and  the  plans  of  General  Miranda        ib. 


LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES 


OP 


LORD    CASTLEREAGH. 


OPERATIONS  IN  PORTUGAL  AND  SPAIN. 

1808-9  (continued). 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  John  Stuart. 
Draft.  London,  November  1,  1808. 

Dear  Sir — As  I  consider  the  instructions  sent  to  you  on  the 
13th  go  as  far  to  direct  an  application  of  your  disposable  force 
to  Spain  as  can  be  done  with  propriety  from  hence,  I  have 
only  further  to  add  to  my  letters,  public  and  private,  of  that 
date,  that  every  day's  intelligence  makes  me  additionally 
desirous  of  hearino:  that  a  British  force  has  shown  itself  on  the 
side  of  Catalonia,  where  its  services  would  be  of  the  utmost 
importance. 

I  hope  the  Court  of  Palermo  will  feel  that,  even  to  their 
ultimate  views  in  Italy,  the  completion  of  the  great  work  in 
Spain  is  of  more  consequence  than  an  imperfect  attempt  in 
Italy,  which,  without  the  co-operation  of  some  important  mili- 
tary power,  can  hardly  expect  permanently  to  deliver  itself, 
assisted  only  by  a  small  British  corps,  with  very  limited  means 
of  furnishing  either  arms  or  military  stores  for  arming  the 
people. 

VOL.  VII.  B 


2  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

You  will,  of  course,  take  the  necessary  steps,  through  the 
King's  Minister,  for  obtaining  their  concurrence  to  your  moving 
with  the  corps  which  you  have  rendered  disposable,  which,  I 
believe,  under  the  late  treaty,  by  which  we  are  bound  to  keep  a 
given  amount  of  force  in  Sicily,  is  necessary,  in  order  to  enable 
you  to  carry  with  you,  on  service,  an  adequate  proportion  of 
your  army. 

It  may  also  be  necessary  that,  during  your  absence,  some 
additional  vigilance  should  be  exerted  with  respect  to  the  local 
force  within  the  island.  You  will  also  suofsest  to  Lord  Collino^- 
wood  the  importance  of  keeping  up  the  naval  defences,  as  far 
as  the  relative  situation  of  the  enemy  may  appear  to  him  to 
require  it. 

Since  I  last  wrote.  Sir  John  Moore''s  army  has  been  put  in 
motion  towards  Spain ;  they  move  by  Almeida  and  Ciudad 
Rodrigo.  Sir  David  Baird,  with  his  corps,  has  landed  at 
Corunna,  after  a  favourable  passage  of  four  days  from  Falmouth, 
and  is  advancing  towards  Valladolid,  where  the  whole  will 
assemble,  consisting  of  35,000  infantry  and  nine  regiments  of 
cavalry.  The  enemy,  between  40  and  50,000  strong,  are  con- 
centrated in  Biscay  and  Navarre,  expecting  reinforcements : 
they  are  encircled  from  Saragossa  by  Milapo,  Lagrono,  Frias, 
and  Bilbao,  by  the  various  provincial  armies,  which  exceed  in 
number  100,000  men,  and  I  have  reason  to  believe  they  medi- 
tate an  attack  before  the  French  reinforcements  are  actually  on 
the  line  of  operations. 

I  conclude  you  will  bring  your  small  corps  of  cavalry  with 
you.  I  shall  endeavour  to  repair  the  losses  sustained  by  the 
detachment  of  the  20th  in  Portugal,  so  that  it  may  be  in  a 
state  to  join  you  in  the  south  of  Spain.  It  was  my  intention 
to  have  sent  it  on  to  Sicily ;  but,  as  it  has  been  roughly  handled 
in  the  action  of  the  21st,  I  deem  it  more  advisable  to  leave  it 
at  Lisbon  till  I  know  more  of  your  movements. 
Believe  me,  &c., 

Oastlereagh. 


1808.]  LOED  CASTLEREAGH.  O 

Lard  Castlereagh  to  Sir  John  Stuart. 
Draft,  Downing  Street,  November  4,  1808. 

Dear  Sir — I  think  it  right  to  apprise  you  that  it  appears,  by 
the  return  of  our  messenger  from  Paris,  that  Buonaparte  had 
left  that  capital  for  Bayonne.  As  his  reinforcements  were  ex- 
pected to  have  reached  the  frontier  about  this  time,  his  object  no 
doubt  is  to  put  himself  at  the  head  of  his  army,  and  attempt 
the  conquest  of  Spain. 

The  division  of  the  French  army  nearest  Erfurth  has,  it  is 
said,  been  put  in  motion  towards  Catalonia.  I  trust  your 
corps  may  embarrass  their  advance.  If  you  find  them  in 
great  force  on  your  arrival,  you  will  regulate  your  movements 
accordingly.  I  am,  &c.,  Castlereagh. 


Memorandum  on  Ranh  between  the  Spanish  and  English  Officers 

in  Spain. 

November  8,  1808. 

Some  decision  must  be  come  to  upon  the  subject  of  rank,  as 
the  British  and  Spanish  officers  must  be  expected,  on  various 
occasions,  to  serve  together  upon  the  same  outposts  or  line  of 
duty ;  and  it  must  be  exactly  defined  in  what  manner  the  com- 
mand is  to  be  respectively  assumed.  There  does  not  appear  to 
me  any  alternative  but  that  the  officers  of  each  army  must  roll 
together,  according  to  the  dates  of  their  respective  commissions, 
without  reference  to  the  powers  from  whom  such  commissions 
are  derived,  whether  regal  or  provincial,  provided  such  com- 
missions are  acknowledged  by  the  Supreme  Government. 

The  British  being  an  auxiliary  force,  it  must  necessarily  be 
under  the  command  of  the  Spanish  Commander-in-Chief,  if  a 
Generalissimo  is  appointed.  The  British  General  must  be 
therefore  liable,  in  that  case,  to  receive  orders  from  the  stafi"  of 
the  Spanish  General,  as  emanating  directly  from  himself;  but 
no  orders  can  be  given  to  the  British  Army  but  through  its 
own  General. 

It   must  be  clearly  understood  that  the   British  force   is 

B  2 


4  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

intended  as  a  field  army,  and  it  is  not  to  be  separated  into  de- 
tachments, nor  is  any  detachment  to  be  made  from  it  but  with 
the  entire  concurrence  and  by  the  express  orders  of  its  own 
General. 

The  British  force  is  not  to  be  employed  in  the  garrisoning 
of  any  place  or  places,  whereby  a  material  diminution  would 
be  made  of  its  effective  strength,  nor  is  it  to  be  occupied  in 
sieges  without  the  particular  consent  of  its  General ;  but  it  is 
to  be  kept  together,  as  far  as  the  circumstances  of  the  war  will 
permit,  for  the  express  purpose  of  opposing  the  enemy  e7i  pleine 
campagne. 

Whenever  the  British  General  shall  have  occasion  to  make 
any  proposition  to  or  hold  any  communication  with  the  Spanish 
Government,  he  shall  correspond  with  it  through  the  medium 
of  the  British  Minister  at  Madrid,  and  all  communications  from 
the  Spanish  Government  shall  be  made  through  the  same 
channel :  but  it  must  be  explicitly  defined  that  the  British 
General  cannot  be  placed  in  any  manner  under  the  control  of 
the  British  Minister,  or  receive  any  orders  from  him,  though 
he  must  be  in  constant  and  intimate  correspondence  with  him, 
as  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  he  cannot  have  a  competent 
knowledge  of  military  affairs,  to  give  a  decisive  opinion  upon 
any  such  matters  that  the  Spanish  Government  or  officers  may 
refer  to  him.  No  proposition,  therefore,  either  from  the  Spanish 
Government,  or  the  British  Minister,  as  emanating  either  from 
himself  or  from  the  Supreme  Junta,  shall  be  considered  as  in 
any  manner  binding  on  the  British  General ;  he  taking  care  to 
make  a  full  answer  to  any  such  proposition,  and  making  known 
his  reasons  for  dissenting  therefrom. 

In  the  event  of  any  difference  of  opinion  upon  important 
subjects  between  the  British  and  Spanish  Generals-in-Chief, 
the  British  General  shall  take  care  to  represent  the  same,  in  the 
most  full  and  proper  manner,  to  the  British  Minister,  to  be  by 
him  made  known  to  the  Supreme  Government,  or  to  his  own 
Court,  as  the  case  may  be ;  but  nothing  is  herein  intended  to 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  5 

prevent  the  British  General  from  the  most  full  and  confi- 
dential communication  with  his  own  Government,  which  he  is 
expected  to  do  bj  every  opportunity. 

It  is  not  deemed  necessary  to  give  any  special  instruction 
relative  to  the  payment  of  the  troops,  or  providing  them  with 
clothing,  forage,  fee,  the  whole  of  which  is  to  be  paid  by  the 
British  Government  in  like  manner  as  if  the  troops  were  acting 
independently  of  the  Spanish  nation.  J.  H.  G. 


General  Kellermann  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

Ryde,  8  Novembre,  1808. 

General — Les  Ministres  de  Sa  Majeste  ont  enfin  consenti  a 
lever  mon  arret  et  je  viens  de  recevoir  Tavis  que  j'allais  etre 
transporte  en  France  sur  un  cartel ;  quoique  ce  n'etait  qu'un 
acte  de  justice  que  j'etais  en  droit  d'^exiger,  je  crois  cependant 
qu'on  n'aurait  pas  tenu  grand  compte  de  mes  reclamations,  si 
elles  n'avoient  et^  appuyees,  et  je  me  regarde  comme  parti- 
culi^rement  oblio:e  en  vers  vous. 

Les  communications  pacifiques,  qui  viennent  d''avoir  lieu 
entre  les  deux  pays  m"'ont  fait  naitre  quelques  idees  que  j''ai 
jette  sur  le  papier,  et  que  je  vous  envoye :  *  si  vous  ne  les 
trouvez  pas  deraisonnables,  vous  pourriez  les  communiquer  ^ 
vos  amis  dans  le  ministere.  Je  vous  observe  que  ce  n^est  que 
de  particulier  a  particulier  que  je  parle,  et  que  cela  ne  part 
uniquement  que  de  moi. 

Je  vous  renouvelle,  General,  Tassurance  de  ma  haute  con- 
sideration, et  vous  prie  de  me  donner  vos  ordres  pour  France. 

J'ai  rhonneur  d'etre  votre  tr^s  humble  Serviteur, 

Kellermann. 

PS.  On  m'annonce  a  Tinstant  que  mon  cartel  ne  sera  pret 
que  dans  5  a  6  jours  :  actuellement  qu'on  admet  les  parlemen- 

^  I  conclude  that  the  paper  which  follows  this  letter  contains  the 
Ideas  here  referred  to  by  Kellermann,  though  it  was  found  entirely 
detached,  and  there  is  no  indication  whatever  about  it  pointing  to  the 
author. 


6  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

taires  h,  Calais,  ne  pourrait  on  consentir  a  me  laisser  prendre 
cette  route  ?  Je  partirais  a  5  heures  du  soir,  sans  meme  entrer 
dans  Portsmouth,  en  marchant  toute  la  nuit  ;  je  serais  le 
lendemain  matin  a  Dover,  mais  j'aurais  obtenu  Tavan- 
tage  d'arriver  avec  certitude  dans  24  heures,  et  je  ne  puis 
vous  exprimer  quelle  obligation  je  vous  aurai  de  ce  ser- 
vice. 

Idees  (Tun  Frangais  sur  les  Moyens  de  Rapprochement  des  Puis- 
sauces  helligerentes,  dans  la  supposition  que  de  part  et  d^ autre 
onfut  dans  r intention  defaire  la  Paix. 

La  reunion  de  la  Russie,  de  la  France,  et  du  Dannemarc 
centre  T Angleterre,  la  neutralite  sincere  ou  forcee  de  T Autriche, 
ne  laisse  aucun  espoir  a  TAngleterre  de  susciter  dans  le  Nord 
une  diversion  favorable  a  TEspagne. 

La  cooperation  des  forces  reunies  de  la  France,  de  la  con- 
federation du  Rhin,  de  la  Hollande,  de  la  Suisse,  et  de  Tltalie, 
commandees  par  TEmpereur  en  personne,  centre  FEspagne, 
defendue  seulement  par  les  restes  de  son  armee  de  ligne  et  un 
ramas  de  paysans,  dangereux  sans  doute  par  leur  exaltation 
et  leur  fanatisme,  mais  non  encore  dresses  a  la  guerre,  ne 
pent  laisser  beaucoup  de  doute  sur  Tissue  de  cette  grande 
lutte. 

L''accession  d''une  armee  An^rlaise  de  50  a  60  mille  hommes 
est  sans  doute  d'un  poids  important  dans  la  balance,  mais  d''un 
autre  cote  est  tres  propre  a  populariser  la  guerre  dans  la  nation, 
et  lea  troupes,  impatientes  de  pouvoir  enfin  atteindre  dans  son 
armee  TAngleterre,  jusqu'  alors  inaccessible  a  leur  coups, 
TEspagne,  malgre  tout  son  fanatisme,  son  exasperation,  peut- 
etre  fondee,  ne  pent  s'*empecher  de  reconnaitre  la  grandeur  du 
danger  qui  la  menace,  la  profondeur  de  Tabyme  oii  elle  va  se 
precipiter  inevitablement,  et  ce  sentiment  irrecusable  de  son 
impuissance  ^  conjurer  Torage  doit  deja  lui  oter  Tespoir  du 
succ^s,  principal  mobile  de  ses  efforts,  amener  le  d^courage- 
ment,  et  la  livrer  k  moiti^  vaincue  a  un  maitre  irrite. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  7 

L'Empereur  et  la  masse  imposante  qu'il  entraine  avec  lui  ne 
peuvent  reculer,  nul  arrangement  possible,  il  faut  perir  ou  se 
soumettre :  le  moindre  relachemont  de  la  part  de  la  France 
annoncerait  de  la  faiblesse,  et  produirait  pour  elle  de  conse- 
quences fatales.  Oette  guerre  est  done  devenue  juste  pour  elle, 
parcequ'*elle  est  devenue  necessaire  :  cette  terrible  verite  sentie, 
le  retablissement  de  la  dinastie  des  Bourbons  sur  le  trone 
d'Espagne  devenu  impossible,  puis  qu'ils  sont  retenus  en  France 
et  qu'une  armee  si  formidable  s'y  oppose,  c''est  a  Ferdinand  a 
se  devouer  lui-meme  pour  son  peuple,  a  delier  les  Anglais  de 
leurs  engagements,  les  Espagnols  de  leurs  serments,  a  leur  faire 
sentir  Finutilite  de  leurs  efforts  pour  lui,  quand  meme  s'ils 
etaient  couronnes  par  le  succes,  a  les  engager  a  se  soumettre 
volontairement,  a  prevenir,  leur  destruction  totale,  a  subir  la 
loi  de  la  necessite,  et  accepter  un  Roi  dont  les  moeurs  douces, 
le  caract^re  afiable,  leur  promet  un  Gouvernement  modere,  du 
moment  qu'il  pourra  se  reposer  sur  leur  foi.  II  pent  alors  de- 
mander  pour  lui  FEmpire  de  PAmerique,  et  la  faculte  de  s'y 
retirer  avec  les  Espagnols  qui  lui  sont  attaches  et  qui  vou- 
draient  le  suivre.  II  avait  forme  ce  projet  dans  un  tems  plus 
recule:  peut-etre  aujourd^hui  FEmpereur  ne  serait-il  pas 
eloigne  d'adopter  un  pareil  arrangement :  si  le  sacrifice  etait 
sincere,  et  si  TEspagne  j  accedait  de  son  cote,  cette  idee  pour- 
rait  etre  murie  et  developpee  plus  amplement ;  et  on  Foflfre 
pour  base  d'un  rapprochement,  qui,  d''apr^s  les  liasons  actuelles 
de  PEspagne  et  de  la  Grande  Bretagne,  ne  parait  pas  pouvoir 
etre  effect ue  autrement. 

Quant  aux  autres  interets  a  demeler  entre  la  France  et 
PAngleterre,  c'est  aux  Gouvernemens  a  s'en  entendre.  II  ue 
sera  pas  difficile  d'y  parvenir,  si  Pun  et  Pautre  veulent  sinc^re- 
ment  rendre  a  PEurope  un  repos  dont  elle  a  tout  besoin,  et 
apres  lequel  elle  soupire  depuis  si  long-temps,  et  si  inutile- 
ment. 


8  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Lord  Castlereagk  to  the  Right  Hon,  E,  E^/der,  Judge 
Advocate  General, 

St.  James*8  Square,  Thursday  night,  November  10,  1808. 

My  dear  Ryder — I  enclose  for  your  consideration  a  draft  to 
Sir  David  Dundas,  written  upon  the  supposition  that  a  previous 
demand  from  the  Court,  which  I  still  continue  to  consider  as  an 
important  preliminary,  will  impose  a  duty  so  difficult  and  im- 
portant upon  me,  as  to  justify  what,  if  voluntarily  performed, 
might  well  be  deemed  no  venial  offence. 

Among  the  endless  perplexities  and  conflicting  duties  and 
difficulties  of  this  delectable  little  military  adventure  of  mine, 
which,  I  conclude,  belong  to  the  Bed  of  Roses,  on  which  I  was 
supposed  to  compliment  our  predecessors  as  reclining,  I  really 
cannot  discover  a  less  thorny  escape.  If  your  judgment  ap- 
proves, I  shall,  without  hesitation,  expose  my  old  limbs  to  be 
scratched  and  torn  in  this  path,  without  searching  for  a  better 
one  in  the  forest. 

I  enclose  also  for  your  perusal  my  private  letter  to  Dalrymple, 
of  which,  at  my  desire,  he  has  enclosed  me  a  copy. 

I  shall  hope  to  see  you  at  one  to-morrow,  at  the  Office : 
pray  ask  Gordon,  en  chemin,  if  Sir  David  has  his  materials  to 
work  upon.  Yours  sincerely,         Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  David  Dundas. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  November,  1808. 

Sir — In  compliance  with  the  desire  signified  to  me  in  your 
letter  of  [blank],  I  have  obtained  his  Majesty"'s  gracious  per- 
mission to  lay  the  accompanying  instructions  and  correspon- 
dence before  the  Board  of  General  Officers  assembled  in  pur- 
suance of  his  Majesty "'s  Warrant  of  the  [blank]. 

Sir  Hew  Dalrymple,  in  his  letter  of  [blank],  has  signified  to 
me  that  he  should  deem  it  essential  to  the  explanation  of  his 
conduct  with  respect  to  the  Convention  of  Cintra,  to  enter  into 
an  extended  view  of  circumstances  collaterally  bearing  upon 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH,  9 

that  transaction.  I  do  not  feel  that  I  can  in  justice  to  him 
undertake  to  select  such  parts  only  of  the  papers  in  question  as 
might  otherwise  appear  to  me  the  material  and  proper  docu- 
ments to  be  produced.  Under  these  impressions,  I  have  thought 
it  my  duty  humbly  to  solicit  his  Majesty''s  gracious  permission 
to  lay  the  whole  of  the  instructions  and  correspondence  con- 
nected with  the  late  expedition  to  Portugal  before  the  Board, 
leaving  it  to  their  wisdom  and  discretion  to  make  such  use  of 
them  as  the  nature  of  the  case  and  the  ends  of  justice  may 
appear  to  them  to  require. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lieut. -General  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple. 
Draft.  Coombe  Wood,  November  6,  1808. 

Sir — However  desirous  I  may  feel  to  pay  attention  to  appli- 
cations proceeding  from  you,  and  which  have  for  their  object 
the  elucidation  of  the  subject  which  the  Court  of  Inquiry  has 
been  directed  to  investigate,  yet  I  trust  you  will  permit  me  to 
protest  as  well  against  the  propriety  of  founding  official  inquiries 
upon  the  anonymous  and  unauthorized  paragraphs  which  daily 
appear  in  the  public  prints,  as  against  the  supposition  that  his 
Majesty's  Ministers  possess  an  influence  over  any  newspaper, 
which  can  justify  any  individual  in  attributing  to'  them  either 
a  knowledge  or  approbation  of  the  sentiments  which  may  be 
found  therein. 

Had  any  letters  been  addressed  to  me  explanatory  of  the 
Convention  of  Cintra,  which  appeared  to  me  proper  to  be  com- 
municated to  you,  I  should  have  felt  it  my  personal  duty  (as 
in  a  recent  instance)  to  have  put  you  in  possession  of  them, 
without  solicitation  on  your  part. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c., 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  Earl  of  Chatham. 
Draft.  St.  James's  Square,  November  11,  1808. 

My  dear  Lord — I  send,  for  your  consideration,  two  drafts 
to  Sir  John  Moore,  together  with  a  memorandum  of  the  Duke 


10  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

of  York's,  on  the  subject  of  Military  Command,  which,  you  will 
observe,  has  been  adopted  as  the  basis  of  these  instructions. 

Being  unwilling  to  ask  you  to  come  up  to  town  if  it  can  be 
avoided,  I  have  communicated  these  drafts  to  such  of  our  col- 
leagues as  are  in  London,  reserving  a  final  decision  upon  them 
till  Tuesday,  if  you  should  have  any  suggestions  to  propose. 
As  far  as  they  have  been  considered,  they  have  met  with  their 
approbation. 

We  have  not  had  any  intelligence  from  our  army  later  than 
the  18th  of  last  month,  which,  I  believe,  you  saw.  There  is 
a  letter  from  General  Leith  of  the  31st,  which  has  been  pro- 
ductive of  numerous  reports  of  battles,  but  contains,  in  truth, 
nothing  but  the  advance  of  Blake's  army  to  Zarnosa,  being  a 
few  leagues  in  front  of  Bilbao,  towards  Durango. 

If  the  temper  of  the  Court  of  Vienna  is  to  be  estimated  by 
the  selection  of  intelligence  given  in  the  Court  Gazette,  the 
conferences  at  Erfurt  do  not  appear  to  have  rendered  it  more 
accommodating  to  France.  In  one  received  to-day,  they  have, 
for  the  first  time,  given  the  account  of  Dupont''s  surrender,  and 
the  victory  of  Vimeira,  in  detail.         I  am,  &c., 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  Earl  of  Chatham, 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  November  11,  1808. 

My  dear  Lord — In  order  that  Sir  John  Moore  and  Sir  John 
Cradock  may  be  the  better  enabled  to  judge  what  requisitions 
it  may  be  necessary  for  them  to  make  for  carrying  on  the 
public  service  in  Spain  and  Portugal,  I  should  be  much  obliged 
to  you  to  let  me  have  a  detailed  specification  of  all  the  advance 
supplies,  including  men,  guns,  ammunition,  &;c.,  similar  to  a 
paper  I  received  from  you  with  respect  to  the  Copenhagen 
equipment,  which  have  been  furnished  by  the  advance  for  the 
service  of  the  British  army  sent  to  Portugal,  and  subsequently 
for  the  force  sent  to  Corunna. 

I  should  not  have  troubled  you   with  this  application,  had 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  11 

the  information  in  this  Office  enabled  me  to  supply  it  at  all  in 
a  satisfactory  manner ;  but,  although  the  whole  has  originated 
in  letters  from  this  Office,  the  orders  are  formed  in  such  general 
terms  as  to  give  but  an  imperfect  view  of  the  subject,  at  least, 
for  my  object. 

I  should  rather  wish  to  see  the  whole  of  the  means  fur- 
nished in  Portugal  brought  into  one  point  of  view,  that  I 
might  confer  with  you  upon  the  explanations  which  it  may  be 
advantageous  to  have  brought  into  view  before  the  Court  of 
Inquiry,  as  far  as  it  can  with  propriety  be  done,  to  repel  any 
suggestion  of  deficiency  of  equipment ;  although  the  conduct  of 
Grovernment  cannot  be  considered  as  matter  of  inquiry  before 
the  Court,  yet,  as  in  the  mode  of  their  receiving  the  informa- 
tion which  they  will  have  a  right  to  call  for,  for  the  immediate 
duty  with  which  they  are  charged,  injurious  impressions  may 
be  guarded  against,  I  am  anxious  that  this  object  should  not  be 
neglected,  as  well  for  the  sake  of  the  Government  in  general  as 
of  myself  individually  ;  specially  responsible,  as  I  must  con- 
sider myself,  for  the  detailed  sufficiency  and  execution  of  the 
expedition. 

From  what  I  can  learn,  I  do  not  apprehend  that  any  of  the 
parties  will  rest  the  explanation  of  their  conduct  on  the  inade- 
quacy of  the  means  with  which  they  were  furnished  by  Go- 
vernment J  but  it  is  better  to  be  prepared  for  such  a  case, 
should  it  arise. 

I  am,  &c.,  Castlereagh. 


Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

London,  November  12,  1808. 
My  dear  Lord — I  enclose  a  letter  which  I  have  received 
from  General  Brenier,  the  object  of  which  is  (to  save  you  the 
trouble  of  reading  it)  to  claim  for  the  officers  who  are  taken  in 
Portugal  the  advantage  of  the  19th  Article  of  the  Convention, 
under  which  he  supposes  that  they  have  a  claim  to  be  set  at 
liberty.     As  for  himself,  he  says  that,  notwithstanding  the 


12  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

claim,  he  is  willing  to  be  considered  as  exchanged  for  General 
Abercromby  ;  but,  as  he  says  that  the  French  Government 
must,  by  this  time,  have  received  the  oflfer  of  the  exchange, 
and  have  not  taken  advantage  of  the  means  afforded  by  the 
frequent  communication  by  messengers  to  decline  it,  he  begs 
you  now  to  consider  it  as  accepted,  and  not  oblige  him  to  wait 
during  the  ten  weeks  during  which  it  was  first  settled  that  he 
should  wait  for  their  answer. 

I  imagine  there  is  no  ground  for  the  claim  of  release,  under 
the  19th  Article  of  the  Convention  ;  and,  as  for  the  exchange, 
I  conclude  that,  if  you  was  to  allow  Brenier  to  go  before  the 
ten  weeks  would  elapse,  the  French  Government  would  inform 
you  that  the  exchange  could  not  be  allowed  ;  that  Abercromby 
would  still  be  considered  a  prisoner  by  them,  and  that  you 
must  keep  Brenier.  He  also  wishes  to  go  by  Calais  when  he 
does  go.  Let  me  know  what  answer  I  shall  give  him  upon 
these  points. 

Ever,  my  dear  lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Sir  Arthur  Wellesley/  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

London,  November  14,  1808. 

My  dear  Lord — After  I  saw  you  on  Saturday,  I  spoke  to 
Colonel  Gordon,  and  he  agreed  entirely  in  opinion  with  me 
that  it  was  expedient  to  recommend  General  Spencer  to  the 
King  at  an  early  period  for  some  mark  of  his  Majesty ""s  favour  ; 
but  he  promised  to  speak  to  the  Duke  of  York  upon  the  sub- 
ject. 

I  have  always  been  of  opinion  that  I  should  not  bo  able  to 
convince  the  public  of  the  goodness  of  my  motives  for  signing 
the  Armistice ;  and  the  late  discussions  in  Middlesex  and 
elsewhere,  and  the  paragraphs  in  the  newspapers,  which,  after 
all,  rule  every  thing  in  this  country,  tend  to  convince  me  that 
it  is  determined  that  I  shall  not  have  the  benefit  of  an  ac- 
quittal, and  that  the  news-writers  and  the  orators  of  the  day 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  13 

are  determined  to  listen  to  nothing  in  my  justification.  I  am, 
therefore,  quite  certain  that  the  Government  will  not  be  able 
to  recommend  for  any  mark  of  the  King''s  favour,  to  which 
they  might  otherwise  think  me  entitled. 

If  this  turns  out  to  be  true,  the  Ministers  will  be  obliged 
to  recommend  that  a  mark  of  the  King's  favour  should  be  con- 
ferred on  General  Spencer,  and  not  on  me,  although  both  were 
employed  on  the  same  service  ;  and  this,  after  an  inquiry  will 
have  been  held,  in  which  my  conduct  will  have  been  investi- 
gated. They  will  be  obliged  to  adopt  this  line,  notwithstand- 
ing that  I  hope  they  will  be  convinced  of  the  propriety  of  my 
conduct  and  the  goodness  of  my  motives  in  every  instance : 
or  they  must  determine  not  to  confer  on  General  Spencer 
those  marks  of  the  King's  favour  which  his  services  un- 
doubtedly merit. 

I  have  no  doubt  of  the  alternative  which  the  Ministers  will 
be  inclined  to  adopt  ;  I  am  convinced  that  Spencer  himself 
will  urge  them  not  to  think  of  him,  if  the  King's  favour  cannot 
be  extended  to  me ;  and  thus  he  will  lose  what  he  so  well  de- 
serves. I  am  convinced  that  this  will  be  the  result  of  any 
further  delay. 

I  wish,  therefore,  that  you  would  immediately  recommend 
Spencer  for  what  you  think  he  ought  to  have.  There  can  be 
no  doubt  of  his  merit  on  every  ground,  and  nobody  can  with 
reason  complain  that  an  injustice  is  done  to  me,  because  even 
my  most  sanguine  friend  cannot  think  that  I  am  in  a  situation 
to  receive  any  mark  of  his  Majesty's  favour.  I  wish  that  you 
would  turn  this  subject  over  in  your  mind,  and  you  will  dis- 
cover that  great  difficulties  will  be  avoided  by  adopting  imme- 
diately the  measure  which  I  most  earnestly  recommend. 
Ever,  my  dear  lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 

It  is  said  that  Spencer  would  not  like  to  accept  any  mark 
of  the  King's  favour  at  present ;  but  I  am  convinced  that  I 
shall  be  able  to  prevail  with  him. 


14  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lieut-General  Sir  John  Cradock, 
Draft.  Stanmore,  November  19,  1808. 

Dear  Sir — If  you  have  not  left  town,  Mr.  Cooke  will  com- 
municate to  you  the  despatches  received  this  day  from  Sir 
Harry  Burrard.  You  will  observe  he  has,  at  the  instance  of 
the  Regency,  sent  two  regiments  to  Oporto  by  sea.  As  all 
disturbance  is  at  an  end  there,  I  hope  the  necessity  of  con- 
tinuing a  British  force  at  Oporto  will  be  but  temporary. 

It  appears  to  me  desirable  that  the  Portuguese  Govern- 
ment should,  as  early  as  possible,  charge  itself  with  the  police 
of  their  own  great  towns,  particularly  Lisbon  and  Oporto,  and 
that  the  British  troops  should  occupy  the  fortresses.  I  trust 
you  will  be  enabled,  with  six  regiments  of  infantry  and  the 
regiment  of  cavalry  which  I  propose  to  send  you  as  soon  as 
circumstances  will  permit,  to  do  every  thing  that  British  troops 
ought,  under  certain  circumstances,  to  be  charged  with  in 
Portugal,  including  the  garrisons  of  Elvas  and  Almeida. 

If  you  find  Oporto  continues  quiet,  I  should  hope  one  of  the 
regiments  might  be  brought  down  to  Lisbon  immediately,  and 
the  other  as  soon  as  the  Portuguese  Government  can  make  the 
necessary  arrangements  for  relieving  them.  It  is  equally  im- 
portant to  them  and  to  us  that  the  tranquillity  of  their  country 
should  not  rest  in  appearance  upon  British  troops. 

BeHeve  me,  &c..,  Castlereagh. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Brighton,  November  22,  [1808]. 

My  dear  Wellesley — I  congratulate  you  on  the  success  of 
the  militia  volunteering  in  Ireland,  which,  certainly,  upon  the 
whole,  has  worked  more  favourably  than  either  in  England  or 
Scotland,  and  leaves  us  no  room  to  doubt  that,  before  the  ex- 
piration of  the  twelve  months,  either  out  of  the  old  or  the  new 
men,  we  shall  have  derived  the  full  quota  authorized  to  enter 
into  the  line. 


1808.]  LORD    CASTLEREAGH.  15 

I  observe,  by  a  letter  from  Sir  G.  Littlehales  to  my  brother, 
that  the  progress  hitherto  made  in  the  new  levies  in  Ireland 
is  not  so  satisfactory,  notwithstanding  the  various  facilities  that 
you  have  afforded  the  counties  for  raising  men.  As  I  conclude 
that  few,  if  any,  will  proceed,  in  the  first  instance,  to  a  ballot, 
which,  by  the  by,  is  the  only  complete  and  perfect  security  for 
obtaining  the  number  required ;  and  as  the  period  for  com- 
pleting the  levy  is  limited  to  six  months,  I  wish  to  submit  to 
your  consideration  whether  it  would  not  be  desirable  now  to 
name  the  time,  that  every  county  should  peremptorily  proceed 
to  a  ballot  for  any  men  then  deficient.  The  effect  of  this,  I 
should  think,  would  be  that  this  notice  would  operate  as  a 
stimulus,  during  the  interval,  to  exertion ;  and  that,  by  order- 
ing them  to  have  a  list  previously  prepared,  sufficient  time 
might  still  remain,  by  the  process  of  ballot,  to  obtain  the  men, 
and  thereby  prevent  the  counties  having  the  penalties  levied 
upon  them,  for  default,  before  the  expiration  of  the  time  allowed 
by  Act  of  Parliament  for  the  termination  of  the  levy.  You 
can  best  judge  what  period  may  be  most  advisable  to  fix,  in 
this  point  of  view.  I  should  conceive  it  ought  not  to  be  post- 
poned beyond  the  1st  of  January. 

Yours,  my  dear  Wellesley,  &c., 

Oastlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  Earl  of  Chatham. 

Downing  Street,  November  25,  1808. 

My  dear  Lord — I  send  you  two  letters  received  yesterday 
from  Corunna,  stating  the  defeat  of  Blake'^s  army,  but  in  so 
loose  a  manner,  as  to  leave  us  altogether  without  the  means  of 
extracting  either  the  extent  or  nature  of  the  disaster  ;  and  it  is 
singular  that  we  have  no  later  intelligence  from  General  Leith 
than  a  letter  of  the  11th. 

As  Sir  D.  Baird  so  pressingly  demands  instructions,  it  ap- 
peared to  the  Cabinet  advisable  to  direct  him,  in  the  only  case 
in  which  it  is  possible  to  give  him  from  hence  any  instructions, 


16  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808 

to  go  with  his  army  to  Portugal,  and  not,  in  the  event  of  his 
being  obliged  to  re-embark,  to  bring  it  immediately  home. 

As  the  next  intelligence  may  possibly  be  of  an  important 
nature,  we  hope  it  may  not  be  inconvenient  to  you  to  afford  us 
your  assistance  on  Tuesday  next. 

I  am,  my  dear  lord,  yours  very  truly, 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  Earl  of  Chatham. 

Stanmore,  November  26,  1808. 

My  dear  Lord — The  only  communications  received  by  me 
from  the  army,  with  respect  to  supplies,  have  been  transmitted 
through  Colonel  Neville  for  your  information.  Sir  John 
Moore  appears  to  have  directed  a  supply  of  ammunition  for  the 
troops  advancing  from  Portugal  to  be  moved  forward  with 
Sir  D.  Baird''s  corps  from  Corunna,  which  demand  appears  to 
have  induced  Sir  D.  Baird  to  desire  an  increased  supply  to  be 
sent  out ;  but  I  have  not  received  any  direct  requisition  from 
Sir  John  Moore ;  but,  in  one  of  his  letters,  he  stated  Corunna 
as  the  port  through  which  he  should  look  hereafter  to  receive 
his  supplies. 

I  have  given  directions  that  the  Transport  Board  should 
provide,  as  early  as  possible,  the  necessary  tonnage  for  the  600 
artillery  horses ;  in  this  number  I  suppose  the  300  before  or- 
dered, and  for  which  tonnage  has  already  been  set  apart,  are 
included.  The  transports  for  the  300  horses  were  reported 
to  me  yesterday  as  ready.  My  intention  was  to  embark  a 
regiment  of  cavalry  in  the  next  ships  that  should  come  for- 
ward ;  if  you  deem  the  artillery  service — that  is,  the  sending  the 
additional  800  horses — the  more  pressing  of  the  two,  it  shall 
have  the  precedence  ;  if  not,  I  should  propose  to  provide  for  it 
immediately  after  the  first  regiment  of  cavalry  is  embarked. 

We  have,  at  present,  between  Portsmouth  and  Falmouth, 
tonnage  for  about  4,000  horses,  only  requiring  to  be  overhauled 
after  their  voyage,  and  to  bo  reforaged.     The  tonnage  for  any 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  17 

supplies  of  ammunition  or  stores,  which,  in  the  absence  of 
requisitions,  it  may  appear  to  you  prudent  to  forward  to  Co- 
runna,  can  be  instantly  supplied  upon  your  orders  being  sig- 
nified to  the  Transport  Board  through  Colonel  Neville. 
I  am,  my  dear  lord,  very  truly  yours, 

Castlereagh. 

Report  from  Brigadier-General  the  Honourable  Charles  Stewart 
to  Lieutenant-General  the  Hon.  J.  Hope, 

Naval  del  Re,  December  13,  1808. 

Sir — You  are  apprized,  by  my  letter  of  yesterday,  that  I 
deemed  it  expedient  to  proceed  to  this  place  instead  of  Carpio, 
in  order  more  effectually  to  cover,  according  to  your  orders, 
the  right  division  of  the  array.  On  my  arrival  in  the  evening, 
with  the  18th  Dragoons,  I  received  information  that  a  party 
of  French,  consisting  of  about  50  infantry  and  30  cavalry, 
had  arrived  from  Valladolid  at  Rueda,  with  the  intention  of 
carrying  from  thence  a  large  quantity  of  cotton,  to  the  amount 
of  3,200  arobas,  which  General  Junot  intended  to  send  as  his 
plunder  from  Lisbon  to  Bayonne  ;  but  which  had  been  arrested 
in  its  progress  by  General  Cuesta,  at  the  commencement  of 
hostilities  in  Spain,  and  had  been  warehoused  at  Rueda.  The 
party  above  alluded  to  had  put  seventy  cars  in  requisition,  to 
accomplish  their  purpose. 

Under  such  information,  I  deemed  it  my  duty  to  prevent  the 
execution  of  the  enemy's  design  ;  and  I  detached  Lieut.-Colonel 
Jones,  with  eighty  men,  to  Rueda,  with  orders  not  to  commit 
the  cavalry  in  the  town,  but  to  surround  it,  and  to  place  him- 
self especially  between  Rueda  and  Valladolid,  and  report  the 
result  to  me.  Not  hearing  from  him  so  soon  as  I  expected,  I 
proceeded  myself  with  fifty  men,  and  found  that  he  had  exe- 
cuted my  orders  with  the  same  ability  as  on  all  occasions. 
And,  as  my  aide-de-camp.  Captain  Dashwood,  had  entered  the 
town  in  disguise  as  a  Spaniard,  I  was  enabled  to  ascertain  the 
post  where  the  infantry  was  and  their  advanced  piquet. 

VOL.  VII.  C 


18  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

To  cut  off  the  latter,  I  detached  a  small  party  under  Lieut.- 
Colonel  Otway,  which  succeeded  perfectly,  while  Lieut.-Colonel 
Jones  and  a  dismounted  party,  with  their  rifles,  and  dragoons 
on  the  road  to  support  them,  entered  the  place  ;  and,  after  a 
brisk  fire  for  a  few  minutes,  succeeded  in  surprising  the  enemy's 
post.  I  have  the  pleasure  to  add  that  we  have  brought  in 
thirty  prisoners ;  their  number  killed  I  have  not  been  able 
yet  to  ascertain,  it  being  nearly  dark  during  the  skirmish.  I 
have  to  regret  the  loss  of  one  man  killed  and  two  dangerously 
wounded,  and  four  horses  killed.  Some  French  horses  and 
mules  taken  make  up  for  the  latter  loss.  The  seventy  cars 
embargoed  by  the  French  will,  I  hope,  transport  hither  to-day 
the  cotton  alluded  to,  for  the  further  disposal  of  which  and  of 
the  prisoners  I  shall  wait  your  orders.  I  have  left  Lieut.- 
Colonel  Otway  with  fifty-six  men,  to  cover  the  removal  of  the 
former. 

Although  this  has  been  merely  a  little  outpost  afiair,  I  can- 
not help  assuring  you,  for  the  information  of  the  Commander 
of  the  forces,  that  I  have  every  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  the 
zeal,  spirit,  and  intelligence,  of  those  officers  and  men  I  had  the 
honour  to  command. 

The  French  arms  and  cartridges  were  distributed  among 
the  peasants,  and  I  am  pleased  to  add  that  they  manifested 
every  disposition  to  assist  us. 

Charles  Stewart,  Brigadier-General. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  Earl  of  Chatham. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  Wednesday,  December  14,  1808. 

My  dear  Lord — The  Moniteurs  to  the  11th  are  in  town, 
—  nothing  from  the  right  of  the  French  army.  That  of 
the  6th  gives  the  11th  and  12th  Bulletins,  dated  Miranda  del 
Douro.  You  will  best  judge  what  the  extent  of  Castanos** 
defeat  was  ;  but  it  appears  to  me  that  both  his  wings  have 
got  off  in  a  better  or  worse  state,  his  right  having  fallen  back 
upon  Saragossa,  his  left  towards  the  centre  of  Spain. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  19 

We  have  nothing  from  the  westward.  The  importance  of 
having  a  corps  disposable  for  Cadiz,  as  Moore  may  possibly 
retain  his  position  on  the  frontier  of  Portugal,  and  not  have 
the  means  of  detaching  without  much  delay  to  Cadiz,  has  in- 
duced the  Cabinet  to  detain  a  sufficiency  of  troop  tonnage,  to 
send  the  5,000  men  under  orders,  if  they  shall  see  occasion 
upon  the  next  accounts ;  and  I  have  settled  with  the  Duke  to 
assemble  the  regiments  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Eamsgate  pier, 
whence  they  can  get  down  Channel  more  easily  than  from  the 
River.  The  service  of  this  corps  may  be  the  more  pressingly 
important  at  Cadiz,  as  Cradock  will  probably,  under  the  requi- 
sition from  Madrid,  have  sent  every  thing  to  reinforce  Moore. 

It  is  hardly  fair,  after  your  late  visit  to  town,  to  express  a 
wish  that  you  could  be  present  next  Tuesday ;  but,  as  the 
consideration  of  this  question  may  arise  out  of  our  first  de- 
spatches, and  it  is  also  thought  desirable  by  Cabinet  that  we 
should  make  up  our  minds  whether  some  measure  should  not 
be  proposed  immediately  on  the  meeting  of  Parliament,  for 
strengthening  an  array,  incessantly  exposed,  as  it  must  be,  if 
it  remains  either  in  Spain  or  Portugal,  to  a  considerable  reduc- 
tion of  its  numbers.  I  should  be  very  glad  if  you  could  make 
it  convenient  to  attend.  I  am,  &ic., 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Colonel  Sir  George  Smith. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  December  18,  1808. 

Sir — Under  the  reverses  the  Spaniards  have  sustained,  and 
the  position  the  enemy  now  occupies  at  Madrid,  I  consider  it 
of  much  importance  to  have  a  confidential  officer  stationed  at 
Cadiz,  who  knows  the  leading  individuals,  and  can  keep  our 
naval  and  military  officers  in  that  quarter  informed  of  the 
events  that  are  passing  in  that  important  place. 

With  this  view,  I  am  desirous,  if  your  health  will  admit  of 
it,  that  you  should  immediately  proceed  in  the  vessel  which 
carries  this  letter  to  Cadiz.  Your  own  sagacity  and  expe- 
rience render  it  unnecessary  for  me  to  furnish  you  with  de- 

c  2 


20  LETTERS  AND  DESrATCHES  OE  [1808. 

tailed  Instructions  for  the  direction  of  your  conduct.  You 
will  watch  the  events  that  are  passing,  and  keep  Sir  John 
Cradock  and  Sir  John  Moore  informed  of  them.  Mr.  Duff 
will  assist  you,  on  explaining  to  him  the  object  of  your  mission, 
as  far  as  his  means  will  enable  him. 

You  will  feel  the  delicacy  of  avoiding  any  step  which  might 
excite  jealousy  and  alarm  ;  but,  if  such  a  crisis  should  be  ap- 
proaching as  may  make  the  Spaniards  desirous  of  receiving 
either  naval  or  military  aid  from  us  for  the  security  of  Cadiz, 
you  will  lose  no  time  in  forwarding  any  requisition  they  may 
be  disposed  to  make  to  the  Tagus.  Proper  dire(?tions  will  be 
given  to  the  naval  and  military  Commanders  to  furnish  every 
possible  aid  in  their  power,  should  it  become  necessary. 

Castlereagh. 

Plan  for  the  Defence  of  Spain  and  Portugal. 

BY  GENERAL  DUMOURIEZ.* 

Copie.  Le  19  Decembre,  1808. 

Quoique  exclus  de  toute  communication  des  affaires  de  votre 
patrie,  Monsieur  le  General,  par  le  silence  de  la  Junte  Supreme 
sur  mon  plan  de  guerre  des  Pyrenees  que  TAmiral  Apodaca 
et  vous  m'avez  certifie  avoir  envoy^  a  votre  Gouvemement  ^ 
la  fin  de  Septembre  ;  quoique,  par  le  funeste  resultat  des  opera- 
tions subsequentes,  j'aye  lieu  de  croire  qu^on  n'y  fait  aucune 
attention,  et  meme  qu'il  a  ete  rejette ;  je  ne  peux  pas  croire 
que  la  perte  de  votre  capitale,  que  je  n'avois  que  trop  pr^vu, 
(si  on  se  livroit  au  syst^me  des  battailles,  qui  avoit  deja  perdu 
les  trois  plus  grandes  puissances  militaires  du  Continent) 
puisse  plonger  une  nation  aussi  ^nergique  que  la  votre  dans  le 
d^sespoir  et  luy  faire  accepter  des  fers  d'autant  plus  p^sants 
que  vos  premiers  efforts  ont  excite  la  vengeance  d'un  tyran 
impitoyable,  que  vous  n"*  avez  m^nag^  ni  dans  vos  Merits  ni  par 
vos  armes. 

'  There  is  nothing  to  show  to  which  of  the  Spanish  Generals  this  letter 
was  addressed. — Editor. 


1808]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  21 

Les  defaltes  glorieuses  du  General  Blake  ont  et^  inutiles, 
parceque  il  ne  devoit  se  porter  en  Biscaye  qu'  apres  la  jonction 
du  Marquis  de  la  Romana.  La  battaille  presque  decisive  de 
Tudela  n'auroit  pas  eu  lieu,  si  le  General  Castanos  avoit  jette 
plusieurs  ponts  sur  TEbre,  et  avoit  rais  cette  riviere  entre 
Tennemi  et  luy,  ou  si,  bien  informe  des  mouvements  de  Fennemi, 
il  Tavoit  devance  a  Soria,  pour  se  retirer  devant  luy  dans  la 
chaine  des  montagnes  de  Guadarrama. 

L^armee  d*'Estramadure,  composee  de  nouvelles  levees  au 
lieu  de  s'avancer  imprudemment  sur  Burgos,  ou  elle  s''est  fait 
aneantir,  auroit  du  se  joindre  a  Tarmee  Angloise  du  General 
Moore,  et  alors,  postee  le  long  du  flanc  droit  de  Tennemi,  elle 
auroit  empeche  Buonaparte  de  s^avancer  sur  Madrid  meme 
apres  sa  victoire  de  Tudela. 

On  ne  pouvoit  pas,  avec  espoir  de  succes,  confier  a  cette 
armee  dispersee,  battue,  efFrayee,  desorganisee,  la  defense  du 
defile  de  Somosierra,  oii  il  n'a  pu  faire  qu^une  foible  resistance. 
Le  projet  de  defendre  Aladrid,  a  Texemple  de  Buenos  Ayres, 
etoit  impratiquable.  Les  Francois  n'auroient  pas  fait  les  memes 
fautes  que  les  Anglois,  et  auroient  ecrase  avec  leur  nombreuse 
artillerie  toutes  ses  foibles  defenses  avant  d'y  entrer.  Ce  foible 
effort  du  desespoir  auroit  termine  la  guerre  par  un  massacre 
effroyable,  sans  une  grande  perte  de  la  part  de  Fennemi.  Une 
fois  les  gorges  de  la  Guadarrama  forcees,  Madrid  n^etoit  pas 
tenable,  et  il  valoit  mieux  Tabandonner,  einmener  tons  ses 
habitans,  et  bruler  tons  les  magasins  que  de  le  fortifier. 

En  Catalogue  on  n'a  point  adopte  mou  plan  de  guerre  des 
Pyrenees ;  on  a  neglige  de  detruire  et  rendre  impratiquable  la 
grande  route  de  Perpignan  entre  Tunquiera  et  Bellegarde ;  on 
s''est  occupe  trop  tard  de  cette  province  j  on  y  a  envoye  trop 
tard  le  General  Reding.  Les  Fran9ois  en  ont  profite ;  lis  ont 
renforce  la  garnison  de  Figueras ;  ils  ont  assiege  et  pris  Tim- 
portante  place  de  Rosas  ;  ils  sent  vraisemblablement  a  present 
maitres  de  Girone ;  Tinutile  blocus  de  Barcelone  est  certaine- 
ment  leve.     La  Catalogue  est  certainement  entre  les  mains 


22  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

des  Francois  ;  ainsi  Saragose  est  enti^renient  ceme  et  tombera 
infalliblement ;  et  vos  troupes  de  Catalogne  et  d^Aragon 
seront  tr^s  heureuses  si  elles  peuvent  se  retirer  sur  Tortosa  et 
M^qmnen9a,  pour  defendre  le  bas  Ebre  et  couvrir  de  ce  cot^  le 
royaume  de  Valence  qu'il  faudra  trouver  un  autre  moyen  de 
couvrir  du  cote  de  Madrid.  Voila  le  tableau  exact  de  votre 
position  :  elle  n'est  pas  enti^rement  desesperee,  si  vous  adoptez 
un  plan  sage  et  de  bons  conseils. 

Vous  vous  trouvez  maintenant  au  premier  mouvement^  ou 
premiere  position^  indique  dans  mon  premier  meraoire  intitule 
Guerre  entironnante  &c.  Vous  avez  Tavantage  d'avoir  1© 
Portugal  delivre  et  occupe  par  40  mille  hommes  de  braves 
Anglois,  sans  compter  les  Portugais,  qui  peuvent  fournir  encore 
40  mille  hommes,  si  les  Anglois  s'*y  prennent  bien.  Vous  avez 
vos  Colonies  intactes  et  assurees,  vos  ports  en  liberte,  votre 
marine  a  vous,  pour  vous  assurer  les  provisions,  munitions  de 
guerre  et  de  bouche,  et  votre  ennemi  n'a  pas  le  meme  avantage. 
Plus  il  s'avancera,  plus  il  ressentira  la  disette  et  la  difficulte 
de  transports.  Vous  avez  perdu  la  Catalogue,  au  moins  je  le 
crois.  Vous  perdrez  TAragon,  au  moins  je  le  presume.  II 
vous  reste  a  TEst  le  royaume  de  Valence  a  defendre;  au  Sud 
la  Sierra  Morena  est  impratiquable  si  vous  employ ez  a  sa 
defensive  un  plan  methodique  et  sage,  lie  avec  celui  du  Portugal 
par  Farmee  Angloise.  Vouz  tenez  encore  la  Galice  et  les 
Asturies,  pays  difficiles  ou  vous  pouvez  empecher  les  Francois 
de  p^netrer.  Si  vous  etes  soutenus  par  les  Anglois,  dont  il  est 
rinteret  autant  que  le  votre,  pour  ne  pas  etre  toum^s  par  les 
deux  provinces  du  nord,  Entre-Minho  et  Tras-os-montes^  que  la 
Galice  couvre.  Voila  votre  premier  mouvement,  ou  votre  pre- 
miere position,  a  la  quelle  vos  d^sastres  vous  ont  ramen^. 

Si  j'avois  un  conseil  a  donner  a  M.  d'^Apodaca,  je  luy  sug- 
gererois,  sans  attendre  les  ordres  de  son  Gouvernement  (car  le 
moindre  retard  augmente  vos  dangers,  vos  desordres,  et  vos 
malheurs)  de  demander  instammeut  au  Gouvernement  Anglois : 

1".  D'ordonner  au  General  David  Baird  de  joindre  avec  son 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  23 

infanterie,  son  artillerie,  et  1,000  ou  1,200  hommes  de  cavalerie, 
le  General  de  la  Romana,  pour  defendre  avec  luy  la  Galice  et 
les  Asturies,  pied  a  pied,  et  de  ne  renvoyer  au  General  Moore 
que  sa  cavalerie ; 

2°.  De  charger  le  General  Moore  de  defendre  le  Portugal  et 
lier  cette  defense  avec  celle  de  la  Galice  et  de  FAndalousie,  sur 
un  plan  general,  en  attendant  que  la  dispersion,  la  disette,  et  les 
maladies  ayent  afFoibli  Farmee  Fran9oise,  et  le  mettent  a  meme 
de  prendre  TofFensive  centre  eux  ; 

8°.  De  faire  partir  pour  Lisbonne  les  troupes  deja  embar- 
quees  ou  destinees  pour  FEspagne,  dont,  sur  les  mauvaises 
nouvelles  on  a  suspendu  le  depart,  afin  que  ces  troupes  remplis- 
sent  le  deficit  du  corps  du  General  Baird,  qui  resteroit  en 
Galice ; 

4°.  De  faire  arriver  dans  Fembouchure  de  FEbre  le  renfort 
qui  avoit  ete  destine  de  la  Sicile,  a  moins  qu^il  ne  soit  destine  a 
faire  une  diversion  prompte  sur  le  continent  de  FItalie. 

Si  M.  d'^Apodaca  reussit  dans  cette  negociation,  il  aura 
rendu  un  service  essentiel,  et  j'aurois  toute  la  confiance  sur  le 
succes  ult^rieur  de  cette  guerre.  Je  suis  si  loin  d'en  desesperer 
que  si  j'^etois  en  Espagne,  je  m'  appliquerois  hardiment  ce  vers 
de  Virijile — 

"  Nil  desperandum  Teucro  duce,  et  hospite  Teucro." 
J"'ai  Fhonneur  d'*etre,  «&c., 

Genl.  Dumouriez. 


The  Bight  Hon.  R.  Ryder  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Judge  Advocate- General's  Office,  December  31,  1808. 
My  Lord — I  had  the  honour  of  receiving  a  letter  from  his 
Royal  Highness  the  Commander-in  Chief,  of  yesterday's  date, 
acquainting  me  that  his  Royal  Highness  has  laid  before  his 
Majesty  the  proceedings  of  the  Board  of  Inquiry,  of  which 
General  Sir  David  Dundas  was  President,  together  with  their 
Report  and  Opinions,  as  transmitted  to  his  Royal  Highness  by 


24  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

me,  and  that  his  Royal  Highness  had  sent  a  copy  of  the  said 
Report  and  Opinions  to  each  of  the  parties  concerned,  viz., 
Lieut.-Greneral  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple,  Sir  Harry  Burrard,  and 
Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

His  Royal  Highness  has  conveyed  to  me  his  Majesty''s  com- 
mands that  the  Board  may  be  dissolved  ;  and  his  Royal  High- 
ness has  desired  me  to  take  the  earliest  opportunity  of  sub- 
mitting the  proceedings,  together  with  the  Report  and  Opinions, 
to  his  Majesty's  Government.  In  pursuance  of  his  Royal 
Highnesses  directions,  I  have  the  honour  to  transmit  the  same 
to  your  lordship,  for  the  purpose  of  being  laid  before  his  Ma- 
jesty's Ministers. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &;c., 

R.  Ryder. 

Mr.  Cooke  to  Colonel  Nemlle. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  January  4,  1809. 

Dear  Sir — As  5000  men  are  embarking  for  Corunna,  and 
do  not  carry  out  with  them  artillery,  it  may  still  be  necessary 
that  they  should  be  furnished  with  spare  ammunition  and  the 
proper  quantity  of  tumbrils.  Lord  Castlereagh  has  directed 
me  to  desire  that  you  will  mention  this  to  Lord  Chatham,  and 
his  lordship,  if  he  thinks  right,  could  furnish  Major-General 
Sherbrooke,  who  has  charge  of  the  corps,  with  a  power  to  apply 
to  the  Ordnance  Store-keeper  at  Portsmouth  for  the  articles  he 
may  find  necessary.  Believe  me,  &c., 

E.  Cooke. 


Lcyrd  Castlereagh  to  the  Hon.  R.  Ryder. 

Draft.  St.  James's  Square,  Friday  evening. 

Dear  Ryder — In  addition  to  my  official  letter,  I  send,  for 
your  private  information.  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple's  letter  and  my 
answer.  When  his  paper  is  read,  you  will  be  enabled  to  inform 
me  whether,  from  the  nature  of  the  reference,  it  is  necessary 
for  me  to  make  any  explanation  to  the  Board  why  the  letter  of 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGIT.  25 

the  20tli  is  not  before  them.  It  is  a  letter  altogether  relating 
to  our  future  operations  in  Spain,  and  unfit  to  be  produced ; 
and,  as  it  appears  to  me,  wholly  unnecessary  to  Sir  Hew, 
1st,  for  the  reasons  I  have  stated,  and,  2ndly,  because  he  did 
not  receive  it  till  after  the  Convention  was  ratified. 

I  shall  be  very  grateful  if  you  will  enable  Cooke  to  send  me 
to  Stanmore  a  hint  of  anything  material  that  may  occur. 

I  am,  &ic.,  Castlereagh. 


Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Dublin  Castle,  January  9,  1809. 
My  dear  Lord — As  the  Board  of  Inquiry  have  made  their 
Report,  it  is  now  necessary  for  me  to  determine  what  I  am  to 
do.  I  am  very  desirous  to  avoid  to  take  any  step  which  can 
embarrass  the  King's  Government,  and  particularly  in  refe- 
rence to  this  country ;  but  it  is  necessary  that  I  should  join 
the  army,  if  it  should  remain  on  service  in  Spain,  within  a 
limited  time. 

I  shall  say  nothing  about  the  Report  of  the  Board  of  Inquiry ; 
but  I  shall  be  obliged  to  you  if  you  will  take  the  opinion  of 
the  King''s  Ministers,  and  let  me  know  what  line  they  propose 
to  take  respecting  it  in  Parliament.  Do  they  mean  to  con- 
sider it  as  conclusive,  and,  on  that  ground,  to  justify  it  and 
all  the  measures  of  which  the  Report  approves ;  or  do  they 
mean  to  leave  the  whole  question  to  be  scrambled  for  as  it  may 
suit  those  who  choose  to  mix  in  the  scramble  ? 

Ever,  my  dear  lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 

Downing  Street,  January  11,  1809. 
Your  Majesty''s  confidential  servants  being  of  opinion  that 
no  time  should  be  lost  in  bringing  the  Spanish  Government  to 
a  declaration  whether  they  will  accept  the  co-operation  of  your 


26  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Majesty's  army  in  the  South  of  Spain,  admitting  a  British 
force  into  Cadiz,  humbly  recommend  to  your  Majesty  that  the 
force  under  Major-General  Sherbrooke  should  proceed  direct 
to  Cadiz  for  this  purpose,  proceeding  on  to  Gibraltar,  in  case 
Mr.  Frere  should  notify  to  the  Major-General  that  their  ser- 
vices have  been  declined  by  the  Central  Government. 


Sir  John  Moore  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Corunna,  January  13,  1809. 

My  Lord — Situated  as  this  army  is  at  present,  it  is  im- 
possible for  me  to  detail  to  your  lordship  the  events  which 
have  taken  place  since  I  had  the  honour  to  address  you  from 
Astorga,  on  the  31st  of  December.  I  have,  therefore,  deter- 
mined to  send  to  England  Brigadier-General  Charles  Stewart, 
as  the  officer  best  qualified  to  give  you  every  information  you 
can  want,  both  with  respect  to  our  actual  situation,  and  the 
events  which  have  led  to  it. 

Your  lordship  knows  that,  had  I  followed  my  own  opinion, 
as  a  military  man,  I  should  have  retired  with  the  army  from 
Salamanca — the  Spanish  armies  were  then  beaten.  I  was 
sensible,  however,  that,  had  the  British  been  withdrawn,  the 
loss  of  the  cause  would  have  been  imputed  to  their  retreat. 
It  was  for  this  reason  that  I  made  the  march  to  Sahaofun  :  as 
a  diversion,  it  succeeded.  I  brought  the  whole  disposable  force 
of  the  French  against  this  army,  and  it  has  been  allowed  to 
follow  it  without  a  single  movement  being  made  to  favour  my 
retreat. 

The  people  of  the  Gallicias,  though  armed,  made  no  attempt 
to  stop  the  passage  of  the  French  through  their  mountains. 
They  abandoned  their  dwellings  at  our  approach ;  and  drove 
away  their  carts,  oxen,  and  everything  that  could  be  of  the 
smallest  aid  to  the  army.  The  consequence  has  been  that  our 
sick  have  been  left  behind ;  and,  when  our  horses  or  mules 
failed,  which,  on  such  marches,  and  through  such  a  country, 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEKEAGH.  27 

was  the  case  to  a  great  extent,  baggage,  ammunition,  stores, 
and  even  money,  were  necessarily  destroyed  or  abandoned. 

In  front  of  Villa  Franca,  the  French  came  up  with  the 
reserve,  with  which  I  was  covering  the  retreat  of  the  army. 
They  attacked  it  at  Oalcabiles.  I  retired,  covered  by  the  95th 
Regiment,  and  marched  that  night  to  Hererias,  and  from  thence 
to  Nogales  and  Lugo,  where  I  had  ordered  the  different  divi- 
sions which  proceeded  to  halt  and  collect.  At  Lugo,  the 
French  again  came  up  with  us.  They  attacked  our  advanced 
posts  on  the  6th  and  7th,  and  were  repulsed  in  both  attempts, 
with  little  loss  on  our  side. 

I  heard  from  the  prisoners  taken  that  three  divisions  of  the 
French  army  were  come  up,  commanded  by  Marshal  Soult. 
I  therefore  expected  to  be  attacked  on  the  morning  of  the  8th. 
It  was  my  wish  to  come  to  that  issue.  I  had  perfect  confidence 
in  th'e  valour  of  the  troops ;  and  it  was  only  by  crippling  the 
enemy  that  we  could  hope  either  to  retreat  or  to  embark  un- 
molested. I  made  every  preparation  to  receive  the  attack,  and 
drew  out  the  army  in  the  morning,  to  offer  battle.  This  was 
not  Marshal  Soult''s  object.  He  either  did  not  think  himself 
sufficiently  strong,  or  he  wished  to  play  a  sure  game,  by 
attacking  us  on  our  march,  or  during  our  embarkation.  The 
country  was  intersected,  and  his  position  too  strong  for  me  to 
attack  with  an  inferior  force.  The  want  of  provisions  would 
not  permit  me  to  wait  longer.  I  marched  that  night ;  and,  in 
two  forced  marches,  bivouacking  for  six  or  eight  hours  in  the 
rain,  I  reached  Betanzos  on  the  10th  instant. 

At  Lugo,  I  was  sensible  of  the  impossibility  of  reaching 
Viofo,  which  was  at  too  o^reat  a  distance,  and  offered  no  advan- 
tages  to  embark  in  the  face  of  an  enemy.  My  intention  then 
was  to  have  embarked  at  the  peninsula  of  Betanzos,  where  I 
hoped  to  find  a  position  to  cover  the  embarkation  of  the  army, 
in  Ares  or  Redes  Bays ;  but,  having  sent  an  officer  to  recon- 
noitre it,  by  his  report  I  was  determined  to  prefer  this  place. 

I  gave  notice  to  the  Admiral  of  my  intention,  and  begged 


28  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

that  the  transports  might  be  brought  to  Corunna.  Had  I 
found  them  here  on  my  arrival  on  the  11th,  the  embarkation 
would  easily  have  been  effected ;  for  I  had  gained  several 
marches  on  the  French.  They  have  now  come  up  with  us ; 
the  transports  are  not  arrived ;  my  position  in  front  of  this 
place  is  a  very  bad  one  ;  and  this  place,  if  I  am  forced  to  retire 
into  it,  is  commanded  within  musket-shot;  and  the  harbour 
will  be  so  commanded  by  cannon  on  the  coast,  that  no  ship 
will  be  able  to  lie  in  it.  In  short,  my  lord,  General  Stewart 
will  inform  you  how  critical  our  situation  is. 

I  find  I  have  been  led  into  greater  length  and  more  detail 
than  I  thought  I  should  have  had  time  for.  I  have  written 
under  interruptions,  and  with  my  mind  much  occupied  with 
other  matter.  My  letter,  written  so  carelessly,  can  only  be 
considered  as  private ;  when  I  have  more  leisure,  I  shall  write 
more  correctly.  In  the  mean  time,  I  rely  on  General  Stewart 
for  giving  your  lordship  the  information  and  detail  which  I 
have  omitted.  I  should  regret  his  absence,  for  his  services 
have  been  very  distinguished ;  but  the  state  of  his  eyes  renders 
it  impossible  for  him  to  serve ;  and  this  country  is  not  one  in 
which  cavalry  can  be  of  much  use. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lieut. -General  Sir  John  Moore. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  January  14,  1809. 

Sir — You  will  receive  enclosed  the  orders  which  have  been 
transmitted  to  Major-General  Sherbrooke,  now  ready  to  sail 
from  Portsmouth  ;  also  instructions  from  his  Majesty's  Secre- 
tary of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs  to  Mr.  Frere,  directing  him 
to  ascertain,  without  loss  of  time,  the  sentiments  of  the  Spanish 
Government  upon  the  proposed  concert  in  the  South  of  Spain, 
the  necessary  preliminary  to  which  must  be  that  we  should 
have  the  free  use  of  Cadiz,  with  a  participation  in  the  garrison 
thereof,  as  the  only  fortified  position,  under  the  protection  of 
which  our  army  can  be  assembled  with  advantage,  and  upon 
which  it  may  retire  in  case  of  disaster. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  29 

His  Majesty  trusts  that  his  motive  for  this  demand  cannot 
be  misunderstood.  The  last  despatches  from  you  and  from 
Mr.  Frere  render  it,  in  the  judgment  of  his  Majesty^s  Govern- 
ment, necessary  that  no  time  should  be  lost  in  obtaining  a  de- 
cision on  a  point  of  such  importance ;  and,  on  these  grounds. 
General  Sherbrooke's  corps  has  been  ordered  to  proceed  direct 
to  Cadiz. 

Mr.  Frere  and  Major-General  Sherbrooke  will  transmit  to 
you  the  earliest  intelligence  of  the  result,  for  the  direction  of 
your  conduct  under  the  instructions  you  have  received. 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  John  Moore. 

Downing  Street,  January  14,  1809. 

Sir — A  French  Bulletin,  No.  16,  was  sent  into  this  country 
from  Boulogne,  purporting  to  be  an  official  publication  made 
by  the  Government  of  France.  In  this  paper  it  is  stated, 
"  The  English  fly  on  every  side  :  the  division  of  Lasalle  has, 
however,  fallen  in  with  sixteen  of  them,  who  have  been  put  to 
the  sword.    They  were  stragglers,  or  such  as  had  gone  astray.'** 

His  ^Majesty  cannot  overlook  this  account,  descriptive, 
according  to  the  obvious  sense  of  it,  of  the  murder  of  some 
unresisting  stragglers  of  his  army ;  although  his  Majesty  is 
disposed  to  disbelieve  a  transaction,  however  officially  recorded, 
which  is  so  utterly  repugnant  to  the  usual  laws  of  war,  and  to 
every  principle  of  humanity.  His  Majesty,  therefore,  desires 
that  you  will  take  the  earliest  means  of  ascertaining  the  truth 
of  the  fact  so  recorded,  and  the  circumstances  under  which  it 
was  perpetrated — if  perpetrated  at  all. 

If  it  shall,  upon  investigation,  appear  to  be  founded,  I  am 
to  desire  that  you  will  cause  a  protest  to  be  made  by  you  to 
the  nearest  head-quarters  of  the  French  army,  and  that  you 
will  take  such  measures  as  shall  appear  to  you  most  expedient 
for  the  protection  of  the  troops  under  your  orders,  against 
conduct  so  barbarous  and  disgraceful.  Castlereagh. 


30  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  H.R.H.  the  Commander-in-Chief. 

Draft.  Downing  Street,  January  18,  1809. 

Sir  —  The  proceedings  of  the  Board  of  General  Oflficers 
appointed  by  his  Majesty  to  inquire  into  and  report  upon  the 
Armistice  and  Convention  lately  concluded  in  Portugal,  which 
were  communicated  to  me  by  the  Judge- Advocate  General,  at 
the  desire  of  your  Eoyal  Highness,  for  the  information  of  his 
Majesty's  Ministers,  having  been  fully  considered,  I  have 
received  the  King*'s  commands  to  transmit  to  your  Royal 
Highness  the  decision  which  his  Majesty  has  taken  upon  the 
review  of  these  proceedings,  a  copy  of  which  your  Royal  High- 
ness will  receive  enclosed  ;  and  I  am  to  desire  that  your  Royal 
Highness  will  be  pleased  to  cause  the  necessary  communication 
to  be  made  to  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  accordingly. 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 
Draft.  St.  James's  Square,  January  21,  1809. 

Lord  Castlereagh,  having  brought  the  despatch  received 
from  Lieutenant-General  Sir  John  Moore,  under  the  considera- 
tion of  your  Majesty ""s  confidential  servants,  they  beg  leave 
humbly  to  recommend  to  your  Majesty  that  the  orders  sent  to 
Sir  John  Moore  with  respect  to  the  disposal  of  his  army,  in 
the  event  of  his  re-embarkation  from  Gallicia,  should  be  ren- 
dered so  far  discretionary,  as  to  leave  it  to  that  officer  to  decide, 
according  to  the  state  and  condition  of  his  troops,  whether  they 
can,  with  advantage  to  your  Majesty ""s  service,  be  immediately 
employed  in  the  execution  of  those  orders,  or  must  return 
home  to  be  refitted  and  prepared  for  service. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 

Without  date.     Endorsed,  January,  1809. 
Lord  Castlereagh  humbly  submits  to  your  Majesty  the  sub- 
stance of  intelligence  received  from  Lord  Paget,  who  reached 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  Bl 

town  this  evening,  at  nine  o''clock.  General  Hope's  despatch 
was  forwarded  by  a  gun-brig  not  yet  arrived.  Lord  Castle- 
reagh,  in  laying  before  your  Majesty  this  unofficial  Report  of 
the  heavy  loss  your  Majesty's  service  has  sustained,  in  the  fall 
of  so  brave  and  distinguished  an  officer  as  Sir  John  Moore, 
has  to  assure  your  Majesty,  from  Lord  Paget's  authority,  that 
the  conduct  of  your  Majesty's  troops  in  action  was  most  ex- 
emplary, and  such  as  to  uphold,  in  the  highest  degree,  the 
reputation  of  your  Majesty's  arms. 


Lard  Castlereagh  to  Lieut. -General  Sir  David  Baird, 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  January  24,  1809. 

Sir — I  have  received  and  laid  before  the  King  your  despatch 
of  the  18th,  stating  the  complete  repulse  and  defeat  of  the 
enemy  on  the  16th,  at  every  point  of  attack  on  his  Majesty's 
army  in  the  position  which  had  been  selected  by  Lieutenant- 
General  Sir  John  Moore,  near  Corunna,  and  enclosing  a  detailed 
Report  from  Lieutenant-General  Hope  of  the  action,  and  of  the 
subsequent  embarkation  of  the  army. 

I  am  commanded  by  his  Majesty  to  convey  to  you  the  satis- 
faction his  Majesty  feels  in  this  additional  instance  of  the 
superior  discipline,  firmness,  and  valour,  which  distinguish  his 
army,  wherever  brought  into  engagement  with  the  enemy,  and 
which  reflects  high  honour  on  the  officers  who  command  the 
troops  ;  and  I  am  particularly  commanded  to  desire  that  you 
will  convey  to  Lieutenant-General  Hope  and  the  General 
Officers  of  the  army  that  his  Majesty  entertains  a  just  sense  of 
their  intrepid  and  meritorious  exertions  in  supporting  the  glory 
of  the  British  arms  in  the  battle  of  Corunna ;  and  you  will 
also  convey  to  the  rest  of  the  officers,  non-conmiissioned  officers, 
and  soldiers  his  Majesty's  acknowledgments  of  their  brave  and 
spirited  conduct  on  that  occasion. 

His  Majesty  feels  the  strongest  regret  for  the  loss  of  so 
distinguished  and  meritorious  an  officer  as  Lieutenant-General 


32  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Sir  John  Moore,  which  he  considers  as  a  national  loss ;  and 
whilst  his  Majesty  sensibly  regrets  the  circumstance  which 
compelled  you  to  quit  the  field  early  in  the  action,  when  you 
were  displaying  your  accustomed  valour  in  leading  the  troops 
into  action,  it  affords  his  Majesty  satisfaction  to  have  observed 
that  your  despatch  is  signed  with  your  own  hand,  which  his 
Majesty  considers  as  a  circumstance  encouraging  the  hope  of 
recovery. 

I  am  further  commanded  to  desire  that  you  will  signify  to 
Lieutenant-General  Hope  that  his  Majesty  is  not  only  fully 
impressed  with  a  sense  of  his  able  and  judicious  conduct,  when 
he  succeeded  to  take  the  command  in  action,  but  that  he  con- 
siders the  arrangements  made  by  him  for  the  immediate  em- 
barkation of  the  troops  as  highly  meritorious. 

The  conspicuous  skill  and  celerity  with  which  this  arduous 
service  was  carried  into  execution  by  the  efforts  of  his  Majesty's 
navy,  under  the  command  of  Rear-Admiral  de  Courcy,  is  a 
pleasing  proof  that  the  same  spirit  equally  actuates  both  de- 
partments of  service  in  the  cause  of  their  Sovereign  and  their 
country.  Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 
Draft.  St.  James's  Square,  [January  24,  1809]. 

Tuesday  morning,  2  a.m. 

Lord  Castlereagh  has  the  satisfaction  of  humbly  submitting 
to  your  Majesty  the  accompanying  despatches,  communicating 
the  meritorious  services  and  the  safe  re-embarkation  of  your 
Majesty''s  army  from  Corunna.  The  Honourable  Captain 
Gordon  left  the  whole  fleet  at  sea  on  the  18th,  all  well,  with  a 
fair  wind,  steering  for  the  Channel. 

Your  Majesty  will  observe  that  Sir  David  Baird'^s  despatch  is 
signed  with  his  own  hand,  and  the  report  of  the  prospect  of  his 
recovery  is  favourable.  Sir  John  Moore  lived  to  be  informed 
of  the  fate  of  the  day,  and  seemed  only  apprehensive,  from  the 
degree  of  strength  he  retained,  that,  being  assured  of  this  fact, 
the  close  of  his  life  might  be  unnecessarily  protracted. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  33 

Lord  Oastlereagh  humbly  hopes  your  Majesty  will  approve 
of  proposing  to  the  House  of  Commons  to  address  your  Majesty 
to  direct  a  monument  to  be  erected  to  the  memory  of  this 
distinofuished  and  meritorious  officer. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 

Downing  Street,  January  25,  1809. 

Lord  Castlereagh,  in  submitting  to  your  Majesty  Lieu  tenant- 
General  Hope'*s  letter,  and  a  report  from  Captain  Bowen,  agent 
for  transports,  on  the  embarkation  of  the  troops  at  Corunna, 
begs  permission  humbly  to  observe  that  any  inconvenience 
that  arose  from  the  empty  store  and  forage  ships  not  having 
been  supplied  with  provisions  did  not  result  from  there  not 
having  been  with  the  army  a  due  proportion  of  victuallers,  but 
from  a  distribution  not  having  been  previously  made  into  those 
ships,  which  are  seldom  used  for  the  reception  of  troops. 

A  large  fleet  of  empty  transports,  with  some  additional 
victuallers,  sailed  from  Portsmouth  on  the  14th  for  Corunna. 

Lord  Castlereagh  hopes  your  Majesty  will  pardon  his  enter- 
ing into  this  detail ;  but  he  is  anxious  your  Majesty  should  be 
persuaded  that,  whilst  your  Majesty's  troops  have  been  engaged 
in  their  late  arduous  and  trying  services,  there  have  been  no 
exertions  omitted  on  the  part  of  your  Majesty's  servants,  in 
contributing  to  their  comforts,  and  in  keeping  them  largely 
provided  with  every  article  of  supply  from  home,  which  could 
be  made  available,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  service  in 
which  the  army  was  engaged. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 

Lord  Castlereagh  begs  leave  humbly  to  acquaint  your  Ma- 
jesty that  he  has  received  from  Spain  three  boxes  addressed  to 
your  Majesty,  containing  books,  of  which  the  Bishop  of  Leon 
solicited  your  Majesty's  acceptance  some  time  since.  The 
boxes  have  been  detained  for  a  length  of  time  at  Gihon.     Lord 

VOL.  VII.  D 


34  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Castlereagli  humbly  requests  to  receive  your  Majesty's  com- 
mands with  respect  to  their  disposal. 
St.  James's  Square,  February  8,  1809. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Major-General  Beresford. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  February  15,  1809. 

Sir — The  Portuguese  Government  having  solicited  that  a 
British  General  Officer  should  be  appointed  to  command  and 
organize  their  army,  T  am  to  acquaint  you  that  his  Majesty  has 
been  gracionsly  pleased  to  select  you  for  this  important  service. 

You  will,  in  obedience  to  his  Majesty's  command,  proceed 
without  delay  to  Lisbon,  where,  on  your  arrival,  you  will  re- 
port yourself  to  the  Commander  of  the  forces  under  Sir  John 
Cradock,  who  will  be  informed  of  the  object  of  your  mission. 
When  the  Portuguese  troops  take  the  field,  you  will,  of  course, 
act  under  his  orders  ;  but,  in  conducting  the  other  details  of 
your  command,  you  will  consider  yourself  as  in  the  Portuguese 
service  ;  communicating,  however,  constantly  with  the  Com- 
mander of  the  forces,  and  using  your  best  endeavours  to  carry 
his  views  with  respect  to  the  common  exertions  and  means 
of  defence  into  effect. 

I  enclose  a  letter  from  Mr.  Secretary  Canning  to  his  Ma- 
jesty *'s  Minister  at  Lisbon,  Mr.  Villiers,  who  is  instructed  to 
present  you  to  the  Regency,  and  to  promote  those  arrange- 
ments which  you  may  consider  necessary  to  the  effectual  exe- 
cution of  your  orders.  Mr.  Villiers  will  also  be  charged  with 
the  arrangement  of  any  pecuniary  advances  which  the  service 
may  require.  A  due  proportion  of  British  officers  will  be  ap- 
pointed to  assist  you  ;  and  a  supply  of  arms,  to  the  extent  of 
10,000  stand,  has  been  for  some  time  embarked,  and  waits  only 
for  a  wind  to  sail  from  Portsmouth  to  the  Tagus. 

I  enclose  a  copy  of  an  Instruction  to  Sir  John  Cradock, 
relative  to  your  command,  and  to  the  officers  accompanying 
you  on  the  present  service,  and  I  have  no  doubt  he  will  afford 
you  all  the  assistance  in  his  power.  Castlereagh. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  35 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lieut. -General  Sir  John  Cradock, 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  February  15,  1809. 

Sir — In  compliance  with  the  wishes  of  the  Portuguese  Go- 
vernment, his  Majesty  has  been  graciously  pleased  to  permit 
Major-General  Beresford  to  take  the  chief  command  of  the 
Portuguese  army,  with  the  rank  of  Lieutenant-General  in 
that  army.  The  General  will  be  accompanied  by  a  certain 
number  of  officers,  who  will  each  have  one  step  of  rank  in  the 
British  army,  giving  up  their  present  regimental  commissions. 

It  is  intended  that  these  officers  should  serve  and  be  dis- 
tributed in  the  Portuguese  corps  as  Major-General  Beresford 
may  direct.  Should  affairs  assume  a  favourable  aspect,  it  may 
be  expedient  considerably  to  increase  the  number  of  these 
officers ;  but,  at  present,  only  a  few  are  sent  :  and  I  have  to 
request  you  will,  in  consequence,  afford  to  Major-General 
Beresford,  from  the  force  under  your  orders,  such  assistance 
in  officers  as  you  can  conveniently  give.  It  must,  however, 
be  left  to  your  discretion  to  judge  how  far  the  numbers,  from 
the  prospects  in  Portugal,  should  be  increased  or  limited. 

I  enclose,  for  your  information,  a  copy  of  the  Instructions 
which  I  have  given  to  Major-General  Beresford,  by  his  Ma- 
jesty ""s  command.  Castlereagh. 


Major-General  Leith  to  Lord  Castlereagh, 
10,  Cork  Street,  Burlington  Gardens,  February  24,  1809. 
My  dear  Lord — The  non-arrival  of  my  papers  in  London, 
and  misinformation  as  to  the  time  of  discussing  the  Spanish 
war  in  the  House  of  Commons,  have  prevented  my  writing 
some  memoranda  on  the  subject  of  the  conversation  which  I 
had  in  St,  Jameses  Square :  I,  however,  think  that  the  project 
of  landing  an  army  of  between  30  and  40,000  men  to  the 
eastward  of  Santoha,  or  at  Santander  and  Santona,  except  in 
detached  and  successive  corps,  not  exceeding  10,000  each,  and 
carrying  with  them  every  individual  article  they  should  require, 

d2 


36  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

if  not  impossible,  at  least  attended  with  such  difficulties  and 
dangers  as  scarcely  to  come  within  the  scope  of  calculation,  as 
a  military  operation  to  be  undertaken  with  a  view  to  act  in  the 
rear  of  an  enemy  equally  numerous  in  Biscay. 

Hasty  Memoranda, 

No  naval  commander  of  experience  would  trust  a  fleet  of 
Transports,  except  in  the  summer  season,  to  the  eastward  of 
Santona  ;  and  even  so  far  to  the  eastward,  if  they  should  miss 
Santander  or  Santona,  with  a  fair  wind  blowing  strong,  they 
run  the  greatest  risk  of  being  wrecked  on  the  Spanish  or  French 
coast.  Single  men-of-war  find  it  difficult  enough  to  weather 
those  shores,  and  the  communication  between  the  coasts  of 
Biscay  and  Gruipuscoa,  and  even  the  eastern  parts  of  Santander 
(Province),  in  all  of  which  there  is  no  port  except  Passage, 
without  capacity  for  a  fleet,  and  no  anchorage  of  safety,  is  so 
precarious,  that  no  dependence  could  be  placed  on  disembarking 
stores  of  any  kind,  or  of  keeping  up  any  intercourse  whatever 
between  the  shore  and  shipping. 

But,  suppose  an  army  of  40,000  men  fairly  on  shore  in 
Guipuscoa,  how  are  they  to  be  fed  or  equipped  ?  Biscay  and 
Gruipuscoa,  before  they  were  exhausted  by  the  long  continuance 
of  the  enemy  in  those  provinces,  never  fed  their  own  popu- 
lation, which  was  actually  starving  in  the*  month  of  October. 
Was  it  at  the  bottom  of  the  Pyrenees  that  the  British  army 
was  to  find  equipment  for  40,000  men  ;  poor,  mountainous, 
and  drained  of  all  military  resources  as  those  countries  had 
been  in  equipping  every  French  corps  which  had  entered 
Spain,  as  it  necessarily  passed  that  way  ?  Was  it  to  act  on 
the  circumference,  while  the  enemy  was  at  liberty  to  follow  the 
radius  of  a  circle,  either  to  attack  the  British  or  Spanish  army 
as  he  might  choose,  without  a  possibility  of  their  reciprocally 
communicating  or  aiding  each  other,  that  the  former  was  to  be 
placed  between  France  and  its  army,  if  the  thing  had  not  been, 
in  the  first  instance,  almost'  chimerical  ?     In  short,  it  appears 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  37 

altogether  so  impracticable  a  measure,  that  it  is  unnecessary  to 
ask  the  solution  of  the  other  numerous  difficulties  to  be  con- 
sidered. 

With  regard  to  the  other  parts  of  the  war  of  which  I  had  a 
knowledge,  your  lordship,  of  course,  well  knows  that  every  aid, 
in  the  way  of  money  and  supplies  of  all  kinds,  was  most  libe- 
rally given  ;  and  that  the  Provinces  and  Generals  expressed, 
on  many  occasions,  their  gratitude  for  the  manner  in  which 
their  wants  were  provided  for  by  the  British  Government,  of 
which  I  have  many  written  proofs  among  my  papers.  Had 
not  a  plan  of  operations  the  most  disjointed  and  absurd  led  the 
Spanish  Generals  latterly  to  expose  unnecessarily  their  armies 
to  famine  and  defeat,  there  ought  to  have  been  a  formidable 
army  concentrated  (no  matter  how  far  they  had  retreated,  pro- 
vided they  had  judiciously  and  in  proper  time  fallen  back)  to 
nave  met  and  been  supported  by  the  British  army,  instead  of 
the  entire  dissolution  of  Blake's  army,  (which  consisted  of 
50,000  men)  before  they  were  supported,  by  his  want  of  judg- 
ment, in  his  ultimate  operations  on  the  frontiers  of  Biscay. 

Although  your  lordship  is  so  well  acquainted  with  and  can 
so  ably  handle  the  subject,  I  should  have  felt  much  gratifica- 
tion if  the  arrival  of  my  papers  had  enabled  me  to  state,  as  they 
forcibly  struck  me  on  the  spot,  many  circumstances  which  bore 
upon  the  question  of  the  war  in  the  northern  provinces  :  as  it 
is,  I  have  now  neither  time  nor  materials  to  do  more  than  to 
address  this  hasty  and  imperfect  letter,  which,  at  least,  how- 
ever, affords  me  the  means  of  assuring  your  lordship  of  the 
great  respect  and  esteem  with  which  I  always  am,  my  dear 
lord,  your  most  faithful  servant, 

James  Leith. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  John  Cradock. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  February  27,  1809. 

Sir — Immediately  upon  the  receipt  of  your  letters  of  the 
12th  and  14th  instant,  from  Lisbon,  by  which  it  appears  that 


38  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

the  services  of  the  corps  detached  by  you  under  the  orders  of 
Major-General  Mackenzie  have  been  declined  at  Cadiz,  In- 
structions were  sent  to  Major-General  Sherbrooke,  v^^hich  I 
hope  may  find  him  at  Cork,  or  meet  him  at  sea,  directing  him 
to  proceed,  with  his  armament,  at  once  to  the  Tagus  instead  of 
Cadiz. 

As  the  Spanish  Government  has  not  thought  fit  to  accede 
to  the  arrangements,  which  were  stated  to  you  in  my  letter  of 
the  14th  January,  as  the  preliminary  conditions  on  which 
alone  the  British  army  could  be  assembled  for  service  in  the 
south  of  Spain,  his  Majesty  feels  that  there  no  longer  remains 
any  military  consideration  on  which  he  should  narrow  the 
means  which  can  be  applied  to  the  defence  of  Portugal,  for  the 
purpose  of  directing  them  to  a  more  remote  point  of  the  Penin- 
sula, unsupported  by  any  secure  position,  from  which  the 
British  army  might  advance,  or  on  which  it  might  retreat,  if 
pressed  by  a  superior  enemy. 

Under  these  circumstances,  I  have  to  acquaint  you  that  his 
Majesty ""s  pleasure  is,  that  you  do  take  immediate  steps  for 
ordering  both  Major-General  Sherbrooke  (if  the  orders  above 
referred  to  shall  not  have  reached  him  before  his  arrival  at 
Cadiz)  and  Major-General  Mackenzie''s  corps  to  join  you  forth- 
with in  Portugal,  unless  they  shall  have  been  actually  re- 
ceived into  Cadiz  in  the  manner  before  directed.  The  40th 
Regiment  may  be  ordered  to  march  from  Seville  to  Gibraltar, 
to  reinforce  that  garrison. 

As  it  is  the  King''s  determination  to  use  every  exertion  to 
strengthen  the  defences  of  Portugal,  with  this  view  you  are 
authorized  to  avail  yourself  of  the  support  of  the  troops  above 
stated,  and  you  will  endeavour  to  draw  every  aid  from  the 
exertions  of  the  Portuguese,  to  whom  Mr.  Villiers  will  be 
directed  to  afford  such  pecuniary  aid  as  may  assist  them  in 
rendering  their  army  capable  of  service  in  the  field. 

Ycrii  will  take  the  necessary  measures  for  rendering  your 
army  effective  for  field  service.     Maintain  yourself  as  long  as 


809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  39 

possible  in  Portugal.  Should  you  be  compelled  to  embark, 
you  will  proceed,  with  the  troops,  as  before  directed,  to  Gi- 
braltar, there  to  wait  further  orders,  considering  yourself,  how- 
ever, as  still  authorized  to  land  your  army  at  Cadiz,  if  required 
to  do  so  by  the  Spanish  Government,  through  Mr.  Frere. 
Castlereagh. 

Memorandum  concerning  the  Defence  of  Portugal. 

BY  LORD  CASTLEREAGH. 

March  7,  1809. 

I  have  always  been  of  opinion  that  Portugal  might  be 
defended,  whatever  might  be  the  result  of  the  contest  in  Spain  ; 
and  that,  in  the  mean  time,  the  measures  adopted  for  the 
defence  of  Portugal  would  be  highly  useful  to  the  Spaniards 
in  their  contest  with  the  French.  My  notion  was  that  the 
Portuguese  military  establishments,  upon  the  footing  of  40,000 
militia  and  30,000  regular  troops,  ought  to  be  revived,  and 
that,  in  addition  to  these  troops,  his  Majesty  ought  to  employ 
an  army  in  Portugal,  amounting  to  about  20,000  British  troops, 
including  about  4,000  cavalry.  My  opinion  was  that,  even  if 
Spain  should  have  been  conquered,  the  French  would  not  have 
been  able  to  overcome  Portugal  with  a  smaller  force  than 
100,000  men ;  and  that,  so  long  as  the  contest  should  con-? 
tinue  in  Spain,  this  force,  if  it  could  be  put  in  a  state  of  ac- 
tivity, would  be  highly  useful  to  the  Spaniards,  and  might 
have  eventually  decided  the  contest. 

It  is  obvious,  however,  that  the  military  establishments  of 
Portugal  could  not  be  revived,  without  very  extensive  pecu- 
niary assistance  and  political  support  from  this  country ;  and 
the  only  mode  in  which  it  appeared  to  me  to  be  safe,  or  even 
practicable,  to  give  this  assistance  and  support,  or  to  interfere 
at  all,  in  a  military  way,  in  the  concerns  of  Portugal,  was  to 
trust  the  King's  ambassador  at  Lisbon  to  give  or  to  withhold 
such  sums  as  he  might  think  necessary  for  the  support  of 
military  establishments  only,  and  to  instruct  him  to  see  that 


40  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

the  revenues  of  Portugal,  whatever  they  might  be,  were,  in  the 
first  instance,  applied  to  the  same  objects.  By  the  operation  of 
these  powers  and  instructions,  it  is  probable  that  he  would  have 
had  a  complete  control  over  the  measures  of  the  Portuguese 
Government,  and  we  might  have  expected,  by  this  time,  to 
have  in  the  field  an  efficient  Portuguese  army. 

As  it  was  not  possible,  however,  to  adopt  those  measures  at 
that  time,  and  as  the  attention  of  the  Government  has  neces- 
sarily been  drawn  to  other  objects,  it  was  probable  that  the 
military  establishments  of  Portugal  have  made  but  little  pro- 
gress ;  and,  in  considering  of  the  extent  of  British  force  re- 
quired for  the  defence  of  that  country,  and  of  the  other 
measures  to  be  adopted,  the  small  extent  of  the  Portuguese 
force,  and  the  probability  of  an  early  attack  by  the  enemy, 
must  be  considered,  on  the  one  hand,  and,  on  the  other,  the 
continuance  of  the  contest  in  Spain,  and  the  probability  that  a 
very  large  French  force  will  not  be  disposable,  in  a  very  short 
period  of  time,  for  the  attack  on  Portugal. 

I  would  still  recommend  the  adoption  of  the  political  mea- 
sures above  suggested,  with  a  view  to  the  revival  of  the  mili- 
tary establishments  in  Portugal.  It  is  probable  that  the 
expence  of  these  measures  will  not,  in  this  year,  exceed  a 
million  sterling.  But  if  they  should  succeed,  and  the  contest 
should  continue  in  Spain  and  Portugal,  the  benefit  which  will 
accrue  from  them  will  be  more  than  adequate  to  the  expence 
incurred. 

The  British  force  employed  in  Portugal  should,  in  this  view 
of  the  question,  not  be  less  than  30,000  men,  of  which  number 
4  or  5,000  should  be  cavalry,  and  there  should  be  a  large 
body  of  artillery.  The  extent  of  force  in  cavalry  and  artillery 
above  required  is  because  the  Portuguese  military  establish- 
ments nmst  necessarily  be  deficient  in  these  two  branches,  and 
British  or  German  cavalry  and  artillery  must  be  employed 
with  the  Portuguese  infantry. 

Tl^e  whole  of  the  army  iu  Portugal,  Portuguese  as  well  as 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  41 

British,  should  be  placed  under  the  command  of  British  officers. 
The  Staff  of  the  army,  the  Commissariat  in  particular,  must 
be  British  ;  and  these  departments  must  be  extensive  in  pro- 
portion to  the  strength  of  the  whole  army  which  will  act  in 
Portugal,  to  the  number  of  detached  posts  which  it  will  be 
necessary  to  occupy,  and  with  a  view  to  the  difficulties  of  pro- 
viding and  distributing  supplies  in  that  country. 

In  reo-ard  to  the  detail  of  these  measures,  I  recommend  that 
the  British  army  in  Portugal  should  be  reinforced,  as  soon  as 
possible,  with  some  companies  of  British  riflemen  ;  with  8,000 
British  or  German  cavalry  ;  that  the  complement  of  ordnance 
with  that  army  should  be  made  »S0  pieces  of  cannon,  of  which 
two  brigades  of  9-pounders ;  that  these  pieces  of  ordnance 
should  be  completely  horsed  ;  that  20  pieces  of  brass  12- 
pounder  ordnance,  upon  travelling  carriages,  should  be  sent  to 
Portugal,  with  a  view  to  the  occupation  of  certain  positions  in 
that  country  ;  that  a  corps  of  engineers  for  an  army  of  60,000 
men  should  be  sent  there,  and  a  corps  of  artillery  for  60  pieces 
of  cannon. 

I  understand  that  the  British  army  now  in  Portugal  consists 
of  20,000  men,  including  cavalry.  It  should  be  made  up 
20,000  infantry  at  least,  as  soon  as  possible,  by  additions  of 
riflemen  and  other  good  infantry,  which,  by  this  time,  may 
have  been  refitted  after  the  campaign  in  Spain.  The  reinforce- 
ments may  follow  as  the  troops  may  recover  from  their 
fatigues. 

The  first  measures  to  be  adopted  are  to  complete  the  army 
in  Portugal  with  its  cavalry  and  artillery,  and  to  horse  the  ord- 
nance as  it  ought  to  be.  As  soon  as  this  shall  be  done,  the 
General  and  Staff"  Officers  should  go  out ;  as  it  may  be  de- 
pended upon  that,  as  soon  as  the  newspapers  shall  have  an- 
nounced the  departure  of  officers  for  Portugal,  the  French 
armies  in  Spain  will  receive  orders  to  make  their  movements 
towards  Portugal,  so  as  to  anticipate  our  measures  for  its 
defence.    We  ought,  therefore,  to  have  everything  on  the  spot, 


42  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

or  nearly  so,  before  any  alarm  is  created  in  France  respecting 
our  intentions. 

Besides  the  articles  above  enumerated,  30,000  stand  of 
arms,  clothing,  and  shoes,  for  the  Portuguese  army,  should  be 
sent  to  Lisbon  as  soon  as  possible. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Major-General  Hill. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  March  12,  1809. 

Sir — lam  to  convey  to  you  the  King'^s  commands,  that,  so  soon 
as  the  troops  placed  under  your  orders  are  embarked  and  ready 
for  sea,  you  do  proceed  without  loss  of  time  to  the  Tagus,  there 
to  place  yourself  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant -General 
Sir  John  Oradock,  Commander-in-Chief  of  his  Majesty's  forces 
in  Portugal. 

Three  hundred  artillery  horses  are  to  accompany  your 
corps.  The  necessary  proportion  of  artillerymen  and  guns 
have  already  been  sent  to  Portugal.  Castlereagh. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Major-General  Hill. 

Draft.  Downing  Street,  March  12,  1809. 

Sir — I  trust  the  occasion  may  not  have  arisen.  I  think  it 
right,  however,  to  inform  you  that  Sir  John  Cradock''s  orders, 
in  the  event  of  being  compelled  to  evacuate  Portugal,  are  to 
proceed  with  his  forces  either  to  Gibraltar  or  Cadiz.  In  the 
above  case,  you  will  lose  no  time  in  forming  a  junction  with 
that  officer,  wherever  he  may  be.  Castlereagh. 


The  Hon.  Charles  Stewart  to  Major-General  Hill. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  March  13,  1809. 

Sir — I  am  directed  by  Lord  Castlereagh  to  acquaint  you 
that  the  Lords  Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty  have  ordered 
the  Tribune  and  Africaine  frigates  to  proceed  from  Plymouth 
to  Cork,  to  convey  the  troops  under  your  command  to  the 
Tagus.     The  general  officers  will  be  accommodated  in  these 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  43 

ships.  His  lordship  trusts  that  every  exertion  will  have  been 
made  by  you  to  have  the  troops  and  artillery  horses  embarked, 
and  that  every  thing  will  be  in  a  state  of  readiness  to  proceed 
to  sea  very  soon  after  the  frigates'"  arrival. 

Charles  Stewart. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 

Your  Majesty"'s  confidential  servants  having  had  under  their 
consideration  the  amount  of  force  (in  infantry,  amounting  to 
about  18,000  men)  which  will  be  assembled  in  Portugal  upon 
the  arrival  of  Major-General  Hiirs  corps  from  Cork,  and 
the  return  of  Major-General  Sherbrooke  and  Major-General 
M^Kenzie's  from  Cadiz,  are  humbly  of  opinion  that  it  may  be 
expedient  to  order  three  regiments  of  cavalry,  for  which  the 
necessary  tonnage  is  prepared,  to  proceed  immediately  to  the 
Tagus  from  hence. 

They  further  beg  leave  humbly  to  propose  to  your  Majesty 
that  Sir  J.  Cradock  should  be  appointed  to  succeed  Sir  Hew 
Dalrymple  in  the  command  at  Gibraltar,  and  that  the  chief 
command  in  Portugal  should  be  entrusted  to  Sir  Arthur 
Wellesley. 

In  submitting  the  latter  appointment  to  your  Majesty's 
approbation,  your  Majesty's  servants  have  not  been  unmindful 
of  the  inconvenience  that  might  arise,  in  case  of  any  conside- 
rable increase  of  this  force,  from  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley's  being 
so  young  a  Lieutenant -General.  But,  as  any  material  increase 
of  the  army  in  Portugal  cannot  be  at  present  looked  to  as  pro- 
bable, either  from  the  state  of  the  regiments  at  home,  or  the 
immediate  circumstances  of  the  war,  they  humbly  conceive 
that  your  Majesty's  service  (without  prejudice  to  the  claims  of 
the  distinguished  officers  in  your  Majesty's  army  who  are  his 
seniors  in  rank)  may  have  the  benefit  of  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley 's 
being  employed  where  he  has  had  the  good  fortune  of  being- 
successful,  and  that  it  will  remain  open  for  your  Majesty's 
future  consideration  to  make  a  different  arrangemeDt  of  the 


44  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

command,  if,  under  all  the  circumstances,  it  shall  appear  to 
your  Majesty  proper  to  confide  it  to  a  general  officer  of  higher 
rank. 

Downing  Street,  March  26,  1809. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  John  Cradock. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  March  30,  1809. 

My  dear  Oradock — In  communicating  to  you  the  arrange- 
ment which  has  been  determined  upon,  with  respect  to  the  two 
commands  in  the  Peninsula,  at  present  of  importance,  I  cannot 
but  feel  much  personal  solicitude  that  the  decision  which  the 
King''s  Ministers  have  come  to  upon  this  subject  may  not  be 
unacceptable  to  you. 

It  would  neither  be  kind  nor  manly  in  me  not  to  avow  that 
the  advice  they  have  felt  it  their  duty  to  offer  to  the  King  on 
the  present  occasion  has  been  dictated  by  the  peculiar  value 
they  are  disposed  to  attach  to  Sir  A.  W.'s  services  gene- 
rally, and  particularly  in  Portugal.  You  will  believe  me 
sincere  when  I  assure  you,  with  respect  to  yourself,  in  addition 
to  much  personal  confidence,  they  feel  very  strongly  indeed ; 
with  respect  to  the  whole  of  your  conduct  in  Portugal,  which, 
in  times  and  under  circumstances  of  peculiar  difficulty,  has  in 
every  instance  met  with  their  unqualified  approbation,  and,  I 
can  truly  say,  fulfilled  every  wish  and  expectation  I  had  or 
could  have  formed,  when  you  were  selected  for  the  command. 

I  trust  the  change  now  proposed  may  not  be  unacceptable  to 
your  feelings :  I  am  very  solicitous  indeed  they  should  be  con- 
sulted to  the  utmost  extent  which  considerations  of  duty  will 
permit ;  and  I  am  sure,  whatever  shade  of  preference  your 
own  mind  might  feel  with  respect  to  the  labour  of  service 
allotted  to  you  at  the  present  moment,  you  will  liberally  in- 
terpret the  weighty  considerations  which  compel  the  King''s 
Ministers  to  meet  the  difficulties  of  the  times  in  the  manner 
which  may  not  only  best  provide  for  the  respective  objects  con- 
fided to  their  care,  but  in  the  mode  which,  from  adventitious 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  45 

circumstances,  may  conciliate  public  impression  with  respect  to 
their  measures. 

In  proposing  to  you  the  command  at  Gibraltar,  I  feel  that  it 
is,  in  the  first  instance,  transferring  you  to  a  less  active  scene ; 
but  the  time  may  not  be  very  distant  when  the  picture  may  be 
reversed,  and  the  eyes  of  the  country  be  turned,  as  they  were 
in  the  year  1 782,  to  Gibraltar,  as  the  point  of  contest  between 
the  two  powers,  where  as  much  solid  service  may  be  rendered, 
and  as  much  personal  glory  acquired,  as  at  the  head  of  an  army. 

It  is  with  this  view,  and  under  a  conviction  that,  if  Spain  is 
conquered,  Gibraltar  will  be  seriously  attacked,  that  the  com- 
mand is  offered  to  you  ;  and  it  is  done  so  under  a  conviction 
that  this  trust  cannot  be  placed  in  better  hands  ;  and  his  Ma- 
jesty has  very  graciously  authorized  me  to  intimate  to  you  that 
he  proposes  to  give  you  the  local  rank  of  General  at  Gibraltar. 

I  should  much  wish  that,  in  proceeding  to  Gibraltar,  you 
could  take  Seville  in  your  way.  Your  being  enabled  to  com- 
municate with  Mr.  Frere  and  the  Central  Government  might 
lay  the  foundation  of  future  facilities  in  conducting  the  many 
delicate  and  important  duties  that  must  devolve  upon  you  in 
the  command  in  Gibraltar.  I  have  not  thought  it  necessary 
to  direct  this  measure  in  my  Instructions  :  I  wish  to  leave  it  as 
a  suggestion  in  your  hands,  to  decide  on  as  you  may  judge  best 
for  the  King's  service. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lieutenant-General  Sir  J.  Cradock. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  March  30,  1809. 

Sir — In  the  present  state  of  affairs  in  the  south  of  Spain,  it 
appearing  to  the  King's  Ministers  indispensably  necessary  that 
an  officer  of  high  rank  and  experience  should  be  entrusted  with 
the  chief  command  at  Gibraltar,  as  well  to  communicate  with 
the  Spanish  Government  upon  military  affairs  as  to  be  charged 
with  the  defence  of  that  most  important  fortress,  in  the  event 
of  the  enemy  making  himself  master  of  that  part  of  Spain,  I 
am  to  acquaint  you   that   his  Majesty  has   been  graciously 


46  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

pleased  to  select  you  for  this  service,  than  which,  in  the  event 
supposed,  none  can  be  of  more  signal  importance  to  his  Ma- 
jesty ""s  interests. 

It  is  his  Majesty's  pleasure  that  you  do  proceed,  without 
delay,  to  Gibraltar,  there  to  assume  the  chief  command  of  the 
garrison ;  and  you  will,  on  your  arrival  there,  open  such  com- 
munication with  the  Spanish  Government,  through  Mr.  Frere, 
and  with  the  provinces  in  the  south  of  Spain,  as  may  enable 
you  to  keep  his  Majesty's  Government  regularly  informed  of 
the  operations  carrying  on,  and  the  measures  by  which,  in  your 
judgment,  the  enemy's  designs  may  be  counteracted. 

I  am  commanded  by  his  Majesty  to  signify  to  you  his 
Majesty's  most  gracious  approbation  of  your  services  in  Por- 
tugal. Every  part  of  your  conduct  has  been  guided  not  less 
by  prudence  and  judgment  than  by  the  most  marked  zeal  for 
his  Majesty's  service ;  and  his  Majesty  is  persuaded  that  the 
same  temper  and  generous  fulfilment  of  the  spirit  of  your 
Instructions,  which  has  so  honourably  distinguished  the  whole 
of  your  late  proceedings  in  Portugal,  will  continue  to  actuate 
your  conduct  at  all  times  in  the  discharge  of  your  military 
duties. 

His  Majesty  has  been  pleased  to  order  Lieutenant-General 
Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  proceed  to  Portugal,  to  take  upon 
him  the  chief  command  of  the  army  now  assembling  there  ;  and 
his  Majesty  leaves  it  to  your  discretion  to  decide,  according  to 
the  events  in  progress,  whether  you  will  await  Sir  Arthur  Wel- 
lesley's  arrival,  or  assume  the  command  at  Gibraltar,  leaving 
the  temporary  charge  of  the  force  in  Portugal  in   the  senior 

oflScer  on  the  Staff. 

Castlereagh. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  April  2,  1809. 

Sir — His  Majesty  having  been  graciously  pleased  to  nomi- 
Date  Lieutenant-General  Sir  J.  Cradock  to  the  chief  command 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  47 

at  Gibraltar,  has  thought  fit  to  select  you  to  replace  that  officer 
in  the  command  of  his  Majesty's  forces  in  Portugal. 

You  will  receive  enclosed  a  return  of  the  troops,  either 
actually  arrived,  or  under  orders  for  Portugal ;  and  it  is  his 
Majesty's  pleasure  that  you  do  proceed  without  delay  to  Lisbon, 
in  execution  of  these  orders,  which  I  am  now  to  convey  to  you 
by  his  Majesty's  command.  Your  attention  will  be  directed, 
in  the  first  instance,  to  prepare  and  equip  the  British  army  for 
the  field.  You  will,  in  the  next  place,  direct  your  utmost 
exertion  to  the  bringing  forward  the  Portuguese  army,  and 
rendering  it  capable  of  co-operating  with  his  Majesty's  troops. 
In  furtherance  of  the  latter  object,  in  addition  to  the  arrange- 
ments already  made,  you  will  make  such  requisitions,  from 
time  to  time,  either  to  the  Portuguese  Government,  or  to  the 
Government  at  home,  as,  upon  communication  with  General 
Beresford,  you  may  deem  requisite  for  rendering  the  Portu- 
guese troops  fit  for  service. 

The  defence  of  Portugal  you  will  consider  as  the  first  and 
immediate  object  of  your  attention.  But,  as  the  security  of 
Portugal  can  only  be  effectually  provided  for  in  connexion  with 
the  defence  of  the  Peninsula  in  the  larger  sense,  his  Majesty, 
on  this  account,  as  well  as  from  the  unabated  interest  he  takes 
in  the  cause  of  Spain,  leaves  it  to  your  judgment  to  decide, 
when  your  army  shall  be  advanced  on  the  frontier  of  Portugal, 
how  your  efforts  can  be  best  combined  with  the  Spanish,  as 
well  as  the  Portuguese  troops,  in  support  of  the  common  cause. 
In  any  movements  you  may  undertake,  you  will,  however, 
keep  in  mind  that,  until  you  receive  further  orders,  your  ope- 
rations must  necessarily  be  conducted  with  especial  reference 
to  the  protection  of  that  country. 

Mr.  Villiers  will  be  instructed  to  procure  for  you  every 
necessary  assistance  from  the  Portuguese  Government ;  and 
you  will  consider  him  as  the  proper  channel  for  such  commu- 
nications as  you  may  have  to  make  to  the  Regency. 

Castlereagh. 


48 


LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF 


[1809. 


Effective  Strength  of  the  Forces  serving  in  Portugal^  and  of  the 
Troops  embarked  and  under  orders  for  Foreign  Service . 


14th  Light 
20th     „ 

Drago( 

ms,  8 

4 

troops 

.     .     672 
.     .     304 

Royal  Waggon  Train  3 

In  Portugal. 
2nd  Foot  Guards,  1st 

5?            •           • 

Battalion 

.     .     250 
.     .     1,198 

1,226 

3rd 

3rd  Foot 

?? 

1st 

Battalion 

.     .     1,229 
.     .     856 

2,427 

9th     „ 

2nd 

»» 

.     .     645 

27th     „ 

3rd 

5? 

.     .     811 

29th     „ 

>» 

.     .     726 

31st     „ 

2nd 

?) 

.     .     784 

40th     „ 

1st 

5? 

.     .    871 

45th     „ 

1st 

)? 

.     .     .     856 

60th     „ 

5th 

?5 

.     .     .     828 

87th     „ 

2nd 

>i 

.     .    .     710 

88th     „ 

1st 

9) 

.     .     758 

97th    „ 

.     .     .     660 

1st  Line  Battalion 

.     .     .     748 

King's 

2nd 

5> 

.     .     .     801 

German   « 

5th 

?? 

.     .     765 

Legion. 
Embarked  at 

7th 

Garrison  Comps. 

Cork— Sailed  29th  Mara 

.     .     721 

.     .     .       49 

n,589 

7th  Foot 

2nd  Battalion 

.     .     576 

30th     „ 

.     .     630 

48th     „ 

.     .     .     717 

53rd     „ 

.     .     699 

66th     „ 

.     .     677 

83rd     „ 

.     .     850 

4,139 

I 


19,381 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  49 

Brought  forward  19,381 

Srd  Drg.  Guards,  8  troops,  Portsmouth  672 

1st  Dragoons         4      „      Cork      .     .  672 

4th         „  „       Portsmouth  672 

16th  Light  Dragoons      „       Falmouth   .  672 

1st  German  Light  Drgs.     Ipswich       .     606 

8,294 

24th  Foot,  2nd  Battalion 780 


23,455 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  April  3,  1809. 

Sir — Upon  the  fall  of  Madrid,  and  the  retreat  of  the  Spanish 
armies  into  the  south  of  Spain,  his  Majesty  was  pleased  to 
signify,  through  his  Minister  to  the  Central  Government  of 
Spain,  that  his  Majesty  was  ready  to  send  an  auxiliary  army, 
to  sustain  the  Spanish  efforts  in  that  quarter,  provided  the 
British  troops  were  assured  of  the  port  and  fortress  of  Cadiz, 
as  a  secure  point  of  retreat,  in  case  of  disaster  in  the  field. 

The  Government  of  Spain  not  having  thought  fit  to  accede 
to  this  preliminary  and  indispensable  condition,  and  having 
actually  declined  to  permit  the  British  troops,  under  Major- 
Generals  Sherbrooke  and  Mackenzie,  who  were  sent  as  the 
advanced  guard  of  the  British  army,  to  land  at  Cadiz,  his 
Majesty  does  not  feel  that  he  can,  in  justice  to  the  safety  of 
his  own  troops,  again  employ  an  auxiliary  army  in  Spain,  till 
the  Spanish  Government  and  nation  shall  cease  to  entertain 
those  feelings  of  jealousy,  which  are  equally  inconsistent  with 
their  own  interest  and  the  effectual  prosecutiou  of  the  war. 

You  will  therefore  understand  that  it  is  not  his  Majesty's 
intention,  in  authorizing  you  to  co-operate  with  the  Spanish 
armies  in  the  defence  of  Portugal  and  of  the  adjacent  Spanish 
provinces,  that  you  should  enter  upon  a  campaign  in  Spain 
without  the  express  authority  of  your  Government ;  and,  in 
any  concert  you  may  form  with  the  armies  of  Spain,  you  will 

vol..  VII.  E 


50  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

cause  it  to  be  understood  that  it  is  to  be  confined  to  the  specific 
object  in  view ;  and  that  the  service  of  your  army  (under  the 
orders  you  have  received)  cannot  be  employed  in  general  opera- 
tions in  Spain,  as  the  force  under  Sir  John  Moore  was  intended 
to  have  been,  without  a  previous  arrangement  being  settled  to 
that  effect  between  the  two  Governments. 

Should  the  enemy  penetrate  in  force  towards  Cadiz,  it  is  not 
improbable  that  the  reluctance  of  the  Spanish  Government  to 
admit  a  British  force  into  Cadiz  may  yield  to  the  sense  of  im- 
mediate danger.  Should  such  a  change  of  sentiment  take  place, 
every  effort  should  be  made  to  assist  in  the  preservation  of 
that  important  place ;  and  I  am  to  convey  to  you  the  King"'s 
commands  that,  in  case  Mr.  Frere  should  at  any  time  notify 
to  you  the  actual  consent  of  the  Spanish  Government  to  admit 
a  British  garrison  into  Cadiz,  you  do  detach  an  adequate  force 
immediately,  notifying  to  me  the  amount  of  such  force,  that 
measures  may  be  adopted  for  supporting  the  corps  so  detached, 
and  for  replacing  it  in  Portugal. 

Should  you  receive  a  requisition  to  the  above  effect  from  the 
Governor  of  Cadiz,  or  other  competent  authority,  you  are 
authorized  to  act  without  waiting  for  a  communication  through 
the  British  Minister.  Castlereagh. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  April  5,  1809. 

Sir — You  will  receive  enclosed  a  list  of  transports  now  in 
Portugal,  or  under  orders.'  As  it  is  of  the  greatest  import- 
ance that  a  greater  number  should  not  be  detained  abroad  than 
you  deem  indispensably  necessary  to  the  security  of  your  army, 
in  the  event  of  its  being  obliged  to  re-embark,  I  am  to  desire 
that  you  will,  immediately  on  your  arrival,  cause  a  careful 
survey  to  be  made  of  the  whole,  sending  home  the  least  effec- 
tive, and  to  as  great  an  amount  as  you  may  deem  consistent 
with  the  above  object. 

*  This  list  enumerates  83  transports,  carrying  17,980  tons. — Editor. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  51 

A  regiment  of  cavalry  being  under  orders  to  join  you  from 
Ireland,  yon  will  lose  no  time  in  sending  tonnage  for  the  recep- 
tion of  800  horses  from  the  Tagus  to  Cork. 

You  will  report  your  opinion,  according  to  the  state  of 
affairs  in  the  Peninsula,  what  further  reduction  may,  in  your 
judgment,  be  made  from  time  to  time  in  the  transport  tonnage 
attendant  on  the  army,  the  expense  of  which,  more  especially 
the  horse  transports,  presses  severely  on  the  public  finances  at 
the  present  moment. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 

Lord  Castlereagh,  in  submitting  for  your  Majesty ""s  appro- 
bation Sir  Arthur  Wellesley's  Instructions,  in  the  present  state 
of  the  campaign  in  Portugal,  and  the  peculiar  circumstances 
of  the  command,  hopes  your  Majesty  will  not  disapprove  of 
his  humbly  soliciting  your  Majesty's  permission  to  order  that 
officer  to  proceed  immediately  on  service,  without  having  pre- 
viously had  it  in  his  power  to  pay  his  duty  to  your  Majesty. 

St.  James's  Square,  April  8,  1809. 


Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Portsmouth,  April  10,  1809,  ^  past  10  a.m. 
My  dear  Lord — Your  letter  from  Stanmore  arrived  about  half 
an  hour  ago,  from  which  I  should  judge  that  you  are  not  aware 
that  we  are  detained  by  an  order  from  the  Admiralty  to  the 
Surveillante,  not  to  sail  till  fui-ther  orders.  This  order  appears, 
by  a  letter  from  Pole  to  me,  to  have  been  sent  down  at  the 
suggestion  of  Cooke.  Pray  let  me  know  as  soon  as  possible 
what  we  are  to  do.  Ever  yours,  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Memorial  on  the  State  of  Spain,  hy  a  Spanish  Officer. 

April  10,  1809. 
Few  persons  in  Europe,  or  even  in  Spain  itself,  can  speak 
upon  the  affairs  of  this   country  with  that  impartiality  and 

e2 


52  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

truth,  which  are  necessary  to  completely  understand  them. 
There  are  some  who,  filled  with  fears  and  the  terror  of  losing 
their  property,  believe  that  the  fate  of  Spain  is  already  de- 
cided, and  that  she  must  submit  to  the  yoke ;  while  others, 
inspired  with  enthusiasm  for  the  holy  cause  which  we  defend, 
view  every  occurrence  in  too  favourable  a  light.  It  is  proper 
to  adopt  a  middle  course  between  these  two ;  and,  while  we 
persuade  ourselves  that,  while  it  is  impossible  that  we  should 
be  conquered  so  long  as  we  possess  valour  and  fortitude,  we 
must  not  conceal  the  misfortunes  which  have  continually 
attended  our  armies  ever  since  the  battle  of  Baylen. 

Something  might  be  said  about  the  operations  during  the 
winter,  and  particularly  of  those  armies  under  La  Eomana 
and  Sir  J.  Moore ;  but  neither  the  brevity  of  this  memoir  will 
allow  of  the  discussion  of  matters  which  have  already  passed, 
nor  could  such  discussion  produce  anything  but  soreness  and 
exasperation.  Let  us  draw  a  veil  over  those  unfortunate  mis- 
understandings between  the  Generals,  which  prevented  them 
from  deriving  those  advantages  that  might  have  been  ex- 
pected from  the  very  considerable  forces  which  they  com- 
manded in  a  country  that  offered  so  many  advantages  for 
defence.  We  will  only  speak  of  the  positions  which  our  armies 
actually  occupy,  that,  from  these  data,  we  may  calculate  with 
accuracy  what  may  be  done  under  present  circumstances. 

Cuesta''s  army  is  posted  on  the  heights  of  Monasterio  and 
Santa  Olaya,  which,  on  being  joined  by  3,000  from  Granada, 
and  1,200  from  the  Canaries,  will  amount  to  30,000  men,  of 
whom  6,500  are  cavalry.  Opposed  to  this  army  is  that  under 
Marshal  Victor,  which  has  already  been,  or  is  to  be,  joined  by 
5,000  men  under  General  Lapisse,  who  was  at  Alcantara. 

The  army  of  Vanegas,  amounting  to  16,000  men,  and  1,500 
cavalry,  occupies  the  gorges  of  the  Sierra  Morena,  and  is 
opposed  to  the  army  of  Sebastiani,  which  cannot  exceed 
12,000  men. 

I  am  totally  uninformed  of  the  force  under  Reding  in  Oata- 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  53 

Ionia;  but,  taking  into  consideration  the  little  progress  that 
the  French  have  made  in  that  province,  notwithstanding  they 
are  in  possession  of  all  the  strong  places,  which  were  delivered 
up  to  them  by  the  infamous  Godoy,  (Prince  of  the  Peace)  it 
may  be  supposed  that  the  French  forces  are  about  equal  to  those 
of  Reding, 

General  Blake  has  united  the  command  of  the  kingdoms  of 
Valencia,  Murcia,  and  Aragon,  and  has  assumed  the  command 
of  a  division  of  the  latter,  which  was  before  under  the  Mar- 
quess of  Lanzas,  and  amounted  to  10,000  men.  We  know 
that  the  disposable  force  of  Valencia  positively  amounted  to 
23,000  soldiers. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  southern  parts  of  Galicia  are  in 
a  state  of  complete  insurrection,  and  that,  according  to  the 
latest  advices,  the  same  spirit  pervaded  the  whole  of  that 
country. 

The  Marquess  of  Romana,  with  what  force  I  know  not, 
after  having  attacked  and  made  prisoners  a  French  regiment 
in  Villa  Franca  del  Bierzo,  had  proceeded  towards  the  moun- 
tains of  Leon,  where  he  was  to  be  joined  by  the  reinforcements 
of  Asturias,  which  had  on  foot  a  force  of  30,000  men  in  arms. 
By  the  positions  which  the  General  (Romana)  has  taken  up, 
all  communication  between  the  French  in  Galicia  is  cut  off 
from  Madrid  ;  and,  although  this  important  operation  has  not 
yet  been  actually  carried  into  effect,  yet  it  may  be  inferred 
that  the  enemy  has  not  a  large  disposable  force  in  Castillo  to 
oppose  to  Romana. 

Such  is  the  present  actual  state  of  the  armies  of  Spain ;  and 
it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  Marshal  Ney  now  occupies 
Coruiia,  Ferrol,  and  Santiago,  with  12,000  troops;  and  Oporto 
is  occupied  by  9,000  men  under  Soult,  who  is  opposed  by  the 
Portuguese  General  Silveira,  with  about  13,000  men;  while 
there  is  in  Lisbon  an  English  army  of  1 7,000  men,  at  least. 

In  an  intercepted  letter  from  Joseph  to  Marshal  Victor,  are 
the  following  expressions :   "  General  Sebastiani  must  employ 


54  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

himself  in  disarming  the  people,  and  putting  down  the  spirit 
of  insurrection  in  La  Mancha,  without  attempting  any  attack 
upon  the  Sierra  Morena,  until  your  Excellency  shall  have 
forced  Cuesta,  whom  you  will,  however,  not  attack,  until  you 
have  been  joined  by  the  division  of  Lapisse,  nor  without  an 
understanding  with  Marshal  Soult,  who  is  at  Oporto."*"* 

Under  such  circumstances,  it  does  not  require  much  military 
knowledge  to  decide  how  to  act.  Cuesta  ought  to  be  strictly 
forbidden  making  any  attack  upon  the  enemy ;  and  in  the 
mean  while,  an  active  and  intelligent  person  should  be  de- 
spatched, with  the  plans  of  the  enemy,  to  the  English  army  at 
Lisbon,  to  whom  he  should  propose  either  to  march  against, 
and  (with  the  assistance  of  the  Portuguese)  to  destroy  Soult ; 
or,  with  their  whole  force,  to  march  upon  Elvas  and  Badajoz, 
and  threaten  the  enemy's  flank  from  these  points. 

Should  Soult  be  conquered,  Ney  is  lost ;  for,  with  his  commu- 
nication with  Castillo  cut  ofi"  by  Romana,  the  whole  country  in 
insurrection,  and  his  flank  threatened  by  Silveira,  he  would  be 
compelled  to  surrender  at  discretion.  What  would  be  the  fate 
of  Victor  and  Sebastiani  ?  Providence,  which,  with  a  protect- 
ing arm,  has  favoured  us  since  the  commencement  of  our  revo- 
lution, could  never  present  us  with  a  fairer  opportunity  for 
destroying  the  armies  of  our  foe,  and  particularly  while  the 
events  in  Germany  must  prevent  his  receiving  any  reinforce- 
ments from  France. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  want  of  firearms  is  great,  and  must 
be  remedied.  England,  whose  friendly  assistance  we  have  ex- 
perienced from  the  commencement,  can  alone  aid  us  with  the 
same  promptitude  and  activity.  Cadiz  is  the  most  convenient 
port  for  the  armies  of  Estremadura  and  La  Mancha,  Cartha- 
genafor  Murcia,  Tortosa  for  Aragon,  and  Tarragona  for  Cata- 
lonia, Vigo  for  Galicia,  and  Gijon  for  the  Asturias. 

Above  all,  it  is  necessary  to  support  the  patriotic  spirit  of 
the  people  of  La  Mancha  and  of  the  capital,  which,  according 
to  intercepted  letters,  becomes  every  day  better  and  better.    On 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  55 

this  account,  we  ought  not  to  relinquish  our  ideas  concerning 
that  province.  And  while  in  the  position  Cuesta  now  occupies, 
he  does  not  require  so  numerous  a  cavalry,  it  might  he  im- 
portant to  increase  that  arm  of  the  army  of  La  Carolina  to  the 
number  of  4,000  horse,  which,  accompanied  by  a  proportionate 
force  of  infantry  and  artillery,  might  make  a  powerful  diver- 
sion in  La  Mancha. 

The  memorable  retreat  of,  and  that  spirit  of  enthusiasm  and 
confidence  inspired  by,  the  worthy  General  (Duke  of  Albu- 
querque) who  commanded  on  that  day,  point  him  out  as  the 
proper  person  to  be  placed  at  the  head  of  this  proposed  expe- 
dition. With  this  powerful  diversion  in  La  Mancha,  it  would 
be  necessary  that  the  English  should  co-operate  by  other  strong 
demonstrations,  which  they  could  do  with  great  facility. 

Were  the  English  to  land  at  Vigo  the  forces  which  they 
have  embarked  at  Portsmouth,  the  fate  of  Galicia  would  be 
more  completely  decided  than  ever,  and  consequently  the  fate 
of  Portugal,  Asturias,  Leon,  nay,  even  Castille  itself.  On  the 
other  hand,  what  is  the  use  of  the  English  army  in  Sicily  ? 
A  powerful  fleet  is  quite  sufficient  to  prevent  a  landing  of  the 
enemy  on  that  island.  And  if  the  Sicilian  army  (English) 
could  be  immediately  conveyed  to  Catalonia,  to  co-operate  with 
Reding,  I  do  not  conceive  how  the  enemy  could  resist,  when 
attacked  at  so  many  points,  and  by  forces  so  considerable. 

Such  are  my  ideas  on  the  actual  state  of  afiairs.  I  have  not 
the  presumption  to  imagine  that  they  are  the  most  correct  and 
indisputable  ;  but  I  can  affirm  that,  in  drawing  up  this  memo- 
rial, I  have  had  no  other  object  than  the  public  good,  by  un- 
deceiving those  who  consider  that  all  is  lost,  and  thus  diffuse 
universal  despair,  which  is  the  greatest  of  all  our  misfortunes. 


Lord  Ca^tlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  April  11,  1809. 

Sir — I  am  to  acquaint  you  that,  upon  a  full  consideration  of 
the   state  of    affairs   in    Portugal,   as   communicated   in  the 


56  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

despatches  received  up  to  the  24th  ult.,  inclusive,  from  Lisbon, 
it  does  not  appear  to  his  Majesty^s  Government  expedient  that 
any  alteration  should  take  place  in  the  measures  in  progress 
for  reinforcing  the  British  army  in  that  country. 

Should  the  British  army  be  unfortunately  compelled  to  eva- 
cuate Portugal,  his  Majesty,  notwithstanding  the  late  refusal 
to  admit  his  troops  into  Cadiz,  is  nevertheless  prepared  to 
renew  that  offer  on  the  same  conditions.  And,  in  the  event 
of  its  acceptance,  it  is  the  King's  pleasure  that  the  whole  force 
now  in  Portugal,  including  the  cavalry,  should  be  disembarked 
at  Cadiz,  from  thence  to  be  employed  in  such  manner  as  may 
appear  to  you  expedient  for  the  support  of  the  common  cause. 

Should  this  proposal  of  generous  and  disinterested  aid  be 
again  declined  by  the  Government  of  Spain,  it  is  his  Majesty ""s 
intention  (unless  you  receive  orders  to  the  contrary)  that,  after 
reinforcing  the  garrison  of  Gibraltar  to  8,000  British  infantry, 
the  detailed  arrangements  of  which  you  will  concert  with  Sir 
John  Cradock,  you  do  return  home  with  the  remainder  of  the 
force.  A  copy  of  these  instructions  will  be  sent  to  Mr.  Frere, 
through  whom,  in  the  above  contingency,  you  will  make  the 
offer  hereby  directed  to  the  Central  Government. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  April  11,  1809. 

Sir — Brigadier-General  Stewart,  on  his  arrival  in  town,  has, 
in  obedience  to  your  orders,  communicated  to  me  your  very 
honourable  feelinofs  of  disinclination  to  interfere  with  Sir  John 
Cradock's  command  in  Portugal,  in  the  event  of  finding  that 
officer  engaged  in  active  operations  in  the  field.  Should  the 
case  exist,  which  you  have  represented  as  by  no  means  impro- 
bable from  the  movements  the  enemy  is  making  towards  Por- 
tugal, his  Majesty  trusts  that  the  same  feelings  of  zeal  for  his 
service,  which  induced  this  suggestion  on  your  part,  will  deter- 
mine you  to  place  yourself  under  the  orders  of  Sir  John 
Cradock  till  his  Majesty^s  furtlier  pleasure  is  known.     And  I 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  57 

have  no  doubt  that  every  communication  which  you  may  have 
with  Sir  John  Cradock,  on  this  point,  will  be  conducted  on 
both  sides  by  considerations  only  of  what  may,  at  the  moment, 
be  most  for  the  advantage  of  his  Majesty's  service. 


Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Portsmouth,  April  12, 1809. 

My  dear  Lord — Charles  arrived  this  morning,  and  we  intend 
to  endeavour  to  sail  this  afternoon,  notwithstanding  that  the 
wind  is  contrary.  As  it  is  possible,  however,  that  it  may 
prevent  us  from  getting  out,  I  take  the  opportunity  of  the 
return  of  the  messenger  to  draw  your  attention  again  to  the 
orders  which  you  have  last  sent  me,  in  respect  to  my  leaving 
the  command  in  the  hands  of  Sir  John  Cradock. 

It  occurred  to  me,  when  I  read  the  accounts  of  the  state  of 
affairs  in  Portugal  up  to  the  25th  of  March,  that  it  might  be 
expedient  that  Sir  John  Cradock  should  continue  to  exercise 
the  command  after  I  should  arrive  at  Lisbon,  even  if  no  event 
should  have  occurred ;  and  I  certainly  considered  that  I  could 
not  with  propriety  assume  the  command  if  he  had  been  in  any 
manner  successftil.  The  question  whether  it  is  expedient  or 
not  that  I  should  assume  the  command  will  become  difficult 
only  in  case  no  event  should  have  occurred  ;  and  the  difficulty 
will  consist  in  its  being  one  personal  to  the  two  parties  most 
interested  in  it,  and  resting  entirely  upon  a  consideration  of 
the  personal  qualifications  and  means  of  bringing  the  army 
through  the  difficulties  in  which  it  is  supposed  they  will  be 
involved.  The  decision  of  this  delicate  question  must,  in  a 
great  measure,  rest  with  me,  and  I  hope  that  I  have  fairness 
and  firmness  to  decide  it  according  to  the  best  of  my  judgment. 
But  I  acknowledge  that  I  think  I  shall  find  the  difficulty  of 
making  the  decision  much  increased  by  having  in  my  posses- 
sion the  orders  sent  to  me  last  night ;  and  I  could  prefer  to  let 
the  decision  on  the  question  rest,  as  indeed  it  must  in  any 
case,  upon  my  private  judgment. 


58  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

The  only  possible  inconveniences  which  can  result  from  my 
want  of  these  official  orders  are,  that  General  Cradock  may 
be  inclined  to  refuse  to  remain  in  command  of  the  army,  and 
that  his  remaining  in  command  would  be,  in  fact,  an  official 
irregularity.  But  it  must  be  recollected  that,  if  he  is  likely 
to  refuse  the  command  in  this  case,  he  would  keep  it  unwil- 
lingly in  the  other ;  and,  in  respect  to  the  official  irregularity, 
I  conceive  that  it  would  be  remedied  by  both  of  us  stating  to 
the  Secretary  of  State  our  opinion  that,  upon  my  arrival,  we 
considered  it  expedient  that  he  should  retain  the  command. 

I  wish,  upon  the  whole,  not  to  have  these  despatches ;  and, 
as  we  may  be  detained,  I  beg  you  to  reconsider  the  necessity 
of  leaving  them  with  me.  If  we  should  be  able  to  sail,  or  if 
you  should  decide  to  leave  them  in  my  possession,  you  may 
depend  upon  it  that  I  will  endeavour  to  decide  upon  the  deli- 
very of  them,  or  otherwise,  according  to  the  best  of  my  judg- 
ment. Pray  send  down  the  messenger  as  soon  as  you  can,  in 
case  I  should  be  detained. 

Ever,  my  dear  lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Welleslei/. 

St.  James's  Square,  April  13,  [1809]. 
My  dear  Wellesley — I  consider  that  you  have  the  most 
entire  discretion  to  abstain  from  making  any  communication 
to  Sir  J.  Cradock  under  the  instructions  sent  you,  which  were 
framed  only  with  a  view  of  giving  a  regular  sanction  to  any 
arrangement  with  respect  to  command,  which,  under  peculiar 
circumstances,  you  and  Sir  J.  Cradock  might,  upon  personal 
communication,  deem  best  for  the  King's  service.  They  were 
not  meant  to  encourage  any  unnecessary  alteration  of  the  former 
orders  to  Cradock  to  deliver  over  the  command  to  you — they 
were  not  intended  to  force  Sir  J.  Cradock  to  continue  in  a 
temporary  command,  under  circumstances  unpleasant  to  hie 
own  feelings— they  were  merely  calculated  to  give  the  King'^s 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  59 

sanction  to  a  suspension  of  the  former  orders  to  Sir  J.  Cradock, 
which  he  might  otherwise  consider  obligatory^  if  the  circum- 
stances should  induce  you  to  propose,  and  him  to  concur  in,  the 
propriety  of  such  a  suspension.  It  certainly  did  appear  to  the 
King's  Government  that,  if  such  an  arrangement  once  took 
place,  the  moment  when  it  should  cease  and  the  former  arrange- 
ment revive  was  a  point  of  so  much  delicacy,  that  it  was 
hardly  fair  to  leave  it  to  the  parties  concerned  to  settle,  and 
that  a  point  of  this  nature,  hanging  upon  circumstances,  might 
be  productive  of  much  embarrassment  to  both.  It  was,  there- 
fore, decided  that,  in  the  event  of  your  determining  to  leave  the 
command  with  Cradock,  he  should  continue  to  exercise  it  till 
he  received  iui*ther  orders  from  home. 

Where  there  is  no  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  substance, 
my  wish  would  certainly  have  been,  in  the  execution  of  a  sug- 
gestion entirely  proceeding  from  yourself,  to  have  conformed 
implicitly  to  your  feelings  upon  it.  On  the  subject  having 
been  brought  under  the  consideration  of  Government,  the 
Cabinet  having  felt  themselves  called  upon  to  form  an  opinion 
upon  it,  and  that  opinion  having  been  submitted  to  the  King, 
I  do  not  feel  that  I  can  now  propose  a  reconsideration  of  it, 
without  considerable  delay  and  inconvenience ;  and  I  persuade 
myself,  from  the  terms  in  which  your  letter  is  expressed,  that, 
under  these  circumstances,  you  would  not  wish  the  question  to 
be  revived,  Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

St.  James's  Square,  April  14,  [1809]. 
Dear  Wellesley — The  accounts  are  very  unfavourable  from 
Portugal,  but  not  such  as  to  induce  the  King's  Government  to 
make  any  alteration  in  the  course  they  are  pursuing.  The 
only  additional  instruction  that  occurs  is  to  avoid  the  appear- 
ance of  being  a  second  time  refused  at  Cadiz.  With  this  view, 
we  think  it  desirable  that  the  army  should  rendezvous  at 
Gibraltar,   rather  than  in   Cadiz   Bay.      The  troops  can   be 


60  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

landed  there,  if  necessary  for  their  health  and  accommodation, 
either  within  or  without  the  fortress.  We  shall  also  have 
time  to  send  you  any  further  instructions  that  circumstances 
may  point  out,  before  your  arrangements  can  be  completed  for 
breaking  up  the  army. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  April  14,  1809. 

Sir — Should  you,  in  execution  of  my  orders  of  the  11th  inst., 
have  occasion  to  proceed  with  the  whole  of  your  force  to  the 
southward,  before  the  determination  of  the  Spanish  Govern- 
ment as  to  your  reception  is  ascertained,  it  is  the  King''s  plea- 
sure, in  that  case,  that  you  do  repair,  in  the  first  instance,  to 
Gibraltar,  and  not  to  Cadiz,  unless  previously  assured  of  being 
admitted.  As  it  is  material,  however,  that  the  intentions  of 
the  Spanish  Government  should  be  known  without  delay, 
Mr.  Frere  will  be  directed  to  press  for  a  decision  on  this 
point,  in  order  that  his  Majesty's  Government  may  know  how 
far  they  are  to  consider  the  force  now  in  Portugal  as  required 
for  service  in  Spain,  or  disposable,  in  the  event  of  the  evacua- 
tion of  Portugal,  for  other  services.  Mr.  Frere  will  communi- 
cate to  you,  for  your  guidance  in  the  execution  of  the  orders 
you  have  received,  the  result  of  his  inquiries. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &;c., 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  Bight  Hon.  Sir  L>.  Dundas. 
Draft.  St.  James's  Square,  April  28,  1809. 

Dear  Sir — Permit  me  to  renew  the  subject  of  supplying  the 
army  in  Portugal  as  early  as  possible  with  such  a  proportion 
of  light  troops  as  our  means  will  admit  of.  The  critical 
situation  of  the  British  army  in  that  country,  the  importance 
attached  to  this  species  of  force  by  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,  and 
the  assurances  he  received  before  he  left  England  that  a  corps 
of  this  description  should  follow  him  without  delay,  will,  I  am 


1809.]  LOKD  CASTLEREAGH.  61 

persuaded,  justify  me  with  you  for  pressing  this  subject  again 
upon  your  attention,  and  with  an  earnest  request  that  such  an 
arrangement  as  may  be  within  our  power  to  make  with  a  view 
to  this  object  may  be  accelerated. 

Believe  me,  dear  sir,  with  great  regard. 

Your  faithful  and  obedient  servant, 

Oastlereagh. 

Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Villa  Franca,  April  29,  1809. 
My  dear  Lord — I  write  in  the  chance  that  this  letter  may 
still  find  the  packet  at  Lisbon,  to  inform  you  that  I  have 
received  a  very  bad  report  indeed  of  the  state  of  the  artillery 
horses,  lately  arrived  from  England  with  the  heavy  dragoons, 
being  very  old,  diseased,  and  out  of  condition.  I  shall  receive 
it  officially  probably  in  a  day  or  two,  when  I  shall  transmit  it 
to  England.  In  the  mean  time,  I  think  it  proper  to  acquaint 
you  with  the  state  of  these  horses,  and  to  recommend  that,  for 
that  reason,  as  well  as  because  it  would  be  very  desirable  to 
attach  a  troop  of  horse  artillery  to  so  large  a  body  of  cavalry 
as  we  shall  have,  that  a  troop  of  horse  artillery  should  be  sent 
out.  Ever,  my  dear  lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  13,  1809. 

Sir — I  am  to  acquaint  you  that  a  light  brigade,  consisting 
of  the  battalions  stated  in  the  margin,^  are  ordered  for  imme- 
diate embarkation,  to  join  your  army  in  Portugal. 

The  officer  in  command  of  this  brigade  will  receive  direc- 
tions, in  pursuance  of  the  suggestion  contained  in  your  letter 
marked  "  Private,"  of  the  24th  ult.,  to  call  off  Aveiro  and  the 
Mondego  river  for  orders. 

^  The  1st  battalions  of  the  43rd,  52nd,  and  95th  Foot,  of  1,000  men 
each. 


62  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

I  am  further  to  inform  you  that  orders  have  been  given  for 
sendino:  to  Portugal  the  men  who  have  volunteered  from  the 
Militia  into  the  regiments  under  your  command,  completing, 
as  far  as  circumstances  will  permit,  the  several  battalions  to 
their  full  establishment.  An  additional  quantity  of  forage  has 
been  ordered  for  the  cavalry,  upon  the  requisition  of  Sir  John 
Cradock. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  13,  1809. 

Sir — Having  received  a  private  letter  from  Lieutenant- 
General  Beresford,  expressing  a  strong  wish  that  he  may  have 
the  assistance  of  an  additional  number  of  British  officers  to  aid 
in  the  organization  of  the  Portuguese  army,  I  am  to  acquaint 
you  that,  exclusive  of  the  twenty-four  officers  who  are  allowed 
to  transfer  their  services  to  the  Portuguese  army,  receiving  in 
the  British  army  one  step  of  permanent  rank,  as  a  compensa- 
tion for  relinquishing  their  regimental  commissions,  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief has  received  the  King's  pleasure  for  permitting 
such  officers  belonging  to  the  regiments  now  in  Portugal  as 
were  permitted  by  Sir  J.  Cradock,  or  may  receive  your  per- 
mission to  that  effect,  to  do  duty  with  the  Portuguese  army 
till  further  orders,  receiving  therein  one  step  of  rank,  with  the 
pay  thereto  belonging. 

As  it  has  appeared  to  his  Majesty's  Government  that  the 
number  of  officers  which  you  may  be  enabled  to  spare,  without 
prejudice  to  the  efficiency  of  your  army,  may  be  inadequate  to 
General  Beresford's  wants,  I  have  signified  to  the  Commander- 
in-Chief  his  Majesty's  pleasure  that  thirty  officers,  from  the 
regiments  at  home,  may  be  forthwith  sent  to  Portugal,  to  be 
employed  upon  the  like  terms  as  those  detached  from  your 
army,  under  General  Beresford's  orders. 

The  requisition  made  by  General  Beresford  for  an  increased 
supply  of  arms  and  clothing  has  been  forwarded  to  Mr.  Secre- 
tary Canning,  whose  province  it  is  to  receive  his  Majesty's 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  63 

commands  upon  all  aids  to  be  granted  to  the  Government  of 
Portugal.  Oastlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley, 
Draft.  London,  May  13,  1809. 

My  dear  Wellesley — I  have  waited  with  much  impatience 
for  the  first  accounts  from  Portugal  after  your  arrival,  and 
rejoice  to  find  that  none  of  the  embarrassments  which  we  had 
so  much  reason  to  apprehend,  with  respect  to  the  state  in  which 
you  were  likely  to  find  the  army,  have  occurred. 

It  is  highly  satisfactory  to  me  to  observe  that  you  are  likely 
to  get  your  army  assembled,  with  a  large  proportion  of  the 
cavalry,  before  you  are  pressed  by  the  enemy,  and  that  you 
will  have  been  enabled  to  originate,  instead  of  conduct,  a  cam- 
paign, the  nature  of  which  had  been  decided  for  you. 

I  regret  that  it  has  not  been  in  my  power  sooner  to  accom- 
plish your  wishes  with  respect  to  the  light  brigade.  I  have 
pressed  the  subject  almost  daily ;  and,  to  do  the  Commander- 
in-Chief  justice,  no  exertion  has  been  wanting  on  his  part ; 
but  the  effects  of  the  late  campaign  in  Spain  have  operated  so 
deeply,  that  it  is  only  by  a  selection  of  men  from  both  the  first 
and  second  battalions,  that  we  have  been  enabled  to  prepare 
this  brigade  for  service.  They  are,  however,  now  promised 
for  the  24th.  We  embark  the  1st  of  the  43rd  at  Harwich, 
and  the  1st  of  the  52nd  and  95th  at  Deal.  Each  of  the  three 
battalions  will  go  out  1,000  strong. 

I  have  also  ordered  all  the  battalions  now  in  Portugal  to  be 
completed  to  their  full  establishment,  as  far  as  we  have  the 
means  at  home  of  doing  so.  The  23rd  and  Commissariat 
horses  will  proceed  from  Cork,  according  to  your  directions ; 
and  both  the  cavalry  and  light  brigade  will  be  directed  to  call 
at  Aveiro  and  Mondego  for  orders. 

As  Cradock,  in  his  last  despatch,  speaks  of  the  difficulty  of 
foraging  the  cavalry,  I  have  directed,  in  addition  to  the  hay 
which  sailed  about  the  same  time  as  you  did,  and  which  was. 


64  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

I  believe,  equal  to  five  weeks'  consumption  for  6,000  horses, 
a  supply  for  the  same  number  of  horses  for  a  month  to  be  sent. 
We  calculate  that,  including  what  is  proceeding  from  Cork 
and  the  Shannon,  you  have  oats  for  a  like  number  for  three 
months.  There  was  an  order  issued  some  time  since,  directing 
a  statement  of  supplies  on  hand  and  deficiencies  every  fort- 
night. I  should  be  glad  you  would  see  this  order  complied 
with. 

Your  brother**s  appointment  to  Spain  has  given  great  satis- 
faction; and  every  hope  is  formed  from  your  joint  exertions. 
I  fear  Austria  has  begun  the  campaign  under  ver}^  unfavourable 
auspices ;  but  our  information  as  yet  does  not  warrant  despon- 
dence. 

In  addition  to  the  officers  already  sent  from  hence,  and  those 
which  Cradock  has  permitted  to  serve  under  Beresford,  receiving 
a  step  of  rank  in  the  Portuguese  service,  Sir  David  has  pro- 
mised me  to  forward  immediately  thirty  more  selected  from  the 
army  at  home,  who  go  upon  the  same  terms,  retaining  their 
regimental  commissions. 

Muskets  are  a  scarce  article,  as  you  know;  but,  in  propor- 
tion as  prospects  brighten  in  Portugal,  the  motive  for  making 
every  effort  will  be  felt  and  acted  upon. 

Ever,  my  dear  Wellesley,  yours,  &c., 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley, 

Draft.  St.  James's  Square,  May  16,  1809. 

My  dear  Wellesley — I  send  you  such  suggestions  as  have 
occurred  to  us  on  Argenton''s  projet,  which  you  will  modify  as 
you  think  best.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  army  is  the 
true  instrument  with  which  to  destroy  Buonaparte'*s  power, 
and  that,  if  that  game  could  be  played  with  any  solid  prospect 
of  success,  it  is  beyond  all  others  the  best ;  but  we  have  never 
yet  seen  the  disposition  exist  to  any  extent,  and  we  must 
therefore  act  cautiously,  and,  without  throwing  out  of  our  hands 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  65 

such  a  weapon  (if  it  really  exists),  try  to  avoid  the  difficulties 
of  Conventions  on  disputable  grounds.  Is  it  not  suspicious 
that  Argenton,  coming  with  a  proposal,  should  expose  himself 
to  all  the  eclat  of  a  journey  to  Lisbon,  where  his  arrival  became 
notorious,  and  the  news  of  which  must  meet  him  at  Oporto  ? 

We  have  not  any  intelligence  from  the  Continent  since  I 
wrote  last,  nor  has  there  been  any  firing  on  the  opposite  coast, 
where  the  battle  of  the  23rd  was  celebrated  on  the  28th.  We 
may,  therefore,  hope  that  no  further  disaster  of  importance  had 
occurred  down  to  the  10th. 

The  L'Orient  squadron,  of  three  sail  of  the  line  and  two 
frigates,  finding  Martinique  in  our  possession,  has  taken  shelter 
at  the  Saintes,  where  Cochrane  is  blockading  them,  having 
sent  to  Beckwith  for  a  corps  to  reduce  the  island.  If  we  should 
get  this  detachment,  Martinique  will  have  done  well  for  us. 
The  movement  of  the  Brest  fleet  having  been  ordered  for  the 
express  purpose  of  liberating  this  squadron,  to  proceed  to  Mar- 
tinique, they  have  a  large  supply  of  provisions,  but  no  troops 
on  board. 

The  detachment  ordered  to  Portugal  are  about  2,000  men : 
the  light  brigade,  3,000,  embarks  the  24th.  I  have  written  to 
Lord  C[hatham]  for  the  troop  of  horse  artillery. 

I  am,  &c.,  Castlereagh. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  16,  1809. 

Sir — Your  despatches  of  the  27th  ult.,  from  Lisbon,  have 
been  received  and  laid  before  the  King.  That  which  relates  to 
the  communication  received  from  Captain  Argenton  has  occu- 
pied the  immediate  attention  of  his  Majesty ""s  Government. 
They  are  fully  impressed  with  the  important  consequences 
which  might  be  expected  to  flow  from  the  revolt  of  any  con- 
siderable part  of  the  French  army  at  the  present  moment, 
which,  if  it  should  be  followed,  would  afford  the  surest  means 

VOL.  VII.  F 


66  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

of  dissolving  the  power  against  which  we  are  now  contending ; 
but,  in  proportion  as  they  feel  all  the  importance  of  this  view 
of  the  subject,  they  cannot  disguise  from  themselves  the  doubts 
that  must  attach  to  the  proposition,  in  point  of  sincerity;  the 
obstacles  that  stand  in  the  way  of  its  successful  execution; 
and,  finally,  to  the  difficulties  which  present  themselves  at  the 
outset,  in  reconciling  the  measures  to  be  taken  with  our 
present  relations  with  the  Governments  of  Spain  and  Portugal. 
With  this  general  view  of  the  subject,  I  am  to  signify  to  you 
his  Majesty's  approbation  of  the  caution  with  which  you  have 
received  the  overture  alluded  to ;  and  I  am  to  desire  that  you 
will  continue  to  observe  the  same  prudent  line  of  conduct, 
taking  care  that  any  arrangement  which  you  may  adopt  with 
the  French  army,  so  far  as  it  aflfects  the  interests  of  Spain  or 
Portugal,  shall  be  made  subject  to  the  ratification  and  concur- 
rence of  their  respective  Governments. 

With  the  above  restriction,  his  Majesty  is  pleased  to  confide 
to  your  discretion  to  decide,  according  to  circumstances,  on  the 
spot,  by  what  course  the  objects  his  Majesty  has  in  view  can 
best  be  promoted.  You  will  not  fail  to  hold  in  mind  that 
nothing  short  of  the  most  unequivocal  proofs  of  determination 
to  turn  their  arms  against  Buonaparte  could  induce  the 
Spaniards  to  permit  a  French  army  (more  especially  one  which 
has  acted  in  the  manner  Soulfs  corps  is  reported  to  have  done 
in  Gallicia)  to  retire  unmolested  through  Spain,  with  the 
power  to  change  its  purpose,  at  any  moment,  on  its  march  to 
take  up  new  and  perhaps  more  advantageous  positions,  or  even 
to  concentrate  themselves  with  other  corps,  the  better  to  prose- 
cute their  operations  in  other  parts  of  Spain.  The  same  diffi- 
culty, on  the  part  of  the  Portuguese,  will  attach  to  any  arrange- 
ment, by  which  the  British  shall  charge  themselves  with  the 
protection  of  troops  which  have  so  recently  committed  the  ut- 
most excesses  within  their  territory;  and  we  must  not  also 
lose  sight  of  the  just  dissatisfaction  which  Austria  would  feel, 
if  facilities  were  given  for  the  transfer  of  a  great  proportion  of 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  67 

the  French  force  now  in  Spain  to  contend  against  Iier  in  Ger- 
many. 

On  the  other  hand,  although  every  proposition  of  this  nature 
must  be  received  with  distrust  (and  the  present  is  not  free  from 
some  features  of  strong  suspicion  in  the  mode  of  bringing  it 
forward),  yet  it  is  impossible  to  contend  that  a  case  may  not 
arise,  which  might  render  it  politic  for  you  to  endeavour  to 
reconcile  the  difficulties  of  such  a  measure,  great  as  they  are, 
with  the  principles  upon  which  your  conduct  towards  the 
powers  with  whom  we  are  acting  in  concert  must  necessarily 
be  governed. 

I  am,  however,  persuaded  that,  whatever  means  you  may 
have  of  prosecuting  military  advantages  against  Soult,  you 
will  not  forego  them  for  any  other  species  of  advantage,  except 
upon  the  strongest  grounds  ;  that  you  will  not  encourage  those 
officers  who  profess  a  disposition  to  revolt  to  expect  your 
countenance  and  intervention  with  the  Allies,  unless  they  are 
prepared  to  give  you  every  pledge  of  their  sincerity,  by  com- 
mitting themselves  at  once  in  the  most  unqualified  and  irre- 
vocable manner  against  their  own  Government,  and  by  sub- 
mitting it  to  your  discretion  to  direct  how  their  concert  with 
the  other  French  armies  in  Spain  shall  be  conducted,  and 
their  future  plans  arranged  with  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese 
Governments. 

Till  such  measures  can  be  agreed  upon,  they  must  consent 
to  occupy  such  cantonments  as  you  may  assign  to  them,  not 
attempting  to  march  forward  into  Spain,  without  the  express 
consent  of  the  Spanish  Government  having  previously  been 
obtained ;  and,  as  an  indispensable  preliminary,  you  will  re- 
quire the  surrender  into  your  hands  of  their  General  and  other 
officers  not  engaged  in  the  measure ;  adopting  such  further 
measures  of  precaution  with  respect  to  artillery,  ammunition, 
&;c.,  as  you  may  think  fit. 

I  have  not  attempted  to  do  more  than  point  your  attention 
to  the  outline  of  the  policy,  on  which  it  appears  to  his  Majesty's 

F  2 


68  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Government  expedient  that  you  should  act,  wishing  to  leave 
to  your  own  judgment  the  fullest  latitude. 

The  plan  announced  by  Captain  Argenton  is  so  crude  and 
undigested  at  present,  so  full  of  hazard  and  difficulty  in  the 
execution,  and  so  formidable  in  prospect  to  those  who  embark 
in  it,  as  not  to  justify  any  sanguine  expectations  that  it  is 
likely  to  take  effect  on  the  larger  scale.  The  disposition,  how- 
ever, of  the  army  in  which  it  originated  (if  truly  represented), 
may  render  it  less  formidable  as  an  antagonist  in  the  field. 
Should  Soult  retire  his  corps  so  far  to  the  northward  as  to 
preclude  you  from  following  him,  and  that  you  should  see  no 
prospect  of  being  enabled  to  bring  him  to  a  decisive  action,  the 
encouragement  of  such  a  spirit  of  revolt,  if  it  really  exists  in 
his  army,  may  be  the  best,  perhaps  the  only  means  of  dis- 
embarrassing yourself  of  a  corps,  which  would  probably  again 
return  to  the  southward  so  soon  as  you  moved  to  the  eastward. 
If  such  should  be  the  case,  and  the  presence  of  your  army  is 
deemed  by  those  who  may  be  engaged  in  this  design  material 
to  protect  and  facilitate  their  revolt,  it  will  remain  for  you  to 
profit  by  that  disposition,  under  such  stipulations  as  you 
think  best. 

His  Majesty''s  Government  can  have  no  objection  to  the 
principle  of  the  measure :  they  are  only  anxious  that  it  should 
be  duly  guarded  in  its  provisions,  so  as  not  to  involve  them  in 
any  embarrassments  with  those  powers  with  whom  they  are 
acting.  Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  22,  1809. 

Sir — By  the  accompanying  return,  it  appears  that  there  is 
now  assembled  or  assembling  in  Portugal  tonnage  for  5,654 
horses.  The  arrangements  in  progress  at  home,  with  a  view 
to  the  operations  of  the  ensuing  campaign,  make  the  immediate 
return  to  England  of  transports  for  3,000  horses  an  object  of 
the  utmost  importance  to  his  Majesty''s  service.     With  this 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  69 

view,  orders  will  be  immediatel  j  sent  to  the  officer  commanding 
his  Majesty's  naval  forces  in  the  Tagus  to  prepare  a  division 
of  the  above  amount,  and  to  despatch  them  to  Portsmouth  so 
soon  as  he  receives  your  authority  for  so  doing.  You  will  be 
enabled  to  judge  from  the  aspect  of  affairs  how  far  this  im- 
portant aid  to  the  public  service  can  be  afforded. 

The  residue  of  this  description  of  tonnage  may  for  the 
present  remain  at  your  disposal ;  and  you  are  also  at  liberty 
to  retain  a  sufficiency  of  troop  ships  to  receive,  with  the  aid  of 
the  navy,  the  whole  of  the  British  army,  should  a  re-embarka- 
tion, contrary  to  our  present  hopes,  become  necessary. 

I  do  not  make  this  order  peremptory;  but,  unless  when  you 
receive  it  you  should  have  reason  to  consider  that  a  crisis  is 
approaching,  I  attach  so  much  importance  to  this  resource 
being  placed,  without  delay,  at  my  disposal,  that  I  should  wish 
you  to  order  the  transports  off  without  a  moment's  loss  of 
time,  as  much  depends  on  their  arrival  being  accelerated. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  22,  1809. 

Sir — The  light  brigade,  under  Brigadier-General  Sir  R.  Crau- 
furd,  will  embark  at  Harwich  and  Deal  on  the  24th  instant. 
The  Brigadier- General  will  be  directed  to  join  you  by  the 
shortest  route,  calling  off  Oporto,  Aveiro,  and  Mondego,  suc- 
cessively, for  intelligence  of  your  movements,  or  any  orders 
you  may  have  despatched  to  meet  him  at  either  of  those 
places. 

A  troop  of  horse  artillery  will  also  embark  about  the  same 
time  from  Ramsgate  with  similar  orders ;  and,  in  case  you 
should  consider  a  second  troop  requisite  for  the  service  of  your 
army,  the  Master-General  of  the  Ordnance  will  direct  the 
troop  now  in  Ireland,  with  300  additional  artillery  horses  of 
the  best  description,  to  be  held  in  readiness  at  Cork,  to  be 
embarked  so  soon  as  you  send  tonnage  to  receive  them.     The 


70  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

troop  of  horse  artillery  will  embark  about  190  horses.  You 
will  give  your  own  orders  to  the  convoy  with  respect  to  the 
point  of  debarkation  in  Portugal.  Castlereagh. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  25,  1809, 

Your  Majesty's  confidential  servants,  upon  a  foil  considera- 
tion of  the  efforts  making  by  the  enemy  to  reinforce  their  army 
in  Gallicia  by  a  corps  of  from  12  to  15,000  men  detached  from 
Arragon  {^ia  Burgos)  for  that  purpose,  and  the  critical  situa- 
tion in  which  the  British  army  may  be  placed  in  Portugal,  if 
it  should  be  threatened  by  a  force  of  equal  strength  with  itself 
on  each  of  its  flanks,  beg  leave  humbly  to  submit  to  your 
Majesty's  consideration  the  expediency  of  reinforcing  Sir 
Arthur  Wellesley  to  the  extent  of  5,000  infantry,  exclusive  af 
the  light  brigade  now  under  orders  for  Portugal. 

Your  Majesty's  servants  humbly  conceive  that  a  corps  of 
this  extent  may  be  drawn  from  the  regiments  now  stationed  in 
Ireland  and  the  islands  of  Jersey  and  Guernsey,  without  im- 
properly reducing  the  respective  garrisons,  and  without  breaking 
in  upon  the  large  disposable  force  at  present  in  Great  Britain, 
so  as  to  interfere  with  the  execution  of  any  service  to  which  it 
might  be  in  your  Majesty's  contemplation  to  apply  it. 

They  are  induced  the  rather  to  recommend  this  arrangement 
for  your  Majesty's  sanction,  as,  in  whatever  proportion  it  may 
operate  to  render  the  position  of  the  British  army  secure  in 
Portugal,  it  will  enable  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  place  at  the 
disposal  of  Government  a  considerable  proportion,  if  not  the 
whole,  of  the  transport  tonnage,  which  is  now  detained,  at  a 
heavy  expense,  in  the  Tagus,  and  without  the  assistance  of 
which  Lord  Castlereagh  apprehends  it  will  be  extremely  diffi- 
cult, in  the  present  state  of  the  commercial  marine  of  the 
country,  to  provide  the  means  of  rendering  any  considerable 
proportion  of  the  force  at  home  moveable  in  the  course  of  this 
campaign.  


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  71 

His  Majesty's  answer. 

Windsor  Castle,  May  26,  1809. 
The  King  acquiesces  in  the  arrangement  proposed  by  Lord 
Castlereagh  for  sending  a  further  reinforcement  to  the  army 
assembled  in  Portugal,  under  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,  of  5,000 
infantry.  George  R. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  25,  1809. 

Upon  referring  to  my  instructions  to  you  of  the  8rd  April, 
and  the  course  that  operations  may  take,  should  Victor  retire 
upon  your  moving  towards  the  Tagus,  I  have  received  his 
Majesty''s  commands,  in  order  that  you  may  be  enabled  the 
better  to  co-operate  with  the  Spanish  armies  against  the  com- 
mon enemy,  to  authorize  you  to  extend  your  operations  in 
Spain  beyond  the  provinces  immediately  adjacent  to  the  Por- 
tuguese frontier,  provided  you  shall  be  of  opinion  that  your 
doing  so  is  material,  in  a  military  point  of  view,  to  the  success 
of  your  operations,  and  not  inconsistent  with  the  safety  of 
Portuojal.  Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  26,  1809. 

Dear  Wellesley — Accept  my  congratulations  and  thanks  for 
what  you  have  already  accomplished,  and  my  best  wishes  for 
your  future  success  and  personal  glory.  I  am  doing  what  I 
can  to  promote  it  by  strengthening  you  from  hence,  and  shall 
press  everything  forward  as  much  as  possible.  If  you  want 
another  regiment  of  cavalry  n^ery  much,  send  transports  for  800 
horses  to  Cork,  in  which  I  will  send  you  the  1st  Dragoons, 
unless  events  should  require  us  to  give  it  another  destination. 
The  Transport  Board  have  directed  Fleetwood  to  place  himself 
under  your  orders,  and  to  execute  all  your  arrangements.  I 
hope  Craufurd  is  going  down  Channel  to-day.    Two  transports 


72  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

have  received  damage  at  Dover,  which  will  render  it  necessary 
for  them  to  call  at  Portsmouth.  The  transports  for  the  horse 
artillery  are  not  arrived  at  Ramsgate. 

I  shall  do  what  I  can  for  Stanhope ;  but,  in  the  present 
temper  of  the  times,  you  will  easily  believe  that  promotion 
against  regulation  cannot  be  attempted. 

Ever  sincerely  yours, 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  26,  1809. 

Sir — I  have  received  and  laid  before  the  King  your  de- 
spatches of  the  12th  instant,  stating  your  successful  commence- 
ment of  the  campaign  in  Portugal.  His  Majesty  commands 
me  to  express  his  entire  satisfaction  in  the  decision  and  the 
celerity  of  your  operations,  the  excellence  of  your  dispositions, 
and  the  vigour  of  your  attacks,  by  which  you  have  been  enabled 
to  defeat  the  enemy  in  three  actions,  to  pass  the  Douro  in  his 
presence,  to  recover  Oporto,  and  to  force  the  army  under  Mar- 
shal Soult  to  retire  with  much  loss,  and  abandon  great  part  of 
their  ammunition  and  artillery. 

You  will  make  it  known  to  the  officers  and  troops  under 
your  command  that  the  conspicuous  valour  and  intrepidity 
they  have  displayed  is  highly  satisfactory  to  his  Majesty. 
The  conduct  of  the  1st  battalion  of  the  Bufis,  commanded 
first  by  Lieutenant-General  Paget,  and  afterwards,  when 
he  was  compelled  to  leave  the  field,  by  Major-General  Hill, 
reflects  the  highest  credit  on  that  corps,  and  the  officers  who 
led  them. 

Whilst  his  Majesty  is  sensible  to  the  loss  his  service  must 
sustain  by  the  absence  from  duty  which  the  wound  received 
by  Lieutenant-General  Paget  must  necessarily  occasion,  he 
feels  great  satisfaction  to  learn  that  there  is  a  fair  prospect  of 
his  speedy  recovery.  Castlereagh. 


1809.] 


LORD  CASTLEREAGH. 


73 


Lord  Gastlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  26,  1809. 

Sir — I  am  to  acquaint  you  that,  in  addition  to  the  light 
brigade,  which  has  embarked,  and,  I  hope  sailed,  under  the 
orders  of  Brigadier- General  Craufurd,  his  Majesty  has  ordered 
the  seven  regiments  of  infantry  enumerated  in  the  margin  ^  to 
proceed  immediately  to  Portugal,  to  reinforce  your  army.  The 
three  first  are  now  stationed  at  Jersey  and  Guernsey,  and  will 
go  by  a  separate  convoy,  with  instructions  to  call  off  Oporto, 
Aveiro,  and  Mondego,  successively,  for  your  orders.  The 
remaining  four  battalions  will  assemble  and  embark  at  Cork. 

When  the  service  will  admit  of  your  sending  home  the  two 
battalions  composed  of  detachments,  it  is  my  wish  they  should 
return  to  their  regiments ;  but  I  am  disposed  to  leave  the 
moment  at  which  this  shall  be  done  to  your  discretion  ;  as  also 
when  the  detachment  of  the  20th  Light  Dragoons  shall  proceed 
to  the  Mediterranean ;  only  pointing  out  the  inconvenience 
that  arises  from  troops  being  long  suffered  to  remain  in  this 
dispersed  state,  and  trust  that  it  will  not  be  unnecessarily 
delayed. 

Steps  have  been  taken  for  collecting  a  remount  for  the 
cavalry,  to  the  numbers  required  in  your  letter  of  the  [blank], 
and  for  purchasing  a  number  of  aged  horses  for  the  regiments 
actually  on  service.  Hay  for  one  month,  for  6,000  horses,  is 
embarked  and  embarking  for  the  use  of  your  cavalry.  I  should 
be  glad  to  know  your  fiirther  wishes  on  the  subject  of  forage. 


^  34th, 

2nd  battalion 

693 

47th, 

do. 

730 

39th, 

do. 

603 

5th, 

do. 

718 

28th, 

do. 

725 

42nd, 

do. 

723 

88th, 

do. 

779 

4,951 


74  LETTEES  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

The  Master- General  of  the  Ordnance,  adverting  to  the  pro- 
portion of  artillery  now  in  Portugal,  and  the  two  troops  of 
horse  artillery  under  orders  (one  immediately  to  proceed  from 
hence,  the  other  to  he  held  in  readiness  at  Cork,  till  transports 
are  sent  from  Portugal  to  receive  it),  does  not  conceive  it 
necessary  that  any  further  detail  of  artillery  should  accompany 
the  infantry  now  going.  The  800  additional  artillery  horses, 
which  you  are  authorized  to  send  for  to  Cork,  will  render  all 
your  brigades  completely  moveable  and  efficient. 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  J.  Cradock. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  June  2,  1809. 

My  dear  Cradock  —  I  have  delayed  my  answer  to  your 
letters,  written  on  your  departure  from  Lisbon,  till  I  could  be 
assured  that  it  would  find  you  at  Gibraltar.  Your  wish  to 
return  has  been  so  strongly  conveyed  to  me  by  your  friends 
here  and  by  Lady  Theodosia,  that  I  can  have  no  other  desire 
than  to  fulfil  your  request.  You  have  done  every  thing  that 
honour  and  duty  could  require  from  you  towards  the  service  and 
towards  the  Government.  Whatever  is  most  satisfactory  to 
your  own  feelings  it  is  only  necessary  for  me  to  be  assured  of, 
to  feel  it  incumbent  on  me  to  promote ;  and,  in  this  sense,  I 
have  most  cheerfully  advised  the  King  to  leave  your  return  in 
your  own  hands.  If  I  have  not  entered  into  the  extent  to  which 
some  of  your  friends,  whose  judgment  upon  such  a  point  may 
be  more  correct  than  mine,  have  felt  upon  the  nature  of  your 
command  at  Gibraltar,  I  am  aware  you  will  believe  that  it  has 
not  proceeded  from  indifference  to  your  military  character  or 
reputation. 

For  both  I  must  always  feel  the  utmost  solicitude,  and  shall 
be  happy  to  avail  myself  of  any  occasion  of  marking  it.  As 
we  shall  probably  soon  meet,  I  shall  only  assure  you  of  tlie  re- 
gard and  esteem  with  which  I  am,  &;c., 

Castlereagh. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  75 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

Draft.  Downing  Street,  June  6,  1809. 

Sir — Your  despatches  of  the  15th,  J  8th,  and  20th,  have 
been  received  and  laid  before  the  King.  His  Majesty  has 
been  pleased  to  express  his  gracious  approbation  of  the  whole 
of  your  conduct  during  the  late  arduous  service  on  which  you 
have  been  engaged.  The  rapidity  of  your  movements  to  the 
northward,  if  not  attended  with  the  complete  reduction  of 
Soult's  corps,  has,  it  is  to  be  presumed,  for  a  length  of  time, 
disqualified  the  remains  of  his  army  from  acting  offensively 
against  Portugal,  and  left  you  at  liberty  to  prosecute  opera- 
tions against  Victor. 

The  decision  and  skill  with  which  the  British  army  has  been 
led,  and  the  animated  bravery  displayed  by  the  officers  and 
troops  in  the  passage  of  the  Duero,  cannot  fail  to  confirm  the 
confidence  which  they  are  entitled  to  feel  in  their  own  supe- 
riority over  the  enemy,  and  to  prepare  the  way  for  future  suc- 
cesses. The  result  of  the  present  operation,  under  the  relative 
circumstances  of  the  two  armies,  has  in  no  respect  fallen  short 
of  what  might  have  been  expected  from  the  talents  of  the 
General  and  the  gallantry  of  the  troops. 

Your  determination  not  to  follow  Soult's  army  further  to  the 
northward,  but  to  return  towards  the  eastern  frontier  of  Por- 
tugal, to  watch  and  repel  the  enemy^s  advance  on  the  Tagus, 
has  been  entirely  approved  by  his  Majesty. 


Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Sir  David  Dundas.^ 

Thomar,  June  7,  1809. 
Sir — I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 
despatch  of  the  13th  of  May,  relative  to  the  appointment  of 
officers  in  his  Majesty'^s  service  to  serve  with  the  Portuguese 

^  On  the  envelope  of  this  letter  there  is  the  following  note,  addressed 


76  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

troops  under  Marshal  Beresford.  It  appears  to  be  his  Majesty''s 
intention  that  the  number  of  officers  who  should  receive  one 
step  of  British  promotion  on  being  permitted  to  serve  with  the 
Portuguese  troops  should  not  exceed  twenty-four,  and  that 
thirty  officers,  who  were  to  be  sent  from  England  to  serve  with 
the  Portuguese  troops,  and  all  who  should  be  appointed  from 
the  army  in  Portugal,  for  the  same  duties,  should  continue  to 
hold  in  the  British  army  the  commissions  which  they  had 
hitherto  held ;  and  to  be  allowed  to  serve  with  the  Portuguese 
troops,  with  one  step  of  advanced  Portuguese  rank,  and  the 
pay 'of  the  Portuguese  commission  in  which  they  should  serve 
with  the  Portuguese  army. 

The  King's  commands,  as  thus  conveyed,  differ  from  what 
were  understood  to  be  the  intentions  of  his  Majesty's  Govern- 
ment, I  believe,  by  the  late  Commander  of  the  Forces  in  Por- 
tugal, and  from  his  practice  and  from  that  which  I  have  fol- 
lowed since  the  command  has  devolved  upon  me.  He  understood 
that  the  officers  who  should  be  allowed  to  serve  with  the  Por- 
tuguese troops  from  the  regiments  of  the  army  in  this  country 
were  to  stand  in  the  same  situation,  and  were  to  accept  their 
appointments  in  the  Portuguese  service  upon  the  same  con- 
ditions with  the  officers  first  appointed  in  England,  to  serve 
with  the  Portuguese  troops ;  and  he,  and  I,  since  the  command 
has  devolved  upon  me,  have  allowed  officers,  of  whose  names  I 
lately  transmitted  you  lists,  to  serve  with  the  Portuguese  troops 
on  those  conditions. 

As  but  few  officers  have  applied  to  serve  with  the  Portuguese 
troops,  even  with  the  advantage  of  receiving  one  step  of  British 
promotion,  I  should  doubt  whether  any  would  be  willing  to 

by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gordon,  Quartermaster- General,  no  doubt  to  Lord 
Castlereagh,  though  he  is  not  named : — 

"  My  dear  Lord — The  enclosed  leads  to  a  minute  detail,  but  I  under- 
stood you  wished  to  see  what  had  been  said. 

"  Yours,  most  respectfully,  J.  W.  Gordon. 

"July  14,  1809." 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  77 

serve  in  this  manner,  upon  the  advantage  now  held  out  to 
them  of  receiving  one  step  of  Portuguese  rank,  which  can  he 
but  local  and  temporary,  together  with  the  pay  of  the  Portu- 
guese rank  in  which  they  should  be  employed,  if  you  had  not 
transmitted  me  a  list  of  the  names  of  thirty  oflBcers  who  are 
willing  to  be  so  employed,  upon  the  terms  held  out  to  them 
in  this  list :  however,  I  beg  to  observe  that  it  contains  the 
names  of  some  oflBcers  now  in  Portugal,  who  will  refuse  to 
serve  with  the  Portuguese  troops  on  the  terms  proposed.  One 
of  them,  indeed.  Captain  Fordyce,  of  the  81st  Foot,  who  is 
Brigade-Major  to  Major-General  Hill,  and  who  has  been 
recommended  as  an  officer  to  serve  with  the  Portuguese  troops, 
upon  the  more  advantageous  terms,  (which  it  was  imagined 
here  that  it  was  intended  we  should  hold  out)  has  desired  that 
he  may  not  be  employed  with  the  Portuguese  troops,  and  that 
he  may  not  be  considered  as  having  expressed  a  wish  to  be  so 
employed,  unless  he  should  receive  one  step  of  promotion  in 
the  British  army,  and  that  this  promotion  should  be  notified  to 
the  army  in  this  country.  I  am  convinced  that  no  officers  in 
this  country  will  oflfer  their  services  upon  the  terms  which,  I 
now  understand,  are  to  be  held  out  to  them. 

There  is  one  branch  of  these  terms  to  which  I  wish  to  draw 
your  particular  attention  and  early  decision :  it  is  that  part 
which  gives  to  British  officers  one  step  of  Portuguese  rank 
above  that  which  they  held  in  his  Majesty's  service.^ 

The  Portuguese  Government  claim  a  right,  which,  I  believe, 
cannot  be  refused  to  any  independent  State,  of  granting  com- 
missions in  their  army,  and  that  the  officers  holding  these  com- 
missions should  rank,  according  to  seniority  of  dates,  with  the 
officers  holding  commissions  of  the  same  denomination  and 
rank  in  the  service  of  other  powers. 

Under  the  terms  proposed  to  be  held  out  to  the  officers  of 
the  British  army  in  Portugal,  to  induce  them  to  serve  with 

^  The  marginal  observations  attached  by  the  Commander-in-Chief  to 
this  and  subsequent  parts  of  this  letter  will  be  found  at  the  end. 


78  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

the  Portuguese  troops,  they  are  to  receive  one  step  of  Portu- 
guese rank  above  that  which  they  hold  in  the  British  army ; 
and  as,  under  their  Portuguese  commission,  they  are  to  rank 
with  British  officers  holding  his  Majesty's  commission  of  the 
same  denomination  and  rank,  according  to  the  seniority  of 
dates,  the  result  of  this  offer  will  be,  to  give  to  all  who  accept 
of  it  local  or  temporary  rank  over  the  heads  of  their  seniors, 
employed  in  the  same  foreign  service.  This  effect  would  not 
be  felt,  if  the  British  and  Portuguese  troops  were  not  likely  to 
serve  together ;  but,  as  they  do  and  must  serve  together,  it 
will  be  felt  daily,  and  will  give  occasion  to  dissatisfaction  and 
constant  complaints. 

I  have  to  mention,  upon  this  part  of  the  subject,  that  this 
dissatisfaction  has  already  existed  ;  and  I  have  been  called 
upon  to  decide  upon  a  complaint  made  in  consequence.  The 
practice  has  been  hitherto  to  give  an  officer,  who  had  already 
been  promoted,  one  step  of  British  rank,  to  induce  him  to  serve 
with  the  Portuguese  army,  another  step  of  Portuguese  rank 
when  he  entered  that  service,  thus  making  those  promoted  to 
be  British  Majors  Portuguese  Lieutenant-Colonels,  and  giving 
them  temporary  and  local  rank  over  all  the  Majors  of  the 
British  army. 

In  consequence  of  this  dissatisfaction  and  complaint,  I  have 
already  had  some  discussion  with  the  British  ambassador  and 
Marshal  Beresford  upon  the  subject,  and  I  proposed  either  that 
British  officers  appointed  to  serve  in  the  Portuguese  army 
should  have  Portuguese  commissions  only  of  the  same  rank 
with  those  which  they  held  from  his  Majesty ;  or  that,  if  they 
should  hold  superior  Portuguese  commissions,  in  a  view  to 
give  them  more  extended  command  over  the  Portuguese  troops, 
they  should  rank  with  British  officers,  when  they  should  meet 
them  on  service,  only  by  the  dates  of  their  commissions  in  his 
Majesty's  service. 

As,  however,  his  Majesty's  commands,  as  conveyed  in  your 
letter  of  the  13th  of  May,  recognise  the  principle  of  a  British 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  79 

officer  holding  advanced  Portuguese  rank,  and  consequently  a 
local  temporary  superior  commission  to  those  held  by  his 
seniors  in  the  British  service,  I  think  it  proper  to  delay  to  give 
any  decision  upon  these  complaints,  and  to  refer  the  following 
points  for  your  consideration  and  that  of  his  Majesty's  ser- 
vants : 

1st.  Are  officers  in  the  Portuguese  service  to  rank  with 
officers  in  his  Majesty''s  service,  according  to  the  dates  of 
their  several  commissions  ? 

2ndly.  If  they  are,  is  it  intended  that  officers  of  the  British 
army,  who  have  been  or  shall  be  appointed  to  serve  with  the 
Portuguese  troops,  shall  serve  with  a  Portuguese  commission 
of  the  same  rank  with  that  which  they  hold  in  the  King's 
service,  or  with  a  Portuguese  commission  of  a  superior 
rank? 

3dly.  If  with  a  Portuguese  commission  of  a  superior  rank, 
in  what  manner  is  the  relative  rank  of  these  officers  to  be 
settled  with  the  rank  of  officers  senior  to  them  in  the  British 
service,  although  junior  in  reference  to  their  Portuguese  com- 
missions I 

4thly.  If  officers  belonging  to  the  British  army  in  Portugal 

are  not  to  serve  with  the  Portuguese  troops,  with  advanced 

Portuguese  commissions,  what  other  encouragement  is  to  be 

held  out  to  them,  to  induce  them  to  accept  of  this  employment  ? 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c., 

Arthur  Wellesley. 

Marginal  Observations,  by  the  Commander-in-Chief  {Sir  David 

Dundas). 

It  is  understood  that  a  British  officer  employed  in  tho  Portu- 
guese service  receives  one  step  of  Portuguese  rank  on  his 
entrance  into  that  service :  that  is,  a  British  Captain,  if  em- 
ployed in  the  Portuguese  army,  receives  a  Portuguese  commis- 
sion as  Major.  In  this  capacity  of  Portuguese  Major,  he 
must,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  be  considered  as  a  Portu- 


80  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

guese  officer,  rankin2;  with  other  Portuguese  officers  according 
to  the  dates  of  their  respective  commissions. 

It  is  also  clearly  understood  that  Portuguese  officers,  when 
serving  or  co-operating  with  British  officers,  rank  with  them 
according  to  the  dates  of  their  respective  commissions,  a  Cap- 
tain with  a  Captain,  a  Major  with  a  Major,  a  Lieut.-Colonel 
with  a  Lieut.-Colonel.  This  being  the  case,  it  follows  that  a 
British  officer,  acting  with  the  Portuguese  army,  under  a  Por- 
tuguese commission^  must  be  considered,  to  all  intents  and  pur- 
poses, as  a  Portuguese  officer,  without  any  reference  whatever 
to  his  British  rank,  which  British  rank  lies  dormant,  (though 
progressive  in  the  British  army)  so  long  as  he  is  employed 
under  a  Portuguese  commission. 

It  is  not  possible  for  the  two  services  to  be  carried  on  together 
under  any  other  arrangement  with  respect  to  the  rank  of  their 
several  officers  than  that  above  mentioned ;  and  it  must,  there- 
fore, remain  with  the  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  united  British 
and  Portuguese  army  to  determine  as  to  the  number  and  elegi- 
bility  of  officers  to  be  lent  to  the  Portuguese  service  ;  and  the 
Commander-in-Chief  of  his  Majesty ""s  army  cannot  recommend 
to  the  King  that  the  number  of  British  officers  with  permanent 
rank  and  promotion,  when  employed  in  the  Portuguese  service, 
should  be  extended;  and  he  is  of  opinion  that  the  number, 
twenty-four,  is  already  too  large — such  a  promotion  bearing 
hard  upon  that  part  of  the  British  army  whose  service  in  dis- 
tant possessions  precludes  them  from  being  advantaged  by  it; 
and,  in  fact,  it  operates  as  a  very  extensive  and  partial  promo- 
tion to  the  army  employed  in  Portugal  alone. 

Besides  this,  as  officers  must  be  obtained  upon  the  spur  of 
the  occasion  for  the  organization  of  the  Portuguese  army,  this 
brevet  promotion  is  granted  of  necessity  to  young  men,  who, 
though  deserving,  have,  by  no  means,  those  claims  which 
attach  to  the  majority  of  the  army ;  and  consequently,  the 
major  part  of  the  most  deserving  officers  in  the  army  would  be 
passed  over,  and  become  thereby  dissatisfied  with  their  situation. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  81 

To  Question  1 .  This  has  been  the  invariable  practice  in  all 
united  armies. 

To  Question  2.  If  a  British  officer  serves  with  the  Portu- 
guese army,  under  a  Portuguese  commission,  which  it  is  sup- 
posed he  must  do,  to  render  his  services  effectual,  he  becomes 
a  Portuguese  officer^  m  toto,  and  no  reference  is  to  be  made  to 
his  British  commission. 

To  Question  8.  Answered  above. 

To  Question  4.  His  Majesty  permits  his  officers  to  serve  in 
the  Portuguese  army  on  the  following  terms,  viz. : 

Lieutenant,  Captain,  Major,  Lieutenant-Colonel,  may  serve 
in  the  Portuguese  army,  retaining  their  situations  in  the 
British  army,  and  with  one  step  of  rank  in  the  Portuguese 
army,  or  such  other  promotion  therein  as  the  Commander-in- 
Chief  in  Portugal  and  the  Portuguese  Regency  may  direct, 
senior  to  that  which  they  held  in  the  British ;  their  British 
commission  remainino:  dormant,  though  their  rank  in  the 
British  service  would  be  progressive.  Thus,  if  the  senior  Cap- 
tain of  the  1st  Regiment  of  Foot  was  serving  as  a  Major  in 
the  Portuguese  army,  and  the  Majority  of  the  1st  Regiment 
was  to  fall  vacant,  his  pretensions  to  succeed  to  such  Majority 
would  be  strengthened,  according  to  the  character  he  supported 
under  the  Portuguese  commission. 

D.  DuNDAS,  Commander-in-Chief. 

Horse-Guards,  July  10,  1809. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Major-General  Lighthurne. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  June  9,  1809. 

Sir — I  am  to  signify  to  you  his  Majesty^s  pleasure  that  you 
do  proceed  with  the  regiments  named  in  the  margin,^  now  in 
Ireland,  to  Portugal,  to  join  the  army  under  the  command  of 


5th  Foot 

2nd  Battalion 

28th     „ 

do. 

42nd    „ 

do. 

88th     „ 

do. 

VOL.  VII. 


82  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Lieutenant-General  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley.  You  will  call  off 
Oporto,  Aveiro,  and  Mondego,  successively,  in  case  the  Lieu- 
tenant-General should  have  left  at  either  of  those  places  in- 
structions for  the  guidance  of  your  proceedings. 


The  Hon.  F.  Robinson  ^  to  Major-  General  Lighthurne. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  June  10,  1809. 

Sir — Referring  to  Lord  Castlereagh''s  Instructions  to  you,  I 
am  directed  by  his  Lordship  to  acquaint  you  that,  as  there  is 
little  prospect  of  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley's  being  engaged  in  ope- 
rations in  the  north  of  Portugal  at  the  time  that  you  may  arrive 
off  that  coast,  his  Lordship  desires  you  will  omit  calling  off 
Oporto,  if  your  doing  so  is  likely  to  occasion  much  loss  of 
time,  but  that  you  do  proceed  without  delay  to  Aveiro  and 
Mondego,  where,  and  particularly  at  the  latter  place,  you  will 
probably  find  Instructions  for  your  guidance. 

F.  Robinson. 

Similar  letters  sent  the  same  day  to  Brigadier-General 
R.  Craufurd  and  to  the  officer  commanding  the  Royal  Artillery 
embarking  at  Ramsgate. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

Draft.  London,  June  11,  1809. 

Dear  Wellesley — It  is  a  lamentable  proof  of  the  uncertainty 
of  all  military  combinations,  which  depend  on  maritime  move- 
ments, to  state  that  Craufurd''s  Brigade  is  still  in  port,  having 
been  ready  since  the  24th  of  last  month.  It  went  to  sea  from 
the  Downs,  but  was  driven  into  Portsmouth.  As  the  trans- 
ports going  to  Cork  and  the  Islands  to  receive  the  seven  regi- 
ments ordered  from  thence  were  also  blown  into  Falmouth  and 
other  ports  to  the  westward,  I  fear  the  23rd  must  have  suffered 
from  the  late  gales  from  the  southward. 

Since  I  last  wrote,  I  have  ordered  a  Veteran  Battalion  to 
^  Now  Earl  of  Ripen. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  83 

Madeira,  to  relieve  the  1 1th  Regiment,  which,  heing  a  first 
Battalion,  of  1000  strong,  will  be  an  acquisition  to  your  army.. 

By  the  enclosed  Return,  I  conclude  you  will  have  35  bat- 
talions of  infantry,  exclusive  of  the  two  battalions  of  detach- 
ments when  the  1]  th,  now  under  orders,  joins  you.  The  propor- 
tion of  second  battalions  is  larger  than  I  could  wish ;  but  this 
you  may  mend  by  taking  the  48th,  57th,  and  61st,  from  Gi- 
braltar, and  replacing  them  with  the  three  least  serviceable  of 
your  army.  I  shall  be  satisfied  if  the  garrison  is  composed  of 
3,000  men,  of  which  the  two  Veteran  Battalions  now  there 
may  be  taken  for  1000. 

The  four  regiments  from  Cork,  viz.,  the  5th,  28th,  42nd, 
and  88th,  are  ordered  to  call  off  the  coast  for  your  instructions, 
particularly  at  Mondego.  The  brigade  from  the  islands,  viz., 
the  34th,  39 th,  and  58th,  will  proceed  to  the  Tagus ;  the  rea- 
son for  which  is  that  the  34th  and  39th  have  a  considerable 
number  of  men,  clothing,  &;c.,  which  are  to  embark  at  Ports- 
mouth, on  the  20th,  to  join  them.  Till  these  arrive,  they  will 
not  be  as  efficient  as  they  ought  to  be,  and  I  have  promised 
that  you  will  detain  them  at  Lisbon  till  the  whole  is  put 
together.  The  34th  was  reported  you  at  693  ;  it  will  now  be 
completed  by  Militia  to  1000.  The  39th,  I  understand,  will 
also  be  augmented,  probably  to  800.  When  these  are  arrived, 
you  will  have  as  large  a  force  as  we  can  for  the  present  spare 
you,  or  indeed  (including  Portuguese)  as  we  can  find  the 
means  of  paying;  specie  being  here  at  the  lowest  possible  ebb. 
What  do  you  now  reckon  the  Portuguese  force  at,  distinguish- 
ing what  is  in  British  pay  ? 

The  Continental  prospects  have  much  improved  since  I 
wrote  last.  The  battle  of  Aspern,  the  details  of  which  have 
not  yet  been  received,  has,  by  Buonaparte's  own  admission, 
thrown  him  back  a  month  in  his  campaign ;  and  it  is  to  be 
hoped  that  its  moral  influence  over  the  mind  of  the  Continent, 
as  well  as  of  the  Austrian  army,  will  be  even  more  important 
than  the  reduction  it  has  caused  in  his  ranks.     The  prospect 

g2 


84  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

of  something  being  done  against  the  enemy  in  the  North  is, 
from  this  circumstance  as  well  as  others,  so  much  increased, 
that  we  shall  be  anxious  to  receive  whatever  transport  equip- 
ment you  can  spare  us. 

Huskisson  will  write  to  you  on  the  subject  of  money.  A 
considerable  sum  is  on  its  way  to  the  Tagus ;  but  so  great  is 
the  pressure,  that  I  have  to  recommend  your  drawing  all  pos- 
sible aid  both  from  Cadiz  and  Gibraltar — in  short,  wherever  a 
bill  upon  England  can  be  realized. 

Gordon  will  explain  the  difficulties  that  are  felt  at  the  Horse 
Guards  to  give  rank  to  all  the  officers  who  have  joined  Beres- 
ford.  I  am,  &;c., 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley, 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  June  13,  1809. 

Sir — Your  despatches  of  the  31st  ultimo,  from  Coimbra^ 
have  been  received  and  laid  before  the  King. 

In  reply  to  that  which  requests  a  supply  of  different  articles 
for  the  use  of  your  army,  I  am  to  acquaint  you  that  directions 
have  been  given  for  forwarding  to  Portugal  the  supplies  therein 
named. 

In  order  to  prevent  any  future  want  of  so  important  an 
article  as  shoes,  50,000  instead  of  80,000  pair  will  be  sent. 
The  bread  will  be  forwarded  as  speedily  as  possible ;  but  it  has 
been  deemed  advisable  that  half  the  quantity  mentioned  in 
your  despatch  should  be  in  the  shape  of  flour. 

No  time  will  be  lost  in  forwarding  an  additional  proportion 
of  hay ;  but,  as  there  is  already  a  large  supply  which  waits 
only  for  a  fair  wind  to  proceed  to  Portugal,  I  trust  no  incon- 
venience will  arise,  if  the  whole  additional  quantity  required — 
3,000,000  pounds — be  despatched  at  different  and  successive 
periods,  on  account  of  the  great  extent  of  tonnage,  which  would 
otherwise  bo  occupied  at  once  on  this  service. 

The  same  remark  will  also  apply  to  the  oats,  of  which  a 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  85 

considerable  quantity  has  sailed  lately  from  Ireland,  but  pro- 
bably had  not  arrived  when  your  letter  was  written. 

The  necessity  of  sending  out  money  has  been  represented  to 
the  Treasury,  and  your  wish  will  be  complied  with,  as  far  as 
the  means  exist.  

Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Abrantes,  June  17,  1809. 

My  dear  Lord — My  correspondence  with  General  Cuesta  has 
been  a  very  curious  one,  and  proves  him  to  be  as  obstinate  as  any 
gentleman  at  the  head  of  an  army  need  be.  He  would  not  alter 
his  position,  even  to  ensure  the  safety  of  his  army,  because  he 
supposed  that  this  measure  might  be  injurious  to  himself  j  not- 
withstanding that  this  alteration  would  have  been  a  part  of  an 
operation  which  must  have  ended  in  the  annihilation  of  Victor''s 
army,  if  he  stood  our  attack,  or,  in  his  retreat  through  the 
mountains  to  Arche  Bispo,  with  the  loss  of  all  his  cannon  and 
baggage,  if  he  went  away.  I  hope  I  acted  right  in  giving 
way ;  more  particularly  as  the  operation  was  to  be  carried  on 
in  Spain ;  and  the  argument  urged  to  me  was  that  the  safety 
of  Cuesta^s  army  depended  on  my  compliance.  The  best  of 
the  whole  story  is,  that  Cuesta,  in  a  letter  of  the  27th  of  May, 
which  I  did  not  receive  till  after  I  had  written  to  him  to  pro- 
pose my  plan  of  operations,  proposed  to  me  the  same  plan, 
with  very  little  alteration. 

I  hope  that,  notwithstanding  Colonel  Roche's  delays,  and 
the  partiality  which  the  Admiral  has  for  the  employment  of 
the  horse  transports  on  all  services,  the  horse  transports  will 
have  arrived  in  time.  It  is  desirable  that  all  the  transports, 
for  horses  as  well  as  infantry,  should  have  a  thorough  clean- 
ing ;  for  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  some  of  the  former,  in 
particular,  are  infected. 

Ever,  my  dear  Lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


86  LETTEKS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Abrantes,  June  17,  1809. 

My  dear  Lord — I  cannot  with  propriety  omit  to  draw  your 
attention  again  to  the  state  of  discipline  of  the  army,  which  is 
a  subject  of  serious  concern  to  me,  and  well  deserves  the  con- 
sideration of  his  Majesty's  Ministers. 

Notwithstanding  the  pains  that  I  take,  of  which  there  will 
be  ample  evidence  in  my  Orderly  Books,  not  a  post  or  a  courier 
comes  in,  not  an  officer  arrives  from  the  rear  of  the  army,  that 
does  not  bring  me  accounts  of  irregularities  committed  by  the 
soldiers  who  have  been  left  behind  on  the  march,  having  been 
sick,  or  having  straggled  from  their  regiments,  or  who  have 
been  left  in  hospitals. 

We  have  a  Provost  Marshal  and  no  less  than  four  assist- 
ants. I  never  allow  a  man  to  march  with  the  baggage,  never 
leave  an  hospital,  without  a  number  of  officers  and  non-commis- 
sioned officers  proportionate  to  the  number  of  soldiers  j  and 
never  allow  a  detachment  to  march,  unless  under  the  command 
of  an  officer ;  and  yet  there  is  not  an  outrage  of  any  descrip- 
tion which  has  not  been  committed  on  a  people  who  have  uni- 
formly received  us  as  friends,  by  soldiers  who  have  never  yet 
for  one  moment  suffered  the  slightest  want  or  the  smallest 
privation. 

In  the  first  place,  I  am  convinced  that  the  law  is  not  strong 
enough  to  maintain  discipline  in  an  army  upon  service.  It  is 
most  difficult  to  convict  any  prisoner  before  a  regimental  Court- 
Martial ;  for,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  the  soldiers  have  little  regard 
for  the  oath  administered  to  them ;  and  the  officers,  who  are 
sworn  "  well  and  truly  to  try  and  determine,  according  to  their 
emdencei  the  matter  before  them,"  have  too  much  regard  to 
the  strict  letter  of  that  administered  to  them.  This  oath  to 
the  members  of  a  regimental  Court-Martial  has  altered  the 
principle  of  the  proceedings  of  that  tribunal.  It  is  no  longer  a 
Court  of  Honour,  by  the  hands  of  which  a  soldier  was  certain 


1 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  87 

of  receiving  punishment,  if  he  deserved  it ;  but  it  is  a  Court  of 
Law,  whose  decisions  are  to  be  framed  according  to  the  evi- 
dence principally  of  those  on  whose  actions  it  is  constituted  as 
a  restraint. 

But,  admitting  the  regimental  or  detachment  Court-Martial, 
as  now  constituted,  to  be  a  control  upon  the  soldiers  equally 
efficient  with  that  which  existed  under  the  old  constitution  of 
a  Court- Martial,  which  my  experience  tells  me  it  is  not,  I 
should  wish  to  know  whether  any  British  army  (this  army  in 
particular,  which  is  composed  of  second  battalions,  and  there- 
fore but  ill  provided  with  officers)  can  afford  to  leave  with 
every  hospital,  or  with  every  detachment,  two  captains  and 
four  subalterns,  in  order  to  be  able  to  hold  a  detachment  Court- 
Martial.  The  law,  in  this  respect,  ought  to  be  amended ;  and 
when  the  army  is  on  service  in  a  foreign  country,  any  one, 
two,  or  three  officers,  ought  to  have  the  power  of  trying  cri- 
minals, and  punishing  them  instanter,  taking  down  all  proceed- 
ings in  writing,  and  reporting  them  for  the  information  of  the 
Commander-in-Chief,  on  their  joining  the  army. 

Besides  this  improvement  of  the  law,  there  ought  to  be  in 
the  British  army  a  regular  Provost  establishment,  of  which  a 
proportion  should  be  attached  to  every  army  sent  abroad.  All 
the  foreign  armies  have  such  an  establishment ;  the  French, 
their  Gendarmerie  nationale^  to  the  amount  of  thirty  or  forty, 
with  each  of  their  corps  ;  the  Spaniards,  their  Police  militaire^ 
to  a  still  larger  amount ;  while  we,  who  require  such  an  aid 
more  than  any  of  the  other  nations  in  Europe,  (I  am  sorry  to 
say)  have  nothing  of  the  kind,  excepting  a  few  sergeants,  who 
are  taken  from  the  Line  for  the  occasion,  and  who  are  probably 
not  very  fit  for  the  duties  which  they  are  to  perform. 

Then  the  authority  and  duties  of  the  Provost  ought  in  some 
manner  to  be  recognised  by  the  law.  By  the  custom  of  the 
British  armies,  the  Provost  has  been  in  the  habit  of  punishing 
on  the  spot,  even  wath  death,  (under  the  orders  of  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief) soldiers  found  in  the  act  of  disobedience  of 


88  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

orders,  of  plunder,  or  of  outrage.  There  is  no  authority  for 
this  practice,  excepting  custom,  which,  I  conceive,  would 
hardly  warrant  it ;  and  yet  I  declare  that  I  don^t  know  in 
what  manner  the  army  is  to  be  commanded  at  all,  unless  the 
practice  is  not  only  continued,  but  an  additional  number  of 
Provosts  are  appointed. 

There  is  another  branch  of  this  subject  which  deserves 
serious  consideration.  We  all  know  that  the  discipline  and 
regularity  of  all  armies  must  depend  on  the  diligence  of  the 
regimental  officers,  principally  the  subalterns.  I  may  order 
what  I  please,  but,  if  they  don't  execute  what  I  order,  or  exe- 
cute it  with  negligence,  I  can't  expect  that  British  soldiers  will 
be  orderly  or  regular.  There  are  two  incitements  to  men  of 
this  description  to  do  their  duty  as  they  ought — the  fear  of 
punishment,  and  the  hope  of  reward.  As  for  the  first,  it  can- 
not be  given  individually  ;  for,  I  believe,  I  should  find  it  very 
difficult  to  convict  any  officer  of  doing  this  description  of  duty 
with  negligence,  more  particularly  as  he  is  to  be  tried  by 
others  probably  guilty  of  the  same  ofience.  But  these  evils  of 
which  I  complain  are  committed  by  whole  corps,  and  the  only 
way  in  which  they  can  be  punished  is  by  disgracing  them  by 
sending  them  into  garrison,  and  reporting  them  to  his  Majesty. 
I  may  and  shall  do  this  by  one  or  two  battalions,  but  I  cannot 
venture  to  do  it  by  more,  and  then  there  is  an  end  to  the 
fear  of  this  punishment,  even  if  those  who  received  it  were 
considered  in  England  as  disgraced  persons,  rather  than 
martyrs. 

As  for  the  other  incitement  to  officers  to  do  their  duty 
zealously,  there  is  no  such  thing.  We,  who  command  the 
armies  of  the  country,  and  who  are  expected  to  make  exertions 
greater  than  those  made  by  the  French  armies,  to  march,  to 
fight,  and  to  keep  our  troops  in  health  and  in  discipline,  have 
not  the  power  of  rewarding  or  of  procuring  a  reward  for  a  single 
officer  in  the  army ;  and  we  deceive  ourselves  and  those  who 
are  placed  under  us,  if  we  imagine  we  have  that  power,  or  if 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  89 

we  hold  out  to  them  that  they  shall  derive  any  advantage 
from  the  exertion  of  it  in  their  favour. 

You  will  say,  probably,  in  answer  to  all  this,  that  British 
armies  have  been  in  the  field  before,  and  that  these  complaints, 
at  least  to  the  same  extent,  have  not  existed ;  to  which  I 
answer,  first,  that  the  armies  are  now  larger,  their  operations 
more  extended,  and  the  exertion  required  greater  than  they 
were  in  former  periods ;  that  the  mode  of  carrying  on  war  is 
different  from  what  it  was  ;  secondly,  that  our  law,  instead  of 
being  strong,  in  proportion  to  the  temptation  and  means  for 
indiscipline  and  irregularity,  has  been  weakened ;  and  that  we 
have  not  adopted  the  additional  means  of  restraint  and  punish- 
ment adopted  by  other  nations  and  our  enemies,  although  we 
have  imitated  them  in  those  circumstances  which  have  in- 
creased and  aggravated  our  irregularities ;  and,  finally,  that  it 
is  only  within  late  years  that  the  Commanders-in-Chief  abroad 
have  been  deprived  of  all  patronage,  and  of  course  of  all  power 
of  incitement  to  the  oflBcers  under  their  command. 

It  may  be  supposed  that  I  look  for  this  patronage,  to  gratify 
my  own  favourites  ;  but  I  declare  most  solemnly  that,  if  I  had 
it  to-morrow,  there  is  not  a  soul  in  the  army  whom  I  should 
wish  to  promote,  excepting  for  services  performed. 

I  have  thought  it  proper  to  draw  your  attention  to  these 
subjects ;  which,  I  assure  you,  deserve  the  serious  considera- 
tion of  the  King*'s  Ministers.  We  are  an  excellent  army  on 
parade,  an  excellent  one  to  fight :  we  are  bad  in  quarters,  when 
campaigning. 

Ever,  my  dear  Lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Lord  Castlereagli  to  the  Che'Galier  de  Souza  CouUinho. 
Draft.  June  20,  1809. 

Lord  Castlereagh  presents  his  compliments  to  the  Chevalier 
de  Souza  Couttinho,  and  has  the  honour  to  acknowledge  his 
letters  of  the  13th  and  15th  instant. 


90  LETTEKS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Lord  Castlereagh  has  taken  an  opportunity  of  communi- 
cating with  the  Commander-in-Chief  on  the  subject  of  them, 
and  finds  that  he  does  not  think  it  proper  to  permit  any  addi- 
tional British  officers  to  proceed  to  Portugal  with  permanent 
rank  in  the  Portuguese  army,  under  the  circumstances  of  their 
services  being  at  present  required  with  the  corps  to  which 
they  respectively  belong. 

With  respect  to  Captain  Prior,  of  the  5th  West  India  Regi- 
ment, Lord  Castlereagh  is  informed  that  it  is  thought  advi- 
sable to  keep  the  Black  corps  as  efficient  as  possible  in  their 
complement  of  officers,  and  that  Captain  Prior  received  his 
appointment  under  the  assurance  that  he  would  immediately 
proceed  to  join  his  regiment.  Castlereagh. 


Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Abrantes,  June  27,  1809. 

My  dear  Lord — The  money  for  which  I  have  been  waiting 
arrived  here  on  Sunday,  and  the  army  has  marched  forward. 
Our  advanced  guard  will  enter  Spain  at  Zarza  Mayor  on  the 
2nd  of  July. 

The  French  retired  from  Almaraz,  on  the  road  to  Madrid, 
on  the  24th  ;  and  General  Cuesta  was  at  Almaraz  on  the 
same  day,  and  was  making  arrangements  to  cross  the  river 
Tagus.  Sebastiani  was  retiring  towards  Toledo.  He  was,  on 
the  22Dd,  at  Madrigoes,  and  Vanegas  at  Villasta,  on  the 
Zancara. 

It  is  unfortunate  that  I  could  not  march  ten  or  twelve  days 
ago  ;  but,  just  to  show  you  the  uncertainty  of  all  communi- 
cations in  this  country,  and  probably  the  deficiencies  of  our 
Commissariat,  I  mention  that  the  money  which  arrived  on  the 
15th  at  Lisbon,  and  was  sent  off"  immediately,  did  not  arrive 
here  till  late  on  the  25th.  It  is  the  same  with  every  thing 
else.  On  the  day  I  determined  to  move  into  Spain,  from 
Abrantes,  I  ordered  every  thing  that  would  be  required  for  the 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  91 

army,  and  I  have  not  had  occasion  to  add  to  or  alter  the 
original  order.  And  yet  the  articles  ordered  are  not  yet  ar- 
rived, notwithstanding  that  there  is  a  water  communication  to 
Lisbon,  and  officers  and  others  come  up  in  five  days.  I  be- 
lieve much  of  this  delay  and  failure  is  to  be  attributed  to  the 
ignorance  and  inexperience  of  our  Commissariat,  much  to  the 
want  of  money,  and  to  our  discredit  in  Portugal,  on  account  of 
our  large  and  long  owed  debts,  and  something  to  the  uncertainty 
and  natural  difficulties  of  all  the  communications  in  Portugal. 
We  shall  not  go  into  Spain  quite  so  strong  as  I  could  wish  ; 
but,  when  Oraufurd's  brigade  will  arrive,  I  think  we  shall  have 
nearly  20,000,  rank  and  file,  of  infantry,  and  about  3,000  of 
cavalry.  I  will  desire  that  a  weekly  statement  may  be  sent  to 
your  lordship,  that  you  may  see  how  we  really  stand,  for  I  ob- 
serve that  it  is  frequently  imagined  in  England  that  armies  are 
much  stronger  than  they  really  are,  and  expectations  are  formed 
which  cannot  be  realized.  It  is  a  most  difficult  task  to  keep 
up  numbers  in  this  country  and  climate,  particularly  of  cavalry. 
The  brigade  of  heavy  cavalry,  which  has  not  yet  done  a  day's 
duty,  is  obliged  to  leave  here  nearly  100  horses;  and  that 
brigade,  which  has  been  to  the  northward,  is  so  much  reduced, 
that  they  are  happy  to  take  110  of  the  Irish  Commissariat 
horses  as  a  remount.  I  hope,  therefore,  that  you  will  send  us 
the  remount  as  soon  as  possible. 

Ever,  my  dear  lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Castel  Branco,  June  30,  1809. 
My  dear  Lord — I  received  your  letter  of  the  11th  yesterday. 
I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  the  reinforcements  you  have 
sent,  and  you  may  depend  upon  it  that  I  will  make  the  best 
use  of  them  in  my  power  when  they  shall  arrive  ;  but  none 
are  arrived  yet,  excepting  the  23rd  Dragoons.  It  is  impos- 
sible to  say  how  we  shall  stand  in  point  of  numbers  when  these 


92  LETTEES  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

troops  will  arrive  till  I  shall  see  a  return  of  their  numbers. 
But  nothing  is  more  fallacious  than  a  return  such  as  that 
which  you  have  sent  me.  It  contains  an  enumeration  of  no 
less  than  11  battalions  not  arrived,  of  two  gone  to  Gibraltar, 
and  of  two  (the  detachments)  ordered  home,  and  the  20th 
Dragoons,  ordered  and  gone  by  this  time  to  Sicily  :  and  it 
omits,  on  the  other  hand,  two  battalions,  the  61st  and  48th, 
arrived  from  Gibraltar. 

The  mischief  of  these  returns  is  that  they  never  convey 
an  accurate  notion  of  the  strength  of  the  army.  According 
to  your  account,  I  have  35,000  ;  according  to  my  own,  I  have 
only  18,000 ;  and  the  public  will  not  be  satisfied  either  with 
you  or  me,  if  I  don*'t  effect  all  that  35,000  men  can  effect.  In- 
cluding officers,  who  ought  to  be  counted,  I  make  no  doubt 
that  before  long  I  shall  have  more  than  35,000  men ;  but,  from 
all  these  returns,  a  deduction  of  ten  in  the  hundred  ought 
always  to  be  made  for  sick  ;  and  then  you  might  expect  to 
come  nearly  to  the  mark. 

I  enclose  an  extract  of  the  last  return  I  have  seen  of  Victor's 
army,  which  shows  the  comparative  numbers  of  effectives  and 
total.  I  hope  that  our  effectives  will  never  be  so  much  re- 
duced in  comparison  with  our  total  as  that  is  :^  but  surely  it 
must  be  admitted  that,  if  our  army  is  now  to  be  called  23,000, 
and  hereafter  to  be  called  35,000,  rank  and  file,  the  French 
army  opposed  to  us  ought  lo  be  called  44,000.  And  yet 
neither  you  nor  I  will  be  forgiven  by  those  who  will  see  your 
return,  if  I  don't  now  perform  deeds,  which  might  with  justice 
be  required  from  35,000  men. 

If  I  am  to  have  the  5  7th  from  Gibraltar,  you  should  send  an 
order  to  the  Governor,  and  that  corps  to  Portugal,  in  exchange 
for  one  which  I  shall  send  to  Gibraltar  to  relieve  it.' 

I  enclose  you  an  abstract  of  the  last  return  of  the  Portu- 

^  The  return  in  question  states  the  total  amount  of  the  French  corps 
to  be  44,358,  of  whom  29,321  were  present  under  arms. — Editor. 
'  Done.     Note  by  Lord  Castlereagh. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  93 

guese  force  which  I  have  received.^  Of  this  number  we  pay  for 
20,000  men,  I  believe,  .^480,000  or  .£'500,000  per  annum.  My 
behef  is  that  the  Portuguese  Government  cannot  go  on  unless 
Great  Britain  will  assist  them  with  a  million. 

The  Portuguese  army  is  not  yet  in  a  state  of  discipline,  or 
organized  as  it  ought  to  be  for  service.  I  have  settled  with 
Beresford  that  he  shall  collect  all  that  part  of  it  not  required 
for  garrisons  in  a  camp  on  the  most  exposed  frontier,  for  the 
double  purpose  of  watching  the  enemy's  movements  and  dis- 
ciplining his  officers  and  troops.  If  he  can  get  them  together 
for  two  or  three  months,  they  will  be  a  fine  army,  and  prO' 
bably  very  useful;  but,  in  order  to  effect  this  object,  they 
must  be  kept  clear  of  the  desultory  operations  of  Romana  and 
the  other  Spanish  chiefs  in  Gallicia.  Besides  these  troops, 
called  Regulars,  there  is  an  army  of  militia,  amounting,  I  be- 
lieve, to  30,000  men,  divided  into  battalions  of  1,000  each. 
We  propose  to  discipline  the  whole  of  these  by  600  at  a  time, 
in  reliefs  of  200  each ;  and,  when  the  whole  are  disciplined, 
to  call  out  the  whole  in  camps  of  8  or  10,000  men,  at  a  season 
of  the  year  in  which  the  country  can  spare  the  labours  of 
the  men,  and  perfect  them,  and  then  send  them  all  to  their 
homes  till  they  shall  be  wanted. 

I  conceive  that,  exclusive  of  militia,  the  Portuguese  army 
will  be  50,000  men  when  complete ;  and  the  question  is,  in 
what  way  this  force  ought  to  be  employed.  There  is  no  doubt 
but  that  that  part  of  the  Portuguese  force  which  is  not  re- 
quired for  internal  purposes  ought  to  be  employed  against  the 
common  enemy  in  Spain,  if  that  addition  of  force  is  likely  to  be 
of  any  avail.  But  if  circumstances  should  bring  the  contest 
in  Spain  to  that  state,  that,  notwithstanding  all  our  efforts, 
the  enemy  should  still  be  superior  to  us  in  the  field,  I 
should  then  doubt  the  expediency  of  marching  the  Portuguese 

*  This  return  of  the  force  of  the  Portuguese  army,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Marshal  Beresford,  exhibits  a  total  of  58,489,  including  22,341 
militia. — Editor. 


94  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

troops  beyond  their  own  frontier.  These  doubts  turn  upon  a 
view  of  the  military  operations  which  it  would  be  expedient  to 
adopt  in  that  case  throughout  the  Peninsula  ;  which,  I  think, 
should  be  founded  upon  strong  reserves  in  parts  of  Spain  as 
well  as  Portugal,  by  means  of  which  the  contest  would  be  in- 
definitely prolonged,  even  if  it  should  ever  be  in  the  enemy*'s 
power  to  make  the  conquest.  They  are  also  founded  upon  my 
apprehension  that  great  length  of  time  will  elapse  before  we  can 
make  the  Portuguese  sufficiently  good  troops  to  retire  before  a 
superior  enemy,  and  my  opinion  that  they,  as  well  as  we, 
might  be  lost  before  we  could  re-enter  the  frontier  of  Portugal. 

I  enclose  the  copy  of  a  letter  which  I  have  written  to  the 
Admiral,  from  which  you  will  observe  that  you  will  have 
home  the  ships  in  the  Tagus  of  all  descriptions  excepting  5,000 
tons  of  infantry  coppered  transports  ;  and  I  purpose  to  keep 
horse  transports  for  300  horses,  (when  returned  from  Ireland) 
in  case  I  should  have  occasion  to  move  horses  by  sea. 
Ever,  my  dear  lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 

I  will  send  you  a  return  of  our  actual  strength  by  every  op- 
portunity. 

Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  the  Hon.  Admiral  Berkeley. 
Copy.  Castel  Branco,  June  30,  1809. 

Sir — His  Majesty''s  principal  Secretary  of  State  having  inti- 
mated to  me  the  wish  of  his  Majesty  that,  if  I  should  not 
require  their  services,  I  should  send  home  the  transports  now 
in  the  Tagus,  I  have  the  honour  to  inform  you  that  it  is  my 
opinion  that  all  the  transports  now  in  the  Tagus  may  be  sent 
home  without  inconvenience,  with  the  exception  of  5,000  tons 
of  transports  for  infantry,  of  the  coppered  ships. 

I  some  time  ago  gave  directions  to  the  commanding  offi- 
cer of  the  artillery  and  to  the  Commissary-General  to  have 
disembarked  from  the  Ordnance  store-ships,  victuallers,  &ic., 
and  put  in  store  at  Lisbon,  all  the  Ordnance  and  military  stores, 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  95 

provisions,  forage,  &c.,  which  were  in  those  ships,  and  de- 
stined for  their  departments  respectively  ;  and  I  have  called 
upon  these  gentlemen  this  day  to  let  me  know  what  progress 
has  been  made  in  the  execution  of  those  orders. 

It  is  my  opinion  that  all  the  store-ships  and  victuallers, 
as  soon  as  their  contents  will  be  disembarked,  may  be  sent  home, 
as  well  as  the  transports,  to  which  I  have  above  referred. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c., 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

Draft.  Downing  Street,  July  11,  1809. 

Sir — Your  despatches  of  the  dates  and  numbers  mentioned 
in  the  margin ^  have  been  received  and  laid  before  the  King. 
His  Majesty  has  been  graciously  pleased  to  approve  of  the 
whole  of  your  proceedings,  as  communicated  in  those  de- 
spatches, and  hopes  the  arrival  of  the  reinforcements  will  have 
enabled  you  to  act  with  effect,  in  concert  with  General  Cuesta, 
against  the  enemy. 

The  scarcity  of  specie  is  become  the  subject  of  much  anxiety. 
The  supply  sent  out  by  the  Rosamond  and  Niobe  (which  left 
this  country  early  in  June)  of  dollars,  doubloons,  and  Portugal 
gold,  to  the  amount  of  about  ^230,000  sterling,  arriving  so 
immediately  after  that  you  received  from  Cadiz,  will  have 
relieved  your  wants  for  the  present ;  but,  as  there  is  not  more 
than  c£*100,000  which  can  now  be  sent  from  hence,  in  addition 
to  what  you  have,  till  dollars  arrive  from  South  America  (the 
period  of  which  is  uncertain),  it  becomes  a  subject  of  the  most 
serious  consideration  for  you  to  concert  with  the  Commissary- 
General  how  you  can  realize  the  funds  necessary  for  your  army 
in  the  Peninsula  by  Bills  on  England. 

The  first  division  of  Horse  Transports  has  arrived,  and 
ftirnishes  a  very  seasonable  supply  for  the  expedition  under 
equipment.  A  long  continuance  of  north-easterly  wind  has 
^  June  7th,  11th,  14th,  17th. 


96  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

delayed  the  second.  I  trust  the  state  of  affairs  in  Spain  and 
Portugal  will  now  admit  of  your  sending  home  all  the  trans- 
ports, of  every  class  and  description,  which  are  not  indispen- 
sably required  for  the  local  services  of  your  army. 


Lord  Gastlereagh  to  Sir  A  rthur  Wellesley, 

Downing  Street,  July  17,  1809. 

My  dear  Wellesley — I  have  communicated  your  letter  on 
the  discipline  of  the  army  to  the  Judge-Advocate,  Attorney 
and  Solicitor-General.  They  feel  all  its  importance,  and  have 
desired  time  to  confer  together  upon  it.  I  have  also  conversed 
upon  it  with  Sir  D.  Dundas,  who  seems  quite  clear  upon  the 
practice,  in  all  times  past,  of  summary  punishment  for  ma- 
rauding, when  armies  have  been  in  the  field  on  actual  service. 
He  says  it  was  done  by  the  Duke  of  York,  an  instance  of  which 
I  enclose ;  by  Sir  Ralph  Abercromby  ;  by  many  others ;  and, 
in  the  last  campaign,  by  Moore — in  short,  he  thinks,  by  all 
commanders,  who  felt  it  necessary  to  the  discipline  of  their 
army  ;  and  he  has  no  conception  that  any  army,  more  parti- 
cularly a  British  one,  can  go  on  without  it. 

You  will  observe,  in  the  enclosed  precedent,  that  the  exe- 
cution is  ordered,  not  upon  the  view  of  the  Commander-in- 
Chief,  or  the  Provost  Marshal,  but  upon  the  report  of  another 
General  Officer  that  such  an  offence  had  been  committed. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  such  a  practice  always  has  existed,  and 
has  never  been  questioned  when  exercised  to  repress  gross 
breaches  of  discipline  in  the  progress  of  a  campaign  ;  but,  as 
this  extraordinary  remedy  is  supposed  to  arise  out  of  and  to  be 
alone  justified  by  the  necessity  of  the  case,  it  does  not  appear 
that  the  mode  and  circumstances  under  which  it  is  to  be 
exercised  have  ever  been  defined  with  any  precision.  It  is 
that  extreme  remedy  which  never  can  be  made  the  subject  of 
enactment,  and  will,  therefore,  probably  always  remain  to  be 
measured  by  the  conscientious  sense  of  its  necessity  operating 
at  the  moment  on  the  judgment  of  the  officer  who  authorizes 


1809.1  I^ORD  CASTLEREAGH.  97 

it  ;  and  I  know  of  no  other  protection  he  has  for  such  exercise 
of  authority  than  precedent,  and  the  disposition  all  reasonable 
men  would  feel  to  support  him,  were  it  questioned. 

As  far  as  I  can  collect  any  principle,  it  seems  to  be  most 
clearly  justifiable,  when  inflicted  instanter  on  the  commission 
of  the  offence,  and  when  the  proofs  are  of  a  nature  to  place  the 
guilt  of  the  party  beyond  all  doubt.  Where  time  has  inter- 
vened, and  the  offenders  been  committed  to  custody,  where  the 
guilt  is  to  be  collected  from  the  evidence  rather  than  from  the 
view,  there  the  intervention  of  a  Oourt-Martial  seems  the 
preferable  course. 

I  have  not  found  any  one  who  doubted  that  it  would  be 
clearly  competent  for  the  General  commanding  to  punish  with 
death,  upon  his  own  mew  of  the  guilt ;  but  whether  he  can  dele- 
gate such  a  power  to  his  Provost  Marshal  seems  more  ques- 
tionable. The  Commander-in-Chief  thinks  he  can,  according 
to  the  usages  of  war. 

As  soon  as  Ryder  returns  to  town,  I  propose  having  a  meet- 
ing between  the  military  and  the  legal  authorities,  and  shall  send 
you  the  result.  What  I  have  stated  in  this  letter  you  will 
consider  as  not  more  than  what  I  have  been  able  to  collect  in 
conversation.  There  seems  much  difficulty  in  treading  back 
our  steps  on  the  mode  of  constituting  Courts- Martial.  I  much 
regretted  the  innovation  in  the  Mutiny  Act  at  the  moment ; 
as  it  was  obvious  it  was  relinquishing  to  theory  and  reasoning 
what  you  could  hardly  ever  hope  to  resume  by  force  of  argu- 
ment from  an  Assembly  not  composed  of  professional  men. 
On  this  part  of  the  subject  we  are  helpless  till  Parliament  re- 
assembles, and,  even  then,  I  cannot  look  forward  with  much 
confidence  to  the  system  being  restored. 

This  consideration  does  not  alter  the  grounds  materially  on 
which  the  summary  exercise  of  punishment  is  to  be  justified. 
It  certainly,  however,  renders  it  the  more  indispensable,  and 
in  so  far  it  may  fairly  be  considered  as  one  feature  more  in  the 
necessity  that  warrants  it.     The  only  additional  part  of,  the 

VOL.  VII.  H 


98  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

question,  upon  which  it  may  be  necessary  in  this  preliminary 
communication  to  say  a  word,  is  that,  whatever  increase  of  the 
Provost  establishment  you  may  find  requisite  will  be  cheer- 
fully sanctioned,  and  I  conclude  you  can  be  at  no  loss  for  proper 
instruments  on  the  spot  to  employ. 

I  find  Sir  David  has  written  to  you  upon  the  relative  rank 
of  officers  in  the  British  and  Portuguese  armies.  In  point  of 
principle  and  reasoning,  he  appears  to  me  to  be  right,  that  our 
army  has  no  business  to  inquire  into  any  other  commission 
than  that  under  which  the  officer  is  serving  in  the  regiment  to 
which  he  is  posted.  It  may  be  a  question  of  prudence  with 
the  Oommanders-in-Ohief  of  both  armies  what  degree  of  en- 
couragement should  be  held  out  to  secure  the  supply  of  officers 
you  i»ay  require  ;  and  there  may  be  the  same  motive  as  in 
any  other  promotion  for  attending  to  the  claims  of  old  officers, 
if  the  preference  is  really  one  that  can  amount  to  a  grievance 
when  the  senior  officer  is  passed  over  ;  but,  having  determined 
on  the  extent  of  the  encouragement  to  be  given,  (which  none 
can  allege  to  be  taken  too  high,  when  it  carries  permanent 
advancement  with  it  in  our  own  service)  I  am  very  much 
inclined  to  think,  with  Sir  David,  that  you  can  consider 
the  officer  so  serving  in  no  other  light  than  you  would  any 
other  Portuguese  officer  of  the  same  rank,  and  that  his  being 
still  in  the  British  service  cannot  be  suffered  to  affect  the 
question. 

The  doubt  I  have  pressed  upon  the  Commander-in-Chief  is, 
whether  we  shall  accomplish  our  object  under  the  limitation 
imposed.  I  certainly  feel  that  I  have  no  right  to  press  upon 
him  more  than  that  the  number  of  officers  required  should  be 
furnished.  Provided  the  service  can  be  carried  on,  it  is  for 
him  to  judge  how  they  can  be  given  with  the  least  prejudice 
to  the  efficiency  or  permanent  interests  of  the  army.  Sir 
David  seems  to  be  very  peremptory  that  officers  enough  will 
be  found  to  serve  in  the  Portuguese  army  on  the  terms  he 
offers ;  and  he  supports  his  assertion  by  stating  that  he  found 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  99 

no  difficulty  in  obtaining  the  number  of  officers  asked  for  from 
among  the  corps  at  home,  and  entertains  no  doubt  that  he  can 
replace  any  who  choose  to  return  to  their  regiments,  upon  find- 
in  of  their  rank  not  confirmed. 

It  is  now  unfortunate  that  permanent  rank  was  given  at  all : 
to  take  up  a  principle  which  we  could  not  follow  up  has  pro- 
duced discontent  by  the  force  of  contrast ;  and  I  also  cannot 
but  regret  that  an  expectation  given  to  a  number  of  officers 
by  a  person  in  General  Beresford's  situation  should  not  be 
confirmed ;  but,  as  it  certainly  was  done  without  authority,  I 
do  not  feel  that  I  can  press  on  the  Commander-in-Chief,  on 
that  ground  merely,  to  do  what  he  considers  would  be  unjust 
and  prejudicial  to  the  army.  I,  therefore,  hope  you  will  make 
the  best  of  his  decision,  and  that,  if  you  want  more  officers, 
you  are  entitled  to  call  upon  us  to  find  them. 

Ever,  my  dear  Wellesley,  yours,  &;c., 

Castlereagh. 

Extract  of  a  General  Order. 

Head  Quarters,  St.  Amand,  April  10,  1794. 

^ajor-General  Abercromby  reported  yesterday  to  his  Royal 
Hifyhness  the  Commander-in-Chief  that  two  men  of  the  14th 
Regiment  had,  during  the  preceding  evening,  attempted  to  rob 
the  house  of  a  countryman,  and,  in  the  course  of  the  attempt, 
they  had  murdered  the  woman  of  the  house,  and  that  a  child 
had  been  also  so  much  wounded  that  there  was  little  prospect 
of  its  living. 

His  Royal  Highness  feels  himself  called  upon,  by  every  tie 
of  justice,  of  humanity,  and  duty,  to  punish,  by  a  signal  act  of 
severity,  the  perpetrators  of  so  horrid  a  fact.  Under  this 
impression,  he  did  not  hesitate  a  moment  to  order  the  Provost 
to  proceed  to  the  spot,  and,  by  the  instant  execution  of  the 
off'enders,  to  put  a  stop  to  conduct,  of  which  too  many  in- 
stances have  occurred  lately  to  leave  his  Royal  Highness  any 

H  2 


100  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

doubt  of  the  necessity  of  an  immediate  and  vigorous  inter- 
position. 

Tbe  two  men  were  executed  this  morning,  at  the  head  of 
the  brigade. 

Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Talavera,  August  1,  1809. 

My  dear  Lord — My  public  letter  will  give  you  some  idea  of 
my  situation.  It  is  one  of  some  embarrassment ;  but  I  think 
I  shall  get  the  better  of  my  embarrassments,  I  hope  without 
fighting  another  desperate  battle,  which  would  really  cripple  us 
so  much  as  to  render  all  our  efforts  useless.  I  certainly  should 
get  the  better  of  every  thing  if  I  could  manage  Cuesta,  but  his 
temper  and  disposition  are  so  bad,  that  that  is  impossible. 

Vanegas'  movement  will  probably  relieve  our  front.  I  think 
it  probable  also  that  the  French  will  not  like  to  press  through 
the  Passo  de  Bafios,  having ^Beresford's  army  in  their  rear,  and 
a  victorious  army  in  their  front ;  and  indeed  that  front  would 
be  quite  secure,  if  I  could  prevail  upon  General  Cuesta  to  rein- 
force his  troops  at  Bejar,  so  as  to  secure  that  point,  as  I  under- 
stood it  already  was. 

We  are  miserably  supplied  with  provisions,  and  I  don't 
know  how  to  remedy  this  evil.  The  Spanish  armies  are  now 
so  numerous,  that  they  eat  up  the  whole  country ;  they  have 
no  magazines,  nor  have  we,  nor  can  we  collect  any,  and  there 
is  a  scramble  for  every  thing. 

I  think  the  battle  of  the  28th  is  likely  to  be  of  great  use  to 
the  Spaniards  ;  but  I  don't  think  them  yet  in  a  state  of  disci- 
pline to  contend  with  the  French  ;  and  I  prefer  infinitely  to 
endeavour  to  remove  them  from  this  part  of  Spain  by  manoeuvre 
to  the  trial  of  another  pitched  battle.  The  French,  in  the  last, 
threw  their  whole  force  upon  us ;  and,  although  it  did  not 
exactly  succeed,  or  will  not  succeed  in  future,  we  shall  lose 
great  numbers  of  men,  which  we  can  but  ill  afford  ;  and  we 
cannot  attempt  to  relieve  ourselves  from  the  weight  of  the 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  101 

attack,  by  bringing  forward  the  Spanish  troops,  owing  to  their 
miserable  state  of  discipline,  and  their  want  of  officers  properly- 
qualified.  The  troops  are  entirely  incapable  of  performing  any 
manoeuvre,  however  simple ;  they  would  get  into  irretrievable 
confusion,  and  the  result  would  probably  be  the  loss  of  every 
thing. 

I  have  received  your  lordship's  letter  of  the  11th  of  July, 
for  which  I  am  much  obliged  to  you.  I  hope  that  your  expe- 
dition will  succeed.  I  guessed  the  point  to  which  it  was 
directed. 

I  understand,  from  your  letter  of  the  11th,  that  you  intend 
that  we  should  take  the  accoutrements  in  the  Hannah. 
Ever,  my  dear  lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  August  12,  1809. 

Sir — Your  despatches  of  the  15th  and  24th  ultimo  have 
been  received  and  laid  before  the  King.  I  am  commanded  to 
signify  to  you  his  Majesty's  entire  approbation  of  your  pro- 
ceedings, as  stated  in  those  despatches. 

The  considerations  which  determined  you  to  decline  under- 
taking any  further  operations,  till  the  wants  of  your  army 
shall  be  fully  and  satisfactorily  supplied,  and  every  arrange- 
ment made  which  may  appear  to  you  necessary  for  the  protec- 
tion of  your  army  against  similar  embarrassments  in  future, 
has  received  his  Majesty's  entire  approbation. 

I  am  happy  to  acquaint  you  that  the  course  of  measures 
you  have  adopted  for  affording  aid  to  the  Spaniards,  and  the 
reasons  which  have  influenced  your  determination,  are  consi- 
dered to  have  been  throughout  in  strict  conformity  to  the 
spirit  of  your  instructions ;  and  I  have  only  to  recommend  a 
perseverance  in  the  same  line  of  conduct. 


102  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  August  12,  1809. 

Sir — You  will  receive,  herewith,  enclosed,  copies  of  two 
despatches  addressed  by  Mr.  Secretary  Canning  to  the  Mar- 
quess Wellesley.  The  sentiments  of  his  Majesty's  Govern- 
ment on  the  present  state  of  the  war,  and  the  campaign  in  the 
Peninsula,  are  brought  so  fully  under  your  consideration  in 
that  despatch,  that  I  have  only  to  recommend  it  to  your  seri- 
ous consideration,  and  to  request  that  you  will  convey,  with  as 
little  delay  as  may  be  consistent  with  due  deliberation,  your 
opinion  on  the  several  important  questions  therein  proposed  to 
his  Majesty''s  Ambassador  in  Spain ;  transmitting  to  me,  for 
the  information  of  his  Majesty''s  Government,  duplicates  of 
your  correspondence  on  the  subject  with  his  Excellency. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

Downing  Street,  August  12,  1809. 

My  dear  Wellesley^I  send  by  a  messenger  the  official 
despatch  on  the  subject  which  I  opened  to  you  in  my  last 
private  letter.  You  will  receive  the  fullest  approbation  of  your 
proceedings  with  Cuesta.  In  order  to  do  any  good  even  to 
Spain,  we  must  take  care  of  our  own  army.  You  are  always 
ready  to  make  an  effort  when  an  adequate  object  presents 
itself;  but,  rely  upon  it,  whenever  you  feel  it  right  to  play  a 
more  cautious  game,  we  shall  be  disposed  to  give  you  full  credit 
for  adequate  motives,  and  I  am  confident  the  country  will  do 
so  also. 

I  have  sent  you  the  latest  intelligence  from  the  army  in  the 
Scheldt.  They  have  had  constant  gales  of  wind,  which  have 
retarded  very  much  the  naval  movements.  You  will  perceive 
that,  notwithstanding  the  delicacy  of  giving,  either  to  the 
e?iemy  or  the  public,  the  case  as  between  ourselves  and  an  ally, 
we  have  thought  it  right  to  publish  enough  of  your  letter  to 
mark,  1st,  that  the  battle  was  not  postponed  by  you  ;  2nd,  that 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  103 

you  did  not  suspend  your  operations  without  justifiable  grounds ; 
and,  3rdly,  that  your  reinforcements  had  not  joined  you. 

I  saw  Lord  William  Bentinck  yesterday :  he  will  proceed 
to  join  you  in  a  few  days.  I  believe  you  will  have  Lowry 
Cole  in  Murray's  room. 

I  have  had  my  conference  with  the  Attorney-General 
and  Ryder,  on  Martial  Law.  They  do  not  enable  me  to 
say  much  in  addition  to  my  former  letter.  They  seem  fully 
impressed  with  the  persuasion  that  the  power  of  summary 
punishment,  even  to  death,  must  reside  in  the  commanding 
officer  of  an  army  in  the  field,  but  in  what  precise  mode,  or 
under  what  particular  circumstances  to  be  exercised,  they  can 
give  no  opinion.  They  consider  that  the  necessity  of  the  case 
can  only  be  the  rule,  and  that  the  power  must  be  regulated  by 
the  conscientious  sense  of  the  commander,  and,  of  course,  upon 
his  responsibility.  They  admit  that  this  is  a  painful  duty,  and 
of  some  hazard  to  an  officer  to  undertake  ;  but  they  say,  at  the 
same  time,  that,  to  be  effectual,  it  must  be  both  summary  and 
arbitrary^  and  that  it  is  impossible,  in  this  Constitution,  that 
such  a  power  should  be  entrusted,  a  priori^  to  any  man.  All 
they  can  say,  with  respect  to  the  safety  of  having  recourse  to 
the  exercise  of  such  extraordinary  means  of  repressing  disorders 
is,  that  they  have  reason  to  believe  that  such  powers  have 
been  in  very  general  use  in  the  field ;  and  that  they  know  of 
no  instance  in  which  the  acts  so  done  in  the  face  of  the  army, 
for  the  preservation  of  its  discipline,  have  ever  been  subse- 
quently questioned.  The  only  practical  suggestion  they  have 
enabled  me  to  ofi"er  on  your  letter  is,  that  the  Mutiny  Act 
allows  three  officers  to  sit '  on  detachment  Court-Martial,  if 
more  cannot  be  had. 

The  6th  Regiment  of  Dragoons  now  with  you  have  only 
250  horses  at  home  fit  for  service.  These  are  ordered  to 
assemble  at  Portsmouth  for  embarkation. 

Ever,  my  dear  Wellington,  yours  very  sincerely, 

Castlereagh. 


104  LETTEKS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 

Downing  Street,  August  17,  1809. 
The  splendid  services  of  your  Majesty ""s  army  in  Spain 
have  induced  your  Majesty's  confidential  servants  humbly  to 
submit  to  your  Majesty  the  propriety  of  a  general  order  being 
issued  by  your  Majesty'*s  Commander-in-Chief  to  the  army,  sig- 
nifying the  sense  which  your  Majesty  is  graciously  pleased  to 
entertain  of  the  conduct  of  your  troops  in  Spain  upon  the  late 
occasion.  They  also  beg  leave  to  submit  to  your  Majesty  that 
the  commanders  of  corps  should  receive  the  same  distinction 
which  your  Majesty  was  pleased  to  signify  your  intention  of 
conferring,  in  the  instances  of  the  action  of  Vimeira  and 
Corunna. 


His  Majesty's  Answer. 

Windsor  Castle,  August  18,  1809. 

The  King  approves  of  Lord  Castlereagh''s  proposal,  that  a 

general  order  should  be  issued  to  the  army  on  the  occasion  of 

the  late  victory  in  Spain,  and  that  medals  should  be  conferred 

on  the  commanding  oflSicers  of  corps  engaged  on  the  27th  and 

28th  of  July. 

George  R. 


Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

TruxQlo,  August  21,  1809. 
My  dear  Lord — My  despatches  of  this  date, will  give  you 
an  unpleasant  account  of  our  situation  in  this  country,  than 
which  nothing  indeed  can  be  worse.  We  want  every  thing, 
and  can  get  nothing  ;  and  we  are  treated  in  no  respect  as  we 
ought  to  be,  and  hardly,  I  might  almost  say,  as  friends.  Y\\ 
just  give  you  one  instance  that  has  occurred  this  day.  In  this 
town,  there  are  two  deputies  of  the  Junta ;  one  Monsieur  de 
Calvo,  a  member  of  the  Government ;  the  other,  Lazaro  des 
Torres,  employed  with  the  British  army,  and  supposed  to 
carry  with  him  suprenie  powers  in  all  parts  of  Spain.     Some 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  105 

sick  had  been  removed  here,  -who,  by  accident,  had  not  been 
taken  care  of  in  the  arrangement  made  at  Taraigo  for  removing 
the  sick ;  and  I  wanted  six  carts  to  remove  them,  for  which  I 
applied  last  night  to  these  deputies,  but  in  vain ;  and  I  have 
been  obliged  to  remove  them  in  the  best  way  I  could.  And 
yet.  Monsieur  de  Calvo  declared  in  writing,  on  the  19th,  that  he 
had  means  of  transport  in  sufficient  quantities  at  his  command 
here,  to  forward  supplies  to  the  British  army  and  its  detach- 
ments from  hence  daily,  some  of  them  being  at  thirty  miles 
distance,  and  the  quantity  to  be  carried  daily  being  100,000 
pounds.  In  the  same  manner,  no  assistance  whatever  was 
given  to  our  wounded  when  they  passed  to  Elvas. 

Just  to  show  the  difference  in  a  country  in  which  good-will 
compensates  for  the  deficiency  of  means,  I  mention  that 
General  Leite  at  Elvas,  having  heard  that  our  wounded  were 
going  there,  prepared  for  their  reception,  and  the  preparations 
were  actually  made,  when  the  officer  whom  I  sent  to  him  with 
my  letters  arrived  to  make  the  preparations. 

In  the  same  manner,  stores,  which  were  written  for  to 
Lisbon  on  the  8th  of  this  month,  will  be  at  Elvas  on  the  26th; 
and  yet  Lisbon  is  farther  from  us  than  Seville  is,  and  the 
means  of  transport  in  that  country  not  so  abundant  by  one- 
half  as  in  Spain. 

However,  I  acknowledge  that  I  go  with  regret,  and  I  wish 
that  I  had  been  able  to  stay  a  little  longer.  Not  that  I  think 
I  could  have  done  much  good,  for  I  am  convinced  that  we 
should  not  have  been  able  to  resume  the  offensive.  Our  own 
cavalry  and  artillery  are  very  low  indeed ;  Cuesta^s  army  is 
much  weakened ;  I  understand  that  it  has  lost  10,000  men 
since  it  crossed  the  Tagus,  although  not  500  in  action.  Whole 
corps,  officers  and  all,  have  disbanded,  and  gone  off. 

If  we  could  have  fed  and  got  up  the  condition  of  our 
horses,  we  might  probably,  after  some  time,  have  struck  a 
brilliant  blow  upon  Soult  at  Placencia,  or  upon  Mortier  in  the 
centre ;  but,  till  there  should  be  a  force  in  the  centre  of  Spain 


106  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

capable  of  keeping  in  check  Ney's  corps,  and  probably  Soult's, 
or  of  alarming  Joseph  for  Madrid,  or  till  we  could  put  a  force 
in  Bafios  on  which  we  could  depend,  we  could  not  hope  to 
make  any  progress  with  the  offensive  in  this  quarter.  The 
Marquess  de  Romana,  who  alone  has  numbers,  has  neither 
cavalry  nor  artillery,  and  cannot  venture  to  quit  the  moun- 
tains ;  and  he,  I  understand,  was  still  at  Corunna  on  the  5th, 
and  we  could  depend  upon  nothing  to  keep  Ney,  and  eventually 
Soult,  out  of  Estremadura,  after  what  I  have  seen  of  the 
Spanish  troops,  excepting  British. 

I  will  not  now  answer  your  letter  respecting  the  discipline 
of  the  army,  notwithstanding  that  I  am  more  than  ever  con- 
vinced that  something  is  necessary  to  be  done.  But  I  believe 
the  Government  is  not  sufficiently  strong,  and  the  times  will 
not  admit  of  doing  this  andlnany  other  good  things. 

Believe  me,  my  dear  Lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 

Lord  Gastlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  August  21,  1809. 

Sir — Your  letters  of  the  dates  referred  to  in  the  marofin^ 
have  been  received  and  laid  before  the  King. 

That  of  the  29tli  of  July,  which  reports  the  result  of  an 
attack  on  the  combined  British  and  Spanish  armies  near  Tala- 
vera  de  la  Reyna,  on  the  27th  and  28th  ultimo,  by  the  united 
corps  of  Victor,  Sebastian i,  and  the  troops  from  Madrid,  has 
been  received  by  his  Majesty  with  the  utmost  interest  and 
satisfaction. 

The  nature  of  the  position  occupied  by  the  Spanish  army, 
and  the  deliberate  purpose  of  the  enemy  to  direct  his  whole 
efforts  against  the  troops  of  his  Majesty,  as  it  has  thrown 
upon  the  British  army  nearly  the  entire  weight  of  this  great 
contest,  has  afforded  them  an  opportunity  of  acquiring  for 
themselves  the  immortal  glory  of  having  vanquislicd  a  French 
'  July  29,  August  1,  and  August  1. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  107 

army  of  more  than  double  their  numbers,  not  in  a  short  and 
partial  struggle,  but  in  a  battle  obstinately  contested  on  two 
successive  days,  not  wholly  discontinued  throughout  the  inter- 
vening night,  and  fought  under  circumstances  which  brought 
the  mass  of  both  armies  into  close  and  repeated  combat. 

The  King,  in  contemplating  so  glorious  a  display  of  the 
valour  and  prowess  of  his  troops,  has  commanded  me  to  declare 
his  royal  approbation  of  the  conduct  of  his  whole  army. 

His  Majesty  has  commanded  me  to  signify  to  you,  in  the 
most  marked  and  especial  manner,  his  gracious  sense  of  your 
personal  services  on  this  ever -memorable  occasion  ;  not  less  dis- 
played in  the  glorious  result  of  the  battle  itself,  than  in  the 
consummate  ability,  valour,  and  military  resource,  with  which 
the  many  difficulties  of  this  arduous  contest  were  met  and 
provided  for  by  your  tried  experience  and  judgment. 

The  conduct  of  Lieutenant-General  Sherbrooke,  second  in 
command,  has  entitled  him  to  the  King's  entire  approbation. 
His  Majesty  has  observed  with  satisfaction  the  manner  in 
which  he  led  on  the  troops  to  the  charge  with  the  bayonet — a 
species  of  attack  which,  on  all  occasions,  so  well  accords  with 
the  dauntless  character  of  British  soldiers. 

His  Majesty  has  noticed,  with  the  same  gracious  approba- 
tion, the  conduct  of  the  several  general  and  other  officers.  All 
have  done  their  duty — most  of  them  have  had  occasions  of 
eminently  distinguishing  themselves — the  particular  instances 
of  which,  as  reported  by  you,  have  not  escaped  his  Majesty's 
attention. 

In  signifying  to  the  officers  of  the  army  in  public  orders  his 
Majesty's  approbation  and  thanks,  it  is  his  Majesty's  pleasure 
that  they  be  extended  in  the  most  distinct  and  particular 
manner  to  the  non-commissioned  officers  and  men.  On  no 
occasion  have  they  displayed  with  greater  lustre  the  inestimable 
qualities  which  they  possess  as  soldiers  ;  nor  have  they,  on  any 
former  occasion,  more  nobly  sustained  the  military  character 
of  the  British  nation. 


108  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

In  acknowledging  the  services  of  the  brave  army  under  your 
command,  his  Majesty  cannot  refrain  from  those  expressions 
of  sorrow  and  regret  with  which  his  royal  mind  has  been 
affected  at  observing  the  great  number  of  gallant  oflficers  and 
men  who  have  fallen  in  the  battle  of  Talavera.  His  Majesty ""s 
paternal  feelings  derive  their  best  consolation  on  this  occasion 
from  the  persuasion  that  bravery  so  distinguished,  and  exer- 
tions so  heroic,  cannot  but  have  obtained  for  their  country  the 
most  important  and  lasting  advantages ;  and  that,  whilst  the 
security  and  glory  of  his  own  empire  have  been  confirmed  by 
the  achievements  of  his  troops,  his  Majesty  trusts  that  their 
efforts  will  not  prove  unavailing,  under  the  favour  of  Divine 
Providence,  in  defence  of  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  Spanish 
nation. 

His  Majesty  has  directed  a  medal  to  be  distributed  to  the 
general  and  other  officers  commanding  corps,  in  commemora- 
tion of  the  victory  of  Talavera,  and  has  further  commanded 
that  his  royal  approbation  of  the  services  of  his  gallant  troops 
in  Spain  should  be  published  in  general  orders  to  the  whole  of 
the  British  army. 

Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh, 

Merida,  August  25,  1809. 

My  dear  Lord — I  received  by  Mr.  Hoey,  on  the  day  before 
yesterday,  your  letter  of  the  4th  of  August;  and,  having  for 
some  time  past,  turned  my  mind  very  seriously  to  the  con- 
sideration of  the  points  to  which  it  relates,  I  am  not  unpre- 
pared to  give  you  an  opinion  upon  them.  The  information 
which  I  have  acquired  in  the  last  two  months  has  opened  my 
eyes  respecting  the  state  of  the  war  in  the  Peninsula,  and  Til 
just  state  a  few  facts,  which  will  enable  you  and  the  King'*s 
Ministers  to  form  your  own  opinions  upon  it. 

I  calculate  the  French  force  in  the  Peninsula  now  to  consist 
of  about  125,000  men  :  of  this  number  about  70,000  are  in 
this  part  of  Spain ;    St.  Cyr's  corps,  about  20,000  men,  en- 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  109 

gaged  in  the  siege  of  Gerona;  -Suchet's,  about  14,000,  in  Aragon  ; 
and  the  remainder  are  employed  in  different  garrisons,  such  as 
Avila,  &c*,  and  in  keeping  up  the  communication  with  France  ; 
all  of  which,  if  necessary,  are  disposable  for  the  field.  These 
125,000  men  are  exclusive  of  the  garrisons  of  Pampeluna, 
Barcelona,  &c. 

These  troops,  you  will  observe,  are  all  in  Spain,  and  against 
this  force  the  Spaniards  have  under  Vanegas  and  Eguia,  late 
Cuesta"*s  army,  about  50,000  men ;  Romana,  the  Duque  del 
Parque,  and  every  thing  to  the  northward,  about  25,000; 
Blake  may  have  got  together  again  about  5  or  6,000  ;  and 
I  believe  there  is  nothing  in  Aragon  and  Catalonia,  excepting 
armed  population.  Thus  the  Spaniards  have  not,  at  the  end 
of  eighteen  months  nearly  after  the  commencement  of  the 
revolution,  above  80,000  men,  of  which  the  composition  and 
qualities  will  be  found  still  more  defective  than  the  numbers 
are  deficient,  to  carry  on  the  contest  with  the  French,  even  in 
their  present  strength.  To  these  numbers  add  all  the  troops 
we  can  bring  into  the  field  at  present,  which  are  about  25,000 
men,  and  about  10,000  Portuguese,  and  you  will  see  that  the 
allies  are,  at  this  moment,  inferior  in  point  of  numbers  only  to 
the  enemy  in  the  Peninsula.  However,  in  this  account  of  the 
troops  of  the  allies,  I  don't  reckon  many  garrisons  and  towns 
occupied  by  the  Spaniards  and  Portuguese,  nor  do  I  reckon  the 
French  garrisons  :  I  count  only  those  men  on  both  sides  who 
can  be  brought  into  the  field  to  fight. 

In  respect  to  the  composition  of  these  armies,  we  find  the 
French  well  supplied  with  troops  of  the  different  descriptions 
and  arms  required,  viz.,  artillery,  cavalry,  and  infantry,  heavy 
and  light.  Cuesta's  army  had  about  7,000  cavalry,  Vanegas' 
about  3,000 ;  and  there  may  be  about  2,000  more  cavalry  dis- 
tributed throughout  Spain.  The  English  have  about  2,500 
cavalry  left,  and  the  Portuguese  may  have  5  or  600.  Pro- 
bably, if  all  this  cavalry  were  efiicient,  and  could  be  divided  as 
it  ought  to  be,  it  might  be  sufficient,  and  might  be  found  more 


110  LETTEBS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

numerous  than  that  of  the  French  in  the  Peninsula ;  hut  you 
will  observe  that  all  the  cavalry  is  now  in  the  south ;  and  Ro- 
mana^s  army,  which  it  is  most  important  to  bring  forward  (as, 
unless  it  is  brought  forward,  the  allies  can  make  no  impression 
on  the  French  to  the  southward),  has  neither  cavalry  nor 
artillery,  and  cannot  quit  the  mountains.  Neither  has  the 
Duque  del  Parque  more  than  one  regiment,  or  Blake  more  than 
the  same  number. 

I  come  now  to  the  description  of  the  troops,  and  here,  I  am 
sorry  to  say,  that  our  allies  fail  us  still  more  than  they  do  in 
numbers  and  composition.  The  Spanish  cavalry  are,  I  be- 
lieve, almost  entirely  without  discipline.  They  are,  in  ge- 
neral, well  clothed,  armed,  and  accoutred,  and  remarkably  well 
mounted,  and  their  horses  are  in  good  condition  —  I  mean 
those  of  Eguia^s  army,  which  I  have  seen.  But  I  have  never 
heard  any  body  pretend  that,  in  any  one  instance,  they  have 
behaved  as  soldiers  ought  to  do  in  presence  of  the  enemy,  ex- 
cepting the  King''s  regiment  in  the  battle  of  Talavera.  They 
make  no  scruple  of  running  off ;  and,  after  an  action,  are  to  be 
found  in  every  village  and  every  shady  bottom  within  fifty 
miles  of  the  field  of  battle. 

The  Spanish  artillery  are,  as  far  as  I  have  seen  of  them, 
entirely  unexceptionable,  and  the  Portuguese  artillery  excellent. 

In  regard  to  the  great  body  of  all  armies,  I  mean  the  in- 
fantry, it  is  lamentable  to  see  how  bad  that  of  the  Spaniards 
is,  and  how  unequal  to  a  contest  with  the  French.  They  are 
armed,  I  believe,  well ;  they  are  badly  accoutred,  not  having 
the  means  of  saving  their  ammunition  from  the  rain ;  not 
clothed  in  some  instances  at  all ;  in  others,  clothed  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  make  them  look  like  peasants,  which  ought,  of 
all  things,  to  be  avoided  ;  and  their  discipline  appears  to  me 
to  be  confined  to  placing  them  in  the  ranks  three  deep,  at  very 
close  order,  and  to  the  manual  exercise.  It  is  impossible  to 
calculate  upon  any  operation  with  these  troops.  It  is  said 
that  sometimes  they  behave  well ;  though,  I  acknowledge,  I 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  Ill 

have  never  seen  them  behave  otherwise  than  ill.  Basse- 
rona^s  corps,  which  was  supposed  to  be  the  best  in  Cuesta^s 
army,  and  was  engaged  on  our  left  in  the  mountains,  in  the 
battle  of  Talavera,  was  kept  in  check  throughout  the  day 
by  one  French  battalion.  This  corps  has  since  run  away 
from  the  bridge  of  Arzo  Bispo  ;  leaving  its  guns,  and  many  of 
the  men,  according  to  the  usual  Spanish  custom,  throwing  away 
their  arms,  accoutrements,  and  clothing.  It  is  a  curious  cir- 
cumstance respecting  this  affair  at  Arzo  Bispo,  (in  which  Soult 
writes  that  the  French  took  thirty  pieces  of  cannon)  that  the 
Spaniards  ran  off  in  such  a  hurry  that  they  left  their  cannon 
loaded  and  unspiked ;  and  that  the  French,  although  they 
drove  the  Spaniards  from  the  bridge,  did  not  think  themselves 
strong  enough  to  push  after  them ;  and  Colonel  Walton, 
whom  I  sent  in  with  a  flag  of  truce  on  the  10th,  relating  to 
our  wounded,  found  the  cannon  on  the  road,  abandoned  by  the 
one  party,  and  not  taken  possession  of,  and  probably  not  known 
of,  by  the  other  ! 

This  practice  of  running  away  and  throwing  off  arms,  ac- 
coutrements, and  clothing,  is  fatal  to  every  thing,  excepting  a 
re-assembly  of  the  men  in  a  stata  of  nature  ;  who.  as  regularly 
perform  the  same  manoeuvre  the  next  time  an  occasion  offers. 
Nearly  2,000  ran  off,  on  the  evening  of  the  27th,  from  the 
battle  of  Talavera,  not  100  yards  from  the  place  where  I  was 
standing,  who  were  neither  attacked  nor  threatened  with  any 
attack,  and  who  were  frightened  only  by  the  noise  of  their  own 
fire.  They  left  their  arms  and  accoutrements  on  the  ground ; 
their  officers  went  with  them  ;  and  they  and  the  fugitive 
cavalry  plundered  the  baggage  of  the  British  army  which  had 
been  sent  to  the  rear.  Many  others  went,  whom  I  did  not 
see. 

When  a  nation  has  devoted  itself  to  war,  as  this  nation 
has  by  the  measures  it  has  adopted  in  the  last  two  years,  it 
is  surprising  that  so  little  progress  has  been  made  in  the 
composition  of  the  officers  of  the  army,  and  that  the  business 


112  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

of  an  army  should  be  so  little  understood.  They  are  really 
children  in  the  art  of  war ;  and  I  cannot  say  that  they  do 
any  thing  as  it  ought  to  be  done,  except,  as  I  have  said, 
running  away,  and  assembling  again  in  a  state  of  nature. 

I  really  believe  that  much  of  this  deficiency  of  numbers, 
composition,  discipline,  and  efficiency,  is  to  be  attributed  to  the 
existing  Government  in  Spain.  They  have  attempted  to 
govern  the  kingdom  in  a  state  of  revolution  by  an  adherence  to 
old  rules  and  systems,  and  with  the  aid  of  what  is  called  en- 
thusiasm. And  this  last  is,  in  reality,  no  aid  to  accomplish 
any  thing,  and  is  only  an  excuse  for  the  irregularity  with  which 
every  thing  is  done,  and  for  the  want  of  discipline  and  subor- 
dination of  the  armies.  People  are  very  apt  to  believe  that  en- 
thusiasm carried  the  French  through  the  Revolution,  and  was 
the  parent  of  those  exertions  which  have  nearly  conquered  the 
world  ;  but,  if  the  subject  is  nicely  examined,  it  will  be  found 
that  enthusiasm  was  the  name  only,  but  that  force  was  the  in- 
strument, under  the  system  of  terror,  which  brought  forward 
those  great  resources  which  first  stopped  the  allies  ;  and  that  a 
perseverance  in  the  same  system  of  applying  by  force  every 
individual  and  every  description  of  property  in  the  country  to 
the  service  of  the  army  has  since  conquered  Europe. 

After  this  statement,  you  will  judge  for  yourselves  whether 
you  will  employ  any  and  what  strength  of  army  in  the  support 
of  the  cause  of  Spain.  Circumstances  with  which  you  are  ac- 
quainted have  obliged  me  to  separate  myself  from  the  Spanish 
army ;  and  I  can  only  tell  you  that  I  feel  no  inclination  to 
join  in  co-operation  with  them  again  on  my  own  responsibility, 
and  that  I  shall  see  my  way  very  clearly  before  me  indeed 
before  I  do  so  ;  and  I  do  not  recommend  you  to  have  any  thing 
to  do  with  them  in  their  present  state. 

Before  I  quit  this  part  of  the  subject,  it  may  be  satisfactory 
to  you  to  know  that  I  don''t  think  matters  would  have  been 
much  better,  if  you  had  sent  your  large  expedition  to  Spain 
instead  of  the  Scheldt.     You  could  not  have  equipped  it  in 


1809.]  LOED  CASTLEKEAGH.  113 

Grallicia  or  any  where  in  the  north  of  Spain.  If  we  had  had 
60,000  men,  instead  of  20,000,  in  all  probability,  we  should 
not  have  got  to  Talavera  to  fight  the  battle,  for  want  of  means 
and  of  provisions.  But  if  we  had  got  to  Talavera,  we  could 
not  have  gone  further,  and  the  armies  would  probably  have 
separated  for  want  of  means  of  subsistence,  probably  without 
a  battle,  but  certainly  afterwards.  Besides,  you  will  observe  that 
your  40,000  men,  supposing  them  to  be  equipped  and  means  to 
exist  of  feeding  them,  would  not  compensate  for  the  deficiency 
of  numbers,  of  composition,  and  of  efficiency  in  the  Spanish 
armies  ;  and  that,  supposing  they  had  been  able  to  remove  the 
French  from  Madrid,  they  would  not  have  removed  them  from 
the  Peninsula,  even  in  the  existing  state  of  the  French  force. 

I  now  come  to  another  branch  of  the  subject,  which  is  Por- 
tugal itself.  I  have  not  got  from  Beresford  his  report  upon 
the  present  and  the  probable  ftiture  state  of  the  Portuguese 
army,  and  therefore  I  should  wish  to  be  understood  as  writing 
upon  this  part  of  the  subject  liable  to  corrections  from  him. 

My  opinion  is,  and  always  has  been,  that  the  mode  of  apply- 
ing the  services  of  the  English  officers  to  the  Portuguese  army 
has  been  erroneous.  I  think  that  Beresford  ought  to  have  had 
the  temporary  assistance  of  the  ablest  officers  the  British  service 
could  afibrd  ;  that  these  officers  ought  not  to  have  been  posted 
to  regiments  in  the  Portuguese  army;  but,  under  the 
title  of  Adjutants  to  the  Field-Marshal,  or  any  other,  they 
ought  to  have  superintended  discipline,  military  movements, 
and  arrangements  of  all  descriptions,  wherever  they  might  be. 
Fewer  officers  would  then  have  answered  his  purpose,  and  every 
one  given  to  him  would  have  been  useful ;  whereas  many  (all 
in  the  inferior  ranks)  are,  under  existing  arrangements,  useless. 
Besides  this,  tho  selection  of  the  officers  sent  out  to  Portugal 
for  this  service  has  been  unlucky,  and  the  decision  on  the 
questions  which  I  sent  to  England  on  the  7th  of  June  has  been 
made  without  reference  to  circumstances  or  to  the  feelin<rs  of 
the  individuals  on  whom  it  was  to  operate,  and  just  like  every 

VOL.  VII.  I 


114  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

other  decision  I  have  ever  seen  from  the  same  quarter,  as  if 
men  were  stocks  and  stones.  To  this  add  that  rank  (Portu- 
guese rank,  I  mean)  has  been  given  in  the  most  capricious 
manner.  In  some  instances,  a  man  not  in  the  army  at  all  is 
made  a  Brigadier-General ;  in  others,  another,  who  was  the 
senior  of  the  Brigadier-General,  when  both  were  in  the  army, 
is  a  Lieutenant- Colonel ;  then  a  junior  Lieutenant-Colonel  is 
made  a  Brigadier-General,  his  senior  a  Colonel,  and  his  senior  a 
junior  Colonel ;  and  there  are  instances  of  juniors  being  preferred 
to  seniors  in  every  rank.  In  short,  the  Prince  Regent^  is  a  de- 
spotic prince,  and  his  commissions  have  been  given  to  British 
officers  and  subjects  in  the  most  arbitrary  manner  at  the  Horse 
Guards  ;  and  the  answer  to  all  those  complaints  at  the  Horse 
Guards  imist  be  uniform.  Nobody  has  any  right  to  complain  ; 
the  Prince  Regent  has  a  right  to  give  to  anybody  any  commis- 
sion he  pleases,  bearing  any  date  he  chooses  to  assign  to  it. 

The  officers  of  this  army  have,  to  a  man,  quitted  the  Por- 
tuguese service  since,  as  I  said  they  would ;  and  there  is  not 
an  officer  who  has  joined  it  from  England  who  would  not  quit 
it  if  we  would  allow  them.  But  here  we  keep  them.  So  much 
for  that  arrangement. 

The  subject  upon  which  particularly  I  wished  Beresford  to 
report  was  the  state  of  the  Portuguese  army  in  respect  to  its 
numbers.  The  troops  have  latterly  deserted  to  an  alarming 
degree,  and,  in  fact,  none  of  the  regiments  are  complete.  The 
Portuguese  army  is  recruited  by  conscription,  constitutionally 
very  much  in  the  same  manner  as  the  French  army ;  but  then 
it  must  be  recollected  that,  for  the  last  fifty  years  nearly,  the 
Portuguese  have  never  left  their  province,  and  scarcely  ever 
their  native  town,  and  their  discipline  and  the  labours  and 
exertions  required  from  them  were  nothing.  Things  are  much 
altered  lately,  and,  notwithstanding  that  the  pay  has  been  in- 
creased, I  fear  that  the  animal  is  not  of  a  description  to  bear 
up  against  what  is  required  of  him ;  and  he  deserts  most  terribly. 
'  Of  Portugal. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  115 

The  military  force  stationed  in  the  provinces  enabled  the 
civil  Government  to  carry  into  execution  the  conscription  ; 
but,  under  present  circumstances,  the  military  force  is,  upon 
principle  as  well  as  from  necessity,  removed  to  a  distance  ;  the 
civil  Government  has  been  so  frequently  overthrown  in  all  parts 
of  Portugal  that  it  can  hardly  be  said  to  exist ;  and  there  is 
another  circumstance  which,  I  am  afraid,  cramps  its  operations, 
particularly  those  operations  which  are  to  put  a  restraint  upon 
the  people,  and  that  is,  that  they  are  all  armed  ;  and  they 
defy  the  civil  magistrate  and  the  Government,  who  order  them 
to  march  as  conscripts,  whose  authority  is  unsupported  by  a 
sufficient  military  force.  I  am  therefore  very  apprehensive 
that  Beresford  will  find  it  impossible  to  fill  his  ranks.  How- 
ever, as  I  said  before,  I  should  wish  Government  to  delay  to 
make  up  their  minds  upon  this  part  of  the  subject,  till  I  shall 
be  enabled  to  send  them  Beresford's  report,  for  which  I  have 
called. 

The  next  point  on  this  subject  is,  supposing  the  Portuguese 
army  to  be  rendered  efficient,  what  can  be  done  with  it  and 
Portugal,  if  the  French  should  obtain  possession  of  the  re- 
mainder of  the  Peninsula  l  My  opinion  is,  that  we  ought  to 
be  able  to  hold  Portugal,  if  the  Portuguese  army  and  militia 
are  complete.  The  difficulty  upon  this  whole  question  lies  in 
the  embarkation  of  the  British  army.  There  are  so  many 
entrances  into  Portugal,  the  whole  country  being  frontier,  it 
would  be  very  difficult  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  penetrating  ; 
and  it  is  probable  that  we  should  be  obliged  to  confine  our- 
selves to  the  preservation  of  that  which  is  most  important — 
the  capital.  It  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  bring  the  con- 
test for  the  capital  to  extremities,  and  afterwards  to  embark 
the  British  army.  You  will  see  what  I  mean  by  a  reference 
to  the  map.  Lisbon  is  so  high  up  the  Tagus,  that  no  army 
that  we  could  collect  would  be  able,  at  the  same  time,  to  secure 
the  navigation  of  the  river  by  the  occupation  of  both  banks 
and  possession  of  the  capital.     One  of  the  objects  must,  I  fear, 

I  2 


116  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

be  given  up ;  and  that  which  the  Portuguese  would  give  up 
would  be  the  navigation  of  the  Tagus,  and,  of  course,  one 
means  of  embarkation.  However,  I  have  not  entirely  made  up 
my  mind  upon  this  interesting  point  5  I  have  a  great  deal  of 
information  upon  it,  but  should  wish  to  have  more  be- 
fore I  can  decide  it.  In  the  mean  time,  I  think  that  Go- 
vernment should  look  to  sending  back  at  least  the  cop- 
pered transports,  as  soon  as  the  grand  expedition  will  have  done 
with  them,  and  as  they  receive  positive  intelligence  that 
Napoleon  is  reinforcing  his  armies  in  Spain  ;  for  I  think  that 
you  may  depend  upon  it  that  he  and  his  marshals  must  be 
desirous  of  revenging  upon  us  the  different  blows  we  have 
given  them,  and  that,  when  they  come  into  the  Peninsula, 
their  first  and  great  object  will  be  to  get  the  English  out. 

I  think  the  first  part  of  my  letter  will  give  you  my  opinion 
respecting  one  notion  you  entertained,  viz.,  that  the  Spaniards 
might  be  induced  to  give  the  command  of  their  armies  to  a 
British  Commander-in-Chief.  If  such  ofier  should  be  made 
me,  I  shall  decline  to  accept  it,  till  I  should  receive  his  Ma- 
jesty'*s  pleasure ;  and  I  strongly  recommend  to  you,  unless 
you  mean  to  incur  the  risk  of  the  loss  of  your  army,  not  to  have 
any  thing  to  do  with  Spanish  warfare  on  any  ground  what- 
ever, in  the  existing  state  of  things. 

In  respect  to  Cadiz,  the  fact  is  this,  that  the  jealousy  of  all 
the  Spaniards,  even  of  those  most  attached  to  us,  respecting 
Cadiz,  is  so  rooted  that,  even  if  the  Government  should  cede  that 
point,  (and  in-  their  present  difficulties  I  should  not  be  surprised 
if  they  were  to  cede  it)  to  induce  me  to  remain  in  Spain,  I 
should  not  think  any  garrison  which  this  army  could  spare  to 
be  safe  in  the  place.  If  you  should  take  Cadiz,  you  must 
lay  down  Portugal  and  take  up  Spain.  You  must  occupy 
Cadiz  with  a  garrison  of  from  15,000  to  20,000  men,  and  you 
must  send  from  England  an  army  to  be  employed  in  the  field 
with  the  Spaniards,  and  make  Cadiz  your  retreat  instead  of 
Lisbon.     You   ought,   along  with  Cadiz,  to  insist  upon   the 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLESEAGH.  117 

command  of  the  armies.  I  think  you  would  certainly  be  able, 
in  that  case,  to  get  away  your  troops,  secure  the  Spanish  ships, 
&c.  But  you  see,  from  the  facts  in  the  commencement  of  this 
letter,  how  little  prospect  you  have  of  bringing  the  cx)ntest  to 
the  conclusion  for  which  we  all  wish. 

I  shall  be  very  glad  if  you  will  send  us  the  remount  horses 
and  any  regiment  of  dragoons  that  is  to  come,  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible. The  best  thing  to  do  then  probably  would  be  to  draft 
the  horses  of  one  of  the  regiments  to  complete  the  others,  and 
send  that  regiment  home  dismounted.  It  would  be  very  desi- 
rable also  to  send  us  600  or  700  sets  of  horse  appointments. 
Ever  yours,  my  dear  lord,  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Viscount  Wellington. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  August  26,  1809. 

Sir — I  feel  myself  most  highly  gratified  in  obeying  his  Ma- 
jesty"'s  gracious  commands,  to  acquaint  you  that,  in  order  to 
mark  his  distinguished  sense  of  your  services  in  the  several 
engagements  you  have  conducted  in  Spain  and  Portugal,  and 
particularly  in  the  late  action  at  Talavera,  against  a  superior 
enemy,  his  Majesty  has  been  pleased  to  confer  upon  you  the 
dignity  of  a  peerage,  by  the  style  and  title  of  Baron  Douro 
of  Wellesley,  in  the  county  of  Somerset,  and  of  Viscount 
Wellington  of  Talavera,  and  of  Wellington  in  the  said  county. 

I  sincerely  offer  to  your  lordship  my  congratulation  upon  a 
distinction  so  well  calculated  to  perpetuate  the  well-earned 
fame  of  yourself  and  the  gallant  army  under  your  command, 
whose  exemplary  courage  and  discipline  have  drawn  upon  them 
the  warm  applause  of  their  Sovereign,  and  the  admiration  of 
their  country. 

Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Badajoz,  September  4,  1809. 
My  dear  Lord — I  have  received  your  letters  of  the  12tli, 
and  I  am  happy  to  find  that  the  King^s  Ministers  approved  of 


118  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

my  conduct  up  to  the  24th  of  July.     I  hope  that  they  will 
approve  of  my  subsequent  measures. 

I  send  you  by  this  occasion  a  copy  of  a  correspondence 
which  I  have  had  with  Lord  Wellesley,  which  will  give  the 
Government  my  opinion  upon  the  points  referred  for  his  and 
mine,  in  Mr.  Canning^s  despatches  of  the  12th.  They  are 
nearly  to  the  same  purport  with  my  last  letter  to  you.  There 
is  only  one  point  in  that  letter  which  I  wish  to  alter,  and  that 
relates  to  the  garrison  required  for  Cadiz.  Upon  further  in- 
quiry, I  find  that  there  are  means  in  Cadiz  of  putting  in  se- 
curity from  a  coup  de  main,  by  the  inhabitants,  4,000  or  5,000 
men ;  and  I  should  think  that  number  sufficient  to  give  us  a 
footing  there,  of  which  we  might  take  further  advantage,  by 
throwing  in  more  troops  if  we  should  find  it  expedient. 
Ever  yours,  my  dear  lord,  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Wellington. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  September  12,  1809. 

Dear  Wellington — I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  early 
and  very  satisfactory  reply  to  my  private  letter.  I  ventured 
to  communicate  it  unofficially  to  the  Cabinet ;  and,  in  com- 
pliance with  your  suggestion,  I  shall  lose  no  time  in  ordering 
an  increase  of  your  tonnage  in  the  Tagus.  About  10,000 
tons  of  copper  troop-ships  are  directed  to  proceed  to  Lisbon, 
now  ready  at  Portsmouth,  and  the  quantity  required  for  the 
reception  of  the  whole  army  may  be  completed,  as  soon  as  the 
transports  return  from  the  Scheldt. 

Should  the  defence  of  Portugal  be  persevered  in,  troop-ships 
capable  of  withdrawing  the  men  of  the  army  may  possibly  be 
kept  there,  although  not  without  a  heavy  expense — say  40,000 
tons,  at  an  expense  of  about  i?50,000  a  month ;  but  I  should 
apprehend  it  quite  impossible  to  think  of  retaining  in  the  ser- 
vice tonnage  for  the  horses,  unless  with  a  view  to  an  immediate 
evacuation,  the  monthly  expense  of  each  horse  not  being  less 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  119 

than  rit?10.  The  Government  will,  therefore,  probably,  have 
to  make  up  their  mind,  in  the  event  of  the  army  continuing 
indefinitely  in  Portugal,  to  leave  the  horses  to  their  fate,  that 
is,  to  be  put  to  death,  should  you  be  forced  to  retire. 

In  addition  to  the  general  report  which  Mr.  Canning's  de- 
spatch to  Lord  Wellesley  will  bring  before  the  Government, 
on  the  conduct  of  the  war  in  the  Peninsula,  it  has  been  deemed 
advisable  to  call  for  a  distinct  report  on  the  question  of  Por- 
tugal, with  a  view  to  the  deliberate  consideration  of  that  im- 
portant branch  of  the  subject. 

Believe  me,  dear  Wellington,  &;c., 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Wellington. 

Downing  Street,  September  14,  1809. 
My  Lord — The  King  having  been  pleased  to  nominate 
Lieut.-General  Sherbrooke  to  be  a  Knight  Companion  of  the 
Most  Honourable  Order  of  the  Bath,  the  insignia  of  which 
order  are  now  forwarded  to  him,  I  have  received  his  Majesty's 
command  to  desire  that  your  lordship  will  avail  yourself  of  the 
first  opportunity  to  invest  him  therewith  in  a  manner  suitable 
to  the  occasion. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Wellington. 

Downing  Street,  September  14,  1809. 
My  Lord — Your  lordship's  despatches  of  the  dates  stated  in 
the  margin^  have  been  received,  and  laid  before  the  King. 

I  am  commanded  to  signify  to  your  lordship  his  Majesty's 
approbation  of  the  conduct  you  have  pursued,  as  therein  de- 
tailed. The  considerations  which  have  influenced  your  deter- 
mination to  fall  back  on  the  frontier  of  Portugal  not  only 
appear  to  have  warranted  that  decision,  but  to  have  rendered 
it  indispensable  for  the  supply  of  the  army ;  and,  if  the  Spanish 
Government  have  to  regret  the  loss  of  your  support,  they  can 
^  August  2nd,  8th,  and  four  of  the  21st. 


120  LETTEKS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

only  attribute  it  to  their  own  want  of  resources,  or  to  their 
inability  to  call  them  forth. 

The  judgment  which  marked  your  determination,  at  the 
critical  moment  the  step  was  taken,  to  retire  behind  the  Tagus ; 
the  success  and  ability  with  which  your  retreat,  encumbered 
with  the  wounded,  has  been  conducted,  through  a  country 
diflScult  in  itself  and  destitute  of  supplies  ;  and  the  determi- 
nation you  have  shown  to  regulate  your  operations  with  as 
much  attention  to  the  safety  and  health  of  your  troops,  as  to 
their  reputation  and  glory,  have  received  his  Majesty''s  entire 
approbation. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Viscount  Wellington. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  September  14,  1809. 

My  Lord — I  am  to  signify  to  you  his  Majesty''s  pleasure 
that  you  dismount  and  send  to  England  the  weakest  of  your 
regiments  of  cavalry,  transferring  the  horses  to  others  most  in 
want  of  them.  I  am  to  acquaint  you  that  the  1st  Regiment 
of  Dragoons,  or  Royals,  sailed  from  Cork  for  Lisbon,  about 
the  beginning  of  this  month,  to  join  the  army  under  your 
command. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Wellington, 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  September  14,  1809. 

My  Lord — As  the  return  of  the  British  army  to  Portugal 
will  afford  you  an  opportunity  of  turning  your  undivided  atten- 
tion to  the  defence  of  that  kingdom,  I  have  to  request  that 
you  will,  as  early  as  possible,  transmit  to  me,  for  the  informa- 
tion of  his  Majesty's  Government,  a  full  report  upon  that  sub- 
ject, stating  your  opinion  of  its  defensibility,  with  what  force, 
British  and  Portuguese,  and  at  what  annual  expense. 

You  will  consider  the  question  of  maintaining  Portugal  in 
the  distinct  cases,  first,  of  the  utmost  effort  the  enemy  can  be 
expected  to  make  against  it  by  any  probable  disposition  of  the 
military  force  now  in  the  Peninsula ;  secondly,  of  the  French 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  121 

force  being  largely  reinforced,  should  a  peace  in  Germany  leave 
Buonaparte  at  liberty  to  turn  his  efforts  in  that  direction. 

You  will  also  state  your  opinion  upon  the  practicability  of 
embarking  the  British  army  in  the  Tagus,  (regard  being  had  to 
its  local  circumstances)  in  the  event  of  its  being  obliged  to  fall 
back  for  that  purpose  in  the  presence  of  a  superior  enemy. 
And,  further,  you  will  suggest  such  measures  as  may  appear 
to  you  necessary  to  be  adopted  within  the  country,  either  with 
a  view  to  its  defence,  or  which,  in  the  event  of  its  evacuation 
by  the  British  army  becoming  necessary,  should  precede  such 
an  evacuation,  with  a  view  to  the  interests  of  the  Prince 
Regent,  and  to  the  counteraction  of  the  designs  of  the  enemy; 
and,  in  the  former  alternative,  you  will  state  at  what  expense, 
and  within  what  period  of  time,  the  measures  you  would 
recommend  for  placing  Portugal  in  an  adequate  state  of  de- 
fence could  be  carried  into  effect. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Wellington, 

Downing  Street,  September  23,  1809. 

My  Lord — I  have  received  and  laid  before  the  King  your 
lordship*'s  two  letters  of  the  4th  of  September ;  the  one  con- 
taining your  reasoning  for  adopting  the  measure  of  falling  back 
on  the  frontier  of  Portugal,  and  your  correspondence  with  Lord 
Wellesley  on  that  subject;  and  the  other,  the  information  you 
had  received  of  the  enemy''s  probable  intentions  upon  Ciudad 
Rodrigo,  and  your  design  of  endeavouring,  if  possible,  to  pre- 
vent their  success. 

You  have  already  received  a  signification  of  the  King's 
approbation  with  regard  to  the  measures  you  are  pursuing  for 
retiring  upon  Portugal,  and  I  am  to  express  the  confidence  his 
Majesty  feels  that  you  will  not  neglect  any  consistent  oppor- 
tunity of  defeating  the  enemy's  views,  and  of  obstructing  his 
designs  upon  that  kingdom,  which  you  shall  find  within  the 
power  of  the  forces  you  may  command. 


122  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Remarks  on  the  Defence  of  Portugal. 

FROM  THE  PORTUGUESE. 

The  preceding  plan  is  admirable,  but  it  will  not  be  found 
practicable  to  execute  it  entirely,  for  the  following  reasons.  In 
the  above  Memoir,*  the  General,  its  author,  considers  all  the 
fortresses  of  the  frontier  of  the  first  order,  as  well  as  of  the 
second,  as  being  in  a  state  of  defence,  notwithstanding  the 
greatest  part  of  them  is  reduced  to  a  heap  of  ruins,  as  appears 
from  the  survey  which,  in  the  year  1790,  Count  d''Aeynhausen 
made  of  the  northern  provinces  of  this  kingdom.  Excepting 
Almeida,  in  Beira,  and  Valen9a,  in  Minho,  no  other  fortress  is 
capable  of  defending  itself ;  and  even  those  two  labour  under 
so  many  inconveniences,  and  are  so  extensive  as  to  require  a 
very  considerable  number  of  troops  to  garrison  them.  Those 
of  Alentejo  are  not  in  a  much  better  condition.  But  Elvas, 
with  its  appendages,  Almeida,  and  Valen9a,  in  Minho,  to  make 
any  resistance,  necessarily  require  competent  garrisons,  com- 
posed of  troops  of  the  line  and  militia.  The  three  latter  may 
justly  be  called  the  keys  of  the  kingdom.  As  to  Campo- 
mayor,  Aronches,  Castello  de  Vide,  and  Monte  Alvao,  they 
must  also  be  preserved,  in  order  to  keep  up  the  communication 
between  the  two  armies  of  Beira  and  Alentejo,  as  well  as 
between  Elvas  and  Abrantes,  which  is  the  chief  depot  of  am- 
munition and  provisions  for  the  above  armies. 

To  remedy,  as  far  as  it  is  possible,  the  inconveniences 
alluded  to,  I  am  of  opinion — 

1 .  That  the  plan  of  the  General  in  question,  with  regard  to 
the  distribution  of  our  troops  in  the  northern  provinces  and 
Alentejo,  ought  to  be  adopted. 

2.  That  the  three  principal  fortresses,  Elvas,  Almeida,  and 
Valen9a,  in  Minho,  be,  without  loss  of  time,  furnished  with 
the  necessary  provisions  and  ammunition,  especially  firewood 

*  The  Memoir,  with  the  plan  referred  to  in  this  paper,  has  not  been 
found. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  123 

and  oak  timber,  as  the  country  does  not  produce  these  two 
requisites,  and  as  they  can  be  procured  only  with  difficulty. 

Nota  bene.  The  garrisons  of  the  above  fortress  require  also 
provisions  for  only  two  months,  unless  particular  circumstances 
should  render  a  larger  supply  necessary. 

3.  The  fortresses  of  Campo-mayor,  Aronches,  Cast  ell  o  de 
Vide,  and  Monte  Alvao,  need  not  be  provisioned  with  any 
particular  care. 

4.  In  order  to  concentrate  the  largest  possible  number  of 
troops  in  the  three  armies  of  Alentejo,  Beira,  and  Minho,  the 
frontier  fortresses  are  to  be  looked  upon  as  objects  of  secondary 
consideration. 

5.  That  the  Generals  of  the  provinces  ought,  without  delay, 
to  examine  and  report  on  the  actual  condition  of  the  regiments 
of  the  line  and  militia,  their  appointments  and  barracks,  and 
whether  they  are  in  a  state  to  take  the  field  at  a  moment's 
warning. 

6.  That  the  Generals  of  the  different  provinces  should,  in 
anticipation,  form  the  regiments  of  the  line  and  the  militia 
into  brigades,  each  brigade  consisting  of  one  regiment  of  the 
line  and  of  two  of  militia,  so  that  they  may  fight  in  conjunction, 
but  by  no  means  separately,  as  General  Dumouriez  advises, 
there  being  many  reasons  for  adopting  the  method  just  men- 
tioned, and  particularly  this — that  the  militia  is  ignorant  of 
the  general  and  indispensable  rules  of  field  service ;  add  to 
which,  that  both  kinds  of  troops  will  fight  with  more  confi- 
dence and  emulation,  which,  in  the  end,  must  lead  to  very 
happy  results. 

7.  That  the  necessary  orders  ought  immediately  to  be  given 
for  forming  competent  parks  of  artillery  for  the  above  three 
armies,  and  that  the  two  principal  ought  to  be  at  Abrantes, 
and  that  of  Minho  at  Oporto. 

8.  That  the  Generals  of  the  provinces  ought  to  make  out 
lists  of  all  the  beasts  of  burden  in  their  respective  districts, 
that  they  may  be  distributed  among  the  different  regiments 


124  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

a  few  (lays  before  the  march  begins  ;  and  that,  when  wanted, 
they  are  to  be  sent  to  the  above  depots. 

N.B.  These  beasts  are  to  be  provided  with  straw  and  barley 
on  account  of  the  Royal  Treasury,  and  their  drivers  with 
ammunition-bread :  the  latter  are  also  to  receive  one  crusade 
per  diem  for  each  beast  of  burden.  This  provision  is  of  the 
utmost  necessity,  that  the  drivers  may  remain  with  the  armies, 
and  be  subject  to  military  laws  in  the  event  of  desertion,  or  the 
commission  of  some  crime. 

9.  That,  if  circumstances  and  time  permit,  twelve  companies 
of  horse-artillery  ought  to  be  formed,  each  of  sixty  men,  fur- 
nished with  four  6-pounders  and  two  howitzers  ;  two  of  these 
companies  to  be  attached  to  the  army  of  Minho,  six  to  that  of 
Beira,  three  to  that  of  Alentejo,  and  one  to  the  defence  of 
Algarve;  the  whole  in  conformity  to  General  Dumouriez"'s  sug- 
gestions. 

10.  In  each  regiment  of  the  line,  as  well  as  militia,  a  certain 
number  of  men  ought  to  be  instructed  in  the  working  of  their 
field-pieces. 

11.  That,  conformably  to  the  ideas  of  the  same  General, 
head  telegraphs  and  corresponding  telegraphs  ought  to  be 
established  in  Valen9a,  Monforte,  Miranda,  Almeida,  Guarda, 
Abrantes,  Elvas,  Beira,  and  Faro,  as  well  as  signals  by  means 
of  fire,  smoke,  and  flags,  especially  upon  the  coast,  and  above 
the  principal  passes  of  the  mountains,  beginning  from  the 
Minho,  and  extending  to  the  mouth  of  the  Guadiana.  These 
telegraphs  are  of  the  greatest  use,  not  only  in  any  enterprise 
against  the  enemy,  but  for  the  purpose  of  apprizing  us  of  their 
movements. 

12.  That  immediately  large  depots  of  provisions  ought  to 
be  established,  such  as  wheat,  millet,  barley,  and  straw,  for 
80,000  men,  and  four  months. 

13.  That  there  be  likewise  formed  magazines  of  wine,  brandy, 
oil,  vinegar,  dried  cod,  bacon,  and  cheese.  The  principal  maga- 
zines ought  to  be  in  Lisbon,  Oporto,  Abrantes,  and  Lamego ; 


1809.]  LOKD  CASTLEREAGH.  125 

those  of  the  second  class  at  Estremoz,  Thorn ar,  Guarda,  and 
Ponte  de  Lima.  Without  these  steps,  all  the  rest  would  be 
fruitless. 

14.  That  the  Generals  of  the  provinces,  immediately  after 
the  declaration  of  war,  and  when  the  enemy  is  near  at  hand, 
force  all  peasants  and  inhabitants  of  frontiers  to  convey  into 
the  interior  and  into  places  of  security,  not  only  their  cattle, 
but  such  provisions  as  are  not  wanted  for  immediate  use. 

15.  That  the  same  Genei-als  raise  immediately  in  their  re- 
spective provinces  companies  of  sixty  men  each,  and  consisting 
of  such  persons  as  are  best  acquainted  with  the  roads,  that 
they  may  serve  as  guides  to  the  armies. 

16.  As  we  have  no  other  light  troops  in  our  army  than  the 
Legion,  flank  companies  must  be  formed  both  from  the  troops 
of  the  line  and  the  militia ;  they  must  constitute  separate 
corps  attached  to  the  three  armies,  and,  destined  for  that  ser- 
vice exclusively,  must  be  under  the  command  of  proper  officers. 


List  of  the  National  Troops, 

Infantry  of  the  Line          .... 

43  Regiments  of  Militia,  when  complete    . 

Artillery           .         .          .          . 

The  Legion      .         .         . 

Cavalry   . 

80,000 

83,600 

5,000 

1,500 

4,000 

Deduct  for  garrisons  of  the  chief  fortresses  . 

74,100 
15,000 

Remain  for  military  operations  .  .  .59,100 
In  this  number  are  not  comprehended  the  train-bands,  and 
others  capable  of  doing  duty  on  posts  of  advice,  and  in  interior 
and  marine  forts.  As  to  the  navy,  they  will  combine  their  ope- 
rations with  those  of  the  military  in  the  defence  of  sea-ports, 
and  assist  them  in  any  other  way  that  may  contribute  to  attain 
the  general  object  in  view. 


126  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Memorandum  upon  Operations  in  Spain, 

BY  LORD  CASTLEREAGH. 

If  the  French  retire  with  a  view  to  evacuate  Spain,  no 
effort  on  our  part  can,  in  point  of  time,  be  made,  either  to 
harass  or  cut  off  their  retreat. 

If  Spain  is  evacuated,  the  Spaniards  will  have  to  form  their 
Government  and  their  army.  They  cannot,  for  the  present, 
think  of  moving  into  the  south  of  France,  and  will  probably 
limit  their  military  efforts  to  the  occupation  and  defence  of  the 
Pyrenees. 

If  the  Spaniards  do  not  act  offensively  against  France  in 
that  quarter,  the  British  army  cannot  separately  enter  upon 
operations. 

The  same  disposition  to  throw  off  the  French  yoke  may 
probably  show  itself  in  Italy,  and  we  be  invited  to  co-operate. 
The  scene  is  too  remote  to  admit  of  our  acting  with  the  gross 
of  our  army  in  that  quarter.  It  may  be  a  question,  according 
to  circumstances,  whether  the  disposable  corps  in  Sicily  should 
be  somewhat  more  or  less  strong ;  but  the  object  must  be  to 
bring  home  the  mass  of  our  force,  and  to  look  to  its  employ- 
ment nearer  home. 

Till  the  abandonment  of  Spain  by  the  French  is  indisputably 
established,  we  are  bound,  on  every  ground,  to  assume  the 
reverse ;  and  it  is  our  duty  to  make  every  exertion  that  is 
calculated  to  accelerate  their  expulsion,  and,  if  possible,  to  lay 
the  foundation  of  their  reduction,  in  case  their  retreat  shall 
be  protected. 

Supposing  the  French  have  retired  from  Madrid,  as  the 
natural  province  of  our  army  is  to  avoid  an  extended  line  of 
operations,  in  separation  from  our  fleet  and  its  supplies  by  sea,  it 
seems  obviously  to  belong  to  the  Spanish  armies  of  the  southern 
and  western  provinces  to  press  the  French  in  front,  and  on 
their  left  flank,  whilst  we,  in  co-operation  with  the  northern 
and  eastern  provinces,  menace  their  right  flank  and  rear. 


1809.]  LOED  CASTLEREAGH.  127 

In  order  that  the  army  of  GaUicia  may  be  enabled  to  advance 
into  the  open  country,  and  form  the  left  of  the  Spanish  army 
which  is  to  press  the  French  in  front,  the  cavalry  in  Portugal, 
and  three  of  the  five  regiments  under  orders  at  home,  should 
be  directed  to  join  Blake'*s  army — a  brigade  of  British  infantry 
to  be  attached  to  this  cavalry  as  a  reserve  for  their  protection. 

Whilst  the  armies  of  Andalusia,  Valencia,  Estramadura, 
and  Gallicia,  are  moving  to  occupy  the  enemy  in  front,  a 
British  corps  of  10,000  infantry,  with  two  regiments  of  cavalry 
to  be  detached  from  home,  to  animate  and  support  the  Astu- 
rias,  to  encourage  Biscay  and  Navarre  to  rise,  and  to  act  upon 
the  French  lines  of  operation,  viz.,  those  of  Vittoria  and  Pam- 
peluna,  in  concert  with  the  Aragonese.  This  corps  to  be  rein- 
forced from  Portugal,  as  early  and  to  whatever  extent  force 
can  be  spared  from  that  country. 

Supposing  20,000  men  can  be  drawn  from  Portugal,  the 
enemy,  unless  his  reinforcements  are  immense,  greater  than  he 
could  possibly  move  or  subsist  in  such  a  country,  deprived  of 
all  suppHes  by  sea,  could  never  maintain  himself  either  at 
Burgos  or  behind  the  Ebro,  while  a  British  corps  of  80,000 
men,  aided  by  the  Asturians,  &c.,  were  upon  his  right  flank 
and  rear,  and  the  accumulated  armies  of  Spain  pressed  him  in 
front. 

The  point  in  the  north  of  Spain  to  which  the  British  troops 
should,  in  the  first  instance,  be  directed,  may  admit  of  some 
doubt — the  more  to  the  eastward,  the  more  menacing  to  the 
enemy ;  but,  until  the  troops  from  Portugal  can  be  positively 
reckoned  upon,  too  advanced  a  position  must  not  be  taken  up. 

There  are  three  points  of  debarkation  for  consideration  :  St. 
Andero,  Gijon,  and  Corunna.  The  first  and  last  are  good 
harbours.  The  port  of  Gijon  hardly  affords  accommodation 
for  a  large  fleet.  Corunna  is  rather  too  much  retired  for 
the  purposes  proposed.  It  is  to  be  well  weighed  whether  St. 
Andero  is  too  near  the  enemy,  whether  it  is  defensible  against 
superior  numbers,  and  what  description  of  retreat  it  affords. 


128  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Supposing  the  French  in  force  at  Burgos,  and  that  the 
Spanish  armies  of  Gallicia  and  the  southern  provinces  are  in 
their  front,  they  must  be  very  strong  to  risk  detaching  a  corps 
into  a  mountainous  country,  of  strength  sufficient  to  dispost 
the  Asturian  army,  supported  by  10,000  British  troops;  the 
distance  of  St.  Andero  from  Burgos  being  100  miles. 

If  this  is  true  with  respect  to  10,000  men,  the  argument  is 
stronger,  if  there  is  reason  to  hope  that  the  corps  may  soon 
be  reinforced  from  Portugal.  If  the  French  cannot  success- 
fully attack  this  corps  without  weakening  themselves  in  front, 
and  consequently  exposing  themselves  to  immediate  destruc- 
tion, they  must  retire  ;  and,  if  they  have  not  taken  their  mea- 
sures for  doing  so  in  time,  pressed  as  they  would  be  on  all 
sides,  and  embarrassed  by  the  armed  peasantry  in  the  Pyrenees, 
they  may  find  it  impossible  to  defile,  with  so  large  a  force, 
through  the  gorges  of  the  mountains,  in  presence  of  an  enemy, 
without  losing  a  great  proportion  of  their  army. 

The  policy  of  the  war,  supposing  the  enemy  not  to  be 
capable  of  acting  off'ensiyely  towards  Portugal,  seems  to  be  to 
strengthen  the  North,  to  render  that  invulnerable,  which  must 
be  conquered,  before  the  enemy  can  establish  any  sure  footing 
in  Spain;  and,  having  first  provided  for  its  security,  to  make 
it  the  basis  from  whence  ofi'ensive  operations  may  be  carried 
on  against  the  enemy's  line  of  operations. 


1808.J  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  129 


SUPPLEMENT 


TO 


OPERATIONS  IN  PORTUGAL  AND  SPAIN. 


NO.  L 
PRECIS  OF  CORRESPONDENCE  FROM  SIR  H.  DALRYMPLE, 

RELATING  TO  SPANISH  AFFAIRS. 

Gibraltar,  January  3,  1808. 
Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  states,  from  private  intelligence,  that 
at  the  Spanish  head-quarters  a  very  considerable  French  force 
is  expected  to  be  assembled  in  that  vicinity.  It  appears  that 
troubles  were  to  be  expected  at  Tangier,  and  that,  in  less  than 
a  month,  the  operations  would  commence.  It  is  said  that 
Buonaparte  has  desired  the  ports  of  Morocco  to  be  shut  against 
us,  which  the  Emperor  has  refused  ;  and  that  orders  have  been 
sent  from  Madrid  to  the  Commandant  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Gibraltar  to  prepare  covering  for  120,000  men ;  the  cork 
woods  near  St.  Roque  to  be  cut  down  for  fascines,  and  an  em- 
bargo laid  on  all  vessels  at  Cadiz,  fit  for  gun-boats,  of  which 

200  are  to  be  equipped. 

Gibraltar,  January  16,  1808. 

In  consequence  of  the  actual  state  of  Spain,  and  of  the 
general  rumour  that  French  troops  will  be  brought  against 
him,  he  has  called  upon  Sir  Charles  Holloway  (Commanding 
Royal  Engineer)  for  a  report  on  the  state  of  the  defences, 
which  he  encloses,  as  also  an  estimate  of  the  expence  of  con- 
structing the  batteries  therein  recommended  by  Sir  Charles, 
amounting  to  ^6*39 6  3^.  S^d. 

^  Governor  of  Gibraltar. 

VOL.  VII.  K 


130  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Gibraltar,  February  9,  1808. 
He  has  learned  that  Buonaparte  is  expected  at  Madrid  on 
the  20th  February ;  that  no  French  troops  had  entered  that 
capital,  and  that,  up  to  the  18th,  not  above  70,000  in  all  had 
passed  the  Spanish  frontier.  He  believes  that  at  Algesiras  no 
immediate  attempt  is  expected  on  Gibraltar;  but  that,  if 
French  troops  come  to  that  coast,  a  design  such  as  described 
by  Lord  Strangford  may  be  in  contemplation,  of  which  it  is 
not  yet  necessary  to  apprize  General  Castanos.  The  popu- 
lation of  Gibraltar  certainly  gives  encouragement  to  such  a 
project. 

Gibraltar,  February  19,  1808. 
Encloses  General  Junot''s  Proclamations,  by  which  it  would 
appear  that  Portugal  is  annexed  to  France.  Heavy  contri- 
butions have  been  exacted  from  the  inhabitants,  particularly 
the  clergy.  The  lower  classes  are  resorting  in  great  numbers 
to  Gibraltar,  where  they  prove  burdensome,  from  the  want 
both  of  space  and  of  the  means  of  maintaining  them.  He  has 
not  heard  of  more  than  71,000  French  as  having  entered  Spain 
and  Portugal. 

Gibraltar,  March  12,  1808. 
The  French  have  seized  the  citadel  of  Pampeluna  by  perfidy, 
and  have  occupied  Barcelona.  The  Duke  of  Infantado  and 
the  Archdeacon  of  Toledo  (who  had  been  tutor  to  the  Prince 
of  Asturias)  have  been  banished ;  and  beds  are  preparing  at 
Seville  for  160,000  soldiers,  of  whom  60,000  are  for  the  camp 
at  St.  Roque.  It  is  reported  that  Tunis  is  the  place  fixed  on 
for  the  junction  of  the  French,  Spanish,  and  Russian  squa- 
drons. 

Gibraltar,  March  24,  1808. 
By  information  from  Madrid,  dated  the  8th  and  11th,  Murat 
was  at  Bayonne,  and  Buonaparte  had  not  left  Paris.     It  ap- 
pears, by  an  enclosed  Proclamation  of  the  Count  of  Espeleta, 
that  the  people  were  impatient  under  the  French  innovation. 


1808.]  LOED  CASTLEREAGH.  131 

It  has  been  supposed,  from  the  seizure  of  Barcelona  and  Pam- 
peluna,  and  the  entry  of  so  many  columns  of  French  troops, 
that  Buonaparte  meant  to  possess  himself  of  Biscay,  Navarre, 
and  Catalonia ;  but  a  Proclamation  from  Murat,  declaring  that 
the  strictest  friendship  subsisted  between  the  two  countries, 
had  tended  to  restore  public  credit. 

French  troops  are  stated  to  be  approaching  Malaga  and  the 
camp  of  St.  Eoque ;  but  Sir  Hew  considers  these  reports  to 
be  founded  more  on  the  probability  of  the  facts  than  on  actual 
intelligence. 

Gibraltar,  March  26, 1808. 

The  Prince  of  Peace  has  been  banished,  in  consequence,  it 
is  said,  of  his  correspondence  with  Admiral  Valdez  about  the 
sailing  of  the  Carthagena  squadron.  It  is  rumoured  that  the 
Prince  has  endeavoured  to  escape  with  his  guards,  and  that 
an  action  ensued,  in  which  60  men  were  killed  and  the  Prince 
wounded.  A  detachment  of  the  Imperial  and  one  of  the 
Empress''s  guards,  and  some  seamen  of  the  Imperial  guard,  had 
passed  through  Madrid. 

Gibraltar,  March  31,  1808. 

States  that  from  the  13th  to  the  19th  of  March,  Madrid 
was  filled  with  scenes  of  insurrection  and  violence,  which  ter- 
minated in  the  abdication  of  Charles  IV.,  and  succession  of 
Ferdinand  VII.  Some  blood  was  shed,  and  many  houses  of 
persons  attached  to  the  Prince  of  Peace  were  burnt.  The 
Duke  of  Infantado,  and  the  nobles  lately  banished  or  im- 
prisoned, surround  the  new  monarch.  Buonaparte's  opinion 
on  these  events  is  not  yet  pronounced,  and  no  allusion  is  made 
in  the  details  of  them  to  French  influence. 

The  Grand-Duke  of  Berg  was  advancing  on  the  13th  from 
Burgos  to  Madrid.  On  the  18th  he  was  waiting  for  definite 
orders  whether  he  should  enter  Madrid  on  his  route  to  Cadiz, 
of  which  he  would  give  previous  notice,  as  well  as  of  the  views 
of  the  Emperor,  whom  he  expected  in  person  in  four  or  five 
days.     Encloses  copies  of  the  Proclamations  and  decrees. 

K  2 


132  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Gibraltar,  April  8,  1808. 

Buonaparte  was  not  expected  immediately  at  Madrid,  and 
his  sentiments  on  the  late  revolution  were  not  received.  The 
Grand-Duke  of  Berg,  with  30,000  men,  was  on  the  1st  of 
April  in  the  vicinity  of  Madrid. 

Encloses  an  extraordinary  Gazette,  in  which  the  King  has 
explained  the  mysterious  business  of  his  imprisonment.  A 
French  officer,  said  to  be  Murat^s  aid-de-camp,  has  passed 
through  Algesiras  from  Cadiz,  in  his  way  to  Madrid.  It  is 
said  that  French  troops  are  pressing  towards  Andalusia,  pro- 
bably to  secure  the  fleet  in  Cadiz. 

Gibraltar,  April  8,  1808. 

He  has  seen  a  Spaniard  whom  he  believes  to  be  in  the  con- 
fidence of  General  Castanos,  and  from  whom  he  has  learned 
that  a  conspiracy  had  existed  (with  the  Prince  of  Peace,  under 
French  influence,  at  the  head)  to  induce  the  late  King  to  fly 
from  Madrid,  under  the  notion  of  emigrating  to  South  Ame- 
rica, in  doing  which  he  was  to  be  intercepted,  and  the  Prince 
of  Peace  was  to  proceed  to  Mexico,  and  assume  that  Govern- 
ment. Godoy,  however,  had  been  himself  betrayed  by  those 
in  whom  he  confided,  but  who  secretly  communicated  with  the 
Prince  of  Asturias;  and,  in  his  first  attempt  to  alarm  the 
King,  and  induce  him  to  fly,  under  the  pretext  that  Madrid 
was  in  insurrection,  he  was  denounced  as  a  traitor,  in  a  Council 
which  had  been  held  to  forward  his  own  views,  by  the  Mar- 
quess of  Cavallero.  Murat,  on  his  arrival,  was  unprepared 
for  the  change,  and  unauthorized  to  acknowledge  the  new  Go- 
vernment :  and  Godoy,  in  confinement,  had  shown  an  anxiety 
to  be  informed  of  Murat''s  arrival,  which  was  considered  as  the 
proof  of  an  understanding  between  them.  The  new  King''s 
advisers  seem  to  have  been  prepared  for  the  event ;  and  the 
throne  is  surrounded  by  persons  whose  political  abilities  have 
been  long  sanctioned  by  public  opinion.  The  nation  seems 
preparing  to  support  the  new  monarch.  Catalonia,  Arragon, 
and  Valencia,  have  offered  to  raise  and  maintain  150,000  men  ; 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  133 

and  when  the  suspicions  of  the  perfidy  of  the  French  shall 
be  confirmed  by  future  acts,  it  is  thought  they  will  be  over- 
whelmed by  an  enraged  population.  Already  the  populace  of 
Madrid  have  forced  the  French  Generals  to  remit  punishments 
on  the  soldiers  for  acts  of  insubordination.  It  is  not  true  that 
Murat  has  detached  any  part  of  his  army,  which,  it  is  plain, 
he  cannot  at  present  venture  to  do.  Buonaparte'*s  visit  to 
Madrid  is  no  longer  talked  of. 

From  the  same  source.  Sir  Hew  learns  that,  had  the  Prince 
of  Asturias  been  constrained  to  fly,  he  would  have  taken  re- 
fuge at  Algesiras,  and  thence  have  passed  over  to  Gibraltar, 
relying  on  the  generosity  of  the  King  of  England,  and  the 
personal  consideration  subsisting  between  the  British  com- 
manding officer  and  General  Castanos.  It  appears  obvious 
that  the  intention  of  the  French  to  seize  Geuta  and  blockade 
Gibraltar  was  for  the  purpose  of  cutting  off  the  retreat  of  the 
Spanish  royal  family  ;  and  Sir  Hew  trusts  that  the  Spanish 
Government  will  place  Ceuta  and  the  other  fortresses  on  the 
coast  in  hands  they  can  fully  rely  on. 

Gibraltar,  April  15,  1808. 

Doubts  still  subsist  at  Algesiras  as  to  the  designs  of  the 
French,  though  a  more  favourable  construction  (however 
founded)  seems  to  be  put  on  them.  Sir  Hew  will  receive  by 
signal  the  earliest  information  of  the  result. 

Buonaparte's  journey  to  Madrid  has  been  delayed  by  sick- 
ness, or  under  that  pretext.  The  Infant  Don  Carlos  left 
Madrid  on  the  5th  to  meet  him  ;  and  it  is  stated  that  he  will 
proceed  to  Paris,  if  necessary,  for  that  purpose.  His  suite  is 
small,  and  one  of  Murat's  aid-de-camps  is  in  it. 

Gibraltar,  April  28,  1808. 

From  a  private,  authentic  source,  as  well  as  partly  from 
Mr.  Hunter  at  Madrid,  he  states  that  56,000  French  were 
actually  in  or  near  that  capital,  and  24,000  more  were  ex- 
pected— that,  from  a  quarter  connected  with  Government,  a 
desire  had  been  expressed  to  Mr.  Hunter  to  know  whether  a 


134  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

supply  of  arms  could  be  got  from  Sir  H.  Dairy mple,  if  wanted  ; 
that  Mr.  Hunter  answered  that  he  could  make  no  reply  to 
unauthorized  insinuations,  bnt  would  faithfully  communicate 
every  overture  made  to  him  in  a  regular  form ;  that  the  King 
of  Spain  was  arrived  at  Burgos,  and  was  every  where  received 
with  enthusiasm ;  that  he  had  afterwards  departed  from  Vit- 
toria ;  that  Buonaparte  arrived  at  Bayonne  on  the  15th ;  that 
a  violent  fermentation  prevailed  in  Spain  against  the  French. 
He  encloses  a  copy  of  a  communication  from  Count  Espeleta, 
Commandant  at  Barcelona,  to  the  General  of  Division  Duheme  ; 
also  the  answer  to  some  queries  sent  by  Sir  Hew^s  desire  to 
the  person  from  whom  the  private  intelligence  has  been  received. 

Gibraltar,  April  30,  1808. 
Encloses  the  substance  of  intelligence  received  from  Alge- 
siras  dated  the  28th,  by  which  it  appears  that,  on  the  20th, 
an  interview  took  place  on  the  frontier  between  Buonaparte  and 
Ferdinand  VII.,  when  the  former  agreed  to  acknowledge  the 
latter,  and  to  grant  him  the  administration  of  Portugal  till  a 
peace,  Spain  acceding  to  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine,  and 
furnishing  50,000  men.  It  appears  further  that,  in  conse- 
quence of  Murat  having  sent  a  Proclamation  to  be  printed  in 
the  name  of  Charles  IV.,  an  angry  correspondence  took  place 
between  him  and  the  Government,  when  Murat  intimated  that, 
if  his  orders  were  not  complied  with,  he  should  level  Madrid 
with  the  ground.  The  arrival  of  the  treaty  between  Buona- 
parte and  Ferdinand  VII.  put  an  end  to  this  altercation ;  but 
the  populace  endeavoured  to  set  fire  to  the  houses  of  Infantado 
and  Escoiquiz,  and  were  much  exasperated  with  the  treaty, 
and  with  the  delivering  up  of  Godoy  to  the  French.  It  was 
reported  that  the  late  King  and  Queen  were  voluntarily  going 
to  France,  escorted  by  20,000  French,  who  were  at  Aranjuez. 

Gibraltar,  May  7,  1808. 
Encloses  further  accounts  received  from  the  same  private 
source,  which  state  that  the  French  continued  to  enter  Spain 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  135 

with  ammunition  and  warlike  stores,  insulting  and  injuring  the 
inhabitants  ;  that  at  Madrid  the  populace  were  much  incensed 
against  Murat ;  and  that  it  was  thought  the  conferences  at 
Bayonne  would  end  soon,  there  having  been  some  movements 
in  France  and  in  the  North. 

In  a  subsequent  letter  from  Algesiras,  dated  the  5th  of  May, 
it  is  stated  that  Napoleon  does  not  acknowledge  Ferdinand  VI I. , 
insisting  that  Charles  IV.  shall  be  reinstated  ;  that  the  old 
King  and  Queen  continue  their  route  to  Bayonne,  where  the  rest 
of  the  royal  family,  the  nobility,  bishops,  merchants,  &c.,  are  to 
be  assembled ;  and  that  the  members  of  the  present  Govern- 
ment resist  transferring  the  Regency  to  Murat,  who,  it  is  said, 
will  appoint  himself  Regent  by  proclamation. 

Gibraltar,  May  8,  1808. 

A  conference  has  taken  place  between  General  Castanos' 
confidential  secretary  and  Mr.  Viale,  a  merchant  of  Gibraltar, 
through  whose  means  Sir  Hew  has  hitherto  received  his  intel- 
ligence, and  Mr.  Viale's  report  of  the  result  is  enclosed,  by 
which  it  appears— 

That  there  was  an  insurrection  on  the  2nd  at  Madrid,  which 
was  quelled  the  same  evening — 

That  it  was  apprehended  Murat  would  attempt  by  force  to 
possess  himself  of  the  Regency,  in  which  case  the  Province 
would  arm  with  the  regulars  and  inhabitants,  and  the  General, 
at  their  head,  would  move  to  Sierra  Morena,  to  check  the  pro- 
gress of  the  French,  and  prevent  their  getting  out  on  that  side 
of  the  mountains  ;  and  that,  if  the  other  provinces  should 
concur,  the  General  would  ask  assistance,  and  even  enter  into 
a  formal  written  convention. 

That  the  insolent  and  sanguinary  Proclamation  by  Murat, 
on  the  8rd,  was  likely,  if  followed  up,  to  lead  to  more  serious 
insurrections  :  in  that  on  the  2nd  there  was  much  slaughter ; 
the  French  had  the  worse,  and  Murat  had  declared  he  would 
try  the  Spaniards  concerned  by  a  military  commission,  punish 
them  with  death,  and  destroy  every  house  where  a  French 
soldier  had  been  killed — 


136  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

That,  if  Buonaparte  attempted  to  put  an  end  to  the  dynasty 
of  the  Bourbons,  they  would  concert  timely  measures  to  secure 
South  America — 

That  to  a  proposal  made  by  Mr.  Viale  for  our  being  put  in 
possession  of  the  French  fleet  at  Cadiz,  it  was  answered  that, 
so  soon  as  the  nation  should  consider  itself  to  be  at  war  with 
the  French,  the  Spanish  fleet  would  sail  to  South  America, 
with  the  Infante  Don  Francisco,  under  escort  of  British  ships, 
if  it  should  then  be  agreed  upon  ;  and  that  the  other  British 
ships  might  enter  Cadiz,  and  rely  on  the  support  of  the 
Spaniards  towards  taking  them  away — 

That  General  Castaiios  has  no  doubt  of  the  concurrence 
of  General  Pena,  who  commands  the  province  of  Anda- 
lusia, and  of  Don  Ventura  Escalante,  Captain  General  of  Gra- 
nada— 

That,  with  respect  to  Ceuta,  nothing  is  to  be  apprehended 
from  the  French,  nor  at  Minorca  or  Majorca ;  and  that  at 
Barcelona,  though  the  French  were  numerous,  the  Spaniards 
were  unanimous — 

That,  of  the  nobles  whom  Murat  had  ordered  to  go  to 
Bayonne,  only  the  young  grandees  have  gone  ;  that,  if  the 
royal  family  be  destroyed,  the  throne  would  be  prepared  for 
the  Archduke  Charles  ;  and  a  British  frigate  is  requested  to 
be  kept  in  readiness  to  bring  him  from  Trieste. 

Sir  Hew  adds,  that  a  copy  of  this  Report  has  been  trans- 
mitted to  Lord  Collingwood,  and  will  be  sent  to  Admiral 
Purvis  ;  and  he  encloses  another  paper  just  received,  as  he 
believes,  from  General  Castaiios  himself,  urging  the  co-operation 
of  the  British,  but  using  at  present  reserve  and  disguise,  and 
stating  that  the  French  in  Guipuscoa  having  taken  posses- 
sion of  the  royal  fabric  of  Plasencia,  carrying  to  France 
30,000  stand  of  arms,  he  should  wish  to  commence  by  making 
reprisals,  to  revenge  that  outrage.  They  have  disarmed  all 
the  towns  they  occupy ;  and  within  Madrid  have  33,000  men 
with  cannon,  and  all  the  squares  and  gates. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  137 

Gibraltar,  May  13,  1808. 
Encloses  a  Madrid  Gazette,  containing  Proclamations  from 
the  Duke  of  Berg,  who  has  assumed  the  Regency  in  the  room  • 
of  Don  Antonio.     It  does  not  appear  how  the  latter  has  been 
disposed  of;  but  the  youngest  brother  has  repaired  to  Bayonne. 

The  system  of  severity  seems  to  have  broken  the  spirit  of 
the  people  of  Madrid,  and  in  other  parts  the  tone  is  consi- 
derably lowered.  Cadiz  being  in  an  unquiet  state,  General 
Spencer'^s  corps  is  preparing  to  join  the  Admiral,  to  take  advan- 
tage of  circumstances. 

Gibraltar,  May  30,  1808. 

Encloses  some  Madrid  Gazettes,  containing  a  series  of  offi- 
cial publications,  which  terminate  in  announcing  the  exclusion 
and  banishment  of  the  royal  family.  The  late  King  has  left 
Bayonne  for  the  interior  of  France.  He  encloses  also  two 
Diaries,  containing  some  political  essays,  which  have  caused  a 
great  sensation  in  Spain.  Buonaparte  has  summoned  the 
Cortes  to  meet  him  at  Bayonne  on  the  15  th  of  June,  to  obtain, 
it  is  supposed,  their  sanction  to  the  succession  of  his  family  to 
the  throne. 

Gibraltar,  May  31,  1808. 

He  has  received  notice  from  Algesiras  of  the  declaration  of 
a  Council  of  Government  at  Seville,  in  the  name  of  Ferdi- 
nand VII.,  that  the  Spanish  cockade  and  scarf  are  to  be  worn 
by  all  Spaniards,  and  vigorous  measures  carried  into  execution. 
General  Castaiios  has  received  instructions  from  this  new  Go- 
vernment, which  he  proposes  to  obey. 

Sir  Hew  has  been  requested  to  facilitate  the  conveyance  of 
the  acts  of  the  new  Government  to  Barcelona  and  Minorca, 
which  he  intends  to  do. 

Gibraltar,  June  2,  1808. 

Encloses  an  official  communication  which  he  has  received 
from  General  Castafios,  with  overtures  of  amity  between  Great 
Britain  and  Spain.  The  pecuniary  resources  of  the  provinces 
seem  considerable  ;   and  in   Andalusia  alone  300,000  armed 


138  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

men  are  expected  to  come  forward.  The  enthusiasm  is  general, 
led  on  by  men  of  influence,  and  kept  up  by  the  clergy.  The 
.  proceedings  of  the  Junta  are  marked  with  vigour.  A  Spanish 
officer  of  rank  has  already  been  shot  publicly  at  Seville.  The 
same  spirit  prevails  in  Valencia.  It  is  believed  that  Murat 
has  retired  from  Madrid.  He  has  consented  that  the  commu- 
nication between  Gibraltar  and  Spain  should  be  opened  upon 
such  restrictions  as  should  be  agreed  upon  between  General 
Castanos  and  himself,  and  to  send  Captain  Dalrymple  to  Se- 
ville, to  treat  with  the  Government  on  matters  relating  to  the 
common  cause.     He  encloses  a  copy  of  his   instructions  to 

Captain  Dalrymple. 

Gibraltar,  June  7,  1808. 

He  has  received  demands  from  several  places  for  small  arms 
and  cartouch-boxes  for  the  infantry,  and  pistols  and  sabres  for 
the  cavalry,  but  had  none  in  the  stores.  Whatever  could  be 
obtained  from  privateer-owners  or  individuals  would  be  fur- 
nished. Suggests  that  there  should  be  an  ample  supply  of 
moulds  for  the  arms  sent  out.  He  expects  to  be  called  on  for 
gunpowder,  which  he  shall  not  hesitate  to  supply,  requesting  it 
may  be  replaced  from  home.  Through  the  intervention  of 
Mr.  Viale,  General  Castanos,  by  Sir  Hew''s  authority,  has  ne- 
gociated  a  loan  of  42,000  hard  dollars,  on  the  security  of  the 
Junta  at  Seville,  and  without  interest  or  premium.  Sir  Hew 
expresses  a  high  sense  of  Mr.  Viale's  services. 

Gibraltar,  June  9,  1808. 

Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh''s  despatches  of  the  25th 
May.  Has  communicated  with  Lord  Collingwood,  who  agrees 
with  him  in  thinking  that  they  should  be  ready  to  grant,  but 
be  very  cautious  as  to  the  assistance  they  press,  or  even  offer. 

He  has  despatched  Captain  Whittingham  to  General  Cas- 
tanos, to  receive  accounts  of  the  proceedings  of  the  army,  and 
discuss  questions  that  may  arise ;  and,  being  unable  to  dis- 
pense with  Captain  Dalrymple's  assistance,  will  send  Major 
Cox  to  Seville. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  139 

Encloses  the  copy  of  a  despatch  he  forwarded  to  General 
Spencer  upon  receiving  his  Majesty^s  commands,  also  the 
official  publications  at  Valencia,  and  the  translation  of  a  letter 
to  the  present  commandant  at  Algesiras,  Don  Juan  Ordonez, 
from  a  friend,  relating  to  the  proceedings  in  other  parts. 

He  likewise  encloses  a  letter  from  General  Don  Eusebio 
Herrera,  respecting  troops  for  service  in  the  interior,  with  his 
answer,  stating  that  he  has  no  authority  to  furnish  them  for 
such  a  purpose,  but  would  suffer  them  to  replace  an  equal  number 
of  Spaniards  in  garrison  or  port  duty,  and  would  send  an  officer 
to  Seville,  to  communicate  with  the  Junta  on  the  sort  of  aid 
which  can  be  afforded. 

Gibraltar,  June  10,  1808. 

Encloses  the  translation  of  a  letter  which  he  has  received 
from  the  Junta  at  Valencia,  requesting  that  he  would  direct 
the  captains  of  all  English  vessels  to  suspend  acts  of  hostility 
on  that  coast  against  Spanish  vessels,  and  that  he  would  send 
arms  and  ammunition.  Sir  Hew  encloses  also  his  answer, 
stating  that  he  fwill  communicate  the  former  request  to  the 
Vice-Admiral ;  but  that,  with  regard  to  the  latter,  he  has  few 
equipments  for  service  in  the  field,  and  has  already  promised 
most  of  them  to  General  Castaiios.  He  urges  a  further  supply 
of  arms,  and  of  cavalry  appointments. 

Gibraltar,  June  14,  1808. 
States  that  General  Dupont  has  defeated  the  Spanish  post 
at  Alcolea,  and  obtained  possession  of  Cordova.  General 
Castanos,  who  is  appointed  Captain- General  of  Andalusia,  had 
his  head-quarters  on  the  10th  at  Carmona.  He  is  much  in 
want  of  camp  equipage,  of  which  Sir  Hew  can  furnish  him  with 
enough  for  3,000  men  ;  but,  as  that  falls  very  short  of  what  is 
required,  he  requests  an  immediate  supply.  He  has  also  re- 
ceived a  request  for  arms  from  the  Supreme  Council  of  Granada. 

Gibraltar,  June  14,  1808. 
Encloses  a  detail  of  the  services  upon  which  Captain  Whit- 


140  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

tingham  has  been  employed  since  he  joined  Castaiios.  He  has 
sent  General  Castaiios  tents,  and  requests  a  supply  for  20,000 
as  soon  as  possible. 

Gibraltar,  June  18,  1808. 
Encloses  letters  from  Carthagena  and  Granada,  with  a 
printed  declaration  from  the  latter,  by  which  it  is  evident  that 
Granada  does  not  acknowledge  the  Junta  of  Seville  to  be 
supreme.  He  also  encloses  a  letter  from  Don  Eusebio  Her- 
rera,  who  has  sent  a  person,  in  the  name  of  the  Junta,  to  nego- 
ciate  a  loan,  for  which  purpose  further  powers  and  the  detail 
of  the  proposed  security  are  promised.  Sir  Hew  furnished 
the  officer  from  Granada  with  a  supply  of  arms,  and  has  sent 
2,000  barrels  of  powder  to  the  army  of  Seville.  It  is  said, 
that  from  20  to  30,000  men  are  already  in  the  field  to  cover 
Valencia,  against  which  place  it  is  believed  that  Marshal 
Moncey  is  advancing  from  Madrid  with  14,000  French. 
Murat  remains  entrenched  at  Buen  Retiro.  Dupont  is,  by  the 
activity  of  the  peasantry,  believed  to  be  deprived  of  all  com- 
munication and  of  the  means  of  reinforcement. 

Gibraltar,  June  18,  1808. 
Encloses  the  copy  of  a  letter  from  Major-General  Spencer, 
acknowledging  Sir  Hew's  of  the  12th  of  June,  and  stating 
that  it  would  be  imprudent,  with  his  corps  of  4  or  5,000  men, 
to  join  the  Spanish  army,  were  they  even  equipped  for  the 
field,  being  ignorant  of  Castanos'  operations,  and  of  the  means 
of  supplying  the  corps  in  the  way  which  would  be  necessary. 
He  thinks  he  should  be  usefully  employed  by  making  diver- 
sions, and,  if  he  should  find  any  French  corps  pushing  to- 
wards the  coast,  frustrating  their  views.  He  adds  that  the 
Spaniards  preserve  a  jealousy  relative  to  his  landing,  and 
thinks  they  would  relax  in  their  exertions  were  he  to  join  them. 
General  Spencer  further  states  that  his  approach  has  already 
checked  tlie  French  corps  pushing  to  join  Dupont,  which  has 
now  fallen  back  from  Elvas  to  Mora,  68  miles. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  141 

Gibraltar,  June  18,  1808. 
Encloses  a  correspondence  with  General  Spencer,  Don 
Eusebio  de  Herrera,  and  Captain  Whittinghara,  on  the  pro- 
posal of  Greneral  Spencer's  landing.  Also  a  letter  from  Sir 
Charles  Cotton,  stating  the  advantages  that  would  arise  from 
General  Spencer's  joining  him  off  the  Tagus,  which  Sir  Hew 
has  in  consequence  authorized  General  Spencer  to  do,  subject 
to  Lord  Collingwood's  approval. 

Gibraltar,  June  18,  1808. 
Encloses  a  letter  from  the  Government  of  Valencia,  request- 
ing that  a  letter  enclosed  may  be  transmitted  to  the  Marquess 
of  Romana,  and  expressing  confidence  that  speedy  means  will 
be  taken  to  transport  the  corps  under  his  command  to  a 
Spanish  port. 

Gibraltar,  June  19,  1808. 
Encloses  a  Report  from  Captain  Whittingham  of  General 
Castahos'  operations,  by  which  it  appears  that  the  Spanish 
army  had  been  greatly  reinforced,  and  had  taken  up  a  very 
favourable  position. 

Gibraltar,  June  20,  1808. 
Encloses  the  translation  of  a  letter  received  by  Mr.  Viale, 
from  Madrid,  stating  that  the  new  King,  Joseph  Napoleon, 
has  issued  three  decrees  from  Bayonne,  confirming  the  nomi- 
nation of  Lieutenant-General  of  the  Kingdom  to  the  Grand- 
Duke  of  Berg,  and  also  confirming  the  councils  and  other  tri- 
bunals, and  the  corps  of  Body  Guards. 

Sir  Hew  adds  the  report  of  a  victory  by  the  Portuguese  and 
Spaniards  over  the  French  garrison  at  Almeyda. 

Gibraltar,  June  25,  1808. 
Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh's  despatch  of  the  4th  of 
June.  He  encloses  two  despatches  from  Captain  Whittingham, 
enclosing  General  Spencer's  letter  to  General  Castanos,  an- 
nouncing'his  intention  to  proceed  to  the  Tagus  with  the  Spanish 
General's  •  answer. 


142  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

He  has  received  notice  from  the  Count  of  Castro  Marin  that 
the  province  of  Algarve,  in  Portugal,  has  declared  against  the 
French.  The  Count  has  requested  arms  and  ammunition,  of 
which  Sir  Hew  could  only  furnish  him  with  a  very  small  pro- 
portion. 

Gibraltar,  June  30,  1808. 

Encloses  a  patriotic  paper  published  at  Valencia,  and  gives 
some  account  of  the  leading  characters  of  the  Junta  at  Seville, 
as  well  as  of  the  views  of  that  body,  which  he  has  obtained  from 
Major  Cox. 

Gibraltar,  July  4,  1808. 

Encloses  a  despatch  from  Major  Cox,  at  Seville,  stating  the 
unwillingness  of  the  Spanish  Government  to  permit  the  Bri- 
tish forces  to  occupy  Ceuta,  and  enclosing  a  correspondence 
he  has  had  with  Father  Gil,  relative  to  the  conduct  of  the 
Spanish  agent  in  Tangier. 

Gibraltar,  July  17,  1808. 

States  that  a  Minister  has  arrived  from  Sicily,  to  protest 
against  the  late  renunciations  in  Spain,  and  to  assert  his 
Sicilian  Majesty ""s  claim  to  the  succession.  Encloses  the  Pro- 
test and  a  letter  from  the  Marquess  de  Circello  to  Admiral 
Thornborough,  introducing  to  him  the  Chevalier  Roberto  (the 
Sicilian  Minister),  and  explaining  the  object  of  his  mission. 

Gibraltar,  July  17,  1808. 

Encloses  copies  of  a  correspondence  between  Major  Cox  and 
Father  Gil,  with  other  papers,  illustrating  the  temper  and 
character  of  the  Junta  of  Seville,  and  displaying  the  jealousy 
which  prompts  the  exclusion  of  the  British  troops  from  the 
Spanish  fortresses,  which,  in  Sir  Hew'*s  opinion,  has  been  in- 
creased, if  not  occasioned,  by  the  urgency  we  have  displayed 
on  this  point. 

Gibraltar,  July  17,  1808. 

Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh''s  two  despatches  of  the 
28th  June.      He  has  reinforced  General  Spencer  with  the 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  143 

6th  Eegiment  of  foot,  and  a  strong  detachment  of  artillery : 
the  former  he  can  continue  to  spare  from  the  garrison,  but  not 
the  latter,  which  he  has  directed  General  Spencer  to  send  back. 
The  guns  were  not  equipped  for  the  field,  and,  therefore, 
rather  impeded  than  helped  the  corps.  He  cannot  venture  to 
send  a  second  regiment  from  Gibraltar,  unless  reinforced  by  a 
second  Veteran  Battalion. 

Gibraltar,  July  20,  1808. 

Encloses  a  Report  from  Captain  Whittingham,  showing 
the  movements  of  Castaiios'  army,  and  its  relative  situation  to 
that  of  the  French,  under  Dupont,  on  the  17th  July  :  and  also 
stating  that,  on  the  16th  July,  an  action  took  place  on  the 
Guadalquivir  near  Mengibar,  between  General  Reding,  with 
8,000  men,  and  a  French  force  of  5,000,  including  a  regiment 
of  cuirassiers,  which  terminated  in  the  defeat  of  the  French 
with  great  loss.  General  Reding,  however,  was  obliged  to 
abandon  the  advantages  he  had  gained,  and  retire  to  Men- 
gibar, for  want  of  provisions.  It  appeared,  by  an  intercepted 
letter,  that  Dupont  was  in  great  want  of  provisions,  and  ex- 
pected reinforcements. 

Sir  Hew  also  encloses  a  letter  from  the  President  of  the 
Junta  at  Seville  to  General  Spencer,  informing  him  that  Ge- 
neral Castanos  concurs  with  him  in  the  expediency  of  his  join- 
ing the  British  army  in  Portugal,  General  Castanos'  army 
being  sufficiently  strong  to  meet  the  enemy  opposed  to  it. 

Gibraltar,  July  24,  1808. 
Encloses  a  Report  from  Captain  Whittingham,  containing 
the  details  of  a  complete  victory  obtained  on  the  19th  by  Ge- 
neral Castanos  over  Dupont  and  Wedel.  Also  a  letter  to 
Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  from  General  Castanos,  expressing  the 
satisfaction  he  has  received  from  Captain  Whittingham's  ser- 
vices. 

Gibraltar,  July  28,  1808. 
Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh''s  despatches,  Nos.  24,  25, 


144  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

and  26,  and  has  taken  measures  to  circulate  in  Spain  the  King''s 
Speech  and  the  Orders  in  Council  touching  the  affairs  of  that 
country. 

Mr.  O'Ryan  has  been  sent  to  Gibraltar  by  the  Junta  at 
Seville,  to  negociate  a  loan,  but  without  success.  Sir  Hew 
encloses  two  letters  from  Major  Cox  on  this  subject ;  he  will 
endeavour  to  raise  100,000  dollars  for  the  immediate  use  of  the 
army.  He  encloses  a  printed  letter  from  the  Count  de  Tilly 
to  the  Junta  at  Seville,  on  the  victory  of  Baylen. 

Gibraltar,  July  30,  1808. 
Encloses  a  letter  from  Lord  Collingwood,  recommending 
that  0^^20,000  should  be  raised,  if  possible,  for  the  use  of  the 
Junta  at  Seville  ;  and  states  that  he  has,  in  consequence  of 
this  letter  and  the  failure  of  Mr.  0''Ryan''s  attempt  to  negociate 
a  loan,  advertised  for  money,  but  the  sum  offered  does  not  yet 
amount  to  ^^20,000  ;  specie  being  scarce,  and  the  Exchange 
consequently  very  disadvantageous  to  the  public. 

Gibraltar,  August  2,  1808. 

He  has  drawn  Bills  on  the  Treasury  for  .£'13,620,  to  make 

an  advance,  by  Lord  Collingwood^s  desire,  to  the  Government 

of  Andalusia,  to  answer  the  most  pressing  wants  of  the  army, 

and  has  sent  the  above  sum  to  his  lordship  by  the  Espoir  brig. 

Gibraltar,  August  8,  1808. 
Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh''s  despatch  of  the  15tli  July, 
communicating  his  appointment  to  the  chief  command  of  the 
forces  in  Portugal  and  Spain.  He  will  proceed  to  join  the 
army  as  soon  as  the  necessary  arrangements  are  completed. 
Transports  are  preparing  for  the  42nd  Regiment,  which  he 
means  to  carry  out  with  him.  He  has  had  a  demand  from 
Catalonia  for  arms  and  stores,  which  he  has  complied  with  in 
part.  He  represents  that  province  to  have  become  an  im- 
portant point,  and  that  it  is  in  want  of  every  thing. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  146 

Gibraltar,  August  9, 1808. 
Encloses  the  extract  of  a  letter  from  Major  Oox,  stating 
that  doubts  have  arisen  in  the  Junta  at  Seville,  whether  the 
terms  granted  to  General  Wedel  ought  to  be  carried  into  exe- 
cution ;  also  Sir  Hew's  answer  to  Major  Cox,  expressing  his 
surprise  that  the  question  should  have  arisen. 

Gibraltar,  August  10,  1808. 

States  that  the  Duke  of  Orleans  and  the  second  Prince  of 
the  Two  Sicilies  have  arrived  at  Gibraltar,  with  the  view  of 
establishing  the  residence  of  the  latter  at  that  place,  for  the 
avowed  purpose  of  negociating  for  the  Regency  of  Spain.  Sir 
Hew,  having  represented  to  them  the  impropriety  of  this 
measure,  has  agreed  to  communicate  the  whole  matter  to  Lord 
Collingwood,  for  his  opinion  ;  and,  in  the  mean  time,  the 
Prince  is  not  to  be  allowed  to  land. 

Encloses  a  letter  on  this  subject  from  Sir  Alexander  Ball, 
with  a  correspondence  between  him  and  Mr.  Drummond,  and 
a  letter  from  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  to  the  Duke  of  Orleans. 

Gibraltar,  August  11,  1808. 

He  has  succeeded  in  convincing  the  Duke  of  Orleans  of  the 
necessity  of  his  going  to  England,  to  communicate  with  his 
Majesty'*s  Ministers  on  the  proposed  plan.  He  encloses  a 
letter  which  he  addressed  to  Prince  Leopold,  disclosing  the 
terms  upon  which  he  can  be  permitted  to  reside  in  the  garrison. 

The  evacuation  of  Madrid  has  not  been  in  consequence  of 
any  defeat,  but  for  the  purpose  of  concentrating  the  French 
force. 

Gibraltar,  August  12,  1808. 

He  has  had  a  further  conference  with  the  Duke  of  Orleans, 

on  the  proposed  attempt  to  obtain  the  Regency  of  Spain  for 

Prince  Leopold,  and  encloses  a  Declaration  from  the  Junta  at 

Seville,  which  the  Duke  interprets  as  favourable  to  that  project. 

-     The  Duke  of  Ascoli,  Adjutant  to  the  King  of  Naples,  whom 

VOL.  VII.  L 


146        LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF       (1808. 

it  had  beeu  proposed  to  send  to  England,  having  strongly  ob- 
jected to  that  measure,  has  been  permitted  to  land,  and  to 
remain  with  the  Prince,  on  condition  that  he  would  not  com- 
municate the  despatches  which  he  brought  for  the  Spanish 
Government, 

Gibraltar,  August  26,  1808. 

Major-General  Drummond  encloses  a  copy  of  despatches  re- 
ceived from  the  Junta  of  Valencia,  announcing  that  the  French 
have  raised  the  siege  of  Saragosa  and  fled  to  Tudela ;  but 
stating  also  that  the  enemy  has  received  a  considerable  rein- 
forcement in  Catalonia,  which  places  in  imminent  danger  the 
garrisons  of  Girona,  Bosas,  and  Hostalrich,  where  the  inha- 
bitants are  chiefly  unarmed.  The  Government  of  Valencia 
solicit  an  immediate  supply  of  arms  to  be  sent  to  Tarragona, 
which  General  Drummond  is  unable  to  furnish  ;  but  requests 
that  he  may  have  the  means  of  doing  it,  and  suggests  the  pro- 
priety of  making  Gibraltar  a  depot  for  arms,  stores,  &;c.,  in 
large  quantities,  to  be  distributed  as  exigencies  may  require. 

General  Drummond  was  left  in  the  command  of  the  fortress 
on  the  13th  of  August  by  Sir  Hew  Dairy mple,  and  has  re- 
ceived Lord  Oastlereagh's  despatches,  Nos.  24,  25,  and  26,  of 
the  6th  July. 


NO.  II. 
PRECIS  OF  LETTERS  FROM  MAJOR-GENERAL  SPENCER, 

RELATING  TO  SPAIN  AND  PORTUGAL. 

H.M.S.  Antelope,  off  Tagus  Bay,  February  29,  1808. 
States  that  he  arrived  off  the  Tagus  on  the  26th.  He  has 
communicated  with  Sir  Charles  Cotton,  who  agrees  with  him 
that  their  hostile  attempts  are  impracticable,  occupied  as  the 
Tagus  and  forts  are  by  1 6,000  French,  making  altogether  in 
Portugal  86,000  French  and  20,000  Spaniards.  The  in- 
habitants have  been  disanned  by  Junot,  and  reduced  to  sub- 
jection J  and,  severely  as  they  feel  the  French  yoke,  they  are 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  147 

in  no  material  want  of  provisions.  The  Russian  ships  (eight 
sail  of  the  line)  were  ready  for  sea,  with  a  Portuguese  line-of- 
battle  ship  and  a  frigate.  The  Russian  Admiral  has  inti- 
mated to  Sir  Charles  Cotton  that,  when  he  receives  orders 
from  his  Emperor,  he  shall  not  scruple  to  venture  out  of  the 
Tagus.  The  French,  it  appears,  are  marching  a  formidable  army 
into  Spain.    General  Spencer^s  troops  are  in  perfect  health. 

Off  Cape  Espartel,  March  10,  1808. 

He  has  had  a  tedious  passage  from  the  Tagus,  but  expects 

to  be  at  Gibraltar  in  the  course  of  the  day.     Encloses  a  list 

(received  from  Sir  Charles  Cotton)  of  the  troops  and  transports 

which  arrived  at  Gibraltar  on  the  l7th  January — 2,280  rank 

and  file. 

Gibraltar,  March  13,  1808. 

He  arrived  there  on  the  10th.  Encloses  the  reports  of 
Captain  Usher,  R.N.,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Browne,  relative 
to  Ceuta,  with  other  papers  on  the  same  subject,  and  states 
that,  in  consequence,  with  the  unanimous  opinion  of  Sir  Hew 
Dalrymple,  Sir  Sidney  Smith,  and  other  officers  assembled 
with  them,  he  has  thought  it  his  duty  to  relinquish  an  attack 
upon  that  fortress. 

Gibraltar,  March  13,  1808. 

Agreeably  to  his  instructions,  he  has  determined  to  remain 
at  Gibraltar,  with  the  British  force  under  his  orders,  a  detach- 
ment of  the  Staff  corps,  and  a  part  of  the  artillery.  The  four 
regiments  of  the  King's  German  Legion,  the  rest  of  the  artillery, 
and  the  recruits  for  the  regiments  at  Sicily  and  Malta,  he  has 
directed  to  proceed  without  delay  for  their  destination,  under 
Brigadier-General  M'Farlane. 

Encloses  a  list  of  the  victuallers  he  has  forwarded  to  General 
Beresford. 

Gibraltar,  March  18,  1808. 

Encloses  a  letter  confirming  the  impossibility  of  carrying 
Ceuta  by  a  coup  de  main.  The  reinforcements  (nearly  6,000 
men)  are  nearly  ready  to  sail  for  Sicily. 

l2 


148  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Gibraltar,  March  27,  1808. 
The  reinforcements  for  Sicily  sailed  on  the  20th,  and  the 
victuallers  for  Madeira  will  proceed  immediately. 

H.M.S.  Minorca,  Gibraltar  Bay,  May  14,  1808, 
In  consequence  of  a  communication  to  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple 
from  Rear- Admiral  Purvis,  he  is  under  weigh  with  the  troops 
to  proceed  off  Cadiz,  to  co-operate  with  the  Rear-Admiral  in 
any  enterprise  likely  to  benefit  the  service. 

H.M.S.  Atlas,  off  Cadiz,  May  29,  1808. 

Having  joined  the  Rear-Admiral  on  the  15th,  the  first  step 
they  took  was  to  make  known  their  sentiments  and  disposition 
to  the  Spaniards,  and  endeavour  to  open  a  private  communica- 
tion with  the  Spanish  officers  at  Cadiz.  Encloses  copies  of 
their  proclamation  for  the  former  purpose,  and  of  their  letters 
to  the  Governor  of  Cadiz,  the  Marquess  of  Socorro  (Solano)  to 
obtain  the  latter.  They  have  studiously  avoided  any  specific 
proposition  which  might  commit  the  British  Government.  No 
answers  have  been  received ;  but  there  is  every  reason  to 
believe  that  the  proclamation  has  been  favourably  received  by 
the  people,  who  are  highly  exasperated  against  the  French, 
and  would  receive  the  English,  if  there  was  a  Spaniard  of 
influence  to  head  and  lead  them. 

To  facilitate  the  means  of  communication,  the  Admiral,  at 
his  request,  has  anchored  the  transports  near  the  shore,  under 
the  protection  of  the  in-shore  squadron.  He  has  at  length 
received  a  note  from  the  Marquess  de  Socorro,  who  does 
not  appear  to  feel  himself  strong  or  bold  enough  to  oppose  the 
views  of  the  French,  and  seems,  with  the  rest  of  the  Spanish 
nobility,  to  prefer  security  and  submission  to  the  danger  of  an 
honourable  resistance. 

H.M.S.  Atlas,  May  29,  1808. 

States  that,  from  the  information  which  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple 
has  received,  concerning  the  dispositions  of  the  Spaniards,  he 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  149 

conceived  that  an  opportunity  would  ofter  for  our  taking  pos- 
session of  the  French  squadron  at  Cadiz.  But,  though  the 
British  proclamation  has  been  favourably  received  by  the 
people,  there  is  reason  to  suspect  the  intentions  of  Socorro, 
who,  however,  has  lost  by  his  late  conduct  much  of  his  popu- 
larity.    He  is  still  without  the  detachment  from  Sicily. 

Off  Cadiz,  June  6,  1808. 
Reports  that,  on  the  30th  May,  (when,  from  the  unfavourable 
complexion  of  things,  he  was  preparing  to  return  to  Gibraltar) 
two  deputies  arrived  from  Seville,  to  know  if  the  British  Com- 
manders were  disposed  to  afford  that  co-operation  and  assistance 
which  had  been  proffered  in  their  public  address.  On  receiving 
strong  assurances  of  the  affirmative,  the  deputies  returned, 
having  informed  the  British  Commanders  that  a  Supreme 
Council  had  been  constituted  at  Seville,  in  the  name  of  Ferdi- 
nand VII.,  for  the  four  provinces  of  Seville,  Andalusia,  Va- 
lencia, and  Cordova ;  also,  that  Socorro,  in  consequence  of  a 
proclamation  he  had  issued,  and  of  his  being  considered  as 
gained  over  to  the  French  interest,  had,  on  the  28th,  fallen  a 
sacrifice  to  the  people  of  Cadiz. 

The  following  day,  the  deputies  returned,  inviting  a  con- 
ference of  accredited  British  officers  on  shore  with  members  of 
the  Supreme  Council.  The  British  Commanders  desired  pre- 
viously to  stipulate  that  the  French  flags  in  the  harbour  should 
be  struck,  the  crews  made  prisoners  of  war,  and  the  ships  taken 
possession  of,  for  the  future  disposal  of  the  British  and  Spanish 
Sovereigns ;  to  which  it  was  replied  that  this  seizure  must  be 
the  consequence,  and  not  the  price,  of  an  alliance  with  Great 
Britain,  and  that  the  appearance  of  British  officers  on  shore 
would  be  attended  with  the  happiest  effects. 

On  this,  the  Commanders  thought  it  right  to  appoint  Cap- 
tain Sir  John  Gore,  R.N.,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sir  George 
Smith,  to  be  the  bearers  of  any  propositions  that  might  be  made 
to  them.     These  officers  were  received  on  shore  with  general 


150  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

respect,  and  with  the  acclamations  of  the  people :  and,  after  a 
long  conference,  they  returned  with  proposals,  a  copy  of  which 
is  enclosed. 

The  proposals  have  for  their  objects — 1.  The  revival  of  the 
peace  of  1782  [1783].  2.  The  assistance  of  Great  Britain 
against  the  common  enemy.  3.  The  protection  of  vessels  sent 
with  intelligence  from  Spain  to  the  colonies.  4.  The  security 
of  Spanish  vessels  against  the  British.  5.  The  reduction  of 
the  French  squadron  as  soon  as  peace  is  confirmed.  6.  The 
appointment  of  plenipotentiaries,  to  arrange  the  details. 

These  propositions  appearing  to  the  British  Commanders  to 
involve  important  national  questions,  they  convened  a  council 
of  officers  of  the  army  and  navy,  who  agreed  that  other  propo- 
sitions (also  enclosed)  should  be  submitted  in  answer  to  those 
received  from  Spain.  The  British  propositions  state :  1.  That 
the  Commanders  are  not  authorized  to  receive  propositions  as 
the  basis  of  a  peace,  but  will  convey  to  England  such  Spanish 
Commissioners  as  may  be  selected  to  treat  for  one.  2.  That 
the  AdmiraFs  instructions  prevent  him  from  acceding  to  more 
than  a  partial  armistice,  which  he  grants  on  condition  that 
British  vessels  shall  have  ingress  and  egress  at  Cadiz,  with  all 
commercial  advantages,  and  allowing  Spanish  coasters  to  navi- 
gate from  and  to  Cadiz,  with  provisions  and  merchandize,  but 
not  naval  or  military  stores,  which  must  be  admitted  under  a 
special  communication.  3.  That  passports  will  be  given  for 
feluccas  conveying  officers  and  intelligence  to  the  colonies,  to 
counteract  the  views  of  the  common  enemy.  4.  That  imme- 
diate steps  must  be  taken  to  reduce  or  destroy  the  French 
squadron  and  making  the  crews  prisoners  of  war ;  and  that  all 
French  privateers,  &;c.,  shall  be  excluded  from  the  Spanish 
ports. 

These  proposals  were  accordingly  despatched  to  the  Supreme 
Council,  whose  answer  is  not  yet  received,  but  is  expected  to 
be  satisfactory.  In  the  mean  time,  the  Spanish  General  at 
Cadiz  is  preparing  to  attack  the  French  squadron  with  batteries, 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  151 

which  are  nearly  completed,  and  Admiral  Purvis  has  been 
requested  to  anchor  his  ships  at  the  mouth  of  the  harbour,  and 
give  assistance,  if  necessary ;  but  the  aid  of  the  British  troops 
in  the  batteries  has  been  declined.  Sir  George  Smith  is  to 
remain  at  Cadiz,  to  communicate  between  the  Spanish  and 
British  Generals. 

OflFCadiz,  June6,  1808. 

Encloses  proclamations  and  papers,  marking  the  general 
disposition  of  the  Spanish  people  to  resist  the  French.  He 
adds  that  a  most  respectable  form  of  government  has  been 
temporarily  established  at  Seville,  according  to  laws  of  the 
nation  on  occasions  like  the  present,  and  at  the  instigation  of 
the  people  themselves,  who  appear  to  pay  due  obedience  to  it. 
He  learns  that  there  is  at  present  no  want  of  money ;  but  that 
some  pieces  of  ordnance,  50  or  60,000  stand  of  arms,  and  a 
large  supply  of  ammunition,  are  indispensable.  200,000  men 
are  said  to  be  in  arms,  in  the  different  provinces,  and  are  taking 
up  the  positions  thought  to  be  the  most  eligible.  It  is  intended 
to  act  on  the  defensive  as  much  as  possible,  confining  their 
oiFensive  operations  to  cutting  off  the  enemy's  supplies  and 
small  detachments. 

It  has  been  hinted  to  him  that  it  might  be  advantageous  for 
a  British  force  to  advance  to  Seville,  and  to  act  with  the 
Spanish  troops  ;  he  has  determined,  however,  not  to  venture 
into  the  interior,  but  to  confine  his  co-operation  to  the  gar- 
risoning of  Cadiz  (if  called  upon),  till  he  shall  receive  orders 
from  home.  Sir  Hew  Ualrymple  suggests  a  diversion  at  the 
Tagus,  but  General  Spencer  thinks  it  his  indispensable  duty  to 
remain  off  Cadiz  till  the  Spanish  and  French  squadrons  are 
secured  from  the  enemy,  or  till  all  hopes  of  that  object  are  at 
an  end. 

He  thinks  the  objects  on  his  present  station  too  important 
to  be  relinquished  for  Minorca,  which,  if  the  former  succeed, 
must  be  gained  as  a  natural  consequence.  Brigadier-General 
Nightingale  and   Sir  George  Smith  concur  in  this  opinion ; 


152  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

but  he  will   keep  himself  prepared  for  the  latter  object,   if 
necessary. 

It  is  reported  that  10,000  French  have  entered  Estremadura, 
and  that  a  similar  force  has  passed  the  Sierra  Morena — 4,000 
are  also  said  to  be  marching  for  Portugal.  The  Spaniards 
have  already  assembled  85,000  at  and  near  Seville.  General 
Castafios  has  moved  to  Ecija  with  1 5,000  men  from  St.  Rocq, 
Algesiras,  and  a  part  of  the  garrison  of  Ceuta :  he  commands 
the  advanced  corps  to  be  opposed  to  the  French.  The  highest 
enthusiasm  animates  all  classes. 

OffCadiz,  June  10,  1808. 

The  Spaniards  seem  unanimous  in  resisting  the  French. 
At  Barcelona  they  have  surrounded  the  French  corps,  and  all 
the  coast  is  in  arms.  In  the  southern  quarter,  they  have 
assembled  more  than  60,000,  including  15,000  regulars,  the 
whole  already  armed,  and  forming  into  battalions  :  their  head- 
quarters are  at  Cormona,  the  advanced  guard  at  Ecija,  but  an 
irregular  corps  is  still  more  in  advance,  and  has  had  a  skirmish 
with  the  French  advanced  corps  near  Cordova. 

The  French,  under  Dupont,  are  said  to  be  16,000:  they 
crossed  the  Sierra  Morena  without  opposition,  and  have  reached 
Cordova.  The  Spaniards  have  requested  General  Spencer  to 
march  to  Xeres,  but  he  does  not  feel  himself  justified  to  do 
this,  either  by  his  instructions,  or  the  strength  and  equipments 
of  his  corps.  It  has  since  been  proposed  that  he  should  pro- 
ceed to  Ayamonte,  as  a  French  corps  is  assembling  at  Tavira, 
with  the  probable  intention  of  continuing  their  route  along  the 
coast,  until  they  can  land  in  the  rear  of  the  Spanish  troops  de- 
fending the  Guadiana  (about  6,000),  and  either  turn  them,  or 
effect  a  junction  with  Dupont.  General  Spencer  proposes  to 
proceed  against  this  corps  immediately,  which  does  not  exceed 
5,000.  General  Spencer's,  including  the  6th  regiment  and  the 
detachments  from  Sicily,  amount  to  4,500. 

The  Spaniards  think  themselves  fully  capable  of  defending 
Cadiz,  provided  there  is  an  open  communication  from  the  sea. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  153 

In  addition  to  the  60,000  stand  of  arms  before  mentioned,  they 
will  want  40,000.  There  is  likely  to  be  a  want  of  provisions. 
Four  Commissioners  are  named  for  England,  but  made  known 
to  the  British  Commanders.  In  a  PS.,  he  adds  that  Brigadier- 
General  Nightingale''s  brigade  is  under  weigh  for  Ayamonte. 
The  negociation  still  continues,  and  hostilities  may  commence 
airain.     Lord  Oollino:wood  has  arrived. 

Off  Cadiz,  June  12,  1808. 

The  French  squadron,  five  sail  of  the  line  and  a  frigate, 
having  placed  themselves  in  a  defensive  position  in  the  Channel 
leading  to  the  Caraccas,  out  of  the  reach  of  the  works  of  Cadiz, 
and  having  refused  to  listen  to  any  terms,  were  attacked  on 
the  9th  at  3  a.m.,  by  the  Spanish  gun  and  mortar  boats,  and 
the  batteries  erected  for  this  purpose  on  the  Isle  of  Leon,  and 
near  Fort  Louis.  The  firing  continued  till  next  day,  when 
the  French  hoisted  a  flag  of  truce ;  but  the  terms  proposed 
being  inadmissible,  the  Spaniards  intend  to  recommence  hostili- 
ties with  an  additional  battery  to  the  eastward  of  St.  Louis. 
The  British  Commanders  would  have  co-operated,  but  the 
Spaniards  declined  their  ofier. 

The  Supreme  Council  of  Seville  have  applied  for  a  frigate, 
to  convey  their  Commissioners  to  England.  He  will  sail  im- 
mediately against  the  French  corps  at  Tavira ;  Lord  Colling- 
wood  approving  of  the  measure.  He  encloses  the  proposals  of 
the  French  Admiral  Rossilly  to  quit  the  Bay,  with  the  answer 
of  Governor  Morla,  that  nothing  but  an  unconditional  surrender 
can  be  accepted. 

H.M.S.  Windsor  Castle,  off  Ayamonte,  June  17,  1808. 
The  French  squadron  surrendered  on  the  14th,  when  the 
Spanish  colours  were  flying  in  all  the  ships.  He  has  not 
received  the  particulars.  .  His  movement  to  Ayamonte  has 
been  successful.  The  French  are  retiring  in  every  direction 
towards  Lisbon,  except  some  small  parties  occupying  the  forts 


154  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

and  posts  in  the  south  of  Portugal.  The  Portuguese  are  rising 
in  all  parts,  encouraged  by  the  appearance  of  the  British ;  and 
the  Spanish  frontier  on  the  Guadiana  is  effectually  secured. 

Off  Ayamonte,  June  17,  1808. 

The  French  corps  has  retired,  leaving  only  2  or  800  men  at 
Villa  Real,  and  very  small  detachments  at  Castro  Marin, 
Tavira,  and  Faro.  About  4,000  men  are  collected  at  Mora, 
twenty  leagues  from  Ayamonte.  A  considerable  body  of 
Spanish  troops  have  escaped  from  the  French,  and  are  on  their 
way,  through  Portugal,  towards  Ayamonte.  He  has  supplied 
the  Spaniards  at  Ayamonte  with  200  stand  of  arms.  It  was 
proposed  to  him  to  dislodge  the  French  at  Villa  Real ;  but,  as 
they  had  a  secure  retreat  to  the  forts  at  Castro  Marin,  which 
could  not  be  taken  without  landing  guns,  and  consequently 
occasioning  delay,  he  did  not  think  it  worth  while. 

The  Portuguese  are  universally  desirous  to  oppose  the 
French,  but  are  without  arms,  which  General  Spencer  is  not 
able  to  supply.  Sir  C.  Cotton  has  requested  him  to  proceed 
off  Lisbon,  which  he  is  desirous  to  do,  if  Lord  CoUingwood 
should  approve  it. 

H.M.  Brig  Scout,  off  Lagos. 

The  information  of  the  forced  renunciation  of  the  Crown  of 
Spain  by  Charles  IV.,  Ferdinand,  and  all  the  royal  family,  in 
favour  of  Buonaparte,  has  excited  a  general  feeling  of  indigna- 
tion, though  some  of  the  upper  classes  appear  to  temporize,  as 
if  they  dreaded  the  consequences  of  resistance.  The  Council 
of  Seville  have  assumed  an  independent  authority,  in  the  name 
of  Ferdinand  VII.,  whom  they  have  proclaimed  King,  and 
have  formally  declared  war  against  France,  appealing  to  the 
Spanish  nation  to  support  them.  Their  supremacy  has  been 
acknowledged  by  several  other  provinces,  though  each  Council 
assumes  a  separate  authority  in  its  own  district. 

In  Andalusia,  from  15  to  20,000  regular  troops  and  60,000 
peasants  are  in  arms.     Castanos  is  appointed  Coramandor-in- 


1808.]  '  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  155 

Chief.  The  defeat  of  17,000  peasants  by  Dupont  at  the  bridge 
of  Alcolea  has  made  them  look  up  to  the  regulars,  who  are,  in 
general,  in  good  order,  and  well  equipped.  They  have  a  pro- 
portion of  near  4,000  cavalry  and  a  large  quantity  of  artillery, 
as  Seville  has  a  foundry  and  large  depot.  Many  small  de- 
tachments of  the  enemy  have  been  cut  off.  Dupont  has  pushed 
to  Cordova,  where  he  is  strengthening  himself.  The  Morena 
passes  have  been  occupied  by  5,000  Spaniards,  the  road  broken 
up,  and,  it  is  supposed,  all  communication  cut  off. 

Proclamations  are  circulated  by  the  Spaniards,  inviting  the 
Portuguese  to  join  in  their  cause.  The  latter  have  already 
risen  at  Faro,  where  they  have  taken  or  destroyed  200  French, 
and  have  seized  the  arms  and  ammunition,  which  the  French 
had  collected  in  a  depot,  as  well  as  40,000  dollars. 

Considering  the  Spanish  frontier  on  the  Guadiana  secure  for 
the  present,  he  will  proceed  to  the  Tagus :  he  has  written 
letters  (of  which  he  encloses  copies)  to  Castaiios  and  the  Council 
of  Seville,  acquainting  them'  with  his  motives  for  this  determi- 
nation. 

H.M.S.  Hibernia,  off  Lisbon,  June  24,  1808. 

On  his  arrival  off  Lisbon,  he  learned  from  Sir  C.  Cotton  that 
the  Portuguese  are  in  a  ripe  state  to  throw  off  the  Freijch 
yoke ;  but  the  French  force,  concentrated  at  Lisbon  and  the 
neighbourhood,  is  very  considerable,  and  fully  capable  of 
resisting  a  much  larger  force  than  he  could  land.  He  has  de- 
termined, with  Sir  C.  Cotton's  concurrence,  to  return  with  the 
troops  to  Ayamonte;  and,  if  he  finds  the  frontiers  quiet,  to 
proceed  to  Cadiz,  to  act  as  circumstances  may  require. 

H.M.S.  Scout,  off  St.  Lucar,  June  26,  1808. 
Ayamonte  is  perfectly  quiet.  The  Portuguese  are  in  pos- 
session of  Villa  Real  and  Castro  Marin,  where  the  French  have 
surrendered.  The  whole  province  of  Algarve  is  in  the  posses- 
sion of  the  Portuguese.  He  has  announced  his  return  to  Cas- 
tanos  and  the  Council. 


156  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Puerto  Santa  Maria,  July  3,  1808. 
-  General  Morla  having  offered  him  barracks  at  Porto  Santa 
Maria,  he  has  landed  there.  Morla  has  stated  to  him  that  he 
shall  look  to  his  assistance  to  defend  Cadiz,  in  the  event  of  any 
misfortune  happening  to  Castanos"*  army.  With  this  view,  he 
will  remain  on  shore,  but  will  not  advance  into  the  interior,  as 
his  corps  is  too  small  and  insufficiently  equipped  for  field 
operations.  The  French  are  said  to  have  been  completely  de- 
feated near  Saragossa ;  and  Dupont  is  reported  to  have  retired 
to  Andujar,  much  in  want  of  supplies,  while  Castanos  is 
marching  to  give  him  battle. 

Puerto  Santa  Maria,  July  13,  1808. 

The  deranged  finances  of  the  Government  at  Seville  having 
compelled  them  to  resolve  on  dismantling  the  ships,  General 
Spencer  applied  for  pecuniary  aid  for  them  to  Lord  Colling- 
wood  and  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple,  who  did  not  think  proper  to 
give  it  for  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  required.  General 
Spencer,  however,  having  held  out  expectations  of  relief  to  the 
Spaniards,  considered  himself  pledged  to  advance  fifteen  days' 
pay  for  their  navy,  which  he  has  accordingly  done. 

He  has  been  pressed  by  General  Castaiios  to  place  his  corps 
at  Xeres,  to  support  the  Spanish  army,  in  case  of  a  defeat. 
This  he  has  consented  to ;  but  the  exhausted  state  of  the 
country  presents  obstacles  to  the  proposed  movement.  He 
will  not  march  without  cannon;  and  Andalusia  has  been 
drained  of  horses  to  supply  the  Spanish  army.  He  has  resolved 
not  to  move  beyond  Xeres,  and  will  take  with  him  only  two 
regiments,  with  four  light  companies,  and  some  artillery, 
leaving  the  remainder  ready  to  support  General  Morla. 

It  is  believed  that  Dupont  has  been  reinforced  by  5,000  men ; 
but  Castanos  has  25,000  regulars,  besides  many  thousands  of 
peasantry.  The  sum  he  has  advanced  to  Morla  is  40,000 
hard  dollars. 

Bulwark,  off  Cadiz,  July  22,  1808. 

Castanos,  by  repeated  attacks  on  Dupont,  has  reduced  him 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  157 

to  ask  for  terms,  which  have  been  refused.  As  these  successes 
have  removed  Greneral  Spencer's  doubts  with  respect  to  the 
propriety  of  his  leaving  that  country,  he  has  communicated  to 
the  Junta  his  intention  of  joining  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  if  they  did 
not  think  his  departure  prejudicial  to  them.  The  Junta  having 
assented,  as  well  as  Lord  Oollingwood,  he  has  embarked  all 
the  troops,  who  are  under  sail. 

The  conduct  of  the  troops  at  Santa  Maria  gained  the  good- 
will of  the  inhabitants.  He  adds,  in  a  PS.,  that  Castanos  will 
march  to  Madrid,  joined  by  the  Valencian  army. 

Bulwark,  ofFCascaes,  August  2,  1808. 

He  has  arrived  off  Cascaes  with  the  whole  of  his  force,  and 

they  are  beating  up  to  join  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  at  Figuera. 

He  is  proceeding  in  the  Nautilus,  to  meet  Sir  Arthur,  without 

delay,  leaving  the  troops  under  Brigadier-General  Nightingale. 


NO.  III. 
PRECIS  OF  DESPATCHES  FROM  SIR  A.  WELLESLEY, 

RELATING  TO  SPAIN  AND  PORTUGAL. 

On  board  H.M.S.  Crocodile,  Corunna,  July  21,  1808. 

States  that,  having  adverted  to  the  tenour  of  Lord  Castle- 
reagh's  instructions  of  the  80th  June,  he  quitted  the  fleet,  as 
soon  as  it  was  clear  of  Ireland,  and  arrived  at  Corunna. 

From  several  conferences  with  the  Junta  of  Gallicia,  he 
learns  that  the  whole  of  Spain,  except  Navarre  and  Biscay,  is 
in  arms  against  the  French,  who  have  been  defeated  in  many 
places.  This  information  is  not  official,  but  is  contained  in 
private  letters  which  are  not  doubted. 

The  combined  Gallician  and  Castilian  armies  (50,000  men, 
of  whom  20,000  were  regulars)  were,  on  the  14th,  attacked  at 
Rio  Seco,  by  Bessi^res,  with  20,000  men,  of  which  4,000  were 
cavalry.  The  Spaniards  were  defeated  on  the  left,  and  lost 
7,000  men,  with  two  pieces  of  cannon ;  the  French  are  stated 


158  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

to  have  lost  7,000  men,  and  six  pieces  of  cannon.  The  Spa- 
niards retired  to  Benevente,  by  which  the  French  have  ac- 
quired the  command  of  the  Duero,  and  are  enabled  to  impede 
the  communication  between  Gallicia  and  the  southern  pro- 
vinces. The  Junta  have  consented  that  Sir  Arthur  should  use 
the  port  of  Vigo,  if  necessary,  to  shelter  the  fleet,  or  even  land 
the  troops. 

The  French  troops  in  Portugal  appear  to  be  about  15,000, 
of  which  12,000  are  at  or  near  Lisbon,  and  a  small  corps  occu- 
pies Almeida.  The  three  provinces  north  of  the  Duero  are  in 
arms  against  the  French.  A  Portuguese  corps  of  10,000  is  in 
Oporto,  and  a  Spanish  corps  of  2,000  on  its  march  thither 
from  Gallicia.  He  has  not  learned  whether  General  Spencer 
will  be  able  to  proceed  to  Lisbon.  He  will  sail  immediately  for 
Oporto,  requesting  Captain  Malcolm  to  follow  him  with  the 
convoy. 

H.M.S.  Crocodile,  July  26,  1808. 

Having  joined  the  fleet  ofi"  Cape  Finisterre,  on  the  22nd,  he 
arrived  at  Oporto  on  the  24th,  and  the  fleet  next  morning. 
He  has  learned  from  the  Bishop  of  Oporto,  the  Portuguese 
General,  and  Lieut.-Colonel  Browne,  that  the  Portuguese 
troops,  militia,  and  regulars,  amounted  to  about  5,000,  and 
were  posted  at  Coimbra ;  that  there  were  also  in  advance  about 
2,000  peasants;  and  a  corps  of  1,500  Portuguese  and  SOO 
Spanish  infantry  at  Oporto,  besides  volunteers  and  peasants  ; 
the  whole,  however,  badly  armed  and  equipped — the  peasantry 
armed  only  with  pikes — and  those  called  regulars  are  indi- 
viduals belonging  to  different  corps  of  the  Portuguese  army. 
The  Spanish  corps  of  2,000  men  mentioned  in  his  last  letter 
had  not  left  Gallicia,  and  were  not  expected  at  Oporto.  A 
post  at  Figuera,  on  the  Mondego,  is  occupied  by  Captain 
Bligh,  of  H. M.S.  Alfred,  with  300  marines. 

He  encloses  a  letter  from  Sir  Charles  Cotton,  recommending 
him  to  leave  the  fleet  at  anchor  to  the  northward,  and  to  go  to 
the  Tagus,  to  commuuicatc  with  him,  thinking  it  might  be 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  159 

deemed  advisable  to  land  the  troops  at  Mondego  Bay,  or 
Peniche.  He  has  accordingly  desired  Captain  Malcolm  to 
anchor  at  Mondego. 

He  provided  with  the  Bishop  for  a  supply  of  150  horses,  for 
the  20th  Dragoons,  and  500  mules,  for  carrying  musket-ammu- 
nition, &c.,  or  camp  equipage,  if  necessary ;  also,  for  a  supply 
of  fresh  meat,  forage,  and  grain.  He  left  Oporto  on  the  25th, 
joined  the  fleet,  and  is  proceeding  to  the  Tagus. 

On  board  the  Donegal,  off  Mondego  River,  August  1,  1808. 

Encloses  despatches  which  he  received  on  the  25th  July 
from  General  Spencer,  who  had  landed  at  Puerto  Santa  Maria, 
and  had  determined  to  remain  in  Andalusia.  After  consulting- 
Sir  C.  Cotton,  Sir  Arthur  thought  it  proper  to  order  General 
Spencer  to  embark  and  join  him,  unless  he  should  be  engaged 
in  any  operation  which  it  might  be  unsafe  to  relinquish. 
General  Spencer  being  in  great  distress  for  money.  Sir  Arthur 
has  authorized  him  to  draw  upon  England  for  c£^100,000.  He 
encloses  copies  of  his  letters  to  General  Spencer,  stating  that 
the  orders  he  has  given  have  been  occasioned  by  the  positive 
directions  of  his  Majesty's  Ministers  that  he  should  make  an 
attack  on  the  French  troops  in  the  Tagus ;  and  he  has  since 
learned  that  Dupont  was  defeated  and  surrendered  on  the 
20th ;  consequently,  the  assistance  of  General  Spencer''s  corps 
in  that  quarter  could  no  longer  be  necessary. 

In  consequence  of  the  information  he  has  received  concern- 
ing the  enemy''s  forces  in  Portugal,  he  is  induced  to  delay  the 
commencement  of  his  operations  till  the  arrival  of  the  rein- 
forcement from  England,  or  of  General  Spencer.  The  enemy''s 
position  near  the  Tagus  appears  so  strong,  that  an  attack  there 
is  impracticable,  without  making  a  diversion  to  the  northward. 
Cascaes  Bay  cannot  be  approached  without  silencing  the  forts 
and  works,  which  the  shipping  seem  scarcely  able  to  do.  From 
Cascaes  to  the  northward  of  Cape  Roca,  there  are  small  bays, 
where  small  bodies  of  men  could  be  disembarked  in  moderate 


160  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

weather,  but  the  surf  would  render  ^the  landing  of  stores  pre- 
carious, and  the  vicinity  of  the  enemy,  joined  to  the  want  of 
resources  in  the  country,  would  increase  the  embarrassment. 
These  considerations,  added  to  the  advantages  to  be  calculated 
from  the  co-operation  of  the  Portuguese  troops,  have  induced 
him  to  decide  on  a  landing  to  the  northward. 

No  place  to  the  north  of  Lisbon,  nearer  than  Mondego,  would 
answer  for  landing,  except,  perhaps,  Peniche ;  but  the  fort  on 
that  peninsula  is  strong  and  well  garrisoned ;  and  the  ordnance 
and  ammunition  mentioned  in  Lord  Castlereagh's  letter  of  the 
30th  June  are  not  yet  arrived. 

He  considers  the  possession  of  the  city  and  harbour  of  Lis- 
bon as  his  immediate  object.  The  forts  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Tagus  must  first  be  attained ;  those  of  Cascaes  and  St.  Julian 
must  be  attacked  with  heavy  ordnance,  which  it  is  obvious  the 
enemy  will  not  allow  until  driven  from  the  field.  He  there- 
fore prefers  attacking  the  enemy'^s  line  of  defence  from  the 
heights  to  the  northward  of  Lisbon,  which  is  likely  to  bring 
the  contest  to  the  issue  of  a  battle  in  the  field. 

He  has  begun  to  disembark  in  the  Mondego  River,  where 
the  landing  is  attended  with  some  difficulties,  and  would  be 
impossible  without  assistance  from  the  country.  If  either 
General  Spencer  or  the  reinforcements  from  home  should  arrive 
(which  is  probable)  before  the  troops  are  landed,  he  will  com- 
mence his  march.  He  has  issued  5,000  stand  of  arms  for  the 
Portuguese  regulars,  who  are  to  co-operate  in  the  attack  on  the 
French. 

Camp  at  Lavaos,  August  8,  1808. 

States  that  General  Spencer  arrived  in  Mondego  Bay  on  the 
night  of  the  5th  August,  followed  by  part  of  his  corps  on  the 
6th,  and  the  remainder  on  the  7th :  the  whole  have  disem- 
barked. 

Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh'*s  letter  of  the  21st  July ; 
he  had  already  given  orders  for  apprizing  all  vessels  coming 
from  England  that  the  army  was  landing  in  Mondego  Bay. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  161 

He  proposes  to  commence  his  march  on  the  10th,  and  en- 
closes the  copy  of  a  letter  which  he  has  left  to  he  delivered  to 
Sir  H.  Burrard,  communicating  what  he  had  learned  of  the 
state  of  affairs  in  Spain  and  Portugal.  In  this  enclosure,  (of 
which  he  has  sent  a  copy  to  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple)  he  states 
that  the  enemy's  force  in  Portugal,  as  far  as  he  can  form  an 
opinion,  is  from  16  to  18,000  men,  of  which  about  500  are  in 
Almeida,  the  same  number  in  Elvas,  6  or  800  in  Peniche,  and 
16  or  1,800  in  the  province  of  Alentejo ;  the  remainder,  dis- 
posable for  the  defence  of  Lisbon,  are  in  the  forts  of  St.  Julian 
and  Cascaes,  in  the  batteries  along  the  coast,  and  in  the  old 
citadel,  where  the  enemy  have  added  works. 

About  2,000  of  the  disposable  force  have  been  detached, 
under  General  Lhomenie,  principally,  as  Sir  Arthur  believes, 
to  watch  his  movements,  and  are  now  at  Alabasa ;  4,000  men, 
under  General  Loison,  were  sent  to  Alentejo  on  the  26th,  to 
disperse  the  Portuguese  insurgents ;  to  force  a  Spanish  corps 
of  2,000,  advanced  to  Evora,  to  retire  ;  and  thus  to  add  to  the 
force  destined  to  defend  Lisbon  the  French  troops  stationed  ia 
Alentejo.  At  all  events,  Loison''s  corps  will  return  to  Lisbon  ; 
and  the  disposable  strength  of  the  enemy  will  be  about  14,000 
men,  of  which  8,000  must  be  left  in  the  garrisons. 

Sir  Arthur  proceeds  to  acquaint  Sir  H.  Burrard  that  Du- 
pont  surrendered  on  the  20th  July;  that  on  the  14th  the 
Spaniards  received  a  check  at  Rio  Seco ;  that  he  understands 
there  has  since  been  an  affair  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bene- 
vente ;  that  the  enemy  had  been  beat  off  from  Saragossa  and 
Valencia,  and  are  reported  to  have  been  cut  off  in  Catalonia, 
where  Barcelona  is  blockaded.  He  adds,  that  it  is  obvious 
that  the  insurrection  against  the  French  is  general ;  that  the 
latter  cannot  carry  on  their  operations  by  means  of  small 
corps ;  and  that,  from  their  inactivity  and  their  misfortunes, 
he  imagines  they  cannot  collect  a  force  large  enough  to  oppose 
the  insurgents,  or  cannot  carry  on  their  operations  with  armies 
so  numerous  without  magazines. 

VOL.  vn.  M 


162  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

The  whole  of  Portugal,  except  the  neighbourhood  of  Lisbon, 
is  in  insurrection  against  the  French,  but  their  means  of  re- 
sistance are  less  powerful  than  in  Spain,  having  suffered  more 
from  the  enemy.  In  the  northern  parts,  the  Portuguese  have 
about  10,000  men  in  arms,  of  which  5,000  are  to  march  with 
the  British  to  Lisbon.  The  remainder,  with  about  1,500  Gal- 
licians,  are  to  blockade  Almeida  and  protect  Oporto.  The  in- 
surrection is  general  in  Alentejo  and  Algarve,  to  the  southward, 
Entre  Minho  e  Duero,  Tra  los  Montes  and  Beira,  to  the  north  : 
but  they  can  do  nothing  for  want  of  arms. 

He  acquaints  Sir  Harry  Burrard  with  his  reasons  for  land- 
ing in  Mondego  Bay,  and  states  that  he  has  desired  Brigadier- 
General  A  eland,  on  his  arrival,  to  proceed  along  the  coast  to 
the  southward,  in  order  to  attack  Peniche,  if  it  be  found  neces- 
sary ;  and,  if  not,  to  join  the  fleet  off  the  Tagus,  with  a  view 
to  disembark  near  the  Rock. 

Head- Quarters  at  Caldas,  August  16,  1808. 
He  marched  from  Lavaos  on  the  10th,  and  was  joined  at 
Lynga,  on  the  12th,  by  5  or  6,000  Portuguese,  under  General 
Bemardin  Freire,  who,  he  is  concerned  to  state,  have  accom- 
panied him  no  further.  The  General  and  other  Portuguese 
officers  wished  the  British  Commissariat  to  support  their  troops 
from  the  British  stores  during  the  campaign,  which  Sir  Arthur 
had  declared  to  them  to  be  impossible.  Before  he  advanced, 
they  requested  him  to  secure  a  magazine  at  Lynga,  which  had 
been  formed  for  the  British  troops.  This  was  done,  but  he 
received  no  supply  from  it,  as  it  was  kept  entire  for  the  Portu- 
guese. Some  extraordinary  messages  were  sent  on  the  subject 
of  the  supplies  ;  and,  the  next  morning,  when  the  Portuguese 
troops  were  to  have  marched  at  an  appointed  time,  General 
Freire  proposed  to  detach  the  Portuguese  troops,  unless  Sir 
Arthur  would  feed  them ;  under  the  pretext  of  the  probable 
want  of  supplies  on  the  road  which  Sir  Arthur  proposed  to 
take,  and  their  great  plenty  on  the  other  road,  where,  too, 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  163 

tha  Portuguese  might  be  in  a  situation  to  cut  off  the  retreat 
of  the  French  from  Lisbon,  ^ir  Arthur,  in  reply,  pointed  out 
the  danger  and  inefl&ciency  of  this  plan,  requesting  Freire  to 
send  him  1,000  infantry,  all  his  cavalry  and  light  troops, 
whom  Sir  Arthur  engaged  to  feed,  and  either  to  join  with  the 
remainder,  or  keep  in  the  rear  in  safety.  Freire  has  sent  1,400 
infantry  and  260  cavalry ;  but  has  announced  that  he  perse- 
veres in  his  proposed  pk,n  for  the  remainder;  though  Sir 
Arthur  has  since  informed  him  that  he  has  found  resources  in 
the  country  adequate  to  subsist  all  the  troops.  This  conduct 
of  General  Freire  Sir  Arthur  attributes  to  apprehensions  that 
the  combined  force  is  not  sufficiently  strong  for  the  enemy. 

He  marched  from  Lynga  on  the  13th,  reached  Alcoba^a  on 
the  14th,  which  the  enemy  had  abandoned  the  preceding  night, 
and  arrived  on  the  15th  at  Calda^.  The  enemy,  4,000  in 
number,  were  posted  ten  miles  from  thence,  at  Borica,  and 
they  occupied  with  their  outposts  Obidos,  three  miles  from 
Caldas,  of  which  Sir  Arthur  dispossessed  them,  by  detaching 
four  companies  of  riflemen,  of  the  60th  and  95th  Regiments. 
They  made  a  trifling  resistance,  retired,  and  were  pursued  for 
three  miles,  where  they  were  reinforced  by  a  superior  body  of 
the  enemy ;  and  it  was  with  difficulty  that  Major-General 
Spencer  was  enabled  to  effect  the  retreat  of  the  riflemen  to 
Obidos,  of  which  they  keep  possession  ;  the  enemy  having  re- 
treated entirely  from  the  neighbourhood.  In  this  affair,  Lieu- 
tenant Bunbury,  of  the  95th,  was  killed,  and  the  Honourable 
Captain  Pakenham  slightly  wounded. 

Besides  the  corps  of  4,000  men,  commanded  by  Laborde 
and  Lhomenie,  retiring  in  front  of  the  army  by  the  sea-road  to- 
wards Lisbon,  there  is  another  of  5,000  at  Rio  Major,  under 
Loison,  likely  to  retire  by  the  great  Lisbon  road,  and  to  join 
the  former  near  Lisbon,  with  whatever  troops  can  be  spared 
from  the  defence  of  the  fortifications.  Loison's  corps  is  under- 
stood to  have  suffered  in  its  operations  against  the  Spanish 
troops  and  the  insurgents  in  Alentejo. 

M  2 


164  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

At  Alcoba^a,  Captain  Malcolm  landed  a  supply :  he  is  now 
off  Peniche. 

Head-Quarters  at  Caldas,  August  16,  1808. 

Encloses  copies  of  letters  which  he  has  received  from  Mr. 
Stuart  and  Colonel  Doyle,  from  Corunna,  and  of  letters  which 
he  has  in  consequence  written  to  Sir  Harry  Burrard,  to  be 
delivered  on  his  arrival.  The  letters  from  Corunna  state  that 
Cuesta,  having  quarrelled  with  General  Blake,  after  the  battle 
of  Rio  Seco,  had  gone  with  all  the  cavalry  (600  men)  to  San- 
tander,  where  he  was  endeavouring  to  organize  the  peasants ; 
while  Blake  had  established  himself  near  Astorga.  Santander, 
being  evacuated  by  the  French,  was  taken  possession  of  by  the 
Asturians  on  the  15th.  Bessi^res,  reinforced,  had  advanced  to 
Benevente,  from  whence  he  detached  4,000  men  to  Leon, 
which  capitulated  on  the  21st.  His  object  seemed  to  be  either 
to  advance  on  Astorga  and  attack  Blake,  or  to  push  on  to- 
wards Portugal,  in  order  to  join  the  corps  at  Almeida,  and 
extricate  Junot. 

Castarios  had  proposed  to  Blake  that  he  should  march  for- 
ward to  Madrid ;  but,  in  the  present  state  of  his  army,  (con- 
sisting of  23,000  men,  chiefly  recruits,  and  badly  armed)  that 
seems  impracticable.  The  Asturians  have  received  stores  and 
money  from  Government,  but  are  not  going  on  as  could  be 
wished,  owing  to  their  disputes  at  home  and  with  the  other 
:provinces  and  Juntas.  It  is  added  by  Colonel  Doyle,  who 
encloses  a  statement  of  the  disposition  and  force  of  the  Gal- 
lician  army,  that  he  understands  the  army  of  Estremadura  has 
a  large  body  of  cavalry,  which  he  wishes  to  join  Blake,  sup- 
posing it  no  longer  wanted  in  Estremadura  or  Portugal,  and 
that  the  French  have  been  beaten  at  Valencia,  and  have  lost 
2,000  men.  General  Moncey  being  wounded. 

Head-Quarter8  at  Villa  Verde,  August  17,  1808. 
States  that   Laborde,   having  continued  in  his  position  of 
Role9a,  an  eminence  with  a  plain  in  its  front,  at  the  end  of  a 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  165 

valley,  and  closed  to  the  southward  by  mountains  having  four 
or  five  passes,  which  were  covered  by  the  enemy,  he  deter- 
mined to  attack  him  that  morning.  Laborde's  force  consisted 
of  at  least  6,000,  with  five  pieces  of  cannon ;  and  there  was 
reason  to  believe  that  Loison  (who  was  at  Rio  Mayor)  would 
join  him  in  the  course  of  the  night.  Sir  Arthur  formed  three 
columns,  and  moved  from  Obidos  at  7  in  the  morning.  The 
enemy,  on  the  advance  of  the  British,  retired  into  the  moun- 
tains with  great  celerity  and  little  loss.  They  were  at- 
tacked with  great  impetuosity,  made  a  desperate  defence, 
but  were  at  length  driven  from  all  their  positions.  They 
effected  their  retreat,  however,  in  good  order,  owing  to  Sir 
Arthur's  want  of  cavalry,  and  to  the  difficulty  of  bringing 
troops  and  cannon  with  celerity  up  the  passes  of  the  moun- 
tains. The  enemy's  loss  has  been  very  great,  including  three 
pieces  of  cannon.  Only  the  5th,  9th,  and  29th,  the  riflemen 
of  the  95th  and  60th,  and  the  flank  companies  of  Major- 
General  HilPs  brigade,  were  actually  engaged.  Their  numbers 
were  by  no  means  equal  to  the  enemy's,  and  their  conduct  de- 
serves the  highest  commendation.  He  expresses  his  acknow- 
ledgments for  the  support  he  has  received  from  Generals 
Spencer,  Ferguson,  Hill,  Nightingale,  and  Fane,  as  well  as 
other  officers ;  and  laments  the  loss  of  the  Hon.  Lieut-Colon6l 
Lake,  who  had  gallantly  distinguished  himself. 

Head- Quarters,  Lourinha,  August  18,  1808. 

Having  heard  that  Brigadier-General  Anstruther  was  off 
Peniche,  with  the  victuallers  and  store-ships,  he  has  ordered 
him  to  land,  and  has  moved  to  Lourinha,  to  protect  his  landing 
and  facilitate  the  junction. 

Loison  joined  Laborde  the  preceding  night  at  Torres  Vedras, 
and  they  are  stated  to  be  marching  towards  Lisbon.  He  also 
hears  that  Junot  has  arrived  at  Torres  Vedras,  with  a  small  corps 
from  Lisbon,  and  concludes  that  the  whole  French  force  will 
be  assembled  between  Torres  Vedras  and  the  capital  in  the 
course  of  a  few  days. 


166  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Vimiera,  August  21,  1808. 

Reports  that  the  enemy  had  attacked  him  at  Vimiera  that 
morning — describes  Vimiera  to  be  in  a  valley,  through  which 
runs  the  river  Maceira ;  at  the  back  and  to  the  west  and  north 
a  mountain,  which  touches  the  sea  on  the  west,  and  is  sepa- 
rated by  a  deep  ravine  on  the  east  from  the  heights  over  which 
the  road  passes  from  Lourinha  to  Vimiera.  The  greater  pari 
of  the  British  infantry  was  posted  on  this  mountain  with  eight 
pieces  of  artillery.  Brigadier-General  Fane,  with  his  riflemen, 
and  Brigadier-General  Anstruther's  brigade,  with  artillery, 
were  posted  on  a  hill  on  the  east  and  south  side  of  the  town, 
commanded  by  the  mountain,  and  commanding  all  the  neigh- 
bouring ground  to  the  south  and  east.  The  cavalry  and 
reserve  were  in  the  valley,  between  the  hills  on  which  the  in- 
fantry stood,  both  flanking  and  supporting  Brigadier-General 
Fane's  advanced  guard. 

The  enemy  appeared  at  8  p.m.,  in  large  bodies  of  cavalry  on 
the  left,  upon  the  heights  on  the  road  to  Lourinha.  Their 
attack  began  in  several  columns  upon  the  whole  of  the  troops 
on  these  heights,  to  which  the  brigades  of  Generals  Ferguson, 
Nightingale,  Bowes,  and  Acland  had  been  moved  on  the  ap- 
pearance of  the  enemy  in  that  quarter.  On  the  left,  the  eneray, 
having  advanced  close,  notwithstanding  the  fire  of  the  riflemen, 
were  driven  back  by  the  bayonet.  On  the  right,  they  were  also 
repulsed  by  the  bayonet ;  and  they  were  attacked  on  the  flank 
by  Brigadier-General  Acland's  brigade  and  the  artillery  on 
the  heights.  At  length,  after  a  desperate  contest,  the  enemy 
was  driven  back  in  confusion,  with  the  loss  of  seven  pieces  of 
cannon  and  many  prisoners.  The  detachment  of  the  20th 
Light  Dragoons  pursued,  but  the  enemy's  cavalry  was  greatly 
superior  in  number. 

The  attack  upon  the  heights  had  been  supported  by  a  large 
body  of  cavalry  with  great  impetuosity,  but  which  were  gal- 
lantly repulsed  by  General  Ferguson's  and  the  other  brigades 
on  that  position,  and  six  pieces  of  cannon  were  taken,  with 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  167 

many  prisoners.     The  enemy  afterwards  attempted  to  recover 
a  part  of  tlie  artillery,  but  was  again  forced  to  retire. 

The  whole  French  force  appeared  to  be  employed  in  this 
action,  under  Junot  in  person.  The  enemy  was  certainly 
superior  in  cavalry  and  artillery ;  has  lost  thirteen  pieces  of 
cannon,  twenty-three  ammunition  waggons,  one  general  officer 
(Breni^re)  wounded  and  made  prisoner,  and  a  great  number 
of  officers  and  soldiers,  killed,  wounded,  and  taken.  Not  more 
than  half  the  British  army  was  actually  engaged.  Sir  Arthur 
bestows  great  praises  on  the  troops,  General  Officers,  and 
Staff.  He  encloses  a  return  of  killed,  wounded,  and  missing ; 
and  adds  that  he  has  learned  that  a  French  General  Officer,  sup- 
posed to  be  General  Thiebault,  has  been  found  dead  on  the  field. 


NO.  IV. 
PRECIS  OF  LETTERS  FROM  BRIGADIER- GENERAL  BARON 

DECKEN, 

ON  THE  AFFAIRS  OF  PORTUGAL. 

Oporto,  August  18,  1808. 

He  arrived  at  Oporto  on  the  17th.  He  has  seen  the  Bishop, 
who  requests  that  money  and  arms  may  be  sent  to  Oporto ; 
30,000  stand  of  arms  being  required  for  the  inhabitants  of  the 
provinces  Entre  Minho  y  Douro,  Tra  los  Montes,  Beira,  and 
Estremadura ;  and  also  requests  that  2,000  British  troops  be 
sent  without  delay  to  Oporto,  to  protect  the  temporary  Govern- 
ment against  the  French  and  the  French  party  there,  which 
the  Bishop  represents  to  be  very  strong.  Baron  Decken  has 
represented  to  the  Commander  of  the  British  forces  that,  by 
forming  militia  at  Oporto  and  in  the  province  of  Entre  Minho 
y  Douro,  it  would  be  easy  to  defend  the  passes,  as,  in  the  pre- 
sent circumstances,  the  French  could  not  send  a  large  force 
thither ;  but,  to  remove  the  Bishop"*s  fears  respecting  the  dis- 
position of  the  inhabitants,  he  has  recommended  the  sending  a 
small  garrison  of  British  troops  to  Oporto. 

The  Bishop  further  requests  that  4,000  British  troops  might 


168  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

be  sent  to  Coimbra,  to  which  Baron  Decken  has  answered  that 
this  must  depend  on  the  plan  of  operations  formed  by  the 
British  General,  who  would  no  doubt  protect  as  much  of  the 
country  as  possible. 

The  utmost  confusion  prevails  with  respect  to  military 
arrangements,  and  he  doubts  whether  he  shall  be  permitted  to 
interfere  in  forming  a  system  of  order. 

Oporto,  August  18,  1808. 

Relates  a  conversation  which  he  has  had  with  the  Bishop  of 
Oporto,  in  which  the  latter  confidentially  communicated  his 
intention  of  resigning  the  government  into  the  hands  of  the 
Regency  established  by  the  Prince  Regent  on  his  leaving  Por- 
tugal, and  requested  Baron  Decken  to  make  his  resolution 
known  to  the  British  Government  and  the  British  Command- 
ing Officer  in  Portugal.  The  Baron,  however,  has  reason  to 
believe  that  the  Bishop  would  not  dislike  to  keep  the  govern- 
ment in  his  hands,  if  it  could  be  done  by  the  interference  of 
the  British  Government. 

Oporto,  August  19,  1808. 

States  that  the  Bishop  of  Oporto  does  not  appear  to  have 
certain  intelligence  of  Spain,  but  supposes  Joseph  Bonaparte 
to  have  returned  to  Paris.  With  respect  to  Portugal,  it  is 
understood  that  6  or  700  French  are  at  Almeida,  (a  fortress 
requiring  a  garrison  of  3,000)  and  are  observed  by  6,000  Por- 
tuguese militia ;  that  1,000  French  are  at  Abrantes,  observed 
by  1,500  Spaniards  at  Castel  Branco ;  that  2,500  French  are 
at  Elvas,  the  most  important  post  in  Portugal ;  and  that  the 
rest  of  the  French,  said  to  consist  of  10,000  men,  are  at  Lis- 
bon, their  advanced  posts  extending  from  Peniche  to  Santarem. 
Almeida  and  Abrantes  seem  occupied  with  a  view  to  facihtate 
Bessi^res^  movement  to  their  assistance.  The  French  at  Lis- 
bon can  retire  on  Elvas,  which  Junot  is  likely  to  do ;  from 
thence,  however,  his  junction  with  the  army  at  Burgos  will  be 
difficult,  Estremadura  being  in  arms.  Badajoz  is  stated  to  be 
strongly  occupied  by  the  Spaniards. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  169 

The  Bishop  believes  the  French  to  have  retired  to  Burgos 
with  a  view  to  concentrate  their  forces,  and  receive  reinforce- 
ments from  France,  and  that  they  will  soon  advance.  Junot's 
position  is  very  strong,  and  the  Baron  fears  he  will  be  rein- 
forced. Some  Portuguese,  chiefly  of  the  nobility,  who  have 
been  arrested  for  being  friendly  to  the  French,  are  to  be  sent 
to  the  Brazils.  Out  of  10,000  Portuguese  troops  raised  by 
the  French,  only  1,600  are  said  to  have  reached  Paris.  The 
rest  have  deserted,  and  have  chiefly  joined  the  Spaniards. 

Oporto,  August  24,  1808. 

Encloses  a  report  from  the  General  commanding  the  Portu- 
guese troops  with  the  British  army,  detailing  the  proceedings 
up  to  the  19th  August,  including  the  attack  made  by  Sir 
Arthur  Wellesley  on  the  enemy,  on  the  17th. 

There  is  a  great  want  of  communication  with  Spain.  The 
Bishop  learns  that  the  French  have  been  reinforced  at  Burgos, 
and  possess  Valladolid ;  and,  fearing  that  an  army  might  ap- 
pear on  the  frontiers  before  the  French  at  Lisbon  have  surren- 
dered, he  has  desired  Baron  Decken  to  request  that  some 
British  troops  should  attack  Almeida,  which  he  considers  as 
the  key  to  the  province  of  Beira.  He  also  wishes  Abrantes  to 
be  occupied,  and  detachments  sent  from  thence  to  cut  ofi"  the 
communication  of  the  French  between  Lisbon  and  Elvas. 
Baron  Decken  has  persuaded  the  Bishop  to  send  an  officer  to 
the  Spanish  armies,  and  establish  a  mail  between  Braganza 
and  Oporto. 

The  Bishop  is  less  anxious  for  British  troops  at  Oporto, 
from  being  convinced  of  the  great  risk  the  French  would  run, 
in  advancing  so  far,  of  being  cut  off  by  the  British,  and  also 
from  considering  the  strength  of  the  mountains  separating  the 
provinces  of  Tras  os  Montes  and  Entre  Minho  y  Douro. 

From  the  confusion  which  prevails  in  the  temporary  Govern- 
ment at  Oporto,  Baron  Decken  has  found  it  impossible  to  ob- 
tain a  correct  knowledge  of  the  Portuguese  force.    The  Bishop 


170  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

has  permitted  him  to  make  proposals  for  a  re^^ular  distribution 
of  the  principal  branches  of  Government,  including  particularly 
a  War  Office.  By  a  printed  edict  of  the  Bishop,  the  regular 
force  of  the  three  northern  provinces  is  to  consist  of 

Infantry  of  the  line,  8  regiments,  each  .  1,659 
Battalions,  Light  Infantry,  4  .  .  .  .  846 
Cavalry,  4  regiments 453 

Making  a  total  of 18,468  troops. 

These  are  old  regiments,  which  have  been  garrisoned  in  the 
three  provinces ;  but  many  of  the  officers  are  gone  to  the 
Brazils,  and  others,  with  many  privates,  have  entered  the 
corps  raised  by  the  French,  so  that  two-thirds  are  new  levies. 
Sir  John  Moore  arrived  on  the  21st  at  Figueras,  where  his 
landing  is  delayed  until  mules  or  draught  bullocks  are  sent 
from  Oporto,  for  which  the  Baron  is  using  every  exertion.  In 
a  PS.  he  adds  that  intelligence  has  been  received  from  Coimbra 
of  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley''s  victory  on  the  21st. 

Oporto,  August  26,  1808. 

The  Bishop  of  Oporto  has  signified  that,  if  the  British 
Government  should  wish  him  to  remain  at  the  head  of  affairs 
till  the  pleasure  of  the  Prince  Regent  be  known,  he  could  only 
accept  it  under  condition  of  remaining  at  Oporto,  where,  in 
that  case,  the  rest  of  the  temporary  Government  must  remain, 
even  after  the  French  have  been  forced  to  evacuate  the  country. 
This  the  people  at  Lisbon  will  most  probably  oppose ;  but  the 
Bishop  is  persuaded  that  the  people  at  Oporto  will  not  suffer 
him  to  depart  from  thence,  and  thinks  that  Lisbon,  when  the 
French  leave  it,  will  be  in  too  much  confusion  for  the  seat  of 
Government.  If  his  proposals  be  adopted,  he  wishes  that 
deputies  from  the  other  provinces  should  be  sent  to  Oporto. 

The  jealousy  subsisting  between  the  northern  and  southern 
provinces  is  likely  to  present  many  obstacles  to  this  plan, 
which  would  be  warmly  supported  by  the  northern  provinces, 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  171 

where  the  people  are  proud  of  having  first  taken  up  arms,  and 
are  more  warlike  and  industrious  than  the  southern  inhabit- 
ants, as  well  as  more  attached  to  the  English. 

The  present  revolution  is  the  work  of  the  common  people, 
excited  by  the  Spaniards,  and  brought  into  some  system  by 
the  priests ;  and  Baron  Decken  thinks  that  the  Church  alone 
can  keep  the  people  in  order.  The  nobles  are  opposed  to  the 
Church,  and  suspected  by  the  people.  The  Bishop  is  of  a 
mild  and  afiable  disposition,  without  great  knowledge  or  talents 
for  business ;  but  appears  to  be  the  best  person  to  be  at  the 
head  of  the  Government.  Religious  motives  alone  can  actuate 
the  Portuguese,  as  they  have  no  attachment  to  their  royal 
family,  and  no  constitution  to  defend.  Nothing  can  be  done 
in  Portugal,  if  their  Government  be  not  supported  and  directed 
by  England ;  with  which  view  the  Baron  recommends  that  a 
Minister  of  great  experience  should  be  sent  from  England. 
The  Portuguese  might  contribute  in  a  great  measure  to  the 
defence  of  Spain ;  but,  unless  forced  by  Great  Britain,  they 
will  form  no  regular  troops,  under  pretence  that  they  cannot 
pay  them :  their  revenues  will  go  to  the  Church,  as  well  as  the 
money  from  England  j  and  Portugal  will  require  British  troops 
to  protect  its  own  Government  against  the  disaffected.  The 
Prince's  return  will  be  no  remedy,  but  may  even  increase  the 
evil.  These  dangers  may  be  averted  by  the  presence  and  ex- 
ertions of  a  British  Minister,  which  would  be  more  effectual 
than  the  influence  of  a  military  commander,  whose  interference 
might  wound  the  pride  of  the  nation,  and  irritate  the  monks. 

Oporto,  August  28,  1808. 
Alentejo  and  Algarve  have  sent  deputies  to  the  Bishop  of 
Oporto,  to  whose  authority  a  part  of  Estremadura  has  likewise 
submitted ;  and  the  whole  kingdom  seems  to  acknowledge  this 
temporary  Government,  except  Lisbon  and  St.  Ubes.  Those 
towns  are  still  in  possession  of  the  French ;  but  the  Bishop  is 
convinced  that  Lisbon,  when  evacuated,  will  oppose  the  Oporto 


1  72  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Government,  and  will  be  supported  by  the  members  of  the 
former  Regency,  who  are  anxious  to  resume  their  power,  for 
which  they  have  already  taken  steps.  Baron  Decken  thinks 
the  opposite  parties  might  be  reconciled  by  adding  to  the  pre- 
sent temporary  Government  such  of  the  members  of  the  Re- 
gency as  have  preserved  their  loyalty  and  the  confidence  of 
the  people.  To  this  the  Bishop  will  not  object,  if  it  be  pro- 
posed by  the  British  General.  Baron  Decken  has  therefore 
proposed  to  the  British  General  to  make  known,  by  a  Publi- 
candum  to  the  Portuguese,  as  soon  as  Lisbon  is  in  our  hands, 
that  he  will  consider  the  temporary  Government  at  Oporto  as 
the  lawful  Government  of  the  kingdom  till  the  Prince"'s  plea- 
sure be  known ;  adding  to  it  the  following  four  members  of  the 
former  Regency :  Don  Francisco  de  Noronha ;  Francisco  da 
Cunha ;  the  Montiro  Mor ;  the  principal  Castro.  These  four 
have  been  pointed  out  by  the  Bishop  as  faithful  to  their  sove- 
reign. The  Bishop  should  be  considered  President,  which  is 
less  objectionable,  as  the  President  of  the  former  Regency  is 
in  France. 

The  confusion  likely  to  prevail  at  Lisbon  offers  a  fair  pre- 
tence for  fixing  the  temporary  Government,  in  the  first  instance, 
at  Oporto.  The  Bishop  sees  the  necessity  of  placing  a  British 
garrison  at  Lisbon ;  but,  wishing  the  feelings  of  the  people  to 
be  wounded  as  little  as  possible,  he  urges  the  placing  some 
Portuguese  troops  in  garrison  there,  under  a  Portuguese  ofiicer, 
who  would  receive  his  orders  from  the  British  military  Governor, 
but  might  direct  the  police  of  the  city ;  and  he  might  likewise 
organize  the  military  force  of  Estremadura.  The  Bishop  is 
convinced  that  the  Government  cannot  exist  without  the  sup- 
port of  British  troops,  and  hopes  that  6,000  men  will  be  left 
till  the  Portuguese  troops  are  organized. 

Oporto,  September  9,  1808. 
He  has  received  a  letter  from  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple,  expressing 
some  apprehension  of  the  nature  and  tendency  of  his  communi- 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  173 

cations  with  the  Bishop  of  Oporto.  He  observes  that  he  has 
never  been  considered  by  the  Bishop  as  an  official  character ; 
that  the  latter  has  assumed  more  power  than  he  had  before  the 
Baron's  arrival ;  and  that  the  Bishop's  willingness  to  resign 
the  Government  is  the  best  proof  that  the  communications 
between  him  and  the  Baron  have  not  been  of  a  nature  to 
interfere  with  any  plans  which  Sir  Hew  may  wish  to  adopt  for 
the  Government  of  Portugal. 

Baron  Decken  requests  to  be  recalled.  The  Bishop  wishes  to 
give  him  the  direction  of  the  organization  of  the  Portuguese 
troops,  but  this  he  is  desirous  to  decline,  feeling  his  situation 
in  Portugal  extremely  unpleasant. 

Oporto,  September  10,  1808. 

In  consequence  of  a  letter  which  the  Bishop  of  Oporto  has 
received  from  Sir  Hew,  the  former,  conceiving  that  Sir  Hew 
could  not  do  otherwise  than  fix  the  seat  of  Government  at 
Lisbon,  wishes  to  resign  his  share  in  it,  but  will  use  his  in- 
fluence as  a  Bishop  to  support  the  measures  of  the  Govern- 
ment which  Sir  Hew  may  establish. 

Baron  Decken  regrets  the  Bishop's  resignation,  but  thinks 
that  the  Bishop  himself  is  not  dissatisfied  with  the  removal  of 
the  responsibility  attached  to  his  situation.  The  latter  has 
sent  an  officer  to  Sir  Hew  with  his  proposals  respecting  the 
Regency.  The  Baron  thinks  that  the  people  of  Oporto  and 
the  northern  provinces  will  be  displeased  with  the  Bishop's 
resignation.  Some  commotion  has  already  taken  place  at 
Oporto,  and  the  Bishop  has  taken  strong  measures  to  stop  it. 

Oporto,  September  13,  1808, 
Encloses  a  statement  of  the  establishment  and  organization 
of  the  Portuguese  troops.  ]^y  this  the  whole  force,  exclusiv^e 
of  artillery,  is  stated  to  be :  Infantry  of  the  Line,  18,272 ; 
Light  Infantry,  3,384;  Cavalry,  1,812  ;  Militia,  19,200  ;  and 
this  force,  supposed  to  be  fit  for  service,  was  to  be  divided  into 
three  parts,  viz. : — 


174  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

1.  A  corps  of  observation,  consisting  of  Militia,  8,800, 
Line,  2,634;  commanded  by  Brigadier  Bacellar,  blockading 
Almeida,  and  defending  Tras  os  Montes.  But  of  the  troops 
of  the  line  only  small  divisions  have  joined,  and  the  corps 
actually  consists  of  about  5,000  men,  badly  armed  in  general. 
2.  Principal  army  in  Estremadura,  commanded  by  Mareschal  de 
Campo  Bernardin  Freire  d'Andrade,  to  consist  of  15,902  men; 
but,  as  many  of  the  regiments  have  not  yet  joined,  the  whole 
army  at  present  does  not  exceed  8,000.  S.  Eeserve,  destined  for 
the  ulterior  defence  of  the  country,  and  to  reinforce  either  the 
corps  of  observation,  or  the  army  of  Estremadura.  This  reserve 
is  to  consist  of  10,400  Militia,  under  Brigadier  Parreirar,  but 
the  number  armed  does  not  exceed  600,  who  belong  to  diflferent 
regiments  of  Militia,  and  are  in  garrison  at  Oporto. 

The  want  of  money,  officers,  arms,  clothing,  and  accoutre- 
ments, has  occasioned  much  delay  and  irregularity  in  orga- 
nizing the  troops,  which  has  gone  on  slowly  from  the  time  that 
it  became  doubtful  whether  the  Bishop  was  to  remain  at  the 
head  of  the  Government.  The  officers,  too,  who  are  superin- 
tending the  formation  of  the  army,  have  neglected  to  send 
proper  reports  to  the  Bishop.  Nothing  can  be  done  till  the 
Regency  is  established,  and  a  certain  plan  made  out.  He  has 
not  yet  been  able  to  obtain  any  correct  information  respecting 
the  artillery  and  ammunition. 

Oporto,  September  20,  1808. 

Brigadier-General  Anstruther  has  arrived  at  Oporto,  from 
Sir  Hew  Dalrymple,  to  propose  to  the  Bishop  that  he  should 
be  appointed  President  of  the  Regency. 

Encloses  the  Report  of  Captain  Heiliger,  whom  Baron 
Decken  had  sent  to  examine  the  provinces  of  Tras  os  Montes 
and  Entre  Minho  y  Douro.  The  former  province  Captain 
Heiliger  describes  to  be  defended  by  two  chains  of  mountains 
running  from  north  to  south,  and  by  the  Tamega,  which  forms 
the  frontier  of  Gallicia,  and  lias  a  deep  channel.  The  roads 
are  generally  uneven  and  narrow,   passable  only  by   mules. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  175 

The  province  is  destitute  of  fortresses,  but  seems,  from  its 
situation,  to  be  capable  of  an  easy  defence,  for  which  purpose 
Captain  Heiliger  offers  a  plan. 

The  few  cavalry  which  Captain  Heiliger  saw  in  the  two  pro- 
vinces were  tolerably  mounted,  but  indifferently  armed  and 
accoutred.  The  Militia  were,  the  greater  part  of  them,  neither 
armed  nor  clothed ;  and  the  volunteers  wear  their  peasant'*s 
dress,  armed  partly  with  guns,  partly  with  pikes.  Magazines 
are  established,  and  commissaries  appointed  to  supply  them. 
The  breed  of  horses  is  indifferent  in  both  provinces  ;  the  mules 
good  and  easy  to  procure.  Bullocks  are  generally  used  for 
draught,  and  may  be  easily  supplied :  those  of  Tras  os  Montes 
are  of  most  excellent  quality.  There  are  good  sheep,  swine,  and 
goats,  in  abundance. 

The  country  is  better  calculated  for  defensive  than  offensive 
warfare ;  it  is  mountainous,  but  Entre  Minlio  y  Douro  is  well 
cultivated  and  peopled.  Tras  os  Montes  is  rocky,  thinly 
peopled,  and  indifferently  cultivated.  The  valleys  are  well 
wooded.  The  lower  orders  and  clergy  are  much  attached  to 
the  old  Government.  The  noblesse  are  chiefly  absent  in  the 
Brazils,  or  at  Lisbon,  and  seem  little  interested  in  the  cause  of 
the  country.  The  climate  is  colder  than  in  the  South,  though 
healthy.  The  winter  sets  in  in  November,  and  is  attended  with 
heavy  rains,  which  make  the  roads  nearly  impassable.  Both 
provinces  abound  with  water. 

Oporto,  September  25,  1808. 

The  Bishop  of  Oporto,  having  been  informed  by  Sir  Hew 
Dalrymple  that  he  has  been  elected  a  member  of  the  Regency, 
has  thought  it  his  duty  to  accept  the  appointment ;  he  appre- 
hends that  the  members  of  the  new  Regency  will  be  against 
him ;  but  flatters  himself  that  he  shall  have  Sir  Hew'*s  support, 
if  necessary,  especially  if,  after  some  time,  he  should  wish  to 
resign,  which  he  thinks  probable.  The  Bishop^s  appointment 
will  have  a  great  effect  towards  reconciling  the  inhabitants  of 
the  North  to  the  new  Regency. 


176  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

London,  November  25,  1808. 
Encloses  an  estimate  of  the  expense  of  a  Portuguese  army 
of  10,000  men  for  365  days,  including  pay  to  officers  and  men, 
and  of  the  number  of  rations  required  for  men  and  horses. 
The  former  he  calculates  would  amount  to  d£^l  18,443  145.  l^d. 
sterling.  Encloses  also  some  military  memorandums  respecting 
Portugal,  under  the  following  heads  : — 

1 .  Organization  of  the  Portuguese  army :  with  respect  to 
which  he  thinks,  from  the  jealousy  already  excited,  the  British 
Government  ought  to  interfere  as  little  as  possible.  The  Por- 
tuguese Government  intends  to  form  the  army  on  the  same 
establishment  as  it  was  before  ;  but  he  thinks,  considering  their 
wants,  it  would  be  advisable  to  reduce  the  regiments  to  half 
the  number.  He  recommends  a  subsidy  for  that  part  only  of 
the  Portuguese  troops  which  will  act  in  Spain.  He  believes 
the  revenues  of  Portugal  (which  have  always  been  carefully 
concealed)  could  maintain  25,000  regulars  and  30,000  militia; 
and  he  recommends  that,  if  money  be  granted  to  them,  it 
should  not  be  under  the  head  of  levy  money,  or  for  equipping, 
arming,  and  clothing  the  soldiers,  but  merely  for  subsistence  to 
those  who  have  taken  the  field. 

2.  Co-operation  of  the  Portuguese  troops  in  Spain :  which 
he  proposes  should  be  effected  by  sending  10,000  men  imme- 
diately to  Catalonia,  in  English  transports,  to  land  at  Tarra- 
gona. He  points  out  the  particular  regiments  which  are  in 
sufficient  forwardness  for  this  service,  and  mentions  Brigadier 
D.  Miguel  Pereira  Forjas  as  the  best  officer  to  command  them. 
He  thinks  the  Portuguese  themselves  would  prefer  serving  in 
Catalonia  to  any  other  part  of  Spain,  many  of  them  having 
formerly  served  there,  and  he  believes  they  would  rather  serve 
with  Spanish  troops  than  with  British. 

3.  Arrangements  to  be  made  for  the  defence  of  Portugal. 
He  thinks,  while  a  British  army  is  in  Spain,  4,000  British 
troops,  including  some  cavalry,  would  he  sufficient  for  Portugal. 
Our  foreign  troops  would  answer  for  the  purpose,  but  should 


1808.]  LOUD  GASTLEREAGH.  177 

be  commanded  by  a  British  General  officer  of  hi<^h  rank,  sta- 
tioned at  Lisbon.  The  appointment  also  of  a  British  Minister 
at  Lisbon  might  do  away  the  prevailing  idea  that  England 
intends  to  treat  Portugal  as  a  colony.  The  British  troops 
should  chiefly  occupy  Lisbon,  and  the  forts  on  the  Tagus. 
The  fortresses  of  Almeida  and  Elvas  should  be  put  in  a  state 
of  defence.  As  the  provinces  of  Tras  os  Montes  and  Entre 
Minho  y  Douro  can  be  defended  by  an  irregular  force,  the 
Militia  there  should  be  formed  and  armed  immediately. 

4.  Supplies  to  be  drawn  from  Portugal  for  the  British  army 
in  Spain.  Under  this  head,  Baron  Decken  observes  that  bul- 
locks, mules,  horses,  &c.,  can  be  largely  supplied,  as  well  as 
drivers ;  and  a  corps  of  pioneers  and  artificers  might  be  easily 
formed ;  also,  he  believes,  one  of  pontoneers.  The  northern 
provinces  might  furnish  some  cattle  and  Indian  com. 


NO.  V. 
PRECIS  OF  CORRESPONDENCE  FROM  LORD  COLLINGWOOD, 

RELATING  TO  SPAIN  AND  PORTUGAL. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  June  17,  1808. 
States  that,  on  receivins:  intelligence  from  Sir  Hew  Dal- 
rymple  of  the  state  of  affairs  in  Spain,  he  left  the  squadron  off 
Toulon,  under  Vice-Admiral  Thornborough,  and  arrived  at 
Cadiz  on  the  11th,  where  he  received,  on  the  17th,  Lord  Castle- 
reagh's  two  letters,  of  the  4th  of  June,  addressed  to  Eear- 
Admiral  Purvis.  Since  the  temper  of  the  nation  has  ceased 
to  be  doubtful,  the  Spanish  leaders  have  altered  their  tone 
with  respect  to  the  surrender  of  the  French  ships  to  us,  which 
they  mentioned  in  their  earlier  communications.  The  French 
Admiral  drew  them  up  in  the  channel  of  the  Caraccas,  hoping 
that  a  part  of  the  French  army  might  make  its  way  down  to 
the  Island  of  Leon.  On  the  8th  and  9th,  they  were  bombarded, 
and  on  the  14th  struck,  when  the  Spanish  flag  was  hoisted. 

VOL.  VII.  N 


178  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

The  country  seems  to  be  unanimous  in  resisting  the  French, 
who  are  said  to  be  exceedingly  embarrassed  by  the  want  of 
communication  between  their  armies.  Lord  Collinowood  states 
the  present  form  of  Government  in  Spain  to  be  very  defective. 
The  Juntas  appear  to  be  independent  of  each  other,  and  at 
present  their  correspondence  is  difficult. 

Lord  Collingwood  has  informed  the  Spanish  chiefs  that  it 
was  his  Majesty's  command  that  every  aid  should  be  given 
them  to  repel  the  French,  and  desired  them  to  point  out  how 
the  British  forces  could  be  most  useful  to  them.  The  proposal 
for  landing  our  troops  at  or  near  Cadiz  had  before  been  rejected ; 
and,  as  jealousy  and  apprehension  with  respect  to  our  views 
appeared  to  exist  on  the  part  of  the  Spaniards,  Major-General 
Spencer  had  acceded  to  a  proposal  of  theirs  to  go  to  Ayamonte, 
to  be  ready  to  act  as  circumstances  might  require. 

Lord  Collingwood  has  opened  a  communication  with  Minorca 
and  Majorca.  The  Spaniards  had  nearly  12,000  men  in  those 
islands,  of  whom  a  large  portion  had  passed  over  to  join  the 
army  in  Catalonia,  under  a  convention  made  by  Vice-Admiral 
Thornborough. 

The  French  have  drawn  some  of  their  troops  from  Portugal 
to  Spain :  they  have  not  more  than  6,000  men  in  the  former, 
where  the  people  are  animated  in  proportion  as  the  French 
force  is  lessened.  Sir  C.  Cotton  has  already  pointed  out  the 
advantage  to  be  derived  from  General  Spencer's  appearance  on 
that  coast;  and  there  is  no  indication  of  much  zeal  in  the 
Russians  towards  their  allies. 

Off  Cadiz,  June  17,  1808. 

States  that  the  Deputies  from  the  Supreme  Council  at 
Seville  have  embarked  for  England ;  that  he  has  urged  that 
despatch  vessels  should  be  sent  to  the  Governors  of  the 
Colonies,  with  intelligence  of  recent  events,  for  which  purpose 
he  has  kept  a  sloop  of  war  in  readiness ;  that  the  Council 
allows  the  necessity  of  this;  but  there  is  still  some  delay, 
which  Lord  Collingwood   attributes  to  their   correspondence 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  179 

with  the  other  provinces  not  being  yet  fully  established.  He 
encloses  a  letter  from  Captain  Bradford,  who  had  been  sent  by 
Major-General  Spencer  to  the  Spanish  head-quarters,  giving 
an  account  of  the  armed  force  in  that  neighbourhood,  which 
consists  of  12,000  regulars  and  three  regiments  of  peasantry; 
stating  also  that  the  arrival  of  the  English  at  Ayamonte  has 
had  the  best  effect  on  the  minds  of  the  people. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  June  19,  1808. 

States  that  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  and  Major-General  Spencer 
having  both  approved  of  the  proposal  that  the  latter  should 
proceed  to  Lisbon,  he  has  appointed  convoy  for  the  transports 
whenever  the  General  determines  to  go,  and  will  take  measures 
for  informing  the  Commanding  Officer  of  the  reinforcement 
coming  from  England  of  this  proceeding. 

General  Morla  and  General  Herrera  have  applied  to  him  for 
passports  for  a  ship  of  the  line  and  frigate,  to  carry  quicksilver 
to  America,  which  he  will  grant.  He  has  also  granted  pass- 
ports without  limit  to  vessels  conveying  supplies  along  the 
coast,  line-of-battle  ships  excepted. 

States  that  a  Spanish  gentleman,  who  had  gone  on  shore  at 
Cadiz  for  information,  received  an  impression  not  very  favour- 
able to  the  talents  of  the  persons  composing  the  Junta.  There 
being  no  accounts  from  Biscay,  and  unfavourable  ones  from 
Catalonia,  (Barcelona  being  totally  subdued),  much  anxiety 
prevails  at  Seville.  Their  wants  are  very  great.  The  Supreme 
Council  have  requested  a  loan  from  Gibraltar,  a  subsidy  of  fifty 
or  sixty  millions  of  reals,  and  a  supply  of  arms  and  ammunition, 
of  which  they  are  almost  destitute.  There  is  still  a  backward- 
ness in  sending  their  despatches  to  America.  The  Governor 
of  Cadiz  has  addressed  a  letter  to  the  Marquess  de  Romana, 
commanding  in  the  North  of  Germany,  which  Lord  Collingwood 
forwards,  noticing  that  the  Spaniards  express  great  hopes  that 
their  troops  in  that  quarter  may  be  in  such  a  situation  as  to 
enable  British  vessels  to  embark  them. 

N  2 


180  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

He  encloses  a  Proclamation,  issued  by  the  Captain- General 
of  the  Baleares  Islands,  and  a  deposition  of  the  master  of  a 
Spanish  packet  from  Barcelona,  describing  the  attack  of  the 
French  there  by  the  populace  and  a  few  regulars. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  June  25,  1808. 

Encloses  a  list  of  requisitions  of  cloth,  linen,  horses,  and 
mules,  which  he  has  received  from  the  Governor  of  Cadiz  and 
the  President  of  the  Junta,  He  will  send  an  officer  to  com- 
municate with  the  Emperor  of  Morocco's  Minister,  in  order  to 
obtain  a  license  for  purchasing  horses,  and  will  pay  for  them 
when  bought. 

Dupont's  army  is  reduced  to  great  extremity ;  the  Spanish 
army  advanced,  but  their  head-quarters  are  still  at  TJtrera.  The 
appearance  of  the  troops  off  Ayamonte  had  a  good  effect  j 
200  muskets  were  given  from  the  ships  ;  and  the  few  French 
left  in  the  small  forts,  being  abandoned,  surrendered  to  the 
peasantry. 

The  winds  have  been  unfavourable  to  General  Spencer 
getting  round  Cape  St.  Vincent.  Sir  C.  Cotton  still  urges 
that  measure.  Lord  Collingwood  encloses  a  letter  he  has 
received  from  General  Castanos  on  the  subject  of  the  employ- 
ment of  our  army,  with  his  lordship"'s  answer,  in  which  he  lays 
great  stress  on  the  advantages  to  be  expected  from  General 
Spencer's  appearance  off  Lisbon.  He  has  ordered  ships  off 
Barcelona  to  cut  off  the  communication  with  France  by  sea, 
and  expects  that  the  troops  left  in  Monjuich  will  surrender. 
Two  Spanish  vessels  have  sailed  for  Rio  de  la  Plata  and  La 
Vera  Cruz  with  despatches.  As  vessels  from  America  are  still 
exposed  to  capture,  he  has  requested  the  Governor  of  Cadiz  to 
use  precaution  for  preventing  the  risk,  as  well  as  to  prevent 
vessels  sailing  from  the  Canaries. 

26th  June.  The  Sabrina  sloop  has  sailed  with  three  officers 
for  the  Caraccas  and  Carthagena ;  also,  a  manifesto  to  be  dis- 
tributed in  the  colonies.     Lord  Colling\^'ood  encloses  one  of 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  181 

them,  with  a  political  tract  published  at  Cadiz.  The  Volon- 
taire  is  gone  to  Barbary,  for  the  license  for  the  horses  and 
mules.  He  forwards  more  letters  to  the  Marquess  de  Romana 
and  his  officers,  for  whom  the  Spaniards  express  great  anxiety. 
Transmits  a  copy  of  the  proposals  made  by  Vice- Admiral 
Thornborough  to  the  Governor  of  the  Ealeares,  with  the 
answer,  and  a  copy  of  a  letter  to  the  latter  from  Lord  Colling- 
wood.  Also  a  letter  from  Major  Cox,  stating  that  the  proposed 
movement  of  the  British  troops  to  Lisbon  was  approved  by  the 
Junta,  and  detailing  the  proceedings  of  the  Spanish  army 
against  Dupont,  who  was  attempting  to  recross  the  Sierra 
Morena. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  June  28,  1808. 
States  that  the  Portufjuese  have  risen  ao^ainst  the  few  French 
remaining  at  Faro,  who  surrendered  without  much  opposition. 
A  Junta  has  been  formed  at  Faro,  of  which  the  Bishop  is  pre- 
sident ;  they  have  requested  troops  and  arms  from  Lord  Col- 
lingwood,  who  encloses  their  letter  and  his  answer,  in  which 
he  has  referred  them  to  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple.  Major-General 
Spencer,  having  gone  on  to  Lisbon  before  the  troops  found  the 
enemy  in  such  force  as  made  any  attempt  upon  them  hope- 
less, has  therefore  returned,  and  part  of  the  transports  are 
gone  to  water  at  Cadiz. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  3,  1808. 
States  that  Major-General  Spencer,  having  consulted  with 
the  Governor  of  Cadiz,  had  settled  that  all  the  troops  should 
go  into  that  port,  and  such  as  could  have  barracks  be  landed  at 
Port  St.  Mary,  where  the  General  will  wait  until  Sir  A.  Wel- 
lesley'*s  arrival.  The  Spaniards  seem  equally  averse  to  our 
holding  any  important  garrison,  or  taking  the  field  with  them  : 
and,  on  learning  that  Lord  Collingwood  intended  to  propose 
that  their  fleet  should  join  his  Majesty's  squadron  whenever 
the  movements  of  the  enemy  should  render  it  necessary,  they 
ordered  their  ships  to  the  upper  part  of  the  harbour,  and  began 
to  dismantle  them.     On  this  subject,  he  encloses  letters  from 


182  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Father  Gil  and  the  Governor  of  Cadiz,  and  from  himself  to 
Major  Cox,  the  Governor,  and  the  President  Saavedra.  Lord 
Collingwood  attributes  this  extraordinary  movement  not  to 
their  want  of  funds  to  maintain  their  navy  (which  the  Governor 
assigns  as  the  reason),  nor  to  any  want  of  confidence  in  us,  but 
to  a  feeling  that  they  are  not  acknowledged  as  the  Supreme 
Council  of  the  nation.  They  refer  Lord  CoUingwood  to  the 
Commander  at  Carthagena,  to  whom  he  has  written  a  letter,  of 
which  he  encloses  a  copy. 

He  transmits  a  paper  from  Badajoz,  giving  an  account  of  a 
battle,  said  to  have  been  fought  on  the  16th  June  near  Sara- 
gossa,  in  which  the  French  army  in  that  quarter  is  said  to 
have  been  annihilated.  He  encloses  a  letter  from  the  Em- 
peror of  Morocco's  Minister,  and  has  not  much  hope  of  being 
able  to  purchase  the  horses  required,  as  the  Mahometan  reli- 
gion forbids  them  to  be  sold  to  Christians.  It  seems,  how- 
ever, that,  if  Ceuta  could  be  given  up  to  him,  (of  which  Lord 
CoUingwood  sees  no  prospect)  the  Emperor  would  furnish  not 
only  horses,  but  whatever  else  his  country  produced. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  7,  1808. 

Encloses  a  letter  from  General  Morla,  with  intelligence  of 
the  success  of  the  army  and  peasantry  of  Catalonia  and  Va- 
lencia, who  have  repulsed  the  army  under  Marshal  Moncey, 
with  great  loss,  and  routed  General  Legi  near  Barcelona.  The 
inhabitants  of  Roussillon  have  joined  the  Catalonians.  Dupont 
expects  reinforcements  at  Anduxar,  but  General  Castafios 
means  to  attack  him,  and  has  requested  that  General  Spencer 
should  take  a  position  at  Xeres,  which  he  means  to  do  with 
part  of  his  forces.  The  want  of  horses  prevents  his  moving 
the  whole.  He  encloses  two  intercepted  letters  from  Junot  at 
Lisbon,  one  to  Buonaparte,  the  other  to  Murat :  he  thinks 
they  were  meant  for  deception,  and  that  Junot  is  about  to 
abandon  Lisbon,  either  for  Madrid,  or  to  reinforce  Dupont. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  12,  1808. 

Encloses  a  letter  from  the  Supreme  Council  (received  from 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEHEAGH.  183 

Cadiz),  stating  that  the  want  of  money  and  stores  was  the 
only  reason  for  dismantling  their  ships,  which,  in  consequence 
of  Lord  Collingwood's  letter,  they  have  now  resolved  to  be 
fitted,  depending  on  the  assistance  of  England  to  do  it.  Lord 
Collingwood  is  satisfied  with  the  stop  put  to  the  dismantling 
of  them  until  affairs  are  more  advanced  ;  as  he  thinks  the  ex- 
pence  of  maintaining  them  will  be  more  than  adequate  to  their 
services. 

The  southern  provinces  are  importunate  for  arms,  ammu- 
nition, and  money.  In  the  North,  the  armies  are  active  and 
successful :  the  pass  of  Figueras  is  in  possession  of  the 
Spaniards.  The  French  hold  Barcelona,  but  their  reinforce- 
ments have  been  cut  off.  He  will  apply  for  two  of  the  Spanish 
ships  at  Minorca,  to  join  in  sustaining  our  frigates  on  that 
coast.  General  Spencer,  for  want  of  horses  to  draw  his  cannon, 
has  not  advanced  beyond  Port  St.  Mary ;  and  General  Morla 
does  not  seem  anxious  that  he  should  do  so. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  15,  1808. 

The  demand  for  arms,  &c.,  being  every  where  urgently 
made,  he  has  directed  the  ships  on  the  eastern  coast  to  supply 
them  as  far  as  they  can,  and  has  written  to  Sir  Alexander  Ball 
for  2,000  muskets,  and  to  the  Governor  of  Majorca  to  employ 
the  forges  in  the  islands  in  making  pikes  for  the  peasantry  of 
Valencia  and  Catalonia.  By  the  best  accounts,  it  seems  that 
the  enemy  in  the  whole  Peninsula  do  not  exceed  60,000,  about 
40,0000  having  fallen. 

General  Spencer,  with  part  of  his  forces  intended  for  Xeres, 
is  still  at  Port  St.  Mary  ;  the  rest  on  board  the  transports. 
By  late  accounts,  it  appears  that  Figueras  is  not  absolutely  in 
possession  of  the  Spaniards,  but  expected  to  be  so. 

He  has  sent  Sir  C.  Cotton  a  communication  from  Mr. 
Brande  at  Magdalene  Islands,  that  the  French  Government 
had  seized  on  all  Russian  vessels  in  Italy  ;  that  the  two  Rus- 
sian ships  at  Toulon  were  unrigged  in  the  inner  harbour  ;  and 


184  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

that  a  report  was  current  in  Italy  of  hostilities  between  Kussia 
and  France.  And  he  has  proposed  to  Sir  C.  Cotton  to  open 
a  correspondence  with  Admiral  Siniavin,  giving  hini  this  in- 
formation. 

On  the  11th,  General  Castaiios  was  preparing  to  attack  the 
enemy  the  next  day.  Some  of  his  officers  have  been  arrested, 
and  sent  to  Seville.  The  war  is  supported  by  the  common 
people,  instigated  by  the  clergy.  Amongst  the  higher  orders 
there  are  many  doubtful  characters.  The  Marquess  de  la  Solana, 
just  before  his  death,  convened  a  council  of  nine  general  officers 
at  Cadiz,  who  (except  one)  gave  their  opinion  that  no  resist- 
ance should  he  made  to  the  French.  General  Morla  was  of 
the  number,  as  well  as  some  who  are  now  in  Castaiios''  army. 

Encloses  a  copy  of  an  application  from  the  merchants  for  a 
packet  between  Cadiz  and  England,  and  some  papers  relating 
to  Valencia,  and  the  instructions  to  Eear-Admiral  Martin  for 
supplying  arms  to  the  Valencians,  &c. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  17,  1808. 

States  that  he  has  assured  the  southern  provinces  they  may 
expect  supplies  of  money,  arms,  and  ammunition,  and  suggests 
that  a  person  should  be  appointed  to  manage  his  accounts  with 
the  Treasury. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  21,  1808. 

States  that  Dupont  and  12,000  men  have  surrendered  as 
prisoners  of  war  on  the  26th. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  24,  1808. 

Gives  further  particulars  of  Dupont^s  surrender,  as  well  as 
of  the  capitulation  of  General  Bedel  and  5,000  men,  about  to 
reinforce  Dupont.  The  latter  are  to  be  sent  to  Rochefort  in 
Spanish  vessels,  carrying  away  their  arms.  Mentions  a  re- 
port that  Admiral  Valdez  has  been  murdered  by  the  people  in 
his  way  to  Madrid ;  and  encloses  a  list  of  the  persons  who 
composed  the  Marquess  de  Solana'*s  council,  noticed  in  his 
letter  of  the  15th. 


1808.]  LOKD  CASTLEREAGH.  185 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  25,  1808. 

Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh's  letter  of  the  7th  of  June, 
and  replies  to  his  instructions  on  the  subject  of  occupying  an 
island  in  the  Archipelago,  and  of  entering  the  Black  Sea. 
Encloses  a  letter  from  Captain  Whittingham,  detailing  the 
operations  against  Dupont  and  Bedel,  with  the  terms  on  which 
they  respectively  capitulated ;  also  a  letter  from  Captain 
Stewart,  on  Turkish  affairs. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  25,  1808. 

From  the  delay  likely  to  take  place  before  supplies  of  money 
can  arrive  from  England,  he  has  been  induced  to  request  Sir 
Hew  Dairy mple  to  raise,  ^20,000  at  Gibraltar,  for  the  Go- 
vernment of  Seville. 

Ocean,  July  25,  1808. 

Encloses  a  letter  from  the  Junta  of  Seville,  with  one  written 
in  July,  1805,  by  the  Prince  of  Peace,  to  the  Governor  of  the 
Spanish  settlement  of  Melilla,  in  Africa,  proposing  to  support 
a  chief,  called  Ali  Beck,  in  his  rebellion  against  the  Emperor 
of  Morocco.  Lord  Collingwood  also  encloses  a  copy  of  his 
letter  to  Major  Cox,  suggesting  the  good  policy  of  avoiding 
measures  which  would  make  an  enemy  of  the  Emperor. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  29,  1808. 

He  had  understood  that  only  Bedel's  division  was  to  be  car- 
ried to  France  ;  but  now  it  appears  that  all  the  French,  above 
16,000,  are  to  go;  BedeFs  division  keeping  their  arms.  He 
encloses  a  copy  of  the  capitulation,  and  comments  on  the  im- 
policy of  its  terms.  It  has  caused  much  agitation,  and  he 
understands  that  the  Junta  at  Seville  disapprove  of  it  entirely, 
though  they  do  not  think  it  proper  to  make  such  declaration. 
He  transmits  an  extract  of  a  letter  on  this  subject  from  Major 
Cox,  enclosing  a  confidential  letter  on  this  subject. 

He  has  told  the  Junta  that  he  will  aid  them  in  fittins:  their 
transports,  but  cannot  allow  them  to  pass  on  the  sea  without 
instructions  from  home.     He  has,  moreover,  observed  that,  as 


186  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

they  have  not  the  means  of  sending  the  enemy  to  Rochefort, 
the  obligation  to  do  it  ceases. 

The  Spanish  army  will  not  proceed  immediately  to  Madrid, 
for  want  of  arrangements  and  equipage,  particularly  canteens. 
He  encloses  a  copy  of  his  letter  to  General  Morla,  relative  to 
the  conveyance  of  the  troops  ;  also  a  plan  of  the  position  of  the 
Spanish  and  French  forces,  when  the  latter  surrendered. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  29,  1808. 
Mentions  that  he  has  heard  that,  after  Dupont's  surrender, 
General  Castanos  proposed  to  the  Count  de  Tilly  to  advance 
and  get  possession  of  Madrid,  in  co-operation  with  the  Gal- 
lician  army,  and  to  procure  the  Cortes  to  be  assembled,  and 
a  Council  of  Government  formed  for  Spain  ;  but  that  the 
Count  de  Tilly  opposed  this,  suggesting  that  their  care  should 
be  Andalusia  and  Portugal,  and  leave  the  rest  of  Spain  to  take 
care  of  themselves,  without  embarrassing  themselves  with 
Cortes  or  Princes.  Castanos  desired  Captain  Whittingham  to 
mention  this  to  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  ;  Lord  CoUing-wood  not 
liking  to  write  on  the  subject. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  August  4,  1808. 
States  that  his  objections  to  the  transporting  of  the  French 
troops  had  been  well  received  by  the  Spaniards,  who  were 
glad  that  a  difficulty  was  started.  A  council  of  general 
officers  is  assembled  at  Seville,  to  arrange  future  proceedings. 
He  learns  from  Admiral  Martin  that  the  eastern  provinces 
are  in  great  want  of  arms,  and  the  French  maintain  themselves 
in  Catalonia,  and  have  relieved  Figueras.  A  great  part  of  the 
garrison  of  the  Balearic  Islands  had  passed  over  to  tJie  Conti- 
nent, and  the  Marquess  de  Palacio  was  gone  to  command  in 
Catalonia.  He  has  received  from  Gibraltar  about  55,000 
dollars,  which  he  shall  supply  to  the  Spanish  Governor. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  August  6,  1808. 
He  believes  the  Spaniards  are  satisfied  as  to  the  views  of 


]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  187 

the  British  Government.  He  hopes  that  the  supply  of  arms 
for  Catalonia  and  Valencia  will  be  sent  direct^  as  their  wants 
are  urgent.  The  Emperor  of  Morocco  has  refused  the 
Spaniards  mules  as  well  as  horses.  The  Dey  of  Algiers  has 
applied  for  naval  stores,  but,  as  his  ships  are  to  cruise  against 
those  provinces  which  we  are  protecting,  Lord  Collingwood  has 
recommended  the  Consul  civilly  to  represent  that  we  have 
not  the  means  of  furnishing  what  he  requires.  The  Phoebe 
frigate  is  ordered  to  receive  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  August  11,  1808. 

States  that  Cuesta  has  beat  the  French  in  an  action  which 
lasted  four  days,  ending  on  the  18th  July.  Joseph  Buona- 
parte arrived  at  Madrid  on  the  20th,  and  quitted  it  on  the  31st, 
with  all  the  French  there  and  those  attached  to  them,  and  with 
such  valuable  effects  as  were  portable.  On  the  8rd  August, 
Castanos  received  a  message  from  Grouchy,  the  French  com- 
mandant, wishing  him  to  occupy  Madrid,  preserve  order,  and 
protect  the  French  sick.  Don  Pedro  Cevallos,  who  returned 
from  Bayonne  with  Joseph  Buonaparte,  remains  at  Madrid, 
and  has  proposed  the  assembling  of  the  Cortes. 

The  French  have  left  the  cannon  uninjured  at  Madrid,  and 
are  marching  towards  Segovia,  perhaps  to  join  Bessieres.  At 
Seville  and  Cadiz  there  is  abundance  of  cannon,  but  no  dis- 
position to  send  them  to  Valencia  or  Catalonia,  where  they  are 
much  wanted.  Lord  Collingwood  pressed  this  on  General 
Morla  without  effect. 

The  Junta  of  Seville  have  disavowed  claiming  any  supe- 
riority in  an  Address  which  is  enclosed.  He  has  given  Ge- 
neral Morla  passports  for  the  French  Admiral  and  some  other 
officers.  The  General  has  also  applied  for  two  ships  of  war, 
to  go  to  the  West  Indies  for  money. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  August  14,  1808. 

Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  has  informed  him  that  the  Duke  of 
Orleans,  with  Prince  Leopold  of  Sicily,  has  arrived  at  Gibraltar, 
with  a  view  to  make  some  proposal  to  the  Junta  of  Seville  as 


188  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

to  a  Regency.  Fearing  that  this  intelligence  might  counte- 
nance suspicions  unfavourable  to  the  British  Government,  he 
has  written  to  the  President  of  the  Junta  at  Seville  and  the 
Governor-General  of  the  province,  announcing  that  the  arrival 
of  the  Princes  was  unexpected  by  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  and 
himself;  and  requesting  to  know  whether  it  was  in  consequence 
of  any  correspondence  of  the  Junta  with  the  Court  of  Palermo. 

He  encloses  General  Morla's  answer,  stating  that  he  is  un- 
informed on  the  subject,  but  is  inclined  to  doubt  that  the  Junta 
had  any  knowledge  or  share  in  the  step  which  the  Princes 
have  taken.  Lord  Collingwood  has  been  informed  by  Sir  Hew 
Dalrymple  (in  his  way  to  Portugal)  that  the  Duke  of  Orleans 
is  to  proceed  to  England,  and  the  Prince  to  return  to  Palermo 
as  soon  as  a  ship  is  appointed  to  convey  him :  but,  as  some  of 
the  Queen  of  Sicily ""s  councillors  are  in  the  suite  of  the  latter, 
Lord  Collingwood  is  not  without  fear  that  they  will,  from 
Gibraltar,  make  proposals  to  the  Junta. 

General  Eeding,  with  the  army  of  Granada,  is  said  to  have 
advanced  towards  Madrid,  and  the  Andalusian  army  to  have 
three  weeks'  leave  of  absence,  to  recover  from  the  fatigues  of 
the  campaign  at  their  houses. 

Dupont  and  some  French  officers  have  been  brought  to 
Port  St.  Mary's,  to  embark :  the  mob  attacked  them,  and 
took  away  their  plunder.  Dupont,  after  being  wounded  in  the 
head,  escaped  to  a  Spanish  ship. 

A  number  of  Spanish  vessels  are  said  to  have  sailed  from 
the  Bay,  with  Joseph  Buonaparte's  despatches  to  the  different 
colonies,  bearing  Spanish  colours,  but  with  an  eagle  instead  of 
the  lion. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  August  16,  1808. 

Encloses  a  letter  from  the  President  Saavedra,  stating  that 
the  Junta  knew  nothing  of  PrinceJ  Leopold's  voyage  to  Gi- 
braltar. Lord  Collingwood  has  seen  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  who 
expressed  his  desire  to  stay  there  to  support  the  views  of  Prince 
Leopold ;  but,  Lord  Collingwood  having  stated  to  him  that 


1808.1  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  189 

it  was  impossible  any  propositions  could  go  to  Spain  from  the 
ships  or  garrison  without  the  directions  of  his  Majesty's 
Government,  at  the  same  time  representing  the  impolicy  and 
inutility  of  making  any  such  proposals  to  a  provincial  Junta, 
the  Duke  seemed  satisfied  with  this  reasoning,  and  resolved  to 
proceed  to  England. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  August  16,  1808. 

Acknowledges  Lord  OastlereagVs  letter  of  the  28th  July, 
received  by  the  vessel  which  has  brought  Mr.  Consul  Duff  and 
the  money  for  the  Spanish  Government  at  Seville.  He  had 
already  written  to  General  Morla,  recommending  him,  in  order 
to  reduce  the  expences,  that  the  ships  should  be  dismantled, 
which  the  Governor  meant  to  do.  He  believes  that  the  trans- 
ports already  sent  will  be  sufficient  for  embarking  Sir  John 
Stuart's  troops. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  August  16,  1808. 

He  has  been  informed  by  Major  Cox  that  General  Reding 
had  proceeded  to  the  northward  of  the  Sierra  Morena,  and 
that  Castaiios  meant  to  go  to  Madrid,  to  meet  Cuesta  and  the 
Valencian  General,  and  with  them  settle  some  plan  of  general 
operation. 

The  French  force  has  increased  in  Arrasfon,  and  Lord  Collins:- 
wood  has  great  apprehensions  for  Catalonia,  where  there  is  a 
great  want  of  cannon,  which  the  Junta  of  Seville  and  Governor 
of  Cadiz  will  not  supply.  He  learns  from  Major  Cox  that, 
Granada  having  refused  to  acknowledge  the  authority  of  the 
Junta  of  Seville,  it  had  been  determined  by  a  majority  of  the 
latter  that  the  army  of  Andalusia  should  be  sent  to  Granada, 
to  reduce  it  to  obedience  ;  but  General  Castanos  (who  was 
present,  though  not  a  member)  warmly  and  resolutely  refused 
to  employ  his  army  against  the  subjects  of  the  King,  or  for 
carrying  on  a  civil  war  between  the  provinces  ;  asserting  that 
it  was  not  the  army  of  Andalusia,  but  part  of  the  army  of 
Spain,  assembled  to  expel  the  invaders  of  their  country.  Be- 
fore the  debate,  it  was  said  that  the  Andalusian  army  was  not 


190  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

to  pass  the  mountains.  Now,  the  Junta  only  style  themselves 
the  Supreme  Junta  of  Government,  "  Spain  and  the  Indies" 
beins:  left  out. 


NO.  VI. 
PRECIS  OF  DESPATCHES  FROM  SIR  HARRY  BURRARD. 

Audacious,  St.  Helen's,  July  29,  1808. 

He  has  not  yet  decided  whether  he  shall  proceed  in  a  light 
vessel  to  Oporto,  or  send  thither  a  confidential  person  to  col- 
lect information. 

Audacious,  off  Falmouth,  August  8,  1808. 

The  convoy  has  been  prevented  from  proceeding  any  further 
by  contrary  winds.  One  of  the  horse  transports  has  been  so 
much  damaged  by  a  Jamaica-man,  as  to  be  obliged  to  put  into 
Plymouth,  with  thirty-six  artillery  horses  and  their  drivers, 
which,  together  with  the  1st  brigade  of  German  Artillery,  and 
the  detachment  of  the  36th  reported  to  have  been  sent  into 
Portsmouth,  he  is  anxious  may  be  ordered  to  follow  as  soon  as 
possible. 

Off  Macera,  to  southward  of  Peniche,  August  20,  1808. 

Mentions  his  having  quitted  the  Audacious,  and  proceeded 
in  the  Brazen  to  Oporto  and  Mondego,  and  thence  to  Macera, 
opposite  to  which  anchorage  he  learns  that  Sir  Arthur  Wel- 
lesley  is  arrived.  Brigadier- General  Acland's  brigade  is  pre- 
paring to  land,  and  Sir  Harry  has  no  doubt  that  the  Audacious 
and  convoy  have  arrived  at  Mondego.  He  means  to  be  with 
Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  in  the  evening. 

Macera,  August  21,  1808. 

This  despatch  is  accompanied  by  a  report  from  Sir  Arthur 
Wellesley,  containing  a  detailed  account  of  the  action,  which, 
Sir  Harry  states,  had  commenced  with  the  enemy  previous  to 
his  arrival  in  the  field  of  battle.  He  observes  that  Sir  Arthur'^s 
disposition  rendered  it  quite  unnecessary  for  him  to  direct  any 
alteration,  and  bears  testimony  to  the  great  spirit  and  good 
conduct  displayed  by  his  Majesty''s  troops  on  this  occasion. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  191 

Lisbon,  October  7,  1808. 

In  consequence  of  letters,  copies  of  which  are  enclosed,  from 
Lord  William  Bentinck,  he  is  preparing  to  march  20,000  men 
to  the  north  of  Spain  in  three  divisions :  one  large  column  of 
infantry  through  Ooimbra,  Almeida,  andCiudad  Rodrigo,  upon 
Burgos,  under  Sir  John  Moore  ;  the  cavalry  and  artillery  to 
join  General  Hope,  already  on  the  route  to  Elvas  ;  and  Lieu- 
tenant-General Fraser's  division  by  a  middle  route,  if  supplies 
can  be  furnished. 

In  consequence  of  an  application  from  Don  Joze  Elola, 
deputy  from  Catalonia,  he  has  granted  him  a  warrant  for 
6^*25,000,  one-half  of  which  he  had  received  in  dollars,  and  the 
other  in  bills,  and  has  proceeded  with  them  to  Cadiz.  The 
Catalonians  have  also  been  furnished  with  13,000  stand  of 
arras. 

Enclosed  is  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  Lord  CoUingwood,  con- 
taining an  application  from  the  Supreme  Junta  of  Arragon  for 
stores,  money,  and  a  corps  of  10  or  15,000  men,  to  which  he 
has  returned  for  answer,  that  he  has  been  t)bliged  to  employ 
the  troops  in  another  direction. 

Encloses  copies  of  two  letters,  «Sz:c.,  from  Lord  W.  Bentinck 
to  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple,  dated  Madrid,  the  2nd  of  October, 
containing  the  particulars  of  several  communications  which  he 
has  had  with  the  Spanish  Government  and  General  Castanos, 
on  the  expediency  of  concentrating  the  British  force,  their  line 
of  march,  general  system  of  co-operation,  &;c. 

Encloses  also  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  Mr.  Stuart  to  Sir  Hew 
Dalrymple,  dated  Aranjuez,  September  25th,  recommending 
his  using  every  endeavour  to  retard  the  execution  of  the  capi- 
tulation concluded  with  the  French,  as  far  as  it  regards  the 
departure  of  Junot^s  army,  and  assigning  his  reasons. 

Lisbon,  October  8,  1808. 

Is  making  every  exertion  to  detach  20,000  men,  with  the 
]  8th  and  German  Light  Dragoons  and  a  proportion  of  artillery, 
under  the  command  of  Sir  John  Moore,  to  whom  he  has  trans- 


192  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

ferred  the  superintendence  of  this  service,  and  directed  him  to 
correspond  with  Lord  Castlereagh.  He  will  consider  his  com- 
mand in  future  as  confined  to  Portugal,  and  obey  his  instruc- 
tions with  regard  to  the  remainder  of  the  troops,  and  the 
detachment  of  the  20th  Light  Dragoons.  It  is  probable  that 
Sir  John  Moore  will  move  the  whole  of  his  armament  by  land, 
with  the  exception  of  some  ordnance  and  other  heavy  stores. 

Lisbon,  October  8,  1808. 
Expresses  great  satisfaction  with  the  appointment  of  Sir 
John  Moore  to  the  command  in  Spain.  Laments  that  the 
cessation  of  hostilities  was  never  communicated,  until  the 
account  of  it  went  home  with  the  ratification  of  the  Conven- 
tion, and  then  in  general  terms,  without  explanatory  reasons. 
He  has  taken  up  his  head-quarters  at  Lisbon,  for  the  purpose 
of  facilitating  an  intercourse  with  the  Regency  and  other  lead- 
ing persons,  from  whom  he  experiences  more  cordiality  than  he 

did  at  first. 

Lisbon,  October  15,  1808. 

Transmits  a  copy  of  a  letter  and  its  enclosures,  which  he 
has  received  from  Sir  Charles  Cotton,  by  which  it  appears  that, 
on  the  arrival  of  the  garrison  of  Almeida  at  Oporto,  great  dis- 
satisfaction was  expressed  by  the  populace  at  the  French  troops 
having  their  arms ;  in  consequence  of  which,  and  a  suspicion 
that  they  had  Portuguese  property  and  Church  plate  concealed 
in  their  baggage,  they  were  attacked  by  the  mob,  and  plun- 
dered, in  despite  of  the  English  escort,  consisting  of  200  men; 
that  the  effects  which  had  not  been  searched  by  the  mob  were 
embarked  and  inspected  by  a  deputation  of  Portnguese  magis- 
trates, but  nothing  found ;  that  some  few  church  ornaments, 
however,  being  contained  in  the  remainder,  the  populace  assem- 
bled in  arms,  to  the  amount  of  12,000  men,  with  artillery, 
and,  threatening  to  sink  the  vessels,  obliged  the  Frenchmen 
who  had  been  embarked  in  the  night  [to  submit  ?]  and  plun- 
dered the  transports  even  of  their  provisions,  and  of  the  cloth- 
ing of  the  master  and   men  ;    that  the  French   troops  were 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  193 

afterwards  disembarked  without  arms,  and  put  into  the  Fort 
of  St.  John  for  security ;  and  that  the  English  convoy  is  not 
suffered  to  put  to  sea,  the  Government  possessing  no  power  to 
restrain  the  populace. 

Sir  Harry  transmits  a  note,  containing  the  particulars  of  an 
interview  which  he  has  had  with  the  Marquess  des  Minas  and 
Mr.  Freire,  the  Secretary  of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs :  by 
which  it  appears  that  certain  symptoms  of  dissatisfaction  had 
previously  existed  among  the  Portuguese  troops,  in  consequence 
of  having  their  pay  lowered  to  what  it  had  been  before  the 
arrival  of  the  French,  which,  they  urged,  was  contrary  to  the 
promise  made  them  when  they  took  up  arms..    He  observes, 
that  they  made  this  claim  with  arms  in  their  hands,  and  that 
the   Government,  being  either  intimidated,  or  convinced,  at 
length  have  asjreed  to  comply  with  it,  although  their  determi- 
nation has  not  yet  been  made  known  to  the  army.     He  is  of 
opinion,  however,  that  the  insurrection  was  instigated  by  some 
dangerous  people   in  the  Junta,  in  which   it  appears,  by  a 
minute  (enclosed)  of  a  conversation  between  Colonel  Donkin 
and  Mr.  Freire,  that  the  Bishop  is  suspected  of  intriguing,  to 
establish  a  separate  interest  at  the  expense  of  the  Regency,  to 
which  he  is  believed  to  be  unfriendly,  from  having  refused  to 
join  it.    The  translation  of  a  letter  is  enclosed  from  the  Bishop 
to  Sir  Harry,  in  which  the  former  is  considered  to  write  in  the 
style  of  an  independent  Government  on  the  subject  of  the  cap- 
ture of  some  Portuguese  vessels  by  the  Barbary  cruisers;  like- 
wise a  copy  of  Sir  Harry's  answer,  expressing  a  wish  that  he 
should  proceed  to  Lisbon,  to  take  his  share  in  the  Regency, 
with  the  view  to  the  restoration  of  order,  which  he  considers 
absolutely   necessary,    even   at   the  expense  of  delaying  the 
march  of  the  army  into   Spain.     Sir  Harry  has  despatched 
General  Beresford  to  Oporto,  with  directions  to  march  thither 
the  whole  of  the  six  battalions  now  on  their  route  to  Almeida, 
in  case  of  necessity.     He  will  also  be  followed  by  a  detach- 
ment of  the  troops  destined  to  remain  in  Portugal,  consisting 
VOL.  VII.  o 


194  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

of  the  40th,  45th,  and  97th  Eegiments,  and  a  brigade  of  artil- 
lery, to  act  according  to  circumstances. 

He  transmits  papers,  containing  the  particulars  of  several 
communications  which  he  has  had  with  the  Regency,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  issue  of  an  edict,  directing  foreign  corn  to  be 
considered  as  merchandize,  &c.,  which  effected  such  a  consider- 
able deterioration  in  the  value  of  the  Spanish  dollar,  that 
great  dissatisfaction  was  manifested  by  his  Majesty's  troops, 
who  were  subjected  thereby  to  distress,  and  serious  conse- 
quences were  apprehended.  It  appears,  however,  that  the 
representations  which  he  made  were  productive  of  the  desired 
effect ;  that  an  edict  was  issued,  declaring  the  value  of  the 
dollar  to  be  45.  6d. ;  and  that  the  matter  has,  in  consequence, 
been  amicably  adjusted. 

He  represents  the  difficulty  of  procuring  waggons ;  as  the 
officers  who  have  received  orders  for  the  purpose  from  the 
Regency  do  not  consider  themselves  authorized  to  enforce 
them ;  he  fears,  therefore,  that  the  baggage  of  the  army  must 
remain  on  the  ground,  for  want  of  conveyance,  unless  the 
system  of  pressing  waggons  is  resorted  to,  which  he  does  not 
think  advisable,  as  it  will  only  serve  to  demonstrate  the  weak- 
ness of  the  Government. 

He  has  desired  General  Beresford  to  make  a  report  upon 
Sir  Robert  Wilson'^s  corps,  which  does  not  appear  to  be  ap- 
proved by  the  Regency ;  and  he  shall,  therefore,  direct  it  to 
be  discontinued,  unless  the  objections  to  it  are  counterbalanced 
by  much  advantage.  The  General  states  that  sickness  has  been 
very  prevalent  among  the  British  troops,  and  in  some  cases 
fatal.  He  has  sent  the  3rd  and  50th  Regiments,  with  Sir  John 
Moore,  in  lieu  of  the  40th,  which  is  in  a  very  sickly  state ; 
the  above  to  be  replaced  from  the  division  expected  at  Corunna. 
He  has  just  been  informed  that  the  Regency  have  ordered 
General  Bernardin  Freire  to  go  to  his  Government  at  Oporto, 
and  to  take  the  command  of  the  troops,  and  that  they  have 
written  a  strong  letter  to  the  Bishop,  to  invite  him  again  to 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  196 

come  and  head  the  Regency.  He  observes  that  the  General  is 
suspected  of  not  being  a  well-wisher  to  the  English,  and  that 
the  Bishop  is  vain  and  easily  led. 

States  that  it  has  been  thought  best  to  compress  all  the 
ordnance  and  provision  stores,  now  in  many  bottoms,  into  as  few 
as  will  hold  them  ;  and  he  thinks  it  would  be  most  advisable 
to  have  them  afloat.  He  laments  that  it  has  been  thought 
right  to  charge  the  allowances  granted  for  bat,  baggage,  and 
forage- money,  with  the  income-tax,  and  encloses  a  memorial, 
signed  by  himself  and  Sir  John  Moore,  on  the  subject.  He 
transmits  a  plan  delivered  by  General  Beresford  to  the  Regency, 
for  re-organizing  the  Portuguese  army,  but  does  not  believe  it 
has  been  acted  upon.  He  urges  the  great  importance  of  send- 
ing out  a  British  Minister  to  Portugal,  and  states  that  there 
is  good  reason  to  believe  that  there  is  a  strong  French  party  in 
Lisbon  and  its  neighbourhood,  as  well  as  in  other  parts  of  the 
country. 

Lisbon,  October  18,  1808. 

Transmits  the  minute  of  a  conversation  between  Colonel 
Donkin  and  Secretary  Freire,  on  the  subject  of  the  riot  at 
Oporto,  together  with  the  copy  of  a  letter  from  Sir  Robert 
Wilson,  containing  a  detailed  report  of  this  affair,  and  recom- 
mending the  General  to  send  thither  a  corps  of  3,000  infantry 
and  200  cavalry  to  preserve  tranquillity.  Sir  Robert  also 
strongly  recommends,  by  any  fair  means,  the  removal  of  the 
Bishop  and  Major  Raymundo,  who  commands  the  fort. 

Encloses  also  a  report  from  Brigadier-General  Anstruther, 
of  the  evacuation  of  the  fortress  of  Almeida,  which  was  taken 
possession  of  by  the  British  troops  in  the  name  of  the  Prince 
Regent,  and  afterwards  delivered  over  to  a  corps  of  Portuguese, 
under  the  command  of  Major-General  Botetho. 

Lisbon,  October  27,  1808. 

Reports  that  Sir  John  Moore  has  left  Lisbon,  and  that  the 
only  part  of  his  army  remaining  are  the  Buffs  and  the  50tli, 
who  will  march  in  a  few  days.     Great  difficulties  have  been 

o  2 


196  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

experienced  in  procuring  mules,  owing  to  the  want  of  power 
and  inclination  on  the  part  of  the  magistrates,  in  consequence 
of  which  it  was  necessary  to  resort  to  coercion. 

Tranquillity  having  been  restored  at  Oporto,  he  had  altered 
his  intention  of  sending  General  Stewart  with  a  brigade  to  that 
place  ;  but,  finding  the  Regency  extremely  urgent  that  he 
should  do  so,  he  proposed  to  send  thither  by  sea  the  82nd  and 
97th  Regiments,  with  a  German  brigade  of  light  6-pounders  ; 
and  he  transmits  a  copy  of  a  note  announcing  this  determina- 
tion. The  Bishop  of  Oporto  has  not  yet  arrived  at  Lisbon. 
Sir  Robert  Wilson,  who  has  conducted  himself  extremely  well, 
represents  him  to  be  attached  to  the  British  interest.  Mr. 
Secretary  Freire  has  represented  the  absolute  inability  of  the 
Government  to  enforce  the  separation  of  the  Oporto  (native) 
garrison  from  that  city ;  but  that  leave  of  absence  and  fur- 
loughs would  be  granted,  and  the  corps  of  chasseurs  allowed  to 
remove  to  Viana. 

Mr.  Freire  having  hinted  to  Colonel  Donkin  the  probability 
that  the  Regency  would  apply  for  money,  alluding,  at  the 
same  time,  to  the  aids  granted  to  Spain,  the  Colonel  replied 
that  the  cases  were  widely  different ;  that  Sir  Harry  Burrard 
could  not  take  upon  himself  any  such  responsibihty  ;  and  that 
the  Portuguese  Government  had  better  at  once  address  them- 
selves to  his  Majesty's  Ministers  in  England.  Sir  Harry  ob- 
serves that  the  resources  of  the  country  are  adequate  to  its 
expenses ;  but  that  the  Government  is  so  embarrassed  by  its 
own  weakness,  that,  unless  a  Minister  is  sent  out  from  England, 
with  powers  to  excite  the  present  rulers  to  a  more  decisive  line 
of  conduct,  they  are  not  likely  to  be  of  any  service  to  the  in- 
terests of  Europe. 

He  has  received  an  application  from  the  Junta  of  Estrema- 
dura  for  a  loan  of  one  million  of  dollars,  with  equipments, 
clothing,  and  arms,  to  an  amount  nearly  equal.  He  has 
referred  the  deputies  who  made  the  application  to  Madrid,  and 
in  the  mean  time  has  granted  them  a  loan  of  20,000  dollars 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGII.  197 

in  bills,  with  2,000  stand  of  arms,  ammunition,  &c.  ;  and  he 
transmits  a  copy  of  a  letter  which  he  addressed  to  the  deputies 
to  this  effect. 

States  that  there  are  three  brigades  of  artillery  on  shore 
without  horses,  and  recommends  that  a  detachment  of  light 
cavalry  may  be  sent  to  Portugal. 

Transmits  an  application  from  the  chaplains  of  the  army,  to- 
other with  an  opinion  of  Mr.  Commissary  Erskine  thereon, 
and  recommends  that  they  may  not  be  subjected  to  any  deduc- 
tion from  their  pay.  Recommends,  also,  that  a  claim  made 
by  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  Major-Generals  Murray  and  Fergusson, 
and  Brigadier-General  Nightingale,  for  bat,  baggage,  and  forage 
money,  may  be  complied  with. 

He  regrets  that  the  Regency  have  refused  to  accede  to  a 
proposal  from  Colonel  Donkin,  for  establishing  a  line  of  com- 
munication between  the  British  armies  in  Spain  and  Portugal, 
by  means  of  Portuguese  dragoons. 

Lisbon,  November  6,  1808. 
Acknowledges   Lord  Castlereagh's  letter  of  the  29th  ult., 
and  will  set  out  for  EnMand  as   soon  as  Bri2:adier-General 
Stewart  or  Major-General  Mackenzie  shall  arrive  at  Lisbon, 
to  take  the  command  of  the  troops. 

Lisbon,  November  6,  1808. 
Returns  thanks  for  the  obliging  manner  in  which  Lord  Castle- 
reagh  has  addressed  him  in  his  private  letter  of  the  29th  ult. 

Lisbon,  November  14,  1808. 
He  is  fearful  that  Brigadier-General  Stewart  will  not  return 
to  Lisbon  for  a  week  to  come,  when  he  will  embark  for  England, 
and  will  reserve,  until  his  arrival,  any  other  communication, 
except  submitting  a  report  from  the  Deputy  Commissary- 
General  ;  on  which  he  observes  that  a  conversation  was  held 
by  Mr.  Secretary  Freire,  who,  in  a  very  high  and  peremptory 
manner,  declared  that  the  Regency  could  not  deliver  over  or 
return  the  stores  therein  mentioned,  without  danger  of  starving  : 
and  he  has  every  reason  to  believe  that  they  do  not  mean  to 


198  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  •  [1808. 

allow  them  to  be  the  property  of  the  British  Grovemment. 
He  states  that  there  is  a  prospect  of  fair  weather ;  that  tlie 
army  is  proceeding  on  its  march  to  Spain  ;  that  the  convales- 
cents are  recovering  rapidly,  and  the  sick  decreasing. 


NO.  VII. 

ABSTRACT  OF  PAPERS  RELATING  TO  TRAISTSACTIONS 

IN  PORTUGAL, 

PREVIOUS  TO  SIR  H.  BURRARD'S  DEPARTURE,  AND  TRANSMITTED 

BY  HIM  TO  LORD  CASTLEREAGH  SINCE  HIS  RETURN  TO  ENGLAND,  BUT 

UNACCOMPANIED  BY  ANY  OFFICIAL  LETTER. 

Sir  R.  Wilsoji  to  Sir  H.  Burrard. 

Oporto,  October  11,  1808. 

States  the  arrival  and  embarkation  of  the  garrison  of  Al- 
meida, and  gives  an  account  of  an  insurrection  of  the  populace, 
in  consequence  of  having  discovered  in  their  baggage  some  silk 
and  velvet  belonging  to  the  churches.  It  appears  that  the 
rioters  were  joined  by  the  artillery,  and  went  the  length  of 
pointing  their  guns  at  a  boat  which  was  conveying  some  of  the 
baggage  on  board,  where  they  have  insisted  on  its  being 
searched ;  and  Sir  Robert  is  apprehensive  that  they  will  not 
be  satisfied  without  disarming  the  French,  and  is  under  some 
fear  for  the  lives  of  the  people  in  the  ships. 

He  observes  that  the  order  to  reduce  the  pay  has  united  the 
soldiery  and  the  people,  and  that  the  views  of  both  seem  to  be 
to  transfer  the  seat  of  Government  to  Oporto ;  that  the  pre- 
sence of  3,000  British  infantry  and  200  cavalry  is  absolutely 
necessary  to  preserve  tranquillity ;  that  the  removal  of  the 
Bishop  and  of  Major  Raymondo,  who  is  a  popular  favourite, 
and  who  ordered  the  opening  of  the  trunk  in  which  the  velvet, 
&c.,  were  found,  being,  besides,  a  man  of  extremely  bad  cha- 
racter, is  very  desirable. 

Sir  Robert  speaks  highly  of  the  conduct  of  his  corps  on  the 
occasion  ;  and  transmits  a  copy  of  a  letter  which  he  has  written 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  199 

to  Brigadier- General  Perreira,  commanding  the  troops,  stating 
that  he  has  no  objection  to  make  any  arrangement  that  may- 
satisfy  the  public,  notwithstanding  there  may  be  some  deviation 
from  the  articles  of  the  Convention ;  but  that  the  lives  of  the 
French  must  be  considered  as  a  sacred  deposit,  and  that  any 
hostile  attempt  on  the  vessels  under  the  British  flag  must  be 
considered  as  a  violation  of  the  alliance  with  Great  Britain. 

Sir  R.  Wilson  to  Mr.  Canning. 

Encloses  a  copy  of  the  preceding  letter,  and  giving  a  further 
account  of  the  proceedings  of  the  rioters,  who,  assisted  by  the 
regular  troops  and  artillery,  notwithstanding  the  remonstrances 
of  the  Bishop,  the  Governor,  the  magistrates,  and  British  offi- 
cers, compelled  the  French  to  disembark  without  their  arms 
and  baggage,  and  plundered  the  vessels  of  every  kind  of  pro- 
perty whatever.  Every  thing  is  now  quiet,  and  the  Bishop, 
who  has  conducted  himself  extremely  well  throughout  the 
business,  has  promised  that  every  public  and  private  satisfac- 
tion shall  be  made. 

Sir  Robert  expresses  his  intention  to  obtain  the  removal  of 
Major  Raymondo,  and  to  gain  every  information  respecting 
the  leaders  of  the  mob ;  but  is  confident  that  the  British  must 
abandon  the  country,  or  send  thither  3,000  men,  with  some 
cavalry.  He  states  that  the  French  behaved  with  great  pro- 
priety, and  are  sensible  that  every  possible  exertion  was  made 
by  the  British  for  their  protection  and  safety. 

Sir  Robert  Wilson  to  Sir  H.  Burrard. 

Oporto,  October  13,  1808. 
Enclosing  a  copy  of  the  preceding  letter,  and  stating  that 
the  mob  appeared  again  in  arms,  and,  in  the  most  tumultuous 
manner,  were  proceeding  to  further  acts  of  plunder,  when  the 
Marquess  of  Valladares  arrived,  with  1,500  Spaniards,  by 
whose  assistance,  and  that  of  the  British  troops  and  Portuguese 
Legion,  the  populace  were  again  quieted.     The  Government 


200  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

assembled,  and  an  edict  was  issued  to  enforce  due  obedience  to 
their  authority.  The  French  are  in  consequence  to  have  their 
arms  restored,  and  all  property  which  is  not  Portuguese,  and 
they  are  about  again  to  embark. 

Major  Raymondo,  whose  conduct  he  thinks  more  indiscreet 
than  criminal,  has  behaved  much  better,  but  Sir  Robert  does 
not  think  it  prudent  that  he  should  be  suffered  to  remain  in  the 
province. 

Sir  E.  Wilson  to  Sir  H.  Burrard, 

Coimbra,  October  20,  1808. 

Reports  his  arrival  at  Coimbra,  and  states  that  the  order  for 
increasing  the  pay  of  the  soldiers,  and  for  repealing  that  which 
diminished  the  value  of  foreign  specie,  has  restored  quiet,  and 
that  he  does  not  think  there  is  any  immediate  necessity  for  the 
presence  of  a  British  garrison  at  Oporto.  He  suggests,  how- 
ever, that  the  removal  of  the  Bishop  to  Lisbon  is  very  desirable  ; 
recommends  occupying  the  northern  provinces  by  troops  from 
the  South,  as  the  regulars  of  Oporto,  &;c.,  are  identified  with 
the  inhabitants,  with  whom  they  will  make  common  cause, 
particularly  under  the  commander  who  is  expected,  and  who 
possesses  neither  the  respect  of  the  people,  nor  the  love  of  the 
troops,  and  against  whom  the  Bishop''s  partisans  will  always  be 
active.  He  has  hitherto  been  obliged  to  procure  supplies  for 
the  hospital,  fee,  by  personal  favour,  and  has  written  to  Mr. 
Erskine  on  the  subject  of  money,  which  he  recommends  may  be 
sent  into  the  Duero  by  some  ship  of  war.  Authority  to  draw 
bills  is  of  no  use,  as  there  is  no  negociation  with  Lisbon,  and 
drafts  on  England  bear  a  discount  of  from  10  to  14  per  cent. 

He  has  enlisted  for  general  service,  and  without  bounty,  200 
Swiss  from  the  garrison  of  Almeida. 

Colonel  Bathurst  to  Sir  H.  Burrard. 

Oporto,  October  21,  1808. 
Reports  his  arrival  at  Oporto,  where  he  found  every  thing 
quiet ;  but  he  understands  that  the  plunder  of  the  French  was 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  201 

only  the  outward  and  plausible  pretence  of  the  late  commotion. 
The  whole  of  the  Portuguese  regular  troops  took  a  part ;  and 
it  does  not  appear  that  any  of  their  officers  attempted  to  pre- 
vent them.  He  found  the  Bishop  surrounded  by  guards,  and 
thinks  he  is  too  fond  of  this  description  of  pomp  and  ceremony 
to  abandon  it  for  the  more  humble  station  he  would  fill  at 
Lisbon — having  sent  a  special  sort  of  ambassador  to  the  Prince, 
at  the  Brazils,  with  the  supposed  view  of  securing  to  himself 
the  situation  of  Viceroy  ;  having,  moreover,  assumed  the  power 
of  granting  military  rank,  and  given  Sir  Robert  Wilson  that 
of  Brigadier-General. 

Colonel  Bathurst  observes  that  the  clergy  in  general  have 
taken  the  most  active  part  in  the  late  revolution,  and  have  ac- 
quired an  influence  which  they  wish  to  retain :  that  the  no- 
bility are  so  weakened  by  the  absence  of  those  who  emigrated 
with  the  Prince,  that  they  can  scarcely  maintain  their  ground ; 
and  that  there  appears  to  be  a  disposition  in  Oporto  and  that 
quarter,  said  to  be  fomented  by  the  Bishop  and  his  friends, 
very  hostile  to  the  Regency.  He  suggests  that  a  few  British 
troops  might  possibly  prevent  any  further  disturbance,  and 
thinks  the  Portuguese  Legion  may  be  as  well  completed  at 
Lisbon  as  at  Oporto ;  but  is  not  aware  that  British  artillery 
can  be  of  any  use  there. 

Sir  Charles  Cotton  to  Sir  Harry  Burrard. 

Informing  him  that  the  French  troops  composing  the  garri- 
son of  Almeida  were  so  completely  plundered  of  all  their  efi*ects 
by  the  Portuguese,  that  it  has  rendered  them  susceptible  of 
contagion  and  disease. 

Dr,  Thompson  to  Sir  H.  Burrard. 

October  29,  1808. 
An  inspection  report  of  the  French  sick  and  wounded  on 
board  two  transports,  amounting  to  148,  whom  he  has  supplied 
with  the  necessary  medicines,  &;c.,  and  recommends  that  they 


202  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

may  be  allowed  the  use  of  bedding  and  a  proportion  of  soft 
bread. 

Captain  Grant  to  Sir  Harry  Burrard. 

Mary  Transport,  November  3,  1808. 
Stating  that  100  of  the  French  troops  on  board  are  dead  or 
dying ;  tliat  they  are  in  want  of  every  thing ;  and  praying 
immediate  assistance,  particularly  that  some  of  the  sick  may 
be  removed  on  board  of  another  vessel. 

Major-General  Beresford  to  Sir  H.  Burrard, 

Oporto,  November  3,  1808. 

He  arrived  at  Oporto  on  the  81st  ult.,  and  on  the  2nd  in- 
stant had  an  interview  with  the  Bishop,  who  expressed  a  strong 
disinclination  to  join,  or  to  have  any  communication  with  the 
Regency,  stating  that  several  proposals  which  he  had  made 
had  never  been  noticed  by  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple,  who  had  not 
acknowledged  the  Government  of  Oporto,  and  that  the  advice 
which  he  had  given  for  continuing  the  Government  of  the 
kingdom  at  Oporto  had  been  treated  with  silence  and  contempt. 

General  Beresford  enters  into  a  detail  of  the  arguments 
he  offered  to  convince  the  Bishop  of  the  impracticability  of 
such  arrangement,  and  to  induce  him  to  join  the  Regency, 
which  he  reluctantly  consented  to  do  in  the  course  of  a  month ; 
but  dwells  much  upon  the  opposition  he  shall  meet  with,  and 
the  little  service  he  shall  be  able  to  perform.  He  has  given 
public  notice,  however,  of  his  intention  to  proceed  to  Lisbon ; 
but  General  Beresford  believes  that  his  object  in  postponing 
his  departure  for  so  long  is  the  hope  that  arrangements  may  be 
made  in  the  mean  time  for  placing  him  at  the  head  of  the  Govern- 
ment. The  General  observes  that  the  Bishop  is  fully  devoted 
to  the  common  cause,  and  that,  notwithstanding  he  is  actuated 
by  personal  vanity,  ambition,  and  local  prejudice,  he  possesses 
an  energy  which  is  much  wanting  in  the  Regency ;  that  he 
has  an  unbounded  influence  at  Oporto,  where  nothing  is  done 
which  is  known  to  be  disagreeable  to  his  Excellency,  even  by 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  203 

the  populace,  who  are  still  ripe  for  insurrection,  and  are  kept 
in  a  state  of  hostility  to  the.  Regency  by  some  secret  means, 
which  he  fears  are  not  greatly  discouraged  by  the  Bishop.  He 
does  not,  however,  think  his  Excellency  would  wish  any  other 
effects  to  result  from  their  present  temper  than  this  show  of 
affection.  Under  these  circumstances,  he  is  of  opinion  that  it 
would  be  most  desirable  that  the  Bishop  should  proceed  to 
Lisbon,  and  that  a  pressing  letter  from  Sir  Harry  Burrard  and 
Mr.  Stuart  would  hasten  his  departure.  He  moreover  strongly 
recommends  the  removal  of  the  Portuguese  troops  from  Oporto, 
and  the  arrest  of  the  principal  movers  of  the  late  insurrection, 
particularly  of  Senhor  Raymondo,  the  Governor  of  Fort 
St.  John. 

Major-General  Beresford  to  Sir  H,  Burrard, 

Oporto,  November  4,  1808. 
He  has  inspected  Sir  Robert  Wilson's  Legion,  which  is 
about  to  undergo  a  medical  examination,  and  to  be  established 
according:  to  a  reijular  standard  as  to  acje  and  size.  It  now 
consists  of  the  skeletons  of  three  battalions  of  infantry  and  one 
company  of  artillery ;  but  he  has  recommended  Sir  Robert  to 
complete  one  of  the  battalions  in  the  first  instance,  and  so  each 
in  succession.  Without  questioning  the  propriety  of  forming 
this  corps,  the  General  observes  that  his  Majesty''s  orders  have 
been  acted  upon  at  a  very  considerable  expence,  which  will  be 
entirely  lost  if  a  stop  is  put  to  its  completion ;  besides  that  it 
would  be  disgusting  to  the  Bishop,  who  considers  it  a  measure 
of  his  own  promoting.  He  thinks,  moreover,  that  it  might  be 
made  very  useful,  by  the  assistance  of  an  additional  number  of 
English  ofiicers,  but  that  it  would  be  better  without  cavalry  or 
artillery,  the  former  of  which  he  has  desired  Sir  Robert  Wil- 
son to  postpone  raising.  The  latter  is  already  formed,  and 
proceeding  in  discipline.  He  thinks  it  probable  that  there 
would  not  be  so  much  objection  to  the  Legion,  on  the  part  of 
the  Regency  and  other  persons  of  consideration,  if  the  choice 


204  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [180S, 

of  the  officers  were  not  so  independently  left  to  Sir  Robert 
Wilson,  who,  however,  wishes  his  recommendations  to  pass 
through  Sir  H.  Burrard,  and  their  commissions  are  signed  by 
the  Regency.  He  has  sanctioned  Sir  Robert's  taking  what 
recruits  he  can  to  complete  the  battalion. 

Sir  Robert  Wilson  to  Sir  H.  Burrard. 

Oporto,  November  4,  1808. 

He  is  putting  his  corps  under  British  regulations,  and  has 
drafted  about  SO  men :  5  feet  3  inches  to  be  the  future  stan- 
dard. The  artillery  company  is  completed  and  well  disci- 
plined in  gunnery,  the  greater  part  being  old  soldiers,  who 
were  sent  from  England,  and  commanded  by  a  very  valuable 
officer.  Only  a  few  officers  of  cavalry  have  been  nominated. 
He  trusts  the  Regency  will  grant  permission  for  600  men  who 
are  at  Viana,  and  not  attached  to  any  regiment,  to  join  his 
corps,  and  that  he  shall  also  be  allowed  to  receive  such  men  of 
the  Marquess  d''Alora"'s  Legion  as  choose  to  enter,  in  which 
case  it  would  be  immediately  completed. 

States  that  the  appointment  of  officers,  according  to  the  Por- 
tuguese regulations,  always  passes  through  the  Chief  of  the 
Corps ;  but  that  he  has  always  considered  this  an  honorary 
power,  having  constantly  received  the  Bishop'^s  private  nomi- 
nation before  he  officially  presented  the  promotions  ;  and  their 
patents  are  signed  by  the  Bishop  and  the  Junta. 

His  object  has  been  to  select  for  commissions  young  men  of 
education,  who  speak  English,  and  are  connected  with  Eng- 
land ;  and,  with  a  few  exceptions,  he  believes  he  has  secured 
the  elite  of  Portugal,  but  still  wants  two  Lieutenant-Colonels 
and  several  Captains,  and  solicits  Sir  Harry  Burrard''s  nomi- 
nation to  the  vacant  commissions. 

States  the  reason  why  he  should  be  loth  to  wave  the  right 
invested  in  him,  as  Chief  of  the  corps,  and  expresses  a  wish  to 
remove  it  from  Oporto,  as  soon  as  it  is  complete,  to  Viana. 
Applies  for  a  medicine-chest  and  surgical  instruments,  omitted 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  205 

to  be  sent  out  with  the  stores,  and  is  anxious  for  a  British 
Commissary,  Paymaster,  and  Surgeon,  to  be  attached  to  the 
Legion. 

Observes  that  the  corps  is  to  have  full  Portuguese  pay,  and 
that  50,000  additional  dollars  have  been  sent  out  for  its  pre- 
sent expences.  He  trusts  that  the  etapes  will  not  be  deducted, 
and  states  that  the  fidelity  of  the  Legion,  and  its  co-operation 
with  the  British,  may  be  depended  on  ;  and  that,  whilst  they 
feel  a  military  spirit  distinct  from  the  Portuguese  army,  they 
begin  to  pride  themselves  on  a  martial  system,  which  has  been 
introduced  without  any  rude  innovation. 

As  it  is  not  possible  to  procure  any  money  under  11  ^  dis- 
count, he  has  applied  to  the  Bishop  and  General  Freire  for 
d£^l 0,000  of  the  money  sent  out  from  England,  on  condition 
of  depositing  Treasury  bills  to  that  amount,  and  the  discount, 
but  not  to  be  negociated  until  the  British  Government  has  the 
option  of  repaying  the  above  sum  at  Oporto,  or  to  the  Portu- 
guese ambassador  in  England.  He  expects  that  these  pro- 
posals will  be  accepted,  and  suggests  that  an  application  may 
be  made  to  the  Eegency  for  20  or  d£'30,000  more,  on  the  same 
conditions.  He  is  making  arrangements  for  the  reception  of 
the  British  troops,  whose  quarters  will  be  in  the  town  and  a 
convent ;  but  the  regiments  of  Oporto  occupy  San  Oviedo,  and 
cannot  be  moved. 

Sir  Robert  Wilson  to  Sir  If,  Burrard. 

Oporto,  November  7,  1808. 

The  Bishop  has  ordered  <^  10,000  to  be  issued  on  the  terms 
proposed  in  the  preceding  letter,  and  there  remains  in  the 
Treasury  about  <£^40,000  of  the  money  sent  out  from  England, 
which  he  thinks,  by  proper  management,  may  be  obtained  for 
the  use  of  the  British  on  similar  conditions.  The  Bishop  pro- 
poses to  set  out  for  Lisbon  within  a  fortnight. 

General  B.  Freire  ofiered  to  draw  <£*5,000  from  his  chest,  in 
case  the  Bishop  had  refused  to  advance  the  whole  ^10,000, 


206  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [18C8. 

the  greater  part  of  which  will  be  sent  to  Brigadier- General  An- 
struther.  Sir  Robert  states  that  the  barracks  will  be  ready 
for  the  British  troops,  and  that  he  has  been  obliged  to  draw 
for  <£*600.  He  trusts  that  an  arrangement  will  be  made  with 
the  Regency  that  the  Legion  may  be  under  the  orders  of 
Sir  H.  Burrard,  as  it  will  be  impossible  to  conduct  its  disci- 
pline, if  subject  to  the  interference  of  the  Portuguese  Generals. 

Sir  H.  Burrard  to  Colonel  Kemmis. 

Lisbon,  November  1,  1808. 
Instructs  him  to  take  the  command  of  the  garrison  of  Elvas  ; 
to  maintain  the  best  understanding  with  the  inhabitants  and 
with  General  Liste,  the  Governor,  under  whose  orders  he  is  to 
appear  to  act  to  a  certain  extent ;  to  avoid  interfering,  with  the 
British  troops,  in  domestic  broils,  as  much  as  possible ;  but  to 
support  the  Government,  if  called  upon  so  to  do ;  to  occupy 
Fort  La  Lippe  with  the  40th  Regiment,  and  not  to  evacuate 
it  without  orders  ;  and  to  make  confidential  reports  of  the  state 
of  the  province  and  its  neighbourhood. 

Colonel  Donhin  to  Mr.  Freire. 

Lisbon,  November  1,  1808. 

Pointing  out  the  necessity  of  acquainting  General  Beresford 
with  the  nature  of  the  instructions  sent  to  General  B.  Freire, 
on  the  subject  of  the  late  disturbances  at  Oporto.  Apprizing 
him  that  three  British  regiments  have  been  ordered  to  Oporto, 
and  the  40th,  with  a  detachment  of  artillery,  is  about  to  pro- 
ceed to  Elvas,  where  it  will  be  provisioned  either  by  a  British 
Commissary,  from  Lisbon,  or  by  the  Portuguese  Commissary 
in  Alentejo,  the  account  to  be  settled  between  the  two  Govern- 
ments. 

Informing  him  that  the  heaviest  complaints  have  been  made 
of  the  disinclination  of  the  magistrates  to  forward  the  British 
troops  on  their  march,  and  particularizes  the  misconduct  of 
the  Juiz  de  Mora  of  Alcoentra ;  transmitting  a  memorial  from 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  207 

the  Vicar  of  the  Convent  of  Santa  Cruz,  at  Coimbra,  who  has 
given  every  possible  assistance  to  the  army,  and  recommend- 
ing that  it  may  be  compUed  with. 

Colonel  Donkin  to  Mr.  Freire. 

Lisbon,  November  5,  1808. 
Transmitting  a  demand  from  the  officer  commanding  the 
French  troops  in  the  Tagus  for  the  restitution  of  the  arms, 
military  chest,  and  personal  property,  stated  to  have  been 
taken  from  the  late  garrison  of  Almeida,  while  marching 
through  Oporto  ;  and  requesting  that  the  same  may  be  com- 
plied with. 

Mr.  Freire  to  Colonel  Donkin. 

Lisbon,  November  6,  1808. 
Informs  him  that  orders  have  been  given  to  inquire  into  the 
circumstances  of  this  demand. 

Mr.  Commissary  Bawlings  to  Sir  H.  Burrard. 

Lisbon,  November  9,  1808. 
Representing  that  a  quantity  of  stores,  belonging  to  the  gar- 
rison of  Almeida,  and  for  which  he  had  given  receipts  to  the 
French  Commissary-General,  had  been  removed  without  the 
least  intimation,  by  the  order  of  the  Portuguese  Government, 
having  forcibly  broken  open  the  lock  of  a  door  where  part  of 
them  were  secured. 

Sir  H,  Burrard  to  Mr,  Bawlings. 

Lisbon,  November  15,  1808. 
Informing  him  that  he  had  referred  the  above  complaint  to 
the  Regency,  and  would  send  a  copy  of  this  letter  to  his 
Majesty''s  Ministers. 

Lisbon,  November  9,  1808. 
Minute  of  a  Conversation  between  Colonel  Donkin  and  Mr. 
Secretary  Freire,  to  whom  the  former  made  an  application  for 
the  release  of  a  Mr.  Baretto,  a  merchant  of  Lisbon,  who  had 


208  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

been  imprisoned  by  the  Regency  on,  as  he  alleged,  the  ground 
of  his  having  illuminated  his  house  on  the  arrival  of  Junot, 
and  of  having  shown  himself  a  partisan  of  the  French.  Some 
papers  are  enclosed,  to  prove  that  this  accusation  is  not  well 
founded :  but  Colonel  Donkin  observes  that  he  principally  rested 
his  appHcation  on  a  claim  made  by  Mr.  Baretto  on  the  pro- 
tection of  England,  under  the  I7th  Article  of  the  Convention 
of  the  SOth  of  August ;  but  that  Mr.  Freire  inveighed  against 
that  instrument  in  a  very  high  tone,  and  in  the  most  un- 
qualified terms,  declaring  that  it  had  given  over  the  Port.u- 
guese  bound,  and,  as  it  were,  into  the  hands  of  the  French, 
towards  whom  it  had  been  fulfilled  with  scrupulous  exactness, 
while  they  had  been  stripped  and  insulted  in  all  possible  ways  ; 
that  it  had  never  been  communicated  officially  to  the  Govern- 
ment, and  that  they  were  not  bound  to  acknowledge  it ;  com- 
plaining of  the  style  of  a  letter  written  by  Brigadier- General 
Cameron  on  the  subject ;  and,  having  intimated  that  the  Gene- 
ral Officer  was  not  entitled  to  interfere  in  matters  relating  to 
the  Government,  declaring  that  nothing  should  induce  him  to 
consent  to  the  release  of  Mr.  Baretto. 

Colonel  Donkin  proceeds  to  observe  that  Mr.  Freire  took 
occasion  to  remark  more  than  once  that  England  had  come 
forward  with  her  usual  generosity  to  relieve  her  old  ally  from 
slavery,  and  had  expelled  the  enemy  ;  that  the  Portuguese  felt 
every  possible  gratitude ;  but  trusted  that  she  did  not  mean  to 
trample  upon  them  by  a  Convention  which  exposes  them  to 
the  cruellest  insults,  and  which  has  been  favourably  executed 
towards  the  French,  even  by  "  connivance,""  while  they  have 
experienced  all  its  severity ;  that  Mr.  Freire  declared,  more- 
over, in  the  most  violent  manner,  that  he  would  rather  have 
died  under  their  late  slavery  than  suffer  such  indignities  from 
a  friend. 

Being  anxious  to  discover  the  true  feelings  of  the  Govern- 
ment, Colonel  Donkin  states  that  he  did  not  interrupt  Mr. 
Freire,  for  whom  he  was  willing  to  make  every  allowance,  more 


1808]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  209 

particularly  as  the  Portuguese  had  been  cruelly  pillaged,  and 
the  Convention  did  not  put  a  stop  to  the  French  system  of 
extortion,  which  was  carried  on  after  the  30th  of  August.  He 
thinks,  however,  that  what  he  said  evidently  amounted  to  a 
declaration  that  the  Regency  are  determined  to  emancipate 
themselves  from  British  influence,  and  to  act  as  an  indepen- 
dent Government. 

It  appears  that  the  conversation  passed  on  to  the  circum- 
stance of  the  removal  by  the  Portuguese  Government  of  the 
stores  transferred  by  the  French  garrison  of  Almeida  to  the 
British  Commissary,  which  Mr.  Freire  justified,  on  the  ground 
of  their  having  been  pillaged  from  the  Portuguese  by  the 
French ;  and,  asking  whether  the  English  were  come  to  live 
upon  them,  and  make  them  die  with  hunger,  stated  that  with 
the  stores  in  question  they  could  not  feed  their  army,  in  order 
to  pay  which  the  Regency  were  obliged  to  beg  a  subscription 
with  hats  in  their  hands. 

Colonel  Donkin  apprized  Mr.  Freire  that  Sir  H.  Burrard 
would  probably  demand  the  restitution  of  the  stores,  which 
Mr.  Freire,  after  renewing  his  picture  of  the  extreme  distress 
of  the  Government,  hoped  he  would  not  do,  as  it  would  lead  to 
the  most  unpleasant  discussions  between  the  two  countries. 

Colonel  Donkin  then  asked  whether,  if  Sir  H.  Burrard 
should  give  up  the  claim  above  mentioned,  the  British  troops, 
who  are  sufi"ering  extremely  for  want  of  bedding,  would  be  sup- 
plied with  paillasses,  and  whether  the  barracks  would  be  put 
into  repair,  for  want  of  which  their  health  is  equally  injured  ; 
to  which  Mr.  Freire  answered,  that  the  Portuguese  Govern- 
ment would  do  everything  that  they  could — that  they  considered 
the  British  army  their  own,  and  were  equally  interested  in  its 
well-being  ;  that  the  barracks  were  repairing  in  some  places, 
and  that  furniture,  such  as  tables,  &c.,  would  be  put  into  them 
as  soon  as  possible ;  that  paillasses,  however,  were  a  heavy 
expense,  which  they  would  meet  if  they  could  afford  it ;  but 
that,  when  payments  were  made  on  the  part  of  the  French  by 
VOL.  VIT.  P 


210  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

the  Commissioners  for  settling  the  Convention,  the  debts  of 
the  great  contractors  were  discharged,  while  those  of  the  smaller 
ones,  such  as  would  furnish  paillasses,  were  left  unpaid,  and 
they  are  ruined ;  that,  consequently,  they  cannot  work  with- 
out ready  money,  of  which  the  Portuguese  Government  have 
none  to  advance. 

Colonel  Donkin  states  that  he  did  not  very  well  know  what 
answer  to  make  to  these  observations,  and,  therefore,  merely 
reminded  Mr.  Freire  that  there  were  500  ready-made  paillasses 
in  store.  These  Mr.  Freire  promised  should  be  issued  imme- 
diately ;  but,  the  order  having  been  given  for  that  purpose  to 
Mr.  Forjas,  the  Minister  for  the  War  Department,  who  is 
remarkable  for  his  inattention  to  all  applications  from  the  Eng- 
lish, Colonel  Donkin  observes  that  none  had  been  delivered 
ten  days  after,  and  adds  that,  unless  they  are  supplied  by  the 
Portuguese  Government,  it  will  be  necessary  to  purchase  at 
least  10,000  for  the  troops,  who  will  perish  without  them.  He 
concludes  by  observing,  that  he  parted  with  Mr.  Freire  with 
much  less  cordiality  than  usual,  after  a  long  and  unpleasant 
interview,  in  which  it  was  manifest  that  that  Minister  meant 
to  make  a  formal  declaration  of  the  feelings  of  his  Government 
as  well  as  his  own. 

Mr.  Ferguson  to 

Lisbon,  November  4,  1808. 
An  inspection  Report  of  the  Deputy  Inspector  of  Hospitals, 
containing  an  account  of  the  state  of  the  transports  in  the 
Tagus,  having  on  board  the  French  troops,  in  the  greater  part 
of  which  it  is  represented  that  pestilence  is  making  the  most 
dreadful  ravages,  in  consequence  of  the  want  of  discipline, 
cleanliness,  and  even  common  attentions. 

Sir  H.  Burrard  to  Lieut. -Colonel  Trant. 

Lisbon,  November  7,  1808. 
Instructions  to  renew  the  investigation  of  the  claims  on  dis- 
puted property,  under  the  Convention  of  the  30th  of  August. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  211 

Lieut-Colonel  Trant  to  Sir  H.  Burrard. 

Lisbon,  November  16,  1808. 
Relative  to  a  claim  made  by  a  division  of  Spanish  troops  to 
some  cotton  avowedly  belonging  to  the  French,  by  whom  it 
was  seized  in  the  province  of  Alentejo,  during  the  existence  of 
the  French  Government  in  Portugal ;  but  against  which  de- 
mand Mr.  Freire  protests,  on  the  ground  of  its  belonging  to 
the  Portuguese  Government. 


NO.  VIIL 

PRECIS  OF  DESPATCHES  FROM  MAJOR-GENERAL 

BRODERICK. 

Corunna,  August  28,  1808. 
Reports  his  arrival  on  the  preceding  day  at  Corunna,  where 
he  found  that  the  Junta  of  the  province  had  established  itself 
at  Lui^o,  with  the  view  of  concertino^  measures  with  the  De- 
puties  from  Leon  and  Asturias.  He  represents  General  Blake's 
anxiety  for  cavalry,  of  which  he  has  not  more  than  from  130 
to  200  dragoons  with  his  army,  and  there  is  not  yet  a  sufficient 
cordiality  of  co-operation  between  the  different  provinces  to 
enable  him  to  supply  the  deficiency.  General  Broderick  ob- 
serves that  there  is  no  disinclination  to  receive  succours,  whe- 
ther of  infantry  or  cavalry,  but  considers  it  most  desirable  that 
the  requisition  should  come  from  General  Blake  himself,  in 
which  he  hopes  to  induce  him  to  include  the  former.  He  is  of 
opinion  that  infantry,  in  the  proportion  of  two-thirds  of  the  num- 
ber of  cavalry,  would  enable  the  British  troops  to  act  indepen 
dently  on  any  probable  emergency.  He  has  directed  Captain 
Kennedy  to  ascertain  the  different  calibres  of  the  Spanish  ar- 
tillery, and  to  communicate  the  same,  and  if  possible  to  pro- 
cure a  set  of  rings  through  which  they  prove  the  shot.  He 
proposes  to  set  out  for  Astorga  on  the  next  day. 

Lugo,  September  1,  1808. 
The  provinces  have   been   induced  to  send  deputies  to  a 

p2 


212  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

General  Assembly,  to  be  convened  probably  at  Ocana,  but 
with  the  express  exception  of  Madrid  as  the  place  of  meeting. 
General  Blake  has  proceeded  in  person  to  Leon,  and  has  sent 
forward  a  part  of  his  army,  but  his  head-quarters  remain  for 
the  present  at  Astorga.  No  deputies  have  been  yet  sent  or 
named  by  the  Asturias  ;  and  the  General  fears  that  there  is 
more  noise  and  clamour  than  effective  execution  in  that  pro- 
vince. 

Reynosa,  September  10,  1808. 

Reports  his  arrival  at  Reynosa,  the  head-quarters  of  Ge- 
neral Blake,  who,  by  having  reached  that  position,  has  over- 
come all  the  difficulties,  which  rendered  a  reinforcement  of 
cavalry  so  essential  to  his  movements,  and  to  which  he  is  con- 
sequently more  indifferent.  General  Broderick  represents  the 
plains  of  Leon  and  Castillo  as  calculated,  in  a  remarkable  man- 
ner, for  the  operations  of  cavalry,  and  how  much  the  common 
cause  has  been  injured  by  the  needless  retreat  and  inactivity  of 
General  Cuesta,  with  the  united  assistance  of  whose  corps  and 
the  army  of  Arragon  he  has  no  doubt  that  General  Blake 
would  have  driven  the  French  from  their  present  position. 
He  states  that  the  French  have  6,000  cavalry,  very  finely 
mounted. 

General  Blake  means  to  take  up  a  position  between  Bilbao 
and  Vittoria,  in  the  hope  of  accomplishing  the  liberation  of 
Arragon,  Alava,  and  Biscay.  He  has  applied  for  an  advance 
of  ^11,000,  and  General  Broderick  has  taken  upon  himself 
the  responsibility  of  recommending  his  being  furnished  with 
that  sum  from  on  board  the  frigate  off  St.  Ander,  on  condition 
of  its  being  returned  into  the  general  stock,  out  of  the  funds  in 
the  liands  of  the  Junta  of  Corunna.  He  requests  Lord  Cas- 
tlereagh''s  instructions  for  his  conduct  on  fixture  occasions  of  a 
similar  nature. 

General  Blake  has  also  applied  for  12,000  pouches  and  belts, 
(the  new  levies  being  obliged  to  carry  their  ammunition  in  their 
pockets)  together  with  40,000  great  coats.     General  Broderick 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  213 

represents  the  latter  to  be  absolutely  necessary,  as  the  Spanish 
army  is  not  allowed  blankets,  and  there  is  no  doubt  but  the 
war  will  be  carried  on  without  going  into  winter-quarters. 

The  first  division  of  Castanos'  army,  consisting  of  11,000 
men,  has  proceeded  nearly  halfway  between  Madrid  and  Sara- 
gossa,  on  its  road  to  Soria.  Ouesta's  army  will  be  in  communi- 
cation with  the  left  of  this  force;  and  General  [Colonel]  Doyle 
is  gone  to  Saragossa,  to  induce  the  army  in  that  quarter  to 
combine  its  operations  with  the  above. 

General  Broderick  suggests  that  the  port  of  St.  Ander  will 
be  much  more  convenient  for  communication  than  that  of  Co- 
runna  or  Gihon.  He  represents  the  army  to  be  advancing  in 
numbers  and  discipline,  but  has  more  faith  in  the  good  will 
than  the  manoeuvring  even  of  the  Spanish  troops  of  the  line. 

PS.  Some  prisoners  just  brought  in  state  the  French  to 
be  only  30,000  strong,  cavalry  included ;  that  Burgos  is 
occupied  by  800  French,  and  that  Lasalle  is  ready  to  quit 
the  town,  keeping  his  mules  constantly  harnessed  to  bring  off 
his  cannon.  Captain  Birch  is  ordered  to  St.  Ander,  to  forward 
the  arms  to  Biscay  and  Guipuscoa. 

R,eynosa,  September  17,  1808. 
He  complains  of  a  great  want  of  communication  on  the  part 
of  General  Blake,  from  whom  he  cannot  procure  frank  state- 
ments, even  of  his  wants.  He  attributes  this  reserve  to  a  wish 
of  the  Junta  of  Corunna,  on  whom  the  General  is  dependent, 
to  avoid  an  examination  into  the  funds  remainins:  in  their 
hands,  as  they  are  desirous  that  the  provinces  which  are  the 
seat  of  war  should  bear  the  expenses  of  it,  and  that  these,  in 
their  turn,  should  refer  demands  for  money  to  those  provinces 
which  have  received  subsidies  from  Enoland.  He  thinks  it 
right  to  add  that  he  has  received  the  utmost  personal  civility 
from  the  General,  whom  he  does  not  suspect  of  having  any 
designs  which  he  is  afraid  of  bringing  into  view ;  but,  under 
all   circumstances,  thinks  it  would  be  extremely  desirable  to 


2  14  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

get  the  remaining  money  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Provincial 
Junta,  and  to  throw  the  whole  subsidy  into  some  common 
fund,  to  be  distributed  under  authority  to  the  different  armies, 
as  occasion  may  require.  In  any  event,  he  thinks  it  would  be 
derogatory,  as  well  as  useless,  to  prosecute  the  objects  of  his 
mission  any  further,  unless  the  General  affords  him  the  means 
of  more  confidential  intercourse. 

The  army  is  on  its  march  to  Bilbao,  and  the  provinces  of 
Biscay  and  Guipuscoa  will  probably  be  in  arms  in  a  few  days. 
General  Blake  has  informed  him  that  he  depends  chiefly  on 
the  country  through  which  he  passes  for  supplies  ;  but  that  he 
has  been  promised  biscuit  from  Corunna  and  Ferrol,  with  which 
he  means  to  establish  magazines  near  St.  Ander.  Being  in- 
duced, however,  by  his  conversation,  to  suspect  that  he  places 
great  dependence  on  the  frigate  off  that  port,  General  Bro- 
derick  thought  it  right  to  explain  that  something  very  far  short 
of  a  day''s  supply  to  his  army  might  produce  a  famine  on  board 
the  frigate.  He  is  waiting  for  a  communication  from  the  Ge- 
neral of  the  situation  of  his  head-quarters,  in  order  to  join  him, 
but  has  endeavoured  in  vain  to  procure  from  him  the  positions 
he  means  to  occupy  during  his  march. 

Traspaderne,  September  22,  1808. 

He  has  had  a  more  satisfactory  conference  with  General 
Blake,  of  whose  intended  movements  he  gives  a  general  outline. 
He  is  posted  along  the  Ebro,  where  he  is  waiting  for  the  4th 
division  of  his  army  now  at  Bilbao,  which  place  they  have  en- 
tered after  a  three  hours'*  attack.  In  consequence  of  the  want 
of  cavalry,  he  means  to  await  the  attack  of  the  French,  who 
are  strong  in  force,  and  have  reconnoitred  his  posts.  The 
Asturian  army,  10,000  strong,  is  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
St.  Ander,  on  its  march  to  support  that  point. 

General  Broderick  regrets  that  the  leaders  in  the  Councils 
persist  in  employing  General  Cuesta  in  the  command  of  the 
corps,  which  should  communicate  immediately  with  the  right 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  215 

of  Blake's  army,  as  no  cordiality  can  subsist  between  these 
Generals. 

Reynosa,  September  26,  1808. 

Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh's  despatch  of  the  3 1st  of 
August,  and  states  that  the  explanation  contained  in  it  per- 
fectly coincides  with  the  ideas  he  had  formed  of  his  mission, 
except  that  he  had  not  conceived  that  there  would  be  any  ob- 
jection to  his  stating  directly  the  wants  of  the  corps  with  which 
he  may  have  occasion  to  commnnicate.  He  is  fully  aware  of 
the  necessity  of  some  central  point  of  application,  but  is  afraid 
that  some  inconvenience  will  arise  from  the  General  with  whom 
he  may  have  to  communicsfte  being  able  to  procure  supplies  by 
other  means  than  those  of  the  British  General  Officers  com- 
missioned to  attend  them. 

He  has  only  lately  received  any  communication  from  Sir 
John  Doyle,  but  has  sent  him  instructions,  and  expects  to 
meet  him  at  Madrid,  whither  he  is  going  for  a  few  days,  with 
the  view  of  extending  his  means  of  intelligence,  which  he  finds 
extremely  limited  at  the  head- quarters  of  the  Gallician  army. 
He  gives  some  account  of  the  position  of  Blake's  army,  the 
head-quarters  of  which  are  advanced  to  Frias ;  mentions  his 
having  written  to  press  Major-General  Leith  to  forward  the 
10,000  Asturians,  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  Bilbao,  until 
the  arming  of  the  Biscayans  is  completed ;  observes  that  the 
arrival  of  the  liberated  Spanish  troops,  who  are  all  veterans, 
in  the  northern  provinces,  will  constitute  a  very  preponde- 
rating force  ;  but  that  such  numerous  bodies,  assembled  in  a 
quarter  from  which  the  French  have  designedly,  perhaps, 
drawn  much  of  their  subsistence,  will  render  supplies  very 
precarious,  unless  special  means  are  taken  to  secure  them.  He 
has,  therefore,  suggested  to  General  Blake  the  necessity  of 
establishing  magazines  on  the  coast,  and  has  requested  Mr. 
Stuart  to  recommend  a  similar  measure  to  the  high  authorities 
at  Madrid.  He  points  out  Bilbao  as  the  most  convenient  port 
for  communication  in  future. 


216  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Corunna,  October  29,  1808. 

He  did  not  receive  Lord  Castlereagh's  instructions  to  pre- 
pare for  Sir  David  Baird's  army,  until  after  it  had  arrived  at 
Corunna ;  but  states  that  Captain  Kennedy,  to  whose  reports 
he  refers,  had  taken  every  previous  step  for  this  purpose,  which 
the  shortness  of  the  passage  of  the  troops  would  allow.  He 
observes  that  the  embarrassments  which  at  first  impeded  their 
disembarkation  have  subsided,  and  that  the  Junta  shows  the 
greatest  disposition  to  provide  for  their  accommodation  on  their 
route,  and  that  all  classes  of  individuals  expressed  their  joy  on 
their  arrival. 

Having  determined  on  hiring,  as  the  most  efficient  as  well 
as  economical  mode  of  providing  mules  for  the  army,  he  has 
suggested  the  following  terms  to  the  different  officers  employed, 
viz.,  16  to  18  reals  per  day  for  mules  of  burden  in  general,  20 
for  those  carrying  ammunition,  and  24  for  draught  mules,  at 
the  rate  of  20  to  the  dollar.  The  purchase  of  horses  and  of  a 
small  proportion  of  mules  will  come  in  aid  as  a  secondary 
means  of  supply. 

General  Broderick  states  that  the  hurry  with  which  he  was 
obliged  to  pass  through  the  country,  to  join  the  army  of  Gal- 
licia,  prevented  him  from  furnishing  any  information  respecting 
its  nature  and  resources. 

Corunna,  November  4,  1808. 

Forwards  a  despatch  from  Lieut.-Colonel  Doyle,  and  gives 
some  account  of  an  action  between  Blake's  army  and  the  ad- 
vanced guard  of  the  French,  near  Zornosa,  in  which  the  latter 
were  driven  back  with  some  loss.  There  is  a  jjood  deal  of 
desertion  in  Blake''s  army,  from  which  the  young  recruits  are 
returning  home,  discouraged  by  the  hardships  of  the  campaign. 
The  French,  moreover,  have  so  completely  exhausted  Bilbao 
and  the  neighbourhood  by  their  exactions,  that  the  Spanish  troops 
begin  to  feel  a  want  of  provisions,  and  Admiral  de  Courcy  has 
taken  measures  for  forwarding  to  that  port  a  portion  of  those 
destined  for  the  use  of  the  army  of  the  Marquess  Romana. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  217 

States  that  Sir  D.  Baird  has  directed  him  to  remain  at 
Corunna,  to  superintend  the  disembarking  of  troops  from  Eng- 
land, to  forward  stores,  and  to  communicate  with  the  Com- 
mander of  the  forces  ;  but  trusts  he  shall  be  allowed  to  resume 
his  former  station,  as  soon  as  the  cavalry  have  been  forwarded 
towards  the  frontier.  Captain  Kennedy  has  been  appointed 
to  act  under  him  in  the  same  service  at  Corunna,  as  Assistant 
Deputy  Quartermaster-General. 

Corunna,  November  15,  1808. 
Eeports  state  that  the  French  have  advanced  beyond  Burgos, 
and  have  cut  to  pieces  a  corps  of  4,000  Spaniards.  The  whole 
of  Sir  D.  Baird's  army  have  left  Corunna,  except  a  part  of 
the  10th  Light  Dragoons.  Sir  John  Moore  was  at  Ciudad 
Rodrigo  on  the  12th,  setting  out  for  Salamanca. 

Corunna,  November  22,  1808. 
He  gives  some  account  of  several  actions  between  Blake^s 
army  and  the  French  on  the  81st  of  October,  and  on  the  5th, 
8th,  10th,  and  11th  of  November;  when,  after  various  success 
and  considerable  loss  on  both  sides,  the  former  was  obliged  to 
retreat  with  not  more  than  7  or  8,000  men.  The  Marquess  of 
Romana  was  at  Santander,  and  expected  to  collect  about  35,000 
men  from  the  remains  of  Blake's  army,  the  militia  of  the  pro- 
vince, the  Asturian  reserve,  and  his  own  dismounted  cavalry. 

Corunna,  December  2,  1808. 
Encloses  three  letters  from  Captain  Carroll,  containing  de- 
tailed accounts  of  the  above  actions.  States  that,  in  conse- 
quence of  instructions  which  he  has  received,  preparations  are 
making  for  the  re-embarkation  of  Sir  D.  Baird'^s  army,  which, 
he  supposes,  has  commenced  its  retreat :  140  sail  of  transports 
and  store-ships  have  sailed  for  Vigo,  and  32  remain  at  Co- 
runna. The  greatest  part  of  the  heavy  baggage  is  on  board, 
and  the  stores  are  embarking.  Sir  John  Moore  was  at  Sala- 
manca on  the  28th  of  November. 


218  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Corunna,  December  4,  1808. 
He  is  apprehensive  that  there  will  be  a  deficiency  of  horse 
transports  at  Vigo,  and  recommends  the  sending  out  some  ships 
of  this  description  to  that  port. 

Corunna,  December  9,  1808. 

Reports  the  arrival  of  the  Lavinia  frigate  with  1,500,000 
dollars,  of  which  700,000  have  been  left  at  Corunna  for  the 
use  of  Sir  D.  Baird's  army,  and  for  the  chance  of  being  able  to 
forward  a  proportion  of  them  by  land  to  Sir  John  Moore. 
The  Lavinia  will,  if  possible,  land  part  of  the  remainder  at 
Oporto,  and  proceed  with  the  surplus  to  Lisbon. 

General  Broderick  suggests  that  a  further  supply  may  pro- 
bably soon  be  wanted,  as  there  is  a  claim  on  Sir  D.  Baird  from 
the  Spanish  Government  for  the  reimbursement  of  upwards  of 
^100,000.  He  mentions  his  having  apprized  Lieut.-Colonel 
Gordon  that  Sir  J.  Moore^s  army  will  probably  want  shoes  and 
blankets. 

Corunna,  December  13,  1808. 
Transmits  a  letter  in  the  Spanish  language,  which  he  has 
received  from  Don  Alv*  Flores,  Procurador-General  of  the 
Asturias,  in  which  it  is  stated  that  the  French  cannot  pene- 
trate and  maintain  themselves  in  that  province  ;  that  they 
have  6,000  men  opposed  to  them  in  the  passes ;  and  that,  if 
they  should  enter  the  province,  the  people  will  attack  them 
en  masse^  to  the  number  of  120,000  ;  also,  that  the  Junta  are 
full  of  confidence.  Adverts  to  the  suo^^estion  contained  in  the 
preceding  letter,  relative  to  a  further  supply  of  money  ;  and  ob- 
serves that,  under  present  circumstances.  Sir  John  Moore  will 
probably  be  obliged  to  draw  his  supplies  from  Corunna,  from 
whence  the  greater  part  of  the  specie  has  been  sent  to  Lisbon. 
^305,000  have  been  sent  to  the  Paymaster-General,  and 
;$92,000  have  been  repaid  to  the  Junta  of  Gallicia  by  order  of 
Sir  David  Baird ;  so  that  there  remain  less  than  ^$(300,000  on 
board  the  Tonnaut. 


1808.]  LOED  CASTLEREAGH.  219 

Corunna,  December  17,  1808. 

Has  just  received  an  express,  desiring  him  to  forward  all  the 
money  remaining  at  Corunna  to  Villa  Franca  ;  states  that  it 
is  impossible  to  comply  literally  with  this  request,  without 
protesting  bills  to  a  large  amount,  which  come  in  daily  from 
various  quarters,  in  advance  :  after  reserving,  however,  a  mo- 
derate sam  for  this  purpose,  and  for  the  eventual  arrival  of 
troops  from  England,  he  shall  forward  ^200,000,  when  the 
whole  of  the  specie  will  have  been  distributed. 

General  Oraufurd's  brigade  and  the  Guards  have  arrived  at 
Benevente,  and  Sir  J.  Moore  at  Valladolid. 

Corunna,  December  31,  1808. 

He  has  received  a  letter  from  Sir  J.  Moore,  referrino*  to  an 
application  made  to  Lord  Castlereagh  for  light  transports  to 
be  sent  to  Vigo,  and  observes  that  the  light  horse  transports 
which  came  out  under  convoy  of  the  Venus  to  Vigo,  to  the 
number  of  27,  have  been  sent  back  ;  but  that  there  are  10  sail 
of  the  line  at  Vigo,  which  will  afford  considerable  additional 
accommodation  to  the  infantry. 

The  want  of  specie  is  likely  to  be  felt  very  sensibly  at  Co- 
runna, and  it  is  doubtful  how  far  the  money  intended  to  be 
landed  at  Oporto  can  be  conveyed  in  time  to  the  present  posi- 
tion of  the  army.  Admiral  De  Courcy  has  sent  an  order  for 
bringing  the  o^  100, 000  sterling,  whicli  came  out  under  convoy 
of  the  Venus,  to  Corunna,  provided  it  appears  to  be  destined 
for  the  army  in  Spain  :  but  General  Broderick  fears  the  order 
will  arrive  too  late,  and,  therefore,  directed  bills  to  be  drawn 
on  the  Paymaster- General  for  as  much  money  as  could  be 
raised  at  or  below  5s.  per  dollar,  from  which  he  has  not  been 
able  to  procure  much  more  than  ^^4,000.  He  had  hoped  for 
authority  to  dispose  of  part  of  the  sum  consigned  to  Mr.  Frere ; 
but  letters  have  arrived  from  liis  Excellency,  directing  it  to  be 
delivered  over  to  the  use  of  the  army  under  the  Marquess 
Romana. 


220  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

NO. IX. 
PRECIS  OF  LETTERS  FROM  MAJOR-GENERAL  LEITH, 

RELATING  TO  SPANISH  AFFAIRS. 

Gihon,  August  31,  1808. 

States  that  he  arrived  on  the  23r(l  at  Santander,  where  he 
found  Major  Roche,  who  had  arrived  at  the  same  time. 
Regrets  that  an  earlier  supply  of  arms,  money,  &c.,  had  not 
been  given  to  the  Biscayans,  who  seem  well  disposed  to  throw 
off  the  French  yoke  ;  to  which,  indeed,  ^vith  very  slender 
means,  they  have  shown  some  resistance  at  Bilbao.  At  that 
town  (which  is  open  and  unfortified)  they  lost  from  5  to  700, 
and  the  French  300.  The  importance  of  arming  the  Asturias, 
Las  Montafias  de  Santander,  Biscay,  and  Guipuscoa,  is  very 
great,  though  he  thinks  that,  in  the  two  latter,  which  are  oc- 
cupied by  the  enemy,  nothing  can  be  done  at  present.  He  has 
expressed  to  the  Deputies  of  those  two  provinces  the  wishes  of 
Great  Britain  to  assist  them ;  but  has  recommended  them  to 
act  with  great  circumspection,  so  as  not  to  bring  down  the 
French  unavailingly  on  their  heads.  He  furnishes  them  with 
vessels  for  their  return,  and  passports  against  British  cruisers. 

The  enemy  left  but  1,000  men  in  Bilbao,  after  the  attack, 
in  consequence,  probably,  of  Palafox's  success  at  Saragossa,  (of 
which  he  encloses  an  account  in  an  Extraordinary  Gazette)  or 
the  re-occupation  of  Burgos  on  the  21st ;  but  it  appears  that 
some  part  of  the  corps  has  returned  to  Bilbao,  where,  on  the 
26th,  they  were  reported  to  have  between  3  and  4,000  men. 

With  respect  to  the  province  of  Las  Montanas  de  Santander, 
he  has  learned  from  the  Bishop  that  five  millions  of  reals 
would  be  necessary  to  be  advanced  to  it ;  that  there  was  no 
immediate  want  of  arms  or  ammunition,  but  money  was  indis- 
pensable. This  demand  appearing  to  General  Leitli  large  and 
unnecessary,  he  wrote  to  the  Bishop,  requesting  to  be  informed 
of  the  nature  of  the  proposed  expenditure,  (of  which  letter,  as 
well  as  of  the  Bishop''s  answer,  he  encloses  a  copy)  and  subse- 
quently agreed  to  pay  down  25,000  liard  dollars  only,  stipu- 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  221 

lating,  at  the  same  time,  for  the  progress  of  the  armament, 
and  for  the  immediate  circulation  of  a  proclamation,  which  he 
encloses.  He  observes  that,  on  his  landing,  he  found  the  state 
of  the  public  mind  very  lukewarm  ;  the  military  force  not 
exceeding  700  men,  badly  appointed;  reports  continually 
arriving  of  the  intended  approach  of  the  enemy ;  and  tlie 
Government  principally  in  the  hands  of  the  Bishop,  an  active 
and  apparently  firm  man,  but  without  method,  and  sur- 
rounded by  ecclesiastics.  The  frontiers,  hitherto  protected  by 
6,000  Asturians,  under  General  Ballasteros  at  Reynosa,  were 
threatened  to  be  exposed  by  the  return  of  those  troops  to  their 
own  province — 2,000  had  actually  withdrawn.  He  could  not 
obtain  any  information  at  Santander,  of  the  state,  strength, 
and  position  of  the  enemy ;  but,  having  despatched  his  aid-de- 
camp. Captain  Hay,  to  General  Ballasteros,  he  has  received 
from  the  latter  a  report,  (which  he  encloses)  stating  that  the 
enemy,  30  or  40,000  in  number,  occupy  all  the  country  be- 
tween Itaxo  and  Bilbao,  laying  waste  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
Spanish  advanced  posts ;  also  describing  the  positions  occupied 
by  General  Ballasteros^  troops.  He  encloses  also  a  sketch  of 
the  roads  from  Santander  to  Reynosa. 

Having  employed  Captain  Birch  of  the  Engineers  to  exa- 
mine the  port  of  Santander,  with  a  view  to  the  operations  of  a 
British  force,  he  encloses  his  instructions  and  Captain  Birches 
report,  which  gives  an  unfavourable  opinion  of  it,  and  repre- 
sents the  batteries  to  be  in  a  very  bad  state.  There  is  another 
post  twenty  miles  to  the  eastward,  called  Santona,  which  is 
reckoned  the  best  in  North  Spain ;  and,  considering  it  of  great 
importance,  he  has  sent  Captain  Birch  thither. 

Being  informed  by  Colonel  Doyle  that  15,000  British  troops 
were  to  land  at  Gihon,  he  left  Santander  (where  every  thing 
was  in  train  of  preparation)  on  the  27th,  and  arrived  on  the 
SOth  at  Gihon.  The  new  modelling  of  the  Junta  at  the  latter 
place  will  prevent  him,  for  a  few  days,  from  setting  out  for 
Oviedo ;  but  he  has,  in  the  mean  time,  written  to  the  Com- 


222  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

mander- in-Chief,  recommending  that  Ballasteros  should  be 
reinforced.  He  learns  that  12,000  Gallicians  and  Asturians 
are  advancing  upon  Burgos,  and  that  Palafox  will  attack  the 
enemy  on  the  side  of  Navarre  from  Arragon. 

Suggests  the  expediency  of  requiring  detailed  information 
relating  to  the  future  expenditure  of  money  advanced  to  the 
Governments,  and  that  clothing,  shoes,  hats,  &c.,  whenever 
required  by  them,  should  be  sent  from  Britain. 

Oviedo,  September  8,  1808. 

He  arrived  at  Oviedo  on  the  31st,  and  was  received  with  the 
greatest  respect.  Nothing  can  exceed  the  gratitude  of  the 
province  towards  the  British. 

Mentions  that  Mr.  Hunter  had  stated  that  he  also  was 
appointed  to  communicate  with  the  Junta  equally,  in  a  civil 
capacity ;  but  observes  that  no  such  instructions  appear  to 
have  been  received  by  that  gentleman  from  Mr.  Canning;  and 
represents  that  much  inconvenience  would  result  from  a  joint 
mission,  though  he  is  desirous  of  taking  every  opportunity  of 
consulting  with  Mr.  Hunter,  of  whom  he  speaks  in  high  terms. 

In  reply  to  a  letter  which  he  addressed  to  the  President  of 
the  Asturian  Junta,  he  has  received  a  letter,  which  he  encloses, 
informing  him  that  the  junction  of  the  provinces  of  Spain  will 
take  place  on  the  10th  of  September,  at  Ciudad  Real ;  de- 
scribing also  the  internal  government  of  Asturias  as  divided 
into  58  districts,  and  stating  that  it  has  now  under  arms 
16,000  men,  (all  recruits,  except  700)  and  to  be  increased  to 
24,000,  when  means  arrive  from  England  for  supplying  their 
wants.  Of  this  force,  it  has  been  agreed  that  10,000  are  to 
serve  out  of  the  principality ;  the  rest  are  thought  necessary 
to  preserve  its  internal  tranquillity.  The  President  concludes 
by  representing  the  great  urgency  of  a  supply  of  clothing, 
tents,  and  money. 

General  Leith  has  not  been  able  to  induce  the  Government 
to  reinforce  the  troops  at  Reynosa,  which  would  defeat  another 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  223 

operation,  which  they  consider  more  important,  that  of  sup- 
porting with  10,000  Asturians  the  advance  of  the  GalHcian 
army  under  Blake  towards  Burgos  ;  for  which  purpose  the 
Asturians  are  to  assemble  at  Llanes,  which  General  Leith  does 
not  think  an  advantageous  position,  but  states  that  it  is  too 
late  to  effect  any  alteration. 

The  Bishop  of  Santander  has  pressed  him  for  a  further 
supply  of  money,  but  without  detailing  the  nature  of  the  ex- 
penditure; and  he  has  been  informed  privately  that  the  Bishop 
has  been  paying  off  the  debts  of  the  province,  incurred  by  a 
former  feeble  attempt  at  arming.  He  will  endeavour,  without 
giving  offence,  to  prevent 'such  proceedings  in  future,  and  has 
sent  the  Junta  25,000  hard  dollars.  He  encloses  his  corre- 
spondence with  the  Bishop  on  the  subject ;  also  a  letter  from 
Mr.  Dickenson,  relative  to  the  furnishing  of  provisions  for  the 
troops  at  Santander,  on  which  General  Leith  does  not  think 
any  thing  necessary  to  be  done  at  present. 

He  has  written  to  the  President  of  the  Junta  of  Leon  and 
Castillo,  to  whom  250,000  hard  dollars  were  transmitted  by 
Mr.  Hunter ;  but  no  account  has  been  received  of  the  expen- 
diture, or  of  their  army,  if  they  have  any. 

He  strongly  represents  General  Blake's  want  of  cavalry, 
from  which  he  has  already  suffered  greatly,  having  in  vain 
solicited  those  with  Cuesta's  army,  amounting  to  about  1,500. 
He  therefore  recommends  that  a  force  of  British  cavalry 
should  be  sent  to  Ooruna  without  delay.  He  will  be  at  Llanes 
when  the  Asturians  assemble,  and  will  try  to  spur  them  to 
exertion.  Two  of  the  Junta  have  been  sent  as  deputies  to 
Ciudad  Real  from  Asturias :  those  from  Leon  and  Gallicia 
have  also  set  out ;  and  he  has  urged  the  Junta  of  Cantabria 
to  send  theirs  without  delay. 

He  encloses  a  secret  communication  from  the  Bishop  of  San- 
tander, relative  to  the  prospect  of  the  escape  of  Ferdinand  VII. ; 
but  General  Leith  thinks  that,  if  this  were  practicable,  the 
indiscretion  of  some  persons  at  Santander  has  already  put  the 


224  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [180S. 

enemy  on  his  guard.  He  has,  however,  requested  assistance 
for  this  purpose  from  the  squadron,  and  the  Iris  frigate  has 
accordingly  sailed  from  Gihon  for  the  coast  of  France. 

In  a  PS.,  dated  September  8th,  General  Leith  states  the 
arrival  of  the  news  of  the  surrender  of  the  French  in  Portugal ; 
and  that  he  learns  from  Captain  Carroll  that  the  Gallician  army 
is  in  motion,  and  will  be  at  Reynosa  on  the  7th  or  8th.  He 
adds  the  report,  which  he  considers  doubtful,  of  a  victory  by 
Palafox  near  Calahorra,  and  mentions  that  the  enemy  have 
increased  the  garrison  of  San  Sebastian  to  3,000  men  who  are 
provisioned  for  three  months. 

Gihon,  September  13,  1808. 

Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh's  despatch  of  the  23rd  of 
August,  with  its  enclosures,  by  Captains  Lefebre  and  Jones, 
and  of  the  31st,  by  Captain  Pasley.  Encloses  a  letter  fi-om 
Major  Roche  at  Leon,  by  which  it  appears  that  a  new  Junta 
had  been  formed  there,  in  consequence  of  the  extreme  unpo- 
pularity of  the  late  President  Valdez ;  that  this  new  Junta 
had  annulled  the  acts  of  the  former;  that,  part  of  the  250,000 
dollars  advanced  by  the  British  Government  being  yet  unap- 
propriated, the  new  Junta  had  desired  Major  Roche's  sanction 
to  their  laying  hands  upon  it,  which  measure  he  declined  giving 
any  opinion  upon,  not  wishing  to  interfere  between  the  two 
parties;  but  he  recommends  that  no  further  advance  should  be 
made  to  them  ;  that  there  are  about  9,000  men  in  arms  within 
the  province,  3,000  of  whom  were  drilling  iat  the  capital,  and 
the  remainder  divided  between  the  armies  of  Blake  and  Cuesta; 
that  Blake''s  army,  33,000  strong,  chiefly  of  what  they  call 
troops  of  the  line,  marched  on  the  2nd  towards  Burgos,  which 
was  evacuated  by  the  enemy  on  the  2nd  or  3rd  of  September ; 
that  15,000  men,  under  Cuesta,  are  at  Valladolid  ;  and  that  an 
extensive  combined  operation  is  forming  at  Madrid  by  a  council 
of  war,  at  which  Castanos,  Cuesta,  and  Palafox,  are  assisting. 

General  Leith  has  endeavoured,  without  effect,  to  establish 
a  correspondence  with  General  Palafox.     He  lias  succeeded  in 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  225 

putting  the  Asturian  head-quarters  in  motion.  The  Captain- 
General  and  Staff  have  set  out  for  Llanes. 

He  transmits  a  return  of  the  army  of  Asturias,  which 
amounts  to  16,802  men.  He  has  no  doubt  that,  if  necessary, 
and  if  they  could  be  paid,  it  might  be  increased  to  35,000. 
He  transmits  also  answers  to  the  Memorandum  of  Instructions 
entrusted  to  him  by  Lord  Castlereagh,  thirty-one  in  number. 

He  encloses  Captain  Birch"'s  report  concerning  the  port  of 
Santona,  with  a  plan,  by  which  it  appears  that  the  peninsula 
of  Santona  is  a  very  strong  position,  and,  with  some  labour, 
might  be  made  capable  of  defence  by  a  very  few  men ;  and 
that  the  harbour  is  very  good,  even  for  line-of-battle  ships  ; 
but  the  advantages  and  resources  afforded  by  the  peninsula  are 
not  to  be  compared  with  those  of  Santandero,  and  the  anchor- 
age is  not  entirely  protected. 

He  also  transmits  letters  from  Captains  Birch  and  Carroll  at 
Reynosa.  The  latter  states  the  present  strength  of  Blake's 
army  at  30,000  infantry,  100  dragoons,  36  pieces  of  artil- 
lery ;  but  three-fourths  of  this  army  are  new  raised  pea- 
sants. The  army  has  hitherto  been  inactive  for  want  of 
cavalry,  which  Cuesta,  from  private  pique  towards  Blake,  has 
refused  to  furnish.  This  want  prevented  Blake  from  attacking 
Bessi^res  in  his  retreat  from  Astorga  and  Leon  to  Burgos. 
Captain  Carroll  adds,  that  Blake''s  object  is  to  advance  towards 
Miranda,  there  to  occupy  a  favourable  position,  and  thus  cut 
off  communication  with  France,  cover  Biscay  and  Guipuscoa, 
facilitate  the  arming  of  the  peasants,  and,  when  joined  by 
10,000  Asturians,  (as  promised)  to  distract  with  a  formidable 
force  the  attention  of  the  enemy,  and  co-operate  with  Castanos' 
army  in  offensive  operations.  The  wants  of  this  army  are 
stated  to  be  many,  and  there  is  a  scarcity  of  bread ;  but,  as 
corn  is  abundant,  this  will  soon  be  remedied.  Captain  Carroll 
informs  General  Leith  that  Brigadier- General  Doyle  is  at 
Madrid,  with  the  Duke  of  Infantado,  making  arrangements 
for  forming  a  general  council      The  French  army  is  believed 

VOL.  VII.  Q 


226  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

to  be  40,000  strong,  a  reinforcement  of  8,000  having  arrived 
from  France.    Marshal  Ney  has  superseded  Bessi^res. 

General  Leith  also  encloses  a  sketch  from  the  map,  showing 
the  positions  of  the  armies,  some  extracts  of  letters  received 
from  spies,  and  an  extract  from  a  Madrid  letter  of  the  7th, 
noticing  the  movement  of  the  Andalusian  army  to  support 
Palafox.  Castellar^s  army,  late  Cuesta''s,  is  said  to  be  in 
motion  towards  Valladolid.  He  has  no  doubt  that  Asturias 
would  be  capable  of  defending  itself,  if  its  army  and  population 
were  armed  and  organized  ;  but  defers  sending  regular  answers 
to  Lord  Castlereagh''s  despatch  of  the  26th  on  this  subject,  till 
he  can  collect  more  perfect  information.  On  one  point,  how- 
ever, he  speaks  with  decision :  that  the  port  of  Gihon  is  one 
of  the  worst  possible,  and,  after  the  present  season,  would 
expose  a  fleet  of  transports  to  the  greatest  danger. 

On  the  subject  of  Lord  Oastlereagh's  secret  despatch  of  the 
27th,  he  refers  to  the  copy  of  a  letter  which  he  has  written  to  Sir 
Hew  Dalrymple,  or  officer  commanding  in  Portugal,  describing 
the  state  of  the  armies,  and  urging  him  to  despatch  all  his  dis- 
posable force  of  cavalry,  horse  or  car  artillery,  and  light  infantry, 
to  move  on  Palencia,  where  they  will  receive  such  intelligence 
as  will  enable  them  to  give  the  most  effective  co-operation. 

In  Biscay  and  Guipuscoa  there  is  again  a  prospect  of  resist- 
ance, and  he  encloses  applications  for  assistance  from  those 
provinces,  which  have  induced  him  to  embark  for  Santander, 
with  7,500  stand  of  arms,  borrowed  from  the  Junta  of  Oviedo, 
and  other  stores.  He  has  also  written  to  Admiral  de  Courcy, 
General  Broderick,  and  Mr.  Stuart,  requesting  25,000  stand 
of  arms,  with  stores,  to  be  sent  off"  Santander  with  all  speed. 

From  Castro,  he  learns  that  the  French  intend  to  maintain 
and  strengthen  themselves  from  the  Ebro  to  that  place,  and 
to  post  troops  along  the  whole  coast  of  Biscay ;  but  General 
Leith  hopes  they  will  not  reach  Santon?,,  relative  to  which  post 
he  encloses  a  memorandum  from  Captain  Digby,  of  H.M.S. 
Cossack,  representinfi:  it  in  favourable  terms,  and  as  a  much 


I 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  227 

better  port,  both  for  men-of-war  and  transports,  than  San- 
tander,  being  easier  of  access,  having  more  water  and  better 
anchorage.  General  Leith  recommends  the  sending  of  the 
Spanish  troops  from  the  North,  to  rendezvous  off  Santander, 
where  their  landing,  should  no  previous  disaster  occur  to  the 
province,  would  be  of  infinite  importance,  and  where  the  ac- 
commodations are  very  good,  and  provisions  easily  obtained. 

He  recommends  that  shoes,  stockings,  hats,  surgical  instru- 
ments, drums,  and  camp  equipage,  should  be  sent  from  England 
instead  of  money ;  and  represents  that  the  governments  of 
those  provinces  are  most  anxious  for  British  troops. 

Gihon,  September  16,  1808. 

Encloses  letters  from  General  Broderick,  Captain  Birch,  and 
Captain  Doyle.  The  first,  from  Reynosa,  requests  the  supply 
of  one  million  of  reals  to  General  Blake,  to  enable  him  to 
undertake  the  liberation  and  organization  of  Biscay  and  Gui- 
puscoa.  The  second  adds,  that  15,000  stand  of  arms  are  also 
wanted  for  this  service;  and  Captain  Doyle  details  the  intended 
movements  of  the  Asturian  army,  and  the  measures  necessary 
to  be  pursued,  in  case  a  British  force  should  arrive,  who  are 
recommended  to  disembark  at  Guotaria.  Under  these  circum- 
stances. General  Leith  represents  the  support  of  the  Spanish 
army  from  the  North,  or  a  British  corps,  to  be  most  material. 
Santander  affords  a  good  point  of  debarkation  ;  and  he  has 
already  noticed  the  merits  of  Santona. 

He  encloses  also  extracts  of  letters  from  Mr.  Stuart,  at  Val- 
ladolid,  and  other  persons,  by  which  it  appears  that  Cuesta  is 
moving  to  Segovia ;  that  Castafios  sends  his  cavalry  to  Burgos, 
and  the  rest  of  his  army  to  Arragon  ;  that  recruits  are  levying 
throughout  the  country,  and  the  French  retreating ;  that  the 
enemy^s  force  is  believed  to  amount  to  about  33,000  infantry, 
and  6,000  cavalry ;  and  that  20,000  men  in  the  province  of 
Santander  can  be  supplied  with  provisions.  He  has  proposed 
to  Mr.  Hunter  to  send  to  Blake  100,000  of  the  hard  dollars 

q2 


228  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

intended  for  Asturias,  and  has  shipped  for  Santander  all  the 
arms  and  stores  he  conld  procure.  Suggests  the  expediency  of 
the  packets  going  to  Santander ;  the  communication  from  the 
line  of  operations  by  Gihon  being  circuitous.  Requests  afield 
telegraph  for  the  coast,  and  shoes  and  clothing  for  the  Asturian 
and  Cantabrian  armies. 

Head- Quarters,  Gallician  Army,  Quincoas,  October  1,  1808. 

The  wind  being  unfavourable,  he  set  out  for  Santander  by 
land,  having  previously  instructed  Major  Roche  and  other 
officers  to  examine  by  different  routes  the  roads  and  communi- 
cations in  Asturias  and  Gallicia.  On  arriving  at  Santander, 
he  learned  that,  on  the  20th  of  September,  the  4th  division  of 
the  Gallician  army,  under  the  Marquess  Portago,  (near  5,000 
infantry,  four  pieces  of  artillery)  took  possession  of  Bilbao, 
where  the  enemy  amounted  to  1,500  men;  there  was  little 
firincr,  and  no  material  loss. 

General  Leith,  on  this,  proceeded  to  Bilbao,  where,  in  con- 
junction with  the  Spanish  General,  he  proposed  a  secret  meet- 
ing with  the  Lords  of  Biscay ;  but  the  unsettled  state  of  the 
province,  still  menaced  by  the  enemy,  prevented  an  effectual 
arming  of  the  peasantry.  He  sent  out  officers  to  obtain  intel- 
ligence, who  reported  that  the  Spanish  outposts  were  extremely 
well  posted,  and  that,  without  being  fully  apprized  of  his 
approach,  the  enemy  could  not  attack  Bilbao.  Reports,  how- 
ever, having  been  received  that  the  French  were  advancing  in 
force,  General  Leith,  in  conjunction  with  the  Spanish  General, 
(who,  he  complains,  has  treated  him  with  too  little  confidence 
and  respect)  made  dispositions  to  cover  the  town  for  a  time, 
on  the  principal  approaches,  as  well  as  so  untenable  a  position 
against  a  superior  force  might  permit ;  and,  if  the  enemy  should 
prove  as  strong  as  was  reported,  the  reserve  to  cover  the 
retreat  of  the  column  after  dark. 

The  enemy  (who  proved  to  be  from  1 1  to  1 2,000  strong, 
of  which    1,500  were  cavalry)  approached  in  three  columns. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  229 

After  firing  a  few  guns,  the  Spanish  column,  perceiving  the 
enemy's  superiority,  retired  by  Soroza,  and  made  good  their 
retreat.  General  Leith  remained  with  the  column  till  it 
reached  Valmaseda,  from  whence  he  set  off  to  General  Blake's 
head-quarters  at  Quincoas.  He  found  that  Major- General 
Broderick  was  gone  to  Madrid.  Blake  was  very  communicative 
to  General  Leith,  who  received  a  most  favourable  impression 
of  his  abilities,  coolness,  and  intelligence.  Blake  stated  the 
enemy's  forces  (exclusive  of  those  in  Catalonia)  at  from  40  to 
45,000,  of  which  from  5  to  6,000  are  cavalry. 

Portago,  when  attacked  at  Bilbao,  appears  to  have  been 
io^norant  of  the  situations  of  the  other  divisions  of  Blake's 
army,  supposing  them  to  be  at  a  greater  distance  from  him  than 
they  actually  were ;  and  Ney,  by  quitting  his  position  to  cut 
off  the  4th  division,  (in  which  he  miserably  failed)  left  the 
right  and  left  wing  of  the  French  army  disjointed,  and  tlie 
latter  exposed  to  the  combined  attack  of  Palafox,  Castaiios, 
and  Cuesta,  whose  effective  force  amounts  to  43,000  men,  while 
that  under  Moncey  cannot  exceed  17,000.  As  soon  as  Ney's 
movement  was  known,  an  express  was  sent  to  the  Spanish 
armies,  to  press  Moncey,  and  not  to  lose  sight  of  him.  Blake 
keeps  some  battalions  to  figure  on  his  right,  while  he  concen- 
trates himself  behind  the  mountains  of  Castillo  and  Biscay, 
keeping  well  to  his  left,  in  order  to  draw  the  enemy  as  far  from 
a  junction  between  his  right  and  left  as  possible,  to  give 
better  opportunity  for  striking  a  decided  blow  on  his  left. 

Blake  intercepted  Buonaparte's  despatches  from  Paris  to 
King  Joseph,  with  one  from  the  Commandant  at  Bayonne  to 
Jourdan,  stating  that,  from  the  10th  of  October  to  the  10th 
of  November,  from  60  to  66,000  infantry,  and  from  7  to  8,000 
cavalry,  would  enter  Spain  by  the  route  of  Vittoria ;  while, 
from  another  intercepted  despatch,  it  appears  that  St.  Cyr  is 
marching  with  reinforcements  by  the  side  of  Eoussillon  and 
Cataluna. 

The  Spanish  soldiers,  although  without  great  coats,  blankets, 


230  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

brandy,  or  covering  over  their  heads  of  any  sort,  endure  the 
extreme  severity  of  the  winter  without  suffering  much :  they 
live  temperately,  and,  in  marching,  are  very  superior  to  our 
soldiers.  He  urges  the  sending  blankets,  clothing,  tents,  «Sz;c., 
from  England  without  delay,  as  well  as  rum ;  and  he  has 
again  sent  expresses  to  the  oflScer  commanding  at  Lisbon, 
requesting  him  to  send  everything  disposable  from  that  quarter 
with  the  greatest  speed :  400  barrels  of  powder,  aground  when 
Ney  occupied  Bilbao,  have,  by  great  exertions,  been  saved. 
He  wishes  for  two  or  three  armed  luggers,  or  small  vessels,  to 
attend  him  on  the  coast. 

Encloses  the  Madrid  Gazette  Extraordinary,  in  which  the 
General  Government  is  announced.  He  has  prevailed  on  the 
Biscayans  to  send  Deputies,  which  has  also  been  promised  by 
the  Bishop  of  Santander. 

Santander,  October  4,  1808. 

Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh''s  letter  of  the  1 4th  Sep- 
tember. He  has  already  arranged  to  send  certain  quantities  of 
biscuit,  rum,  and  salt  pork,  to  the  Gallician  army.  He  under- 
stands that  the  enemy  has  not  above  12,000  men  in  Bilbao, 
and  that  Ney  is  gone  again  towards  Durango.  The  left  of  the 
Gallician  army  has  its  advanced  posts  at  La  Errera,  a  league  in 
front  of  Valmaseda :  the  main  body  of  the  4th  division  still  at 
Nava,  a  league  behind  Valmaseda. 

Santander,  October  5,  1808. 

He  has  taken  the  necessary  means  to  supply  the  Gallician 
army,  for  the  present,  with  rum,  biscuit,  and  salt  meat.  Sug- 
gests that  no  local  allotment  of  money,  &c.,  should  hencefor- 
ward be  made  in  the  rear ;  as  the  armies  near,  and  on  the  line 
of  operations,  on  whom  the  fate  of  the  campaign  depends,  in- 
dispensably require  supplies.  By  his  own  and  Mr.  Hunter''s 
exertions,  the  wants  of  the  Gallician  army  have  been  in  some 
measure  relieved,  principally  by  advancing  to  them  money  which 
had  been  promised  to  Asturias ;  for  which  step,  under  present 
circumstances,  he  trusts  he  shall  stand  excused. 


1808]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  231 

The  first  division  of  the  Asturian  army  has  arrived  at  Torre 
la  Vega,  four  leagues  from  Santander.  The  whole  column  of 
10,000  is  to  proceed  to  Yillarcayo,  behind  the  Gallician  right, 
where  Greneral  Leith  will  attend  to  their  wants,  being  near  the 
line  of  operations.  The  regiment  of  Laredo  will  take  care  of 
the  country  from  Valmaseda  and  Nava  to  Castro  Urdiales, 
near  which  the  predatory  parties  of  the  enemy  have  pushed, 
and  from  whence  the  powder  landed  near  Bilbao  was  rescued 
with  difficulty. 

He  has  received  despatches  from  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple,  dated 
the  7th  September ;  the  advanced  guard  was  at  Almeida,  and  as 
Sir  Hew  had  not  received  his  letters,  he  is  still  at  a  loss  as  to 
any  aid  from  Portugal  advancing  towards  Palencia.  The  officers 
of  his  staff  show  the  utmost  zeal  and  activity.  The  baggage  of 
Captains  Lefebvre  and  Jones  fell  into  the  enemy^s  hands  at 
Bilbao,  where  there  are  now  supposed  to  be  not  more  than 
1,500  French,  who  cannot  long  subsist  there.  The  retreat 
from  Bilbao  was  very  orderly  and  quiet. 

Having  insisted,  before  he  advanced  another  shilling,  that 
the  Bishop  and  Junta  should  name  Deputies  to  the  General 
Government,  they  have  appointed  M.  Cevallos  the  Minister,  a 
native  of  that  province,  and  the  Marquess  Cillezudos. 

Santander,  October  16,  1808. 
The  army  of  the  Marquess  de  Eomana  is  safely  landed  at 
Santander,  except  the  troops  on  board  of  three  transports,  who 
landed  at  Ribadio,  and  are  marching  through  Asturias.  They 
amount  to  8,671  non-commissioned,  and  rank  and  file,  are  very 
fine  troops,  and  their  arrival  is  of  great  importance.  The 
cavalry  are  unfortunately  without  horses.  He  requests  horses 
and  saddles  for  2,500  men.  He  has  been  able  completely  to 
arm  the  infantry,  and  supply  the  army  with  money,  and  he 
is  expecting  the  arrival  of  orders  for  their  movement  from  the 
Supreme  Junta  at  Madrid.  The  Gallician  army  has  again 
occupied  Bilbao.     No  action  of  moment  has  yet  taken  place 


232  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

between  the  armies,  but  their  position  must  speedily  produce 
something  of  interest. 

Santander,  October  18,  1808. 

Encloses  a  letter  addressed  to  Lord  Castlereagh  by  Captain 
Carroll,  dated  Bilbao,  ISth  October,  stating  that  that  town  was 
re-captured  on  the  preceding  day  by  the  vanguard  and  4th 
division  of  the  army  of  Grallicia.  The  enemy,  who  occupied 
the  town,  (nearly  5,000)  retreated  at  two  in  the  morning  of 
the  12th  towards  Durango,  before  any  part  of  the  troops  could 
come  up  with  them.  Few  of  the  enemy,  if  any,  were  killed  in 
the  pursuit ;  but  a  lieutenant,  sergeant,  and  fourteen  privates 
were  taken — also,  several  stragglers.  The  Spanish  troops  were 
joyfully  received  by  all  ranks  of  people :  there  cannot  now  be 
any  impediment  to  the  immediate  arming  of  the  province. 
The  French  have  been  guilty  of  extreme  cruelty  at  Bilbao : 
two  sick  Spanish  soldiers,  who  had  been  left  there,  were  publicly 
shot,  by  order  of  General  Merlin. 

General  Leith,  on  learning  that  Bilbao  was  re-occupied, 
wrote  to  the  Lords  of  Biscay,  acquainting  them  that  he  was 
proceeding  to  Bilbao,  with  arms,  ammunition,  and  money.  He 
will  expedite  the  march  of  the  Marquess  of  Romana"'s  army, 
and  complete  the  arrangements  for  the  reception  of  a  British 
corps.  He  thinks  that  hiring  mules  of  burden  or  draught  will 
be  the  best  mode  of  fulfilling  Lord  Castlereagh's  instructions 
on  that  subject,  the  purchase  being  very  expensive.  He  has, 
therefore,  made  arrangements  for  procuring  1,000  mules,  at 
from  1 7  to  25  reals  a  day,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  service 
required  of  them. 

He  encloses  a  letter  from  Colonel  Murray,  in  answer  to  his 
letter  from  Oviedo  to  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple.  Colonel  Murray 
states  that  the  great  distance,  the  natural  difficulties  of  the 
intervening  countries,  and  the  advanced  season,  must  oppose 
great  obstacles  to  the  arrival  in  Biscay  of  any  reinforcements 
from  Lisbon  ;  but  every  exertion  will  be  made  to  prepare  the 
army  for  so  long  a  march. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  233 

He  also  transmits  the  copy  of  a  letter  from  Captain  Birch 
at  Yalmaseda  head-quarters,  who  states  that  Cuesta  is  gone  to 
Madrid,  whither  he  had  been  called  by  the  Deputies,  who,  It 
is  said,  are  displeased  with  his  conduct  towards  M.  Baldeis ; 
and  it  is  reported  that  another  commander  will  be  appointed  to 
his  division,  which  has  marched  under  General  Gia  for  Ber- 
langen,  on  its  way  to  the  Ebro.  The  head-quarters  of  the 
Andalusian  and  Valencian  armies  are  at  Soria  and  Taragona : 
that  of  Arragon  had,  on  the  29th  September,  its  advanced 
corps  near  Langueira,  which  is  on  the  river  of  Arragon,  opposite 
to  Pampeluua.  The  Valencian  army  will  be  at  Alfarro,  Corella, 
and  Tudela,  on  the  7th  or  8th ;  and  the  Andalusians  at  the 
same  time  at  Calahorra  and  Lodosa :  the  army  of  Leon  and 
Castille  follows  the  march  of  the  latter,  and  is  to  file  from 
Calahorra  to  Logrono  on  the  11th.  Their  ulterior  movements 
are  not  fixed  on,  for  want  of  a  Commander-in-Chief:  their 
present  positions  appear  to  Captain  Birch  to  be  too  much 
extended.  He  learns  the  force  of  the  armies  to  be — Arragonese, 
22,000;  Valencians,  18,000;  Andalusians,  10  or  12,000,  in- 
cluding 1,000  cavalry;  Castilians,  the  same  number,  with  12 
pieces  of  artillery.  He  learned  at  Burgos  that  the  army  of 
Estremadura  was  on  its  march  to  Madrid.  He  has  just  heard 
that  Castanos  commands  the  Andalusian  and  Castilian  armies. 

General  Leith  again  represents  the  disadvantages  experienced 
by  the  Spanish  armies  for  want  of  cavalry.  He  has  made 
great  exertions  to  collect  for  them  supplies  from  all  parts,  ad- 
verting only  to  their  real  necessities,  and  not  to  the  provinces 
to  which  they  belonged.  Before  he  has  granted  any  succours 
to  the  provinces,  he  has  stipulated  for  their  sending  Deputies 
to  the  General  Junta ;  but  no  provision  has  yet  been  made  by 
the  Central  Assembly  for  the  army  or  provinces,  nor  does  he 
at  present  know  whether  they  have  the  means  :  until  they  have, 
the  absolute  wants  of  the  armies  must  be  supplied  from  the 
British  purse  and  stores  with  economy  and  method. 

He  complains  that   Mr.  Hunter,  without  his  authority,  has 


234  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

offered  to  the  Central  Government  the  stores  which  arrived  in 
the  Fortuna  transport.  He  does  justice  to  Mr.  Hunter's 
character  and  motives,  but  doubts  the  expediency  of  his  acting 
in  a  diplomatic  capacity,  and  represents  that,  in  the  present 
instance,  his  interference  has  kept  back  the  stores  from  the 
army,  by  whom  they  were  much  wanted.  He  urges  the  expe- 
diency of  his  being  immediately  furnished  with  means  to  supply 
the  smaller  but  scarcely  less  urgent  wants  of  the  provinces, 
especially  Biscay.  If  the  difficulty  of  finding  Spanish  specie 
be  great,  he  has  no  doubt  that  letters  of  credit  on  Spain  could 
be  obtained,  or  money  might  be  obtained  there  by  bills  on  the 
Treasury.  He  again  notices  the  want  of  small  vessels  for  co- 
operation and  despatch. 

Major  Roche,  whom  he  had  sent  to  ascertain  the  routes  from 
Leon  to  Coruna,  and  thence  back  by  Oviedo,  has  been  diverted 
from  this  object  by  a  journey  to  Oviedo,  whence  he  has  been 
despatched  by  Lord  W.  Bentinck,  to  conduct  the  British  army 
on  its  route  from  Portugal. 

Santander,  October  19,  1808. 

He  recommends  the  sending  of  supplies  in  kind  as  far  as 
possible,  not  only  because  the  articles  are  extremely  bad  in 
Spain,  but  to  encourage  our  own  exports,  and  prevent  a  drain 
of  specie.  Suggests  that  large  supplies  of  oak  timber  might  be 
had  from  Asturias,  Santander,  and  Biscay,  for  the  supply  of 
Great  Britain.  He  has  also  communicated  on  this  subject 
with  the  Procurador-General  of  Asturias,  who  has  undertaken 
to  export  any  quantity  required.  At  the  port  of  Riba  de  Sella, 
there  is  enough  for  three  ships  of  the  line,  which  he  could  send 
to  England,  if  desired.  He  has  been  applied  to  for  sending 
back  the  transports  returning  to  England,  freighted  with 
Spanish  wool.  Suggests  that  a  person  might  be  confidentially 
sent  to  survey  the  ship-timber. 

Santander,  October  31,  1808. 

He  has  been  occupied  since  the  18th,  by  making  arrange- 
ments for  Sir  John  Moore's  army,  furnishing  supplies  for  Blake 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  235 

and  the  province  of  Biscay,  and  by  the  daily  expectation  of  the 
arrival  of  the  Marquess  of  Romana. 

Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh^s  despatches,  two  of  the 
25th  and  two  of  the  26th  September,  with  the  copy  of  one  to 
Major-General  Broderick,  all  received  through  Sir  David  Baird. 
He  has  been  much  embarrassed  by  the  non-arrival  of  the 
Marquess  of  Romana,  who,  as  he  has  been  given  to  understand, 
will  be  appointed  Commander-in-Chief.  Not  the  slightest  notice 
was  taken  by  the  Government  of  the  arrival  of  Romana^s 
army,  no  supplies  sent,  nor  any  instructions.  General  Leith 
supplied  their  wants,  keeping  them  in  good  humour  with  their 
own  Government ;  and  the  army,  though  without  any  regular 
authority,  has  been  placed  at  Blake^s  disposal. 

He  learns  from  Sir  John  Moore  that  he  is  making  every 
exertion  to  move  20,000  men  forward  to  the  north  of  Spain. 
The  convoy  of  transports  has  just  sailed  from  Santander,  for 
Coruna;  200  mules  had  been  collected,  and  ordered  from 
Santander,  for  Sir  D.  Baird's  army:  he  has  also  taken 
measures  in  Asturias.  M.  Assiotti  is  too  ill  for  the  fatigues 
of  service. 

He  encloses  a  letter  from  Captain  Lefebvre,  dated  Bilbao, 
25th  October,  stating  that  the  Lords  of  Biscay  have  applied 
for  assistance,  urging  their  want  of  provisions,  both  for  the 
army  and  the  people ;  that  the  province  is  making  great  exer- 
tions for  supplying  Blake^s  forces  :  that  a  General  Junta  is  to 
assemble  on  the  28th,  to  select  Deputies  for  the  Central 
Government,  and  to  make  arrangements  for  arming  the  pro- 
vince; when  money  will  be  required,  as  well  as  arms  and 
ammunition. 

Another  letter  from  Captain  Lefebvre,  also  enclosed,  dated 
Bilbao,  26th  October,  states  that  he  had  been  at  Blake's  head- 
quarters ;  that  the  General  expected  a  happy  result  from  the 
meeting  of  the  Junta  on  the  28th ;  that  he  pressed  for  supplies, 
and  approved  of  leaving  the  arms  for  the  present  at  Castro ; 
that  the  Asturians  are  on  Blake's  right,  and  in  movement,  sup- 


236  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

posed  to  be  covering  Bilbao ;  that  Blake  considers  the  troops 
at  Sautander,  from  the  North,  were  not  a  part  of  his  army, 
and  would  therefore  decline  giving  orders  to  them,  conceiving 
the  Bishop,  the  Count  de  San  Roman,  and  General  Leith, 
responsible  for  them. 

General  Leith  also  encloses  a  bulletin,  dated  Bilbao,  the 
2oth  of  October,  by  which  it  appears  that  skirmishes  had  taken 
place  at  Zornosa,  but  nothing  decisive.  General  Leith  adds 
that,  on  the  26th,  the  French  retreated  from  Zornosa,  without 
making  opposition  to  Blake,  who  established  his  head-quarters 
there,  while  the  enemy  concentrated  himself  towards  Durango. 
Reinforcements  have  since  arrived  under  Marshal  Lefebvre,  to 
the  amount  of  8  or  10,000. 

Santander,  November  7,  1808. 

Encloses  a  letter  from  Captain  Carroll,  dated  Valmaseda, 
2nd  November,  describing  an  attack  made  on  the  31st  October 
by  the  enemy,  who  had  received  very  considerable  reinforce- 
ments, and,  by  means  of  their  superior  numbers,  forced  the 
Gallicians  to  retreat,  which  they  did  with  great  regularity. 
Captain  Carroll  speaks  in  high  terms  of  the  conduct  of  the 
Spaniards,  whose  numbers  did  not  exceed  17,000,  while  he 
estimated  those  of  the  enemy  at  28,000.  The  retreating  army 
arrived  at  Bilbao  on  the  night  of  the  31st.  No  return  has 
been  made  of  the  killed  and  wounded,  which  must  have  been 
considerable  on  both  sides.  In  a  postscript  to  this  letter,  dated 
the  night  of  the  2nd  November,  on  the  heights  over  Valmaseda, 
Captain  Carroll  fears  the  retreat  of  the  Spaniards  is  cut  off, 
and  adds,  they  must  cut  their  way  through. 

General  Leith,  having  heard  that  4,000  of  the  enemy'*s 
cavalry  had  entered  Vallarcayo,  has  concerted  with  Brigadier 
Caro  (Romana''s  brother)  and  Count  Villa  Nueva  de  la  Baroa 
every  measure  of  resistance  and  reconnaissance  which  their 
scanty  means  will  afford.  He  learns  from  the  Commandant  of 
Reynosa  that  his  communication  with  Blake''s  head- quarters 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  237 

was  open  on  the  6th.  He  has  taken  every  measure  to  prevent 
Blake's  army  from  starving. 

The  fleet  of  chasse-marees^  which  he  had  sent  first  to  Castro, 
and  subsequently  to  Bilbao,  arrived  at  the  latter  on  the  day  of 
Blake's  retreat.  General  Blake  sent  Captain  Lefebvre  thither, 
to  encourage  the  province  to  give  the  army  and  people  the 
supplies  of  food,  and  prevent  their  premature  expenditure  for 
undefined  purposes,  while  Blake's  army  stood  in  danger.  The 
Biscayans  have  proved  sensible  of  the  exertions  of  the  British 
Government ;  and  the  arms  and  provisions  in  vessels  in  the 
river  have  been  all  saved  from  the  enemy.  He  is  embarrassed 
in  his  endeavours  to  supply  Blake's  army  by  the  secrecy 
which  that  General  observes  with  regard  to  his  movements. 
He  was  preparing  to  send  2  or  300  mules  to  the  British  army, 
when  Blake's  pressing  wants  made  it  necessary  to  change 
their  destination.  Unless  Blake  was  in  co-operation  with  the 
army  on  the  side  of  Navarre,  which  must  have  been  badly 
planned,  ill  executed,  or  defeated,  General  Leith  knows  not 
what  could  induce  him  to  expose  himself,  without  cannon,  to 
famine  and  superior  numbers:  he  suspects  his  position  was  too 
extended.  He  suggests  that  a  British  Commissariat  and 
Medical  staff  should  be  established  for  the  Spanish  armies. 

Encloses  a  letter  from  Captain  Jones,  who  has  in  vain 
attempted  to  learn  from  Blake  the  position  of  the  Asturians. 
He  was  in  the  action  of  the  31st,  and  extols  the  bravery  of  the 
Spanish  troops. 

The  Semiramis  had  arrived  with  a  million  of  dollars  for  the 
Spanish  Government,  and  50,000  for  Eomana's  army.  He 
has  prevented  their  landing,  and  has  acquainted  Mr.  Frere 
with  what  has  passed. 

He  encloses,  in  a  PS.,  a  letter  from  Mr.  Aguire,  dated 
Santona,  6th  November,  who  has  learned  from  an  aid-de-camp 
of  General  Blake  that  the  army,  30,000  strong,  is  in  high  order 
at  Valmaseda.  The  French  attacked  them  in  the  valley  of 
Mina,  but  were  repulsed  with  great  loss  and  pursued. 


238  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Santander,  November  11,  1808. 

The  Marquess  de  la  Romana  is  at  last  arrived,  and  the 
Jupiter  has  brought  a  convoy,  with  stores,  &c. 

Encloses  a  letter  from  Captain  Carroll,  dated  Valmaseda, 
November  5th,  detailing  the  particulars  of  the  repulse  of  the 
enemy  that  day.  The  loss  of  the  enemy  must  have  been  great ; 
that  of  the  Spaniards  is  comparatively  trifling.  One  gun,  two 
ammunition-waggons,  and  a  quantity  of  baggage,  were  taken 
from  the  French,  besides  several  cars  loaded  with  provisions, 
which  proved  very  acceptable,  as  the  troops  had  been  almost 
destitute  of  food  during  a  march  of  five  days.  Their  behaviour 
in  the  field  was,  nevertheless,  gallant  in  the  extreme:  8,000 
Asturians  and  2,300  of  Romana's  troops  are  with  the  army. 

Encloses  a  duplicate  of  Colonel  Doyle's  letter  to  Lord  Castle- 
reagh,  of  the  21st  October.  The  Marquess  de  la  Romana  is 
appointed  Commander-in-Chief;  and  he  agrees  with  General 
Leith  in  the  necessity  of  concentrating  the  forces,  and  pro- 
ceeding on  an  entirely  different  principle  of  attack. 

Encloses  a  letter  from  Captain  Birch,  R.E.,  who  has  been 
wounded  in  the  leg  at  Valmaseda.  Captain  Birch  communi- 
cated at  Calahorra,  on  the  15th  October,  with  Castafios,  who 
had  just  arrived  from  Madrid,  and  took  Captain  Birch  with 
him  to  Zaragossa,  where  he  had  a  conference  with  Palafox. 
The  result  of  this  was,  that  they  should  unite  their  armies  near 
Sanguessa,  and  act  against  the  enemy,  at  the  same  time  with  the 
army  of  Blake  on  the  left.  The  enemy  has  received  a  reinforce- 
ment of  12,000  men.  Captain  Birch  encloses  a  statement  of  the 
numbers  of  corps  in  that  part  of  the  country,  as  under  : — 

Blake's  .         .         .       44,1 00~| 

Oastaiios 

Palafox 


Estremadurans 
Andalusians  . 


27,500  lat  present. 
13,000J 


12,0001 

^comiuc:. 
10,000J  ^ 


106,600 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  239 

Of  these  63,000  are  peasants,  41,000  regular  troops,  2,600 
cavalry.  The  Estramadurans  are  ordered  to  march  to  Burgos, 
and  the  Andalusians  are  yet  at  Madrid. 

Head- Quarters,  Army  of  the  Left, 

Cabexon,  November  16,  1808. 

It  appears  that  Blake^s  army  had  a  severe  and  unsuccessful 
action  on  the  7th,  in  the  valley  on  the  Bilbao  side  of  Valma- 
seda.  They  retreated  to  Espinosa  de  los  Monteros  almost  in 
a  state  of  famine,  but  their  wants  were  partially  relieved  by  the 
supplies  which  General  Leith  had  forwarded.  Had  they,  after 
the  affair  of  the  5th,  retreated  towards  Burgos  by  Reynosa, 
these  disasters  would  have  been  avoided,  and  their  communi- 
cation with  the  British  army  and  the  mass  of  the  kingdom 
preserved. 

On  the  10th,  they  were  again  attacked  at  Espinosa:  the 
action  recommenced  on  the  11th,  and  the  Asturians  on  the 
left  gave  way  without  resistance,  which  enabled  the  enemy  to 
occupy  the  heights,  and  occasioned  a  panic,  which  led  to  the 
total  defeat  and  dispersion  of  the  army.  The  loss,  which 
must  have  been  great,  is  not  yet  known.  The  Division  of  the 
North,  under  the  Count  de  San  Roman,  behaved  most  gal- 
lantly.    The  Count  received  a  mortal  wound. 

On  receiving  this  account  on  the  12th,  General  Leith  re- 
embarked  the  stores,  and  the  transports  sailed  on  the  13th  for 
Coruna.  He  set  off  on  the  12th,  with  the  Marquess  of  Ro- 
mana,  towards  Reynosa.  Blake,  on  the  12th,  without  noticing 
the  action,  apprized  Romana  that,  after  a  Council  of  War,  the 
troops  had  been  ordered  towards  the  country  of  Leon,  by  Sal- 
daiia ;  but,  on  the  1 3th,  hearing  that  the  Estremadurans  had 
been  defeated  at  Burgos,  he  retreated  ft-om  Reynosa  by  Soto, 
sending  part  of  his  artillery  towards  Santander.  He  had  not 
with  him  more  than  4  or  5,000  men,  and  those  in  utter  con- 
fusion. The  night  march  of  the  13th  completed  their  dissolu- 
tion ;  and  the  naked,  starved,  and  dispirited  remnants  of  the 
army  retired,  in   their  own  way,  towards  Asturias.     Romana 


240  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

sent  for  Blake,  who  came  to  the  head- quarters  at  Henedo  on 
the  15th.  The  Marquess  has  taken  pains  to  re-establish  order, 
making  0  viedo  and  Leon  the  points  of  rendezvous  for  the  fugitives. 
General  Leith  states  the  force  to  be  collected  not  less  than 
18,000  :  few,  if  any,  have  thrown  away  their  arms.  The  dis- 
aster he  attributes  to  the  injudicious  exposure  of  the  army  to 
diflBculties  and  famine,  and  the  misconduct  of  the  officers  of 
the  new  levies  :  the  men  were  capable  of  every  thing,  under 
proper  arrangement.  He  has  acquainted  Sir  J.  Moore  and 
Sir  D.  Baird  with  what  has  occurred. 

Head -Quarters,  San  Vincente  de  la  Barquera, 

November  17,  1808. 
The  Marquess  of  Romana  removed  to  Barquera  from  a  re- 
port that  4,000  French  infantry,  with  some  cavalry,  occupied 
Cartes,  intending  to  pursue  the  discomfited  army.  The  chasse- 
marees  are  at  Barquera  with  provisions.  Every  exertion  is 
making  to  rally  the  broken  army.  He  encloses  a  sketch  of  the 
route  of  the  army. 

Leon,  November  25,  1808. 
The  Marquess  of  Romana,  with  the  remains  of  Blake's  army, 
had  made  a  further  retreat  to  Leon  through  the  Asturias. 

November  28,  1808. 
In  consequence  of  an   order  from  Sir  John  Moore,  he  has 
joined  the  division  of  the  British  army  under  Sir  D.  Baird, 
acting  as  a  Major-General  and  in  the  command  of  a  brigade. 

Lugo,  December  10,  1808. 
Reports  the  death  of  M.  Assiotti,  Deputy  Commissary 
General,  on  the  27th  November.  Recommends  Mr.  White, 
one  of  M.  Assiotti''s  clerks,  to  be  appointed  Assistant- Com- 
missary, and  fears  that  another  of  the  clerks  has  fallen  into 
the  hands  of  the  enemy  at  Santander,  with  ^^3,000,  and  letters 
for  General  Leith,  some  of  them  probably  from  Lord  Castle- 
reagh.     He  understands,  also,  that  a  packet  has  been  cap- 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH,  *  241 

tared,  but  that  the  letters  were  sunk.  In  conveying  away  the 
Bishop  and  his  retinue  from  Santander,  no  vessel  was  left  there 
to  warn  British  vessels  of  the  change,  which  precaution  had 
before  been  observed.  He  is  still  in  correspondence  with  Ro- 
mana,  and  has  received,  for  the  use  of  his  army,  ^£^60,000  in 
bills  on  the  Treasury. 


NO.  X. 

ABSTRACT  OF  DESPATCHES  FROM  SIR  HEW  DAL- 
RYMPLE  TO  LORD  CASTLEREAGH, 

FROM  THE  TIME  OF  HIS  TAKING  THE  COMMAND  OF  THE  ARMY 
IN  PORTUGAL. 

Cintra,  September  3,  1808. 

Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  landed  in  Portugal,  and  took  the  com- 
mand of  the  army  on  the  22nd  of  August,  the  day  after  the 
battle  of  Vimiera,  when  the  enemy  sustained  a  signal  defeat. 
A  few  hours  after  his  arrival.  General  Kellermann  came  in 
with  a  flag  of  truce  from  the  French  Oommander-in-Chief,  to 
propose  a  cessation  of  hostilities,  in  order  to  conclude  a  Con- 
vention for  the  evacuation  of  Portugal  by  the  French. 

He  encloses  the  articles  first  agreed  on  and  signed  by  Sir 
Arthur  Wellesley  and  General  Kellermann ;  but,  as  one  of 
those  relating  to  the  disposal  of  the  Russian  fleet  in  the  Tagus 
was  objected  to  by  the  British  Admiral,  it  was  finally  agreed 
that  Lieut. -Colonel  Murray  and  General  Kellermann  should 
proceed  to  the  discussion  of  the  remaining  Articles,  and  finally 
concluded  a  Convention  for  the  evacuation  of  Portugal  by  the 
French,  subject  to  the  ratification  of  the  respective  Com- 
manders-in-Chief. After  much  discussion,  a  Convention  was 
signed,  and  the  ratifications  exchanged  on  the  30th. 

Orders  were  sent  to  the  Bufis  and  42nd  to  land  and  take 
possession  of  the  forts  on  the  Tagus,  in  order  to  gain  anchorage 
for  shipping  without,  exposed  on  a  dangerous  coast,  and  to 
secure  a  communication  with   the  victuallers.     Accordingly, 

VOL.  VII.  R 


242  '         LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

the  forts  of  Oaecaes,  St.  Julien's,  St.  Bugio,  were  yesterday 
evacuated  by  the  French  troops,  and  taken  possession  of  by 
ours.  His  want  of  local  information  had  great  weight  in  de- 
ciding his  opinion  in  favour  of  expelling  the  French  by  a  Con- 
vention, which  the  late  defeat  had  induced  them  to  solicit  in 
preference  to  continuing  hostilities ;  in  which  case  the  enemy 
could  have  consumed  much  valuable  time,  by  a  protracted  de- 
fence of  the  strong  places  they  occupied. 

When  the  suspension  was  agreed  on,  doubts  were  enter- 
tained whether  Sir  J.  Moore''s  army  could  land,  and,  if  landed, 
whether  it  could  be  supplied  with  provisions  from  the  sliipping 
in  its  present  exposed  situation.  During  the  negociation,  Sir 
J.  Moore''s  force  was  landed ;  but  the  fear  of  the  latter  diffi- 
culty was  confirmed.  Sends  his  despatch  by  Captain  Dal- 
rymple,  who  can  give  further  information. 

Cintra,  September  3,  1808. 

Soon  after  the  suspension  of  arms  was  agreed  on,  Sir  Hew 
Dalrymple  learnt  that  the  Portuguese  were  offended  that  the 
Provisional  Government  of  Oporto  had  not  been  adverted  to  in 
the  transaction.  He  stated  to  General  Freire  that  he  con- 
ceived the  Convention  to  be  a  military  measure  of  the  Com- 
manders of  adverse  armies,  without  reference  either  to  the 
British  or  French  Government.  He  encloses  correspondence 
on  the  subject,  containing  the  alleged  grounds  of  complaint. 

Soon  after  his  arrival,  he  received  from  Sir  Arthur  Wel- 
lesley  a  communication  between  Sir  C.  Cotton  and  the  Junta 
of  Oporto,  respecting  the  re-establishment  of  the  Regency  at 
Lisbon.  Encloses  copy  of  correspondence  with  Brigadier- 
General  Decken  on  the  subject.  In  a  letter  to  the  Bishop  of 
Oporto,  he  merely  adverts  to  the  re-establishment  of  the  Re- 
gency, but  waves  any  opinion  of  it.  On  a  general  view  of  the 
subject,  he  thinks  no  plan  so  good  as  restoring  the  Regency 
of  the  Prince  Regent,  with  some  improvements.  The  Bishop 
of  Oporto  seems  a  worthy  man,  but  easily  worked  upon. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  243 

There  exists  a  petty  intrigue  at  Oporto,  to  make  that  the 
seat  of  Government,  and  to  perpetuate  the  power  of  the  Junta. 
It  appears,  from  conversation  with  M.  de  Pinto,  that  the 
Junta  of  Oporto  is  as  ready  to  relinquish  the  province  of 
Algarve  as  the  Junta  of  Seville  is  to  adopt  it.  The  latter 
would  have  no  objection  to  Alentejo  into  the  bargain. 

Except  one  letter  from  Castaiios,  which  he  encloses,  he  has 
had  no  intelligence  from  Spain  since  he  left  Gibraltar.  He 
intends  to  communicate  with  Oastanos  and  the  Andalusian 
army,  and  will  arm  and  send  off  the  Spaniards  about  to  be 
released  by  the  Convention. 

Head -Quarters,  Ocyras,  September  11,  1808. 

Encloses  extract  of  a  letter  from  Colonel  Whittingham,  con- 
taining intelligence  and  a  request  from  Castanos  for  a  body  of 
British  cavalry.  He  is  surprised  to  find  there  is  an  idea  that 
he  has  a  sufficient  force  of  cavalry  to  enable  him  to  detach 
2,000  to  Madrid,  when  his  whole  force  does  not  amount  to  that 
number,  and  is  not  sufficient  for  the  services  of  his  army  in 
the  field. 

Encloses  letters  from  Valencia,  strongly  painting  the  wants 
and  distresses  of  the  patriots  in  that  part  of  Spain.  By  a 
deputy  from  Arragon,  whom  Lord  Collingwood  saw,  it  ap- 
pears that  this  province,  like  almost  every  other,  thinks  of  no 
wants  but  its  own,  without  reference  to  the  forming  a  Central 
Government  for  the  Spanish  nation.  The  Junta  of  Seville  are 
employed  in  useless  discussions,  and  betraying  great  jealousy 
at  every  measure  likely  to  produce  a  Government  for  the 
nation,  and  to  extinguish  their  own  power.  Their  deputies  to 
the  General  Junta  are  not  men  of  respectability.  Count  Tilly 
is  notoriously  the  contrary.  Sir  H.  Dairy mple  doubts  whe- 
ther the  pecuniary  advance  made  by  Mr.  Duff  to  the  Junta  of 
Seville  was,  under  present  circumstances,  well  applied. 

The  Council  of  Castille,  soon  after  the  exclusion  of  the 
French  from  Madrid,  declared  itself  against  them,  and  wrote 

R  2 


244  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808, 

a  letter,  which  he  encloses.  The  Junta,  from  the  misconduct 
of  some  of  the  individuals  composing  the  Council  of  Castille, 
argue  the  dissolution  of  the  body  itself,  from  which,  if  pro- 
perly constituted,  the  kingdom  would  find  a  resource  against 
anarchy  and  the  exorbitant  pretensions  of  the  Juntas. 

By  comraunciations  he  has  received  from  Colonel  Doyle, 
dated  the  23rd  and  24th  of  August,  it  appears  that  arms  and 
money  had  been  landed  at  Bilboa ;  that  the  insurrection  in 
Bilboa  was  in  great  forwardness,  14,000  already  enrolled,  and 
a  reinforcement  expected  from  the  Asturians  ;  and  that  certain 
important  passes  had  been  occupied.  He  also  mentions  the 
evacuation  of  Burgos.  By  a  later  communication,  however, 
from  Colonel  Doyle,  it  appears  that  the  French  had  fallen 
heavily  upon  Burgos,  putting  many  to  the  sword.  Ney  and 
Soult  are  to  command  in  Spain.  No  doubt  but  that  the  French 
have  received  reinforcement. 

Head-Quarters,  Da  Funda,  September  12,  1808. 

Since  his  last  letters,  he  has  been  much  occupied  in  enforcing 
the  provisions  of  the  Convention,  (some  of  which  the  French 
seem  inclined  to  infringe)  and  in  making  arrangements  for  the 
establishment  of  a  Regency  after  the  French  are  gone.  The 
establishment  of  a  Regency  will  be  a  matter  of  much  delicacy. 
The  Council  of  Regency  left  by  the  Prince  is  not  so  much  con- 
nected with  French  interest  as  has  been  represented  to  his 
Majesty\s  Government.  The  patriotism  of  the  Marquess 
d'Abrantes,  the  President,  is  questioned ;  two  of  the  other 
four  are  respectable  men ;  and  the  other  two,  although  they 
acted  in  the  French  Government,  are  respectable  men,  and 
highly  esteemed  even  now  by  their  colleagues. 

The  Supreme  Junta  of  Seville  is  to  be  believed  in  its 
solemn  declaration  to  the  Spanish  nation  of  the  3rd  of  August. 
"  The  Portuguese  provinces  of  Algarve  and  Alentejo  have 
joined  in  placing  themselves  under  our  protection,  and  the 
Canary  Isles  have  sent  us  a  deputy  for  the  same  object.*"     The 


1808.1  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  245 

Junta  of  Oporto,  which  claims  the  superiority  over  every  other 
part  of  Portugal,  (not  including  Algarve)  seems  to  act  on  the 
same  principle  as  the  other  Juntas.  Their  formation  was  by 
the  acclamation  of  the  people,  and  their  principles  are  revo- 
lutionary. He  understands  that  the  favourite  plan  is  to  esta- 
blish this  Junta  at  Oporto,  to  rule  the  kingdom,  with  the  ad- 
dition of  some  members  from  the  former  Regency,  whom  it  is 
proposed  to  summon  to  Oporto.  He  does  not  know  whether 
any  of  these  parties  will  accept  the  Regency  on  the  only  foot- 
ing he  can,  under  his  instructions,  confer  it.  He  has  no  means 
of  acquiring  information  respecting  the  characters  and  political 
views  of  the  several  persons  of  weight  in  Portugal ;  yet  very 
shortly  some  definitive  resolution  must  be  taken  and  acted 
upon.  He  disapproves  of  the  conduct  of  the  Junta  of  Oporto, 
and  thinks  their  project  of  a  form  of  Government  is  inadmis- 
sible, as  derogatory  to  the  honour  of  the  Prince  Regent,  and 
subjecting  the  nominal  Regency  to  the  unconstitutional  in- 
fluence of  a  body,  which,  though  withdrawn  from  view,  avow- 
edly continues  to  exist. 

Da  Funda,  September  12,  1808. 

Sir  A.  Wellesley,  being  indisposed  to  the  mission  proposed 
to  him,  General  Leith  and  two  able  assistants  have  been  sent 
to  report  on  the  local  situation  of  the  Asturias,  and  the  ad- 
vantages which  might  be  derived  from  a  British  corps  acting 
on  that  coast. 

He  is  of  opinion  that  the  whole  of  the  force  under  his  command 
ought  to  be  placed  in  cantonments  during  the  approaching  rains, 
in  such  situations  as  may  enable  them  to  assemble  and  march 
beyond  the  frontiers  of  Portugal  into  Spain,  to  co-operate  with 
the  Spanish  armies  against  the  enemy''s  front.  The  march  of 
the  army  must,  of  course,  depend  on  the  disposition  of  the 
Spaniards,  as  to  its  appearance  and  their  means  of  supplying 
such  an  army  in  the  field.  Whether  the  aid  of  a  British  force 
will  be  necessary  to  oppose  the  French  army  in  front  will 
depend,  not  only  on  the  numbers,  but  on  the  union  and  dis- 


246  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

cipline  of  the  Spanish  armies  ;  and,  according  to  these  con- 
siderations, the  Spaniards  will  manifest  more  or  less  desire  to 
have  a  British  force  united  to  them,  particularly  if  it  is  under- 
stood to  be  so  considerable  as  to  take  a  prominent  part  in  the 
measures  pursued.  He  thinks  Castafios"'  request  for  a  small 
corps  of  cavalry,  though  impracticable  in  the  execution,  was 
made  from  the  best  motives. 

In  making  these  suggestions,  Sir  Hew  holds  in  view  the 
very  army  he  now  commands  :  It  will  require  some  littlQ  time 
to  settle  in  Portugal,  and  he  thinks  it  would  be  inexpedient  to 
make  any  considerable  detachment  from  thence,  whilst  there 
remains  any  chance  of  the  French  moving  forward,  with  effect ; 
besides  which,  from  the  present  disposition  of  the  transports, 
it  would  take  some  time  to  make  any  considerable  embarkation. 
To  consider  his  a  mere  army  of  observation  destined  for  the 
defence  of  the  country  would,  he  thinks,  be  an  unfortunate  ne- 
cessity, which  ought  to  be  avoided. 

He  is  not  sufficiently  acquainted  with  the  northern  provinces 
of  Spain  to  give  a  decided  opinion  upon  the  operations  which 
might  be  undertaken  in  that  quarter.  He  thinks  that  10,000 
men  and  a  proportion  of  cavalry  might  soon  arrive  there  from 
England,  and  shortly  after  10,000  from  his  army  might  join 
them ;  when  the  affairs  in  Portugal  are  settled,  10,000  more 
might  follow,  and  the  remainder  might  be  left  to  maintain  the 
internal  tranquillity  of  that  country.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed 
that  the  French  will  remain  long  at  Burgos ;  and  the  fate  of 
Bilboa  and  of  Biscay  proves  that  their  officers  will  be  sensible 
of  any  movement  threatening  that  quarter. 

He  proposes  sending  Lord  William  Bentinck  to  Madrid,  to 
communicate  with  Castanos  and  the  Generals  in  command  of 
the  Spanish  forces. 

Prayeas,  September  16,  1808. 

Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereaglfs  despatch,  enclosing  Ge- 
neral Freire'*8  report  to  the  Junta  of  Oporto,  and  the  commu- 
nications between  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  Portuguese 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  247 

Minister.  Now  that  he  is  more  fully  apprized  of  the  enemy^s 
strength  and  resources  than  he  was  on  landing  in  Portugal, 
Sir  Hew  does  not  hesitate  to  state  that,  in  his  opinion,  the 
advantages  gained  by  the  Convention  greatly  counterbalance 
those  which  would  have  been  derived  from  a  perseverance  in 
hostilities. 

Prayeas,  September  16,  1808. 

He  has  sent  Lord  William  Bentiuck  to  Madrid,  to  ascer- 
tain the  feelings  and  views  of  the  Spanish  nation,  their  incli- 
nation and  power  to  give  the  necessary  aids  to  the  advance  of 
a  British  army  into  Spain,  an  accurate  description  of  the 
country  likely  to  become  the  seat  of  war,  and  other  circum- 
stances connected  with  the  proposed  employment  of  the  force 
under  his  command. 

In  the  present  unsettled  state  of  affairs,  he  cannot  form  a 
precise  opinion  as  to  the  amount  of  the  force  it  may  be  neces- 
sary to  leave  in  Portugal,  to  support  the  Regency  to  be  esta- 
blished in  the  name  of  the  Prince  Regent ;  and  he  conceives 
it  to  be  a  matter  worthy  the  attention  of  his  Majesty's  Go- 
vernment whether  that  Regency  is  to  be  supported  by  a  British 
force.  If  the  Juntas  are  sincere  in  their  professions  of  loyalty, 
no  danger  is  to  be  apprehended  whilst  the  French  are  checked 
in  Spain.  In  the  mean  time,  British  influence  and  British 
interference  seem  to  be  objects  of  jealousy  to  all  parties. 

Prayeas,  September  16,  1808. 
Count  Tilly  proposed  to  march  a  division  of  Castahos*'  army 
to  force  the  Government  of  Granada  to  acknowledge  the  supre- 
macy of  Seville.  This  violent  measure  was  stopped  by  the 
firmness  of  Castanos,  who  said  that  no  part  of  the  army  of  Spain 
entrusted  to  his  command  should  become  the  vile  instrument 
of  civil  war.  This  Junta  refused  the  application  of  the  Cata- 
lans for  artillery,  which  they  could  easily  have  spared.  Sir 
Hew  thinks  it  will  be  prudent  to  keep  a  watchful  eye  on  their 
proceedings. 


248  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Prayeas,  September  19,  1808. 

The  conduct  of  the  Supreme  Junta  of  Seville,  in  the  appli- 
cation of  the  supplies  from  England,  evidently  proves  that  they 
have  lost  sight  of  the  common  cause  in  pursuing  their  indi- 
vidual interests  :  instead  of  directing  their  efforts  to  the  re- 
storation of  their  legitimate  sovereign  and  established  form  of 
Government,  they  are  endeavouring  to  fix  the  permanency  of 
their  own,  and  to  separate  its  interests  from  those  of  other  parts 
of  Spain.  They  threaten  to  withhold  from  Oastafios  the  means 
of  subsisting  his  army  if  he  advances  beyond  the  limits  pre- 
scribed by  them.  If  other  provinces  follow  this  example,  the 
cause  of  Spain  is  ruined,  and  the  triumph  of  the  enemy  com- 
plete. 

To  remedy  these  evils,  Sir  Hew  proposes  that  the  money 
intended  for  the  supply  of  the  Spanish  armies  should  be  en- 
trusted to  some  individual  of  consequence,  in  the  confidence 
of  his  Majesty's  Government,  who  might  see  that  all  pecuniary 
aids  were  applied  to  the  right  purpose,  and  not  employed  for 
the  individual  interest  of  any  particular  Junta. 

Considerable  connexion  subsists  between  the  Junta  of  Seville 
and  that  of  Spanish  Estremadura.  The  army  of  the  latter 
still  surrounds  Elvas,  notwithstanding  the  termination  of  hos- 
tilities in  Portugal.  The  Spaniards  were  actually  bombarding 
the  French  garrison  in  Fort  La  Lippe,  when  the  British  ar- 
rived to  take  possession  of  it.  Sir  Hew  has  expostulated  on 
this  subject  with  the  General  commanding  at  Badajoz,  and 
hopes  to  bring  him  to  reason,  but  fears  it  will  be  more  difficult 
to  persuade  him  to  march  upon  Madrid. 

September  20,  1808. 
The  Bishop  of  Oporto  declines  taking  a  distinguished  place 
in  the  Regency,  on  the  ground  of  feeling  the  necessity  of  re- 
maining at  Oporto,  and  endeavouring  to  support  the  autho- 
rity of  Government  in  the  northern  provinces.  A  deputy 
from  the  Junta  held  nearly  the  same  moderate  language  as  the 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  249 

Bishop ;  and,  finding  that  the  Princess  Kegency  was  likely  to 
be  restored,  with  the  exception  of  those  members  who  had 
forfeited  the  confidence  of  the  nation,  he  signified  his  appro- 
bation of  the  measure ;  and,  although  Sir  Hew  thinks  he  was 
instructed  to  do  so,  he  did  not  press  that  the  Junta  should  par- 
ticipate with  the  British  Government  in  the  act  of  replacing 
the  power  of  the  Regency. 

On  the  rumour  of  the  Bishop's  resigning  the  Government, 
commotions  took  place  in  Oporto,  and  were  apprehended  in 
other  parts  of  the  northern  provinces,  but  these  will  soon  sub- 
side, if  the  Junta  is  sincere  in  its  declaration  of  attachment  to 
the  lawful  sovereign. 

Lieut.-General  Hope's  division  has  been  ordered  into  Lisbon, 
to  protect  the  embarkation  of  the  French,  and  he  has  been  di- 
rected to  communicate  with  Don  Francisco  de  Noronha  and 
Don  Francisco  de  Cunha,  the  only  two  members  left  by  the 
Prince  who  were  altogether  unexceptionable. 

The  Count  de  Castro,  Marin  or  Monteiro  Mor,  having  been 
requested  to  repair  to  Lisbon,  to  explain  certain  doubtful  parts 
of  his  conduct,  at  first  excused  himself,  on  pretence  of  ill  health, 
but  has  since  met  Lieut.-General  Hope  and  the  other  two 
noblemen,  after  which  Sir  Hew  published  a  proclamation,  call- 
ing to  take  upon  themselves  the  functions  of  Government,  till 
the  will  of  the  Prince  Regent  should  be  known,  the  following 
noblemen  :  The  Count  de  Casto  Marin,  or  Monteiro  Mor,  Don 
Francisco  Xavier  de  Noronha,  Francisco  de  Cunha  e  Menezes, 
Joao  Antonio  Salter  de  Mendo9a,  and  Don  Miguel  Pereira 
Forjaz  Coutinho.  To  this  Government  the  inferior  jurisdic- 
tions and  tribunals,  the  constituted  and  legal  authorities  of 
the  kingdom,  and  all  persons  of  every  description,  were  by  the 
Proclamation  required  to  pay  all  deference  and  submission. 
The  Regency  then  met,  and  proceeded  to  complete  the  num- 
bers by  the  election  of  the  Bishop  of  Oporto  and  the  Marquess 
de  las  Minas.  Sir  Hew  does  not  know  how  far  the  Bishop  and 
Junta  will  be  pleased  with  what  has  been  done  ;  but,  whatever 


250  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

may  be  their  professions,  he  suspects  that  the  power  which  they 
have  assumed  will  not  be  cheerfully  relinquished. 

Prayeas,  September  16,  1808. 
He  has  not  yet  been  able  to  select  a  confidential  oflScer,  to 
send  into  Catalonia.  Should  one  be  found,  he  requests  to  be 
informed  what  pay  and  allowances  are  to  be  attached  to  the 
situation ;  also  how  Major  Cox  and  Captain  Whittingham 
are  to  be  paid.  By  some  mistake,  Mr.  Markland  has  not  yet 
proceeded  to  Valencia  as  Consul :  he  speaks  highly  of  his 
abilities,  and  expects  much  useful  information  from  him. 

Prayeas,  September  20,  1808. 

By  letters  from  Lord  William  Bentinck  at  Seville,  it  appears 
that  he  has  communicated  with  Governor  Don  Jonas  Morla  ; 
whose  conversation  proves  him  to  be  a  true  Spaniard.  He 
strongly  represented  the  necessity  of  a  Central  Government, 
and  of  the  appointment  of  a  Commander-in-Chief.  He  feared 
these  desirable  objects  would  be  retarded  by  private  interests, 
and  recommended  the  interference  of  British  influence  as  most 
likely  to  produce  union  among  the  Spaniards,  and  represented 
the  orreat  advantages  which  would  attend  the  march  of  a  13ri- 
tish  army  into  Spain. 

By  a  letter  from  Major  Cox,  it  appears  that  he  thinks  the 
Junta  have  discovered  that  they  were  in  a  wrong  course,  and 
have  resolved  to  change  it.  A  conspiracy  has  been  formed 
against  the  lives  of  some  of  the  members.  Cuesta  had  dis- 
solved the  Supreme  Junta  of  Leon,  and  threatened  that  of 
Salamanca :  he  considers  his  authority  as  paramount  within 
his  command,  having  been  appointed  by  the  King. 

The  Junta  of  Seville  have  now  declared  that  Doyle's  bills 
shall  be  paid ;  that  Castaiios  shall  be  supplied  with  money  ; 
and  that  he  is  at  liberty  to  proceed  upon  his  own  judgment, 
and  to  act  according  to  circumstances,  without  consulting  their 
deputy  at  the  Central  Junta. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  251 

Sir  Hew  has  heard  from  Mr.  Stuart  at  Madrid,  who  states 
the  necessity  of  a  British  force,  to  control  the  parties,  and 
wishes  that  the  Spaniards  released  at  Lisbon  may  be  sent  to 
join  Blake  and  a  body  of  Portuguese  to  Rosas,  and  that  General 
Galluzo  may  be  ordered  to  march  from  Badajoz  into  Castillo. 

The  French  army  has  sailed,  except  the  garrisons  of  Al- 
meida and  La  Lippe :  the  latter  General  Galluzo  has  hitherto 
prevented  from  marching,  to  prove  his  disapprobation  of  the 
Convention.  The  French  have  been  taught  to  know  the  mean- 
ing  of  the  article  relating  to  property,  and  much  plunder  has 
been  restored. 

The  army  is  in  high  order.  As  the  rains  are  setting  in, 
Sir  Hew  proposes  to  canton  it,  but. it  will  be  ready  to  proceed 
when  orders  arrive.     He  has  been  attentive  to  supplies. 

Benefice,  September  29,  1808. 

In  obedience  to  the  orders  he  has  received,  Sir  Hew  will  re- 
turn to  England  as  soon  as  he  can  prepare  the  documents 
which  will  be  indispensably  necessary  to  enable  him  to  fulfil, 
in  a  satisfactory  manner,  the  object  for  which  he  is  recalled. 
He  has  communicated  to  the  Admiral  the  order  for  putting  on 
shore  the  French  troops,  in  the  event  of  the  third  division  not 
having  sailed,  or  having  put  back. 

Benefice,  September  30,  1808. 

In  consequence  of  letters  from  Mr.  Stuart  and  Captain 
Whittingham,  and  similar  applications  from  Castaiios  and 
Galluzo,  Sir  Hew,  after  having  communicated  his  intention  to 
Sir  Harry  Burrard,  has  directed  the  Spaniards  lately  prisoners 
to  be  embarked  for  Rosas,  with  10,000  stand  of  arms.  He 
has  taken  no  step  with  the  Regency  relating  to  detaching  the 
Portuguese  troops  to  Catalonia,  as,  in  the  present  state  of  the 
army,  no  very  efiective  corps  could  be  spared  for  that  purpose. 

He  learns  from  Colonel  Graham,  who  had  been  sent  to 
Badajoz,  to  endeavour  to  induce  Galluzo  to  raise  the  siege  of 
Elvas,  that  he  has  succeeded  in  the  attempt ;  but  that  the  fine 


252  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

body  of  troops  under  his  command,  whom  he  wishes  to  lead  to 
Catalonia,  are  destitute  of  many  necessary  equipments.  Sir 
Hew  has,  therefore,  under  the  pressure  of  the  moment,  ordered 
that  the  supply  may  be  furnished  to  him  from  the  supposed 
stores  in  Elvas. 

Benefice,  October  3,  1808. 

By  letters  from  Major  Cox,  at  Seville,  the  violent  conduct 
of  Cuesta,  in  arresting  the  deputies  from  Castille  and  Gallicia, 
on  their  way  to  the  Central  Junta,  appears  to  have  excited 
great  alarm,  which  is  likely  to  produce  very  serious  conse- 
quences. The  Juntas  of  Castille,  Leon,  and  Gallicia,  have 
united.  Cuesta  is  suspected  of  being  a  traitor,  and  it  is  thought 
the  Council  are  in  league  with  him. 

London,  November  2,  1808. 

In  answer  to  Lord  Castlereagh'*s  inquiries  respecting  the 
state  and  situation  of  the  hostages  for  securing  the  execution  of 
the  Convention,  states  that  Colonel  Donkin,  from  the  British 
army,  and  Colonel  La  Roche,  from  the  French,  were  at  the 
head- quarters  of  the  respective  armies,  forming  a  part  of  the 
families  of  the  Commanding  Officers.  On  the  embarkation  of 
the  French,  General  Loison  sent  back  Colonel  Donkin,  when 
Colonel  La  Roche  was  permitted  to  depart.  It  never  was  un- 
derstood that  Colonel  Donkin  was  to  accompany  the  French 
army,  or  that  Colonel  La  Roche  was  to  remain  with  us  after  its 
departure. 

London,  November  3,  1808. 

In  reply  to  Lord  CastlereagVs  letter  of  yesterday,  he  states 
that,  during  the  negociation  of  the  Convention  ratified  at 
Torres  Vedras,  he  wrote  to  Lieut.-Colonel  Murray,  observing 
that  some  of  the  Articles  were  so  framed  as  to  make  him  re- 
sponsible for  what  it  might  not  be  in  his  power  to  fulfil :  for 
instance,  that  respecting  persons  taken  by  the  Spaniards ;  and 
that  therefore  his  acquiescence  must  be  understood  to  mean  his 
using  all  the  influence  he  possessed  in  their  behalf.  In  conse- 
quence of  this  engagement,  he  took  an  early  opportunity  of 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  253 

applying  to  Castafios,  Galluzo,  and  the  Junta  of  Gallicia,  in 
favour  of  the  persons  alluded  to.  The  Junta  of  Gallicia  pro- 
mised to  release  some  persons  of  this  description,  and  to  restore 
them  their  property,  provided  the  Spaniards  detained  by  the 
French  had  been  treated  in  the  same  manner.  He  cannot  say 
whether  these  people  were  released  or  not ;  but  he  thinks  the 
Junta  would  at  once  release  the  property  of  their  prisoners,  if 
desired. 

He  never  heard  that  the  French  General  knew  of  any  per- 
sons such  as  are  alluded  to  in  this  Article,  except  those  in  Gal- 
licia, and  does  not  know  whether  the  non-combatants  taken 
in  Portugal  were  released,  as  he  had  not  received  any  re- 
port on  that  subject  when  he  left  Lisbon. 

London,  November  4,  1808. 
Requests  Lord  Castlereagh  will  allow  him  to  have  copies  of 
some  letters  alluded  to  in  the  Morning  Post,  as  having  been 
addressed  to  his  Majesty "'s  Ministers.  He  considers  that  these 
documents  may  be  of  the  greatest  consequence  in  the  elucida- 
tion of  the  business  before  the  Court  of  Inquiry. 

London,  November  5,  1808, 
Encloses  a  letter  which  Major-General  Beresford  had  ad- 
dressed to  him,  dated  5th  October,  stating  that  in  an  interview 
with  Mr.  Cipriano  Robino  Freire,  very  satisfactory  explana- 
tions took  place  on  the  subject  of  intercourse  with  the  Regency, 
and  of  their  intentions  and  wishes.  He  expressed  from  their 
Excellencies  the  greatest  readiness  to  attend  to  the  representa- 
tions of  the  British  Commander-in-Chief.  General  Beresford 
attributes  the  cold  and  distant  intercourse  which  has  hitherto 
taken  place  to  the  person  through  whom  that  intercourse  has 
till  now  been  carried  on. 

London,  November  7,  1808. 
If  there  is  no  objection  to  his  request,  he  wishes  for  a  copy 
of  the  Despatch  from  the  Junta  of  Oporto  to  the  Chevalier  de 


254  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Souza,  referred  to  in  the  Note  of  that  Minister  to  Mr.  Can- 
ning, dated  8rd  September. 

London,  November  10,  1808. 
Encloses  copy  of  a  private  letter  from   Lord  Castlereagh, 
recommending  to  his  particular  attention  the  talents  and  expe- 
rience of  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  and  acknowledges  with  thanks  the 
receipt  of  a  copy  of  the  French  engineer  Vincent'*s  Report. 

London,  November  14,  1808. 
The  paper  enclosed  is  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  General  Spen- 
cer, dated  off  Lisbon,  24th  June,  stating  that,  on  his  arrival, 
he  consulted  with  Sir  0.  Cotton  on  the  advisability  of  an  attack 
on  Lisbon.  It  appearing  from  the  report  of  some  intelligent 
Hanoverian  deserters  that  the  French  force  (20,500)  was  fiilly 
capable  of  resisting  a  much  larger  force  than  could  be  brought 
against  them,  Major-General  Spencer,  with  the  advice  of  Sir 
C.  Cotton,  determined  to  return  to  the  corps  he  had  lefl  under 
General  Nightingale,  which  he  expected  to  join  next  day,  to 
the  southward  of  Cape  St.  Vincent.  He  then  proposes  to  re- 
turn immediately,  with  the  troops,  to  Ayamonte,  and,  on 
finding  the  frontiers  secure,  to  proceed  to  Cadiz,  there  to  act 
according  to  the  instructions  he  may  receive. 

London,  November  16,  1808. 
[Addressed  to  Mr.  Ryder,  and  by  him  enclosed  to  Lord  Castlereagh.] 

Specifies  the  papers  which  he  requests  Lord  Castlereagh  will 
cause  to  be  laid  before  the  Court  of  Inquiry. 

London,  November  18,  1808. 
Acknowledges  receipt  of  Lord  Castlereagh's  of  the  1 7th,  and 
perfectly  coincides  in  the  propriety  of  not  producing  before  the 
Court  some  parts  of  the  correspondence.  He  has  found  it 
necessary  to  mention  in  his  Narrative  the  full  powers  and 
assurances  of  support  contained  in  Lord  Castlereagh's  letter  of 
20th  August,  and  wishes  to  know  whether  his  letter  of  the 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  255 

4th  September,  acknowledging  it,  ought  not  to  be  produced, 
as  also  his  letter  to  Lord  Castlereagh  of  the  12th  September, 
containing  his  opinion  on  the  further  prosecution  of  the  war. 
Upon  these  opinions  he  acted,  and  he  considers  it  material  to 
prove  to  the  Court  that  he  communicated  his  sentiments  to 
Government  at  that  early  period. 

London,  November  2,  1808. 
He  has  received  from  Mr.  Cooke  a  copy  of  the  draft  of  a 
Warrant  for  a  Court  of  Inquiry.  He  fears  that,  according  to 
the  Warrant,  the  Court  will  not  feel  itself  bound,  or  even 
authorized,  to  enter  into  the  measures  he  pursued  for  establish- 
ing the  Regency.  This  subject  appears  to  him  intimately  con- 
nected with  the  moti'ces  which  induced  a  party  in  Portugal  to 
raise  a  clamour  against  him.  He  trusts  it  will  be  clearly  un- 
derstood that  the  steps  he  took  to  carry  the  provisions  of  the 
Convention  into  execution,  and  to  avail  himself  of  the  advan- 
tages it  was  intended  to  produce,  are,  under  the  authority  of 
the  Warrant,  fit  subjects  for  inquiry. 

'  London,  December  23,  1808. 

The  extract  from  the  letter  from  the  Junta  of  Oporto  to  the 
Chevalier  de  Souza  was  not  enclosed  in  Lord  Castlereaf!:h''s 
letter  of  the  4th  September.  When  this  document  was  com- 
municated to  Sir  Hew,  on  his  arrival  in  England,  it  was  his 
intention  to  produce  it  before  the  Court,  and  expose  the  fallacy 
of  the  statements  it  contains,  at  the  same  time  explaining,  by 
his  correspondence  with  Brigadier-General  Decken,  the  motives 
which  possibly  actuated  the  Junta  of  Oporto  in  the  hostility  of 
which  he  has  experienced  the  effects.  He  now  encloses  a  con- 
tinuation of  his  correspondence  with  Brigadier-General  Decken, 
in  order  to  explain  the  real  views  of  the  Junta  of  Oporto,  so 
entirely  at  variance  with  their  public  professions.  The  asser- 
tion contained  in  the  letter  above  alluded  to,  that  the  Junta 
had  thought  fit  to  make  similar  observations  on  the  armistice 
to  the  British  General,  is  (as  far  as  relates  to  him)  unfounded. 


k 


256  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

He  believes  that  Sir  A.  Wellesley  is  the  English  General 
alluded  to,  and  he  encloses  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  the  Bishop 
of  Oporto  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  dated  24th  August,  containing 
such  observations  as  it  was  then  thought  fit  to  avow.  When 
these  observations  are  contrasted  with  those  addressed  two 
days  before  to  the  Chevalier  de  Souza,  and  when  the  views  on 
the  subject  of  the  Regency,  as  stated  by  Brigadier-General 
Decken,  are  compared  with  the  sentiments  expressed  to  Bri- 
gadier-General Anstruther,  as  mentioned  in  a  letter  from  him 
enclosed,  Sir  Hew  thinks  a  just  estimate  may  be  made  of  the 
degree  of  credit  which  ought  to  be  attached  to  representations 
from  that  quarter.  Finding  that  these  documents  cannot, 
with  propriety,  be  produced  in  Court,  he  requests  Lord  Castle- 
reagh  will  lay  them  before  the  King. 

Of  all  the  mortifications  he  has  experienced,  none  has  given 
him  so  much  concern  as  the  impression  his  Majesty  seems  to 
have  taken  on  the  subject  of  the  removal  of  the  Portuguese 
property.  He  conceives  the  immediate  matter  of  his  recall,  if 
considered  separately  from  the  share  he  had  in  the  Convention, 
can  only  be  attributed  to  his  not  having  given  earlier  notice 
of  the  signature  of  the  armistice.  On  this  head  he  confesses 
his  error ;  but  each  day  held  out  so  near  a  prospect  of  final 
arrangement,  that  he  was  insensibly  betrayed  into  a  delay, 
which  he  cannot  altogether  justify. 


LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  257 


STATE  OF  THE  SPANISH  COLOISIES 
IN  AMERICA. 

1779—1809. 

Among  the  Papers  in  this  Section  will  be  found 
some  which  prove  that  the  idea  of  withdrawing  the 
Colonies  of  Spam  from  their  dependence  on  the 
mother-country,  and  thus  depriving  her  of  the  vast 
resources  which  they  furnished  when  she  was  at  war 
with  Great  Britain,  had  occurred  to  various  intel- 
ligent minds,  long  before  it  was  entertained  by  our 
Government.  The  communications  on  this  subject 
from  Mr.  Hippisley,  with  which  it  opens,  date  so  far 
back  as  the  year  1779,  during  the  administration  of 
Lord  North,  and  there  is  one  from  the  pen  of  Sir  Ralph 
Abercromby,  which  could  scarcely  have  been  written 
later  than  towards  the  conclusion  of  the  last  century. 

The  most  zealous  advocate,  however,  for  the  politi- 
cal emancipation  of  those  Provinces  was  Don  Fran- 
cisco de  Miranda,  a  native  of  Caracas,  who,  from  in- 
timate acquaintance  with  the  grievous  nature  of  the 
yoke  imposed  upon  them,  laboured  with  untiring 
perseverance  to  effect  the  liberation  of  his  countrymen 
from  the  galling  oppression  in  which  they  were  held. 

From  his  Letters,  which  are  numerous,  we  learn 
that,  prior  to  the  discussions  with  Spain  relative  to 
Nootka  Sound  in  1789  and  1790,  he  had  solicited  aid 

VOL.  VII.  s 


258         LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF 

from  Mr.  Pitt  towards  the  execution  of  plans  for  ac- 
complishing the  one  grand  pui-pose  of  his  life :  but 
having,  at  the  commencement  of  the  first  war  of  the 
French  Kevolution,  obtained  high  miHtary  rank — he 
was  second  in  command  in  the  army  under  Du- 
mouriez — it  appears  not  improbable  that  a  distrust 
of  his  political  principles  may  have  deterred  our 
Ministers  from  entering  heartily  into  those  schemes 
to  which  he  so  frequently  called  their  attention.  It 
is  not  surprising,  indeed,  that,  after  opposing  with  all 
their  might  that  reckless  spirit  of  democracy,  which, 
in  the  Old  World,  had  covered  France  with  blood 
and  ashes,  and  St.  Domingo,  in  the  New,  with  deso- 
lation and  anarchy,  they  should  hesitate  about  ex- 
tending its  influence  to  the  Colonies  of  Spain.  Ac- 
cordingly, no  sooner  had  the  entire  Spanish  nation 
acknowledged  Ferdinand  YII.  for  its  sovereign,  than 
the  efforts  of  the  British  Cabinet  were  exerted  to  pre- 
serve to  the  Spanish  monarchy  its  vast  American 
possessions,  not  to  break  them  up  into  independent 
Republics. 

The  misguided  policy  of  Ferdinand,  and  the  exe- 
crable barbarities  and  perfidies  practised  by  the 
commanders  of  the  royal  troops  sent  to  quell  the 
discontents  of  the  Americans,  thwarted  the  friendly 
intentions  of  our  Ministers,  and  inflamed  those  dis- 
contents to  such  a  degree,  as  to  dissever  the  Colonies 
from  Old  Spain,  and  to  induce  the  adoption  of  repub- 
lican forms  in  them  all. 

Miranda  himself  ultimately  became  a  victim  to  the 
faithlessness  of  his  royalist  antagonists.    After  several 


LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  259 

attempts,  the  failure  of  wliicli  disappointed  his  too 
sanguine  expectations  of  support  from  his  country- 
men of  the  Caracas,  he  at  length,  in  1810,  succeeded 
in  planting  the  banner  of  freedom  in  that  province. 
In  the  following  year,  the  congress  of  that  and  six 
adjoining  provinces,  assembled  at  Venezuela,  set  the 
example  to  all  the  rest  of  Spanish  America,  by  pro- 
claiming them  a  federative  Republic. 

Miranda  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the  army,  with 
dictatorial  authority ;  but,  discouraged  by  the  unpro- 
mising state  of  the  affairs  of  the  infant  Republic,  and 
the  successes  of  the  Royalists,  he  concluded  a  Conven- 
tion with  their  General,  Monteverde,  with  the  appro- 
bation of  the  Executive  Council,  surrendering  to  him 
La  Guayra,  Caracas,  Barcelona,  and  Cumana;  while 
he  was,  on  his  part,  promised  a  complete  amnesty,  free 
permission  to  emigrate,  and  the  introduction  at  Ca- 
racas of  the  constitution  given  by  the  Spanish  Cortes. 
This  Convention  Monteverde  most  treacherously  vio- 
lated, by  seizing  Miranda,  and  sending  him  a  prisoner 
to  Old  Spain.  There  he  was  consigned  to  the  most 
dismal  of  the  dungeons  of  the  Inquisition,  at  La 
Caraca,  near  Cadiz,  w^here  he  died,  after  a  rigorous 
confinement  of  four  years. 

In  this  Section  will  also  be  found  various  plans  ema- 
nating from  the  fertile  mind  of  General  Dumouriez, 
among  which  will  be  particularly  remarked  those  re- 
lating to  his  favourite  project  of  founding  with  one 
of  the  Spanish  provinces  a  kingdom  for  the  Duke  of 
Orleans  (Louis  Philippe) ;  and,  from  a  paper  written 
by  the  Prince  himself  on  Mexico,  that  country  was 

s2 


260  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1779- 

no  doubt  selected  for  constituting  the  proposed  mo- 
narchy, under  the  protection  of  Great  Britain.  The 
information  respecting  Mexico,  obtained  from  other 
sources,  seems  to  indicate  that  this  project  was  not 
deemed  unworthy  of  consideration.  Had  it  been  car- 
ried into  execution,  how  different  might  perhaps  be 
at  this  day  the  condition  of  the  American  kingdom, 
as  well  as  that  of  the  European  Republic ! 


Extracts  of  Letters  addressed  to  Lord  Loughborough^  and  com- 
municated to  the  Secretary  of  State^  1779. 

Rome,  June  18,  1779. 
*  *  *  *  Governor,  or  principal  officer  commanding  at  Arica, 
in  Peru,  in  correspondence  with  his  brother,  an  ex-Jesuit  at 
Rome,  informs  him  of  a  great  insurrection  at  Mexico — "  that, 
after  forcing  the  Viceroy  to  retire,  they  had  burned  the  King's 
warehouses  of  tobacco,  to  the  amount  of  seven  millions  of 
piastres;  that  all  the  provinces  of  Peru  also  were  in  the  highest 
degree  disgusted  with  the  Spanish  Government;  that  at  Arica 
they  had  paid  the  assessments  of  the  present  year  with  great 
discontent,  openly  protesting  against  any  similar  impositions 
in  future." 

This  account  is  confirmed  by  several  letters  received  from 
Old  Spain,  which  mention  the  late  arrival  of  a  King's  ship  at 
Cadiz  from  the  Spanish  West  Indies  ;  and  that  all  communi- 
cation between  the  ship  and  shore  is  prohibited.  It  is  well 
known  this  ship  brings  a  confirmation  of  the  above  intelligence. 

The  King  of  Naples  read,  at  his  table,  a  letter  he  had 
received  from  his  father,  dated  the  18th  of  May,  complaining 
of  "  the  haughtiness  of  Great  Britain,  which  would  compel 
him  speedily  to  declare  war  against  her." 

Rome,  July  7,  1779. 
The  number  of  ex-Jesuits  now  settled  in  the  Papal  terri- 
tories is  computed  at  near  2,000 ;  they  are  in  general  subsist- 


1779]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  261 

ing  upon  email  pensions  of  six  Roman  crowns  per  month, 
which  are  paid  to  them  by  the  Ministers  of  the  different  States 
where  they  originally  professed :  to  a  man,  they  bear  impla- 
cable animosity  to  the  Court  of  Spain.  The  most  violent  are 
the  ex-Jesuits  from  Peru  and  Mexico.  They  are  in  general 
descended  of  old  Spanish  settlers,  who  have  intermarried  with 
the  principal  American  families,  and  many  are  of  great  consi- 
deration. This  class  comprehends  some  hundreds,  who  are 
anxiously  in  expectation  of  a  favourable  period,  which  may 
facilitate  their  return  to  their  native  country.  It  may  be  pre- 
sumed that  such  men  might  prove  essential  instruments  in 
effecting  a  reduction  of  New  Spain,  having  an  entire  influence 
on  their  countrymen,  who  universally,  both  in  Peru  and 
Mexico,  are  predisposed  to  revolt. 

Every  Jesuit  with  whom  I  have  conversed  on  this  subject 
concurs  in  this  opinion,  but  my  chief  information  is  derived 
from  *  *  *,  in  the  earlier  part  of  his  life  an  officer  in  the 
Neapolitan  service,  but  afterwards  professed  a  Jesuit,  and  was 
Secretary  to  the  General  of  the  Order,  who,  on  the  abolition, 
was  imprisoned,  and  died  in  the  Castle  of  St.  Angelo.  He  is 
a  universal  scholar,  and  perfect  master  of  the  system  of  Spanish 
policy  in  the  government  of  their  American  colonies.  His 
brother,  whom  I  have  mentioned  in  a  former  letter,  is  Governor 
of  Arica,  and  commands  the  King's  troops  in  the  northern 
provinces  of  Peru,  and  is  known  here  to  be  very  ill  affected 
to  the  Spanish  Government.  He  intimates  in  his  letters  to 
his  brother  that,  from  the  excessive  imposts  on  the  Spanish 
colonists,  as  well  as  on  the  native  Peruvians,  they  were  on  the 
eve  of  a  revolt — that  by  his  influence  they  had  been  induced, 
within  his  districts,  to  pay  the  assessment  of  the  last  year,  but 
they  avow  resistance  to  any  future  attempt  to  tax  them  in  the 
same  excess. 

It  formerly  was  the  policy  of  Spain  to  send  drafts  from 
veteran  regiments,  to  maintain  the  government  of  their  colonies 
in  America.     The  Duke  de   Grimaldi,  (now  Ambassador   at 


262  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1779. 

Borne)  when  Minister  in  Spain,  first  discontinued  this  usage, 
and  embodied  new  regiments  for  the  American  service,  con- 
sisting chiefly  of  Flemings  and  other  foreigners,  the  greater 
part  of  whom,  from  time  to  time,  have  deserted  to  the  interior 
of  the  country,  where  they  have  connected  themselves  with 
the  natives,  and  are  ready  to  co-operate  in  any  attack  on  the 
Spanish  Government.  The  Prince  of  Quito  can  command  a 
considerable  force,  and  is  stated  to  be  an  implacable  enemy  to 
the  Spanish  Government. 

Memorandum  of  a  Conversation  with  Don  *  *  *. 

Rome,  August  4,  1779. 

His  situation  for  many  years,  both  in  Old  and  New  Spain, 
afforded  great  opportunities  of  being  well  informed  on  this  sub- 
ject. At  the  Havannah  his  advice  was  often  solicited  by  the 
Government.  Velasques,  who  so  bravely  defended  the  Moro, 
was  his  intimate  friend,  and  died  in  his  arms.  He  is  much 
respected  in  Rome,  and  lives  in  habits  of  great  intimacy  with 
the  chief  prelates  of  the  Government.  He  was  several  years 
an  Inquisitor,  both  in  Old  and  New  Spain,  chiefly  at  Mexico. 

I  have  communicated  with  many  other  principal  Mexican 
ex- Jesuits,  who  entirely  concur  with  Don  *  *  *.  "He  says 
that  the  Havannah  is  now  much  richer  than  when  taken  by 
the  English — that  the  fortifications  are  strengthened,  and,  in 
his  opinion,  an  attack  from  the  same  place  as  before  must 
prove  abortive — that  the  Spaniards  were  much  surprised  that 
the  English  had  not  made  their  attack  on  the  south  side, 
which,  in  that  event,  must  have  surrendered  in  a  short  time, 
and  that,  at  present,  if  an  attack  was  made  in  that  quarter, 
the  garrison  must  soon  submit,  as  any  number  of  troops  the 
Spaniards  can  keep  there  will  always  be  inferior  to  what  the 
extent  of  the  fortifications  requires." 

The  inhabitants  of  the  Havannah,  he  observed,  were  origi- 
nally well  inclined  to  submit  to  the  British  Government,  but 
the  conduct  of  Lord  A e  had  greatly  disgusted  them  by 


1779.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  263 

exacting  from  the  clergy  nearly  <£^200,000  as  a  nominal  free 
gift — that  a  similar  measure,  on  any  future  attempt  on  the 
Spanish  settlements,  would  prove  to  be  highly  impolitic — that, 
on  the  contrary,  it  would  be  wise  on  the  part  of  the  English, 
if  any  such  attempt  was  to  be  in  contemplation,  to  endeavour 
to  ejfface  the  former  impression,  by  having  it  well  understood 
that  no  exaction  from  the  clergy  should  be  permitted. 

The  attack  on  the  Havannah,  he  observed,  was  too  late  in 
the  season :  had  it  been  six  weeks  earlier,  the  troops  would 
not  have  been  exposed  to  sickness,  which  all  foreigners  experi- 
ence without  the  walls,  in  the  summer  months,  though,  within 
the  town,  they  are  exempt  from  it. 

Speaking  of  the  Continent  of  America,  he  says  that,  if 
Acapulco  and  La  Vera  Cruz  were  attacked,  they  must  be  soon 
reduced  by  a  very  inconsiderable  force,  and  the  entire  Ameri- 
can trade  of  Old  Spain  must  consequently  be  destroyed.  He 
knows  La  Vera  Cruz  at  present  to  be  extremely  rich :  if  an 
attack  should  be  made  from  the  East  Indies  on  the  Spanish 
settlements,  it  would  be  advisable  first  to  make  a  descent  on 
the  peninsula  of  California,  which  could  be  attended  with  little 
or  no  opposition,  and  would  be  highly  detrimental  to  the  trade 
of  Spain.  The  possession  of  that  peninsula,  with  the  capture 
of  Acapulco,  on  one  side  of  the  Isthmus,  and  of  La  Vera 
Cruz  on  the  other,  must  necessarily  force  Mexico  to  submission, 
probably  without  offensively  marching  a  single  league  into  the 
country ;  but  that  manifestoes  should  be  industriously  circu- 
lated, to  assure  protection  to  the  inhabitants. 

The  Jesuits  had  often  remonstrated  to  the  Court  of  Madrid 
against  the  impolicy  of  constructing  fortresses  in  the  interior 
parts  of  a  country  so  notoriously  disaffected  to  the  Spanish 
Government ;  as  such  fortresses  were  always  reducible  by  a 
small  force,  and  would  afterwards  serve  as  strongholds  to  secure 
the  independence  of  the  disaffected.  The  Spanish  Govern- 
ment paid  no  attention  to  these  remonstrances,  but  constructed 
several   fortresses,   at  distances  from  forty  to  eighty  leagues 


264  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1779. 

within  land,  from  La  Vera  Cruz,  which,  on  the  first  alarm, 
would  probably  be  seized  by  the  disaffected  natives,  as  the 
Spaniards,  even  admitting  them  to  be  well  affected  to  Govern- 
ment, cannot  sufficiently  garrison  them. 

In  the  event  of  any  attack  on  the  Spanish  settlements,  he 
thouorht  it  advisable  that  the  Ensjlish  should  declare  in  their 
manifestoes  that  their  object  was  to  retain  possession  of  the 
ports  of  Acapulco  and  La  Vera  Cruz  only^  and  that  they 
would  leave  all  the  interior  parts  of  the  country  to  be  governed 
by  such  regulations  as  were  most  agreeable  to  the  inhabitants, 
particularly  recommending  the  choice  of  governors  and  magis- 
trates, natives  of  their  Continent — a  hint  he  well  knew  would 
operate  with  inconceivable  energy,  by  contrasting  their  present 
state  of  oppression  with  the  establishment  of  a  system  of  go- 
vernment so  congenial  with  their  native  principles  ! 

The  most  powerful  Caciques,  he  observed,  might  readily 
be  excited  to  take  arms  against  the  Spaniards.  In  the  northern 
provinces,  many  of  their  native  princes  still  pride  themselves 
on  being  of  the  race  of  Montezuma,  and  entertain  an  insuper- 
able aversion  to  them.  He  is  decided  in  his  opinion,  from  his 
knowledge  of  this  country  and  disposition  of  the  natives,  that 
a  few  well  instructed  emissaries  would  render  more  essential 
service  than  any  military  force  unaided  by  such  coadjutors.  In 
every  quarter  the  antipathy  to  the  Spaniards  is  universal,  and, 
since  the  suppression  of  the  Jesuits^  their  Government  is  deprived 
of  the  only  medium  of  influence  on  the  minds  of  the  natives. 
The  conquest,  he  added,  might  be  said  to  be  already  effected 
to  our  hands  :  nothing  remained  for  us  but  to  take  possession. 

The  peninsula  of  California  he  represents  as  a  barren  soil, 
but  the  port  of  Loretto,  which  the  Manilla  ships  always  make 
in  their  passage  to  Acapulco,  is  of  much  consequence. 

The  Jesuits  of  Rome  are  now  reduced  to  the  habit  of  secular 
priests.  The  Duke  de  Grimaldi,  Ambassador  of  Spain,  has 
enjoined  a  very  strict  attention  to  be  directed  to  the  conduct 
of  those  from  Peru  and  Mexico,  ordering  that  they  should 


1779.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  265 

appear  in  person  from  time  to  time,  at  his  palace  in  the  Piazza 
di  Spagna.  The  present  Pope  is  known  to  be  well-affected  to 
the  Jesuits,  and  supposed  secretly  to  favour  their  general  re- 
establishment  ;  but  the  Court  of  Madrid  ijiaintains  an  ascen- 
dency in  the  Vatican,  and  even  constrained  the  Pope  to  create 
the  Spanish  Nuncio,  Palavicini,  a  Cardinal,  and  afterwards 
Secretary  of  State,  much  against  the  Pope^s  inclination. 

Yesterday  (September  10),  the  Duke  de  Grimaldi  had  an 
audience  of  the  Pope,  and  delivered  a  sharp  remonstrance 
against  the  permission  lately  granted  by  the  Court  of  Rome 
to  the  Jesuits  in  Russia  and  Poland  to  found  a  Noviciate — a 
circumstance  considered  as  a  dawning  of  the  general  re- 
establishment  of  the  Order. 

Should  it  be  deemed  necessary  to  come  to  a  more  explicit 
communication  with  these  Jesuits,  it  will  appear  but  equitable 
to  assure  to  them  at  least  an  equivalent  to  their  little  pensions, 
and  an  asylum,  in  the  event  of  a  discovery  of  any  negociation 
with  them.  A  few  of  them,  such  as  Don  *  *  *,  fcc,  receive 
liberal  allowances  from  their  families  and  connexions  in  Spain, 
&c.,  and  are  enabled  to  support  a  respectable  appearance  in 
Rome.  The  multitude  are,  nevertheless,  restricted  to  their 
narrow  pensions  of  six  Roman  crowns  per  month,  and  their 
mass  (only  one  paul  per  diem)  in  addition. 

I  am  acquainted  with  a  Mexican  Spaniard,  now  living  with 
Don  *  *  *^  who,  within  a  few  months  of  his  professing  him- 
self a  Jesuit,  surrendered  into  the  Treasury  of  the  Order  a 
property  nearly  equal  to  iJ40,000,  which  had  devolved  to  him 
from  his  family.  He  is  now  reduced  to  a  pittance  in  common 
with  the  lowest  of  his  Order. 

I  am  persuaded  that  many  of  these  Jesuits,  conversant  with 
the  Mexican  and  Peruvian  languages,  would  very  cheerfully 
expose  themselves  to  any  hazard  in  embarking  for  the  Conti- 
nent of  America,  under  an  assurance  of  a  free  exercise  of  their 
religion  being  secured  to  them.  Possibly  one  or  two  of  them 
might  be  found  serviceable  in  England  to  be  consulted  with. 


266  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1779. 

previous  to  the  arrangement  of  any  expedition  that  might  be 
formed. 

Rome,  November  28,  1779. 

In  the  apprehension  of  a  probable  rupture  with  Spain,  it 
occurred  to  me  that  any  authentic  information  relative  to  the 
state  of  the  Spanish  Colonies  might  prove  of  consequence ;  and, 
as  no  intelligence  whatever  could  be  so  interesting  as  that 
derived  from  the  Mexican  and  Peruvian  Jesuits,  I  made  such 
inquiry  as  seemed  to  throw  most  light  on  the  subject.  I  knew 
that  the  Papal  State  was  the  only  country  in  Europe  where 
such  information  could  be  obtained,  as,  since  the  general  aboli- 
tion of  the  Order,  it  had  afforded  an  asylum  to  the  ex- Jesuits 
of  every  nation.  I  had  long  lived  in  habits  of  particular  inti- 
macy with  those  I  have  before  named :  I  therefore  reasonably 
flattered  myself  that  I  had  the  means  of  procuring  the  most 
satisfactory  information  more  unsuspectedly  than  any  person 
who  had  not  antecedently  lived  in  equal  habits  of  communica- 
tion with  them.  No  person  in  a  public  character,  or  being  less 
in  their  confidence,  could,  without  great  suspicion  at  that  period^ 
have  commenced  an  intercourse  with  them. 

During  my  long  residence  in  Rome,  I  had  been  introduced 
to  many  other  ex- Jesuits  who  had  possessed  considerable  influ- 
ence in  the  Spanish  Colonies,  and  were  violently  incensed  at 
their  treatment.  I  was  therefore  led  to  believe  that,  should 
hostilities  commence  with  Spain,  they  might  be  used  as  effi- 
cient instruments  in  rendering  essential  services  to  Great 
Britain.  Some  corps  of  Irish  Catholics  might  be  embodied 
with  great  advantage  for  such  an  expedition. 

The  Abbate  B  *  *  *,  who  has  been  lately  appointed  by  the 
Pope  to  one  of  the  Catholic  Bishoprics  in  Ireland,  has  been 
many  years  resident  here,  as  agent  for  the  Irish  Catholic 
Bishops  and  clergy.  He  is  now  on  his  route  for  London,  and 
is  well  attached  to  the  British  Government.  I  have  found  him 
always  extremely  cordial  in  his  communications,  and  have 
written  to  Brummell,  desiring  him  to  give  him  a  private  iutro- 


1781.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.   .  267 

duction  to  Lord  North.  I  profited  here  of  his  introduction  to 
several  Mexican  Jesuits,  who  confirmed  every  thing  I  have 
hitherto  communicated. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Mr.  Corneille  (late  GoTernor  of  St. 
Helena)  to  Mr,  Hippisley. 

November  ,  1781. 
I  recollect  Governor  Johnston's  conversation  with  me  on 
the  South  American  business,  and  perfectly  remember  his 
telling  me  of  having  despatched  the  Shark  sloop,  commanded 
by  Captain  Macdowjall,  somewhere  near  Madeira,  in  March 
last,  to  the  Rio  Janeiro,  with  a  Jesuit,  taken  by  a  Glasgow 
privateer  in  a  Spanish  ship  bound  to  Spain — that,  in  conse- 
quence of  some  intelligence  in  the  hands  of  Lord  Hillsborough 
of  South  America  being  in  a  state  of  revolt  against  the 
Spanish  Government,  it  was  thought  this  Jesuit  might  be  a 
proper  person  for  encouraging  the  same  ....  Mr.  Johnston 
expressed  great  satisfaction  on  receiving  Captain  Macdowall's 
packet,  wherein  he  mentioned  the  safe  landing  of  the  Jesuit, 
with  further  particulars — that  several  of  the  Spanish  provinces 
were  then  in  a  state  of  revolt,  and  that  a  general  dissatisfac- 
tion ran  through  the  whole  coasts  of  Chili  and  Peru,  wishing 
to  shake  oif  the  Spanish  yoke.  The  name  of  a  particular  chief 
thus  in  arms  was  therein  mentioned  as  the  principal  leader  of 
the  revolters,  who  was  very  formidable  to  the  Spaniards. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  to  Warren  Hastmgs^  Esq.^  (then  Governor- 
General  of  Bengal)  from  Mr.  Hippisley. 

Fort  St.  George,  August  11,  1782. 
Colonel  Fullarton,  on  his  departure  for  the  command  of 
Trincomalee,  very  anxiously  expressed  his  wishes  that  the 
accompanying  papers  might  be  submitted  to  your  perusal. 
In  apology  for  the  Colonel  and  myself,  it  is  incumbent  on  me 
to  say  that  I  have  been  drawn  into  this  communication  from 
having  mentioned  to  him  that  the  extracts  of  my  correspond- 


268  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1782. 

ence  with  Lord  Loughborough  had  the  good  fortune  to  have 
received  some  share  of  your  notice.  Colonel  Fullarton,  con- 
scious of  the  magnitude  and  importance  of  the  object,  ex- 
pressed a  desire  that  his  own  ideas  and  specific  propositions  to 
Government  on  the  same  subject  might  at  least  have  equal 
advantage  with  my  little  labours  ;  and  he  has  also  requested 
me  to  say  that,  if  the  situation  of  India  under  your  auspices 
should  permit  the  revival  of  an  enterprise  against  the  Spanish 
settlements,  he  would  then  hope  for  the  honour  of  paying  his 
personal  respects  to  you,  and  submitting  to  your  judgment  the 
detail  of  many  incidental  circumstances  which  had  originally 
been  arranged  for  the  expedition. 

In  the  memoranda  which  I  gave  Mr.  S ,  on  his  depar- 
ture for  Calcutta,  I  mentioned  the  conversations  I  had  been 
honoured  with  by  Lord  North  on  this  subject — the  confirma- 
tion of  the  revolt  in  Peru,  &;c.,  received  by  the  capture  of  the 
Corunna  packet,  and  the  intelligence  brought  by  Captain  Mac- 
dowall,  who  had  been  despatched  by  Commodore  Johnston, 
with  a  Jesuit,  to  the  Eio  Janeiro. 

This  intelligence  has  been  further  confirmed  by  Sir  Thomas 
Mills,  whose  information  is  derived  immediately  from  the 
Viceroy  of  the  Brazils,  purporting  that  Peru  was,  at  the  last 
moment  of  advice,  in  a  state  of  revolt  that  threatened  the 
entire  subversion  of  the  Spanish  Government.  I  need  not 
suggest  to  you,  sir,  that  the  rebellion  is  of  a  nature  that  cannot 
be  expected  speedily  to  terminate,  or,  if  crushed  for  the 
moment,  the  Spaniards  can  have  any  security  against  its 
revival,  whenever  the  least  encouragement  is  held  out  to  the 
original  revolters. 

My  first  communication  (June,  1779)  to  Lord  Lough- 
borough was  previous  to  our  rupture  with  Spain.  Colonel 
FuUarton's  overtures,  in  the  beginning  of  the  following  year 
(January,  1780),  preceded  by  some  months  my  return  from 
Italy.  At  that  period  we  had  no  communication  on  the  sub- 
ject :  our  information  was   drawn  from  different  sources,  but 


1799.]  LOKD  CASTLEREAGH.  269 

has  received  the  most  irrefragable  confirmation  from  a  variety 
of  facts,  supplying  weight  and  credit  to  each  other. 

J.  Cox  HiPPlSLEY. 

N.B.  The  preceding  letter  was  accompanied  by  Colonel 
Fullarton's  opinion  (dated  May,  1781),  prepared  for  a  Council 
of  War  between  St.  Jago  and  the  equinoctial,  and  his  Propo- 
sitions for  an  Expedition  to  South  America  by  India,  dated 
June  3,  1780,  laid  before  the  Cabinet  by  Lord  North,  and 
approved. 

On   the  Liheratmi  of  South  America  from  the  Dominion  of 

Spain. 

BY  SIR  R.  ABERCROMBY. 

The  people  of  Great  Britain  in  general  take  little  share  in 
the  affairs  of  foreign  nations.  The  balance  of  power  is  a  sub- 
ject they  do  not  understand  ;  and  they  are  little  interested  in 
any  thing  that  does  not  tend  to  the  security  and  extension  of 
commerce,  and  the  dominion  of  the  sea. 

To  keep  up  the  spirits  of  the  nation,  and  to  engage  it  heartily 
in  the  further  prosecution  of  the  war,  it  seems  necessary  that 
every  military  enterprise  we  shall  undertake  shall  be  directed 
to  such  objects  as  shall  tend  to  secure  to  us  or  to  enlarge  the 
sources  of  our  commerce  and  wealth. 

With  this  view  it  has  occurred  that  the  removal  of  the 
French  from  Egypt  should  be  effected  before  a  negociation  for 
peace  should  take  place  :  to  allow  it  to  remain  in  their  posses- 
sion would  threaten  the  security  of  our  dominions  in  the  East ; 
at  any  rate,  were  the  cession  of  it  to  become  an  object  of  discus- 
sion at  the  peace,  a  considerable  degree  of  weight  would  be  given 
to  it  in  the  general  scale,  and  concessions  would  be  demanded 
of  more  consequence  than  we  would  be  inclined  to  grant. ^ 

But  of  all  the  objects  that  ought  to  claim  our  attention,  the 

^  This  paper,  which  is  not  dated,  is  shown  by  the  above  paragraph  to 
have  been  written  during  the  occupation  of  Egypt  by  the  French,  conse- 
quently, between  1798  and  1800.  We  shall,  therefore,  not  err  much  in 
placing  it  under  1799. 


270  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1799. 

liberation  of  South  America  from  the  dominion  of  Spain 
seems  to  stand  first ;  it  can  only  be  accomplished  while  we  are 
still  at  war  with  Spain,  and  if  it  should  be  happily  effected,  it 
would  be  beyond  the  reach  of  negociation  at  a  peace. 

It  should  be  undertaken  without  any  view  to  conquest,  to 
exclusive  commerce,  or  to  plunder.  Every  port  in  South 
America,  and  the  whole  trade  of  that  extensive  Continent, 
should  be  declared  free,  and  laid  open  to  every  nation  in  the 
world.  Every  country  would  feel  interested  in  it,  Spain  and 
Portugal  excepted:  Great  Britain,  however,  from  her  enter- 
prise, from  her  capital,  and  from  her  industry,  would  in  reality 
possess  nine  parts  in  ten  of  this  great  commerce.  A  market 
would  be  equally  opened  for  British  and  for  East  India  com- 
modities. In  a  short  time,  the  Brazils,  which  would  follow 
the  fate  of  the  Spanish  settlements  in  South  America,  and  the 
other  countries  now  under  the  dominion  of  Spain,  would  pro- 
duce more  sugar,  cotton,  and  indigo,  than  all  of  our  West 
India  Islands,  which  we  retain  at  a  great  expense,  and  which 
are  frequently  the  source  of  wars. 

Should  Great  Britain  decline  at  this  time  to  undertake  this 
great  enterprise,  some  other  nation  will  attempt  it,  on  princi- 
ples less  liberal  and  less  advantageous  to  the  happiness  of 
South  America  and  to  the  world  at  large. 

The  present  state  of  that  country  gives  us  reason  to  believe 
that  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  accomplish  this  object.  The 
Creole  Spaniards  and  Indians  are  oppressed  beyond  measure : 
no  office  can  be  held  in  that  part  of  the  world  but  by  a  native 
of  Old  Spain ;  and  the  restrictions  on  trade  are  severe  in  the 
extreme.  Justice  is  venal,  and  extortion  commonly  practised 
by  all  in  power.  The  clergy,  who  have  great  influence  over 
an  ignorant  and  superstitious  people,  are  in  general  natives  of 
New  Spain,  and  consequently  would  favour  a  revolution.  It 
seems  only  necessary  that  we  should  remove  the  Spanish  force, 
declare  to  the  people  what  our  intentions  are,  and  the  Spanish 
Government  would  fall  to  the  ground. 


1799.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  271 

Two  expeditions  should  be  fitted  out :  one  to  proceed  to  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  from  thence  to  the  River  Plate ;  the 
other  should  rendezvous  at  Barbadoes  or  the  Gulf  of  Paria, 
and  should  act  on  the  provinces  of  Oaraccas  and  Venezuela. 

Monte  Video  is  the  principal  port  and  rendezvous  for 
shipping  in  the  River  Plate,  and  is  situated  on  the  left  bank 
of  that  great  river  :  Buenos  Ayres,  the  capital  of  the  country, 
is  situated  on  the  right.  One  or  two  line-of-battle  ships,  and 
as  many  frigates,  are  commonly  stationed  at  Monte  Video,  and 
two  battalions  of  Spanish  infantry  at  Buenos  Ayres,  for  the 
defence  of  that  country.  Of  the  force  at  Monte  Video  little 
is  known. 

The  approach  to  Buenos  Ayres  by  water  can  only  be  made 
in  vessels  of  a  small  draught,  on  account  of  the  shoals.  The 
climate  is  good,  and  the  country  abounds  in  provisions.  Roads 
have  been  opened  across  the  country  to  Chili  and  Peru,  and 
European  commodities  are  carried  over  land  into  those  pro- 
vinces, which  are  paid  for  in  specie,  and  brought  from  Buenos 
Ayres  to  Europe. 

The  expedition  against  the  Terra  Firma  should  act  in  the 
rivers  Oronoque  and  Guarapichi,  and  against  La  Guayra  and 
Portocabello.  The  above  mentioned  rivers  give  an  opening 
into  the  province  of  Cumana. 

La  Guayra  is  the  port  of  St.  Juan  de  Leon,  of  the  Caraccas  ; 
it  covers  the  approach  to  that  great  capital,  and  is  strongly 
fortified  to  the  sea:  a  landing,  however,  may  probably  be^ 
effected  to  the  right  or  left  of  La  Guayra,  particularly  at  the 
small  river  Tuy  ;  and,  if  the  batteries  to  the  sea  can  be  turned, 
(which  they  probably  may)  this  fortress  would  soon  fall,  and 
.consequently  the  capital  of  the  province. 

Portocabello  is  said  to  be  a  place  of  considerable  strength, 
but  probably,  like  La  Guayra,  it  is  not  equally  strong  on  the 
land  side  as  on  the  water.  It  may  admit  of  a  doubt  whether, 
in  carrying  on  these  operations,  we  should  do  more  than  block- 
ade these  fortresses,  taking  it  for  granted  that,  as  soon  as  the 


272  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1799. 

revolution  had  taken  effect,  they  would  surrender :  but  it  is  to 
be  apprehended  that  a  people,  who  possess  so  little  energy  as 
the  Creole  Spaniards,  would  not  venture  to  adopt  so  decided 
a  measure  as  throwing  off  the  Spanish  yoke,  until  they  have 
their  enemies  removed,  and  British  garrisons  in  La  Guayra 
and  Portocabello. 

If  a  revolution  could  be  set  fairly  on  foot  in  the  principal 
settlements  on  the  coast,  it  would  spread  with  rapidity  into  the 
interior  of  the  country.  Emissaries  would  be  sent  to  propa- 
gate the  news  of  the  joyful  event,  and  to  assure  them  that 
the  British  troops  should  not  quit  the  country  till  relieved 
from  the  Spanish  yoke,  and  until  a  new  government  of  their 
own  should  be  established.  All  that  would  be  required  on  the 
part  of  Great  Britain,  in  the  first  instance,  would  be  to  furnish 
them  with  arms  and  ammunition,  and  to  assist  them  in  framing 
a  form  of  government,  best  suited  to  the  genius  and  temper  of 
the  people. 

Much  information  and  many  details  will  be  necessary  before 
these  undertakings  can  be  set  on  foot.  Captain  Mc  Douall,  of 
the  Ganges,  who  was  an  Admiral  in  the  Portuguese  service 
when  Portugal  endeavoured  to  establish  a  colony  at  St.  Sacra- 
ment, certainly  knows  the  navigation  of  the  River  Plate,  and 
among  the  Spanish  prisoners  now  in  England,  with  a  little 
address,  some  of  them  may  be  found  who  can  give  pretty 
accurate  knowledge  of  the  River  Plate  and  of  the  coasts  of 
.Terra  Firma;  and  General  Miranda  is  still  in  London. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Picton,  the  Commandant  of  Trinidad, 
was  instructed,  in  July,  1797,  to  procure  every  possible  infor- 
mation relative  to  the  neighbouring  provinces  of  Cumana,  th& 
Caraccas,  and  Venezuela :  and  Colonel  Maitland  might  be 
directed  to  go  to  Trinidad  to  arrange  with  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Picton  the  plan  of  operations. 

The  province  of  Guyana  is  already  nearly  in  our  posses- 
sion :  there  remains,  however,  in  the  possession  of  the  French 
the     small    island    of    Cayenne,    and     some    inconsiderable 


1799.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  273 

plantations  on  the  main  land.  It  may  be  necessary  to  root  out 
the  French,  by  removing  the  garrison  and  the  French  settlers 
in  this  island,  and  by  a  total  destruction  of  the  fort  and  the 
adjacent  town. 

To  ensure  the  success  of  this  grand  enterprise,  a  very  con- 
siderable force  (not  less,  probably,  than  12,000  men)  would 
be  required :  were  it  to  fail,  the  unfortunate  natives  would  be 
left  to  the  merciless  revenge  of  their  cruel  masters,  and  many 
of  them  would  end  their  days  on  the  scaffold,  or  in  the 
mines.  The  diflSculty  seems  to  be  to  find  a  sufficient  dis- 
posable force ;  this,  however,  may  be  procured,  provided  the 
general  principles  on  which  this  enterprise  is  founded  shall  be 
approved  of. 

Nothing  has  been  said  of  Mexico.  Unless  the  Americans 
were  to  co-operate,  we  have  not  a  sufficient  force  to  favour  a 
revolution  in  that  part  of  the  Spanish  settlements ;  the  proba- 
bility, however,  is  that  the  same  spirit  would  prevail  through 
that  great  continent. 

General  Miranda  to  the  Bight  Hon.  Henry  Dundas. 

D.  Francisco  Miranda  presents  his  respectful  compliments 
to  the  Right  Honourable  Henry  Dundas.  He  has  the  honour 
to  send  him  copies  and  translations  of  the  enclosed  papers, 
which  he  received  three  days  ago ;  and  as  the  importance  of 
the  subject  is  perfectly  obvious,  he  will  only  say  a  few  words 
respecting  the  person  who  writes  them. 

D.  Manuel  Gual  is  the  eldest  son  of  D.  Matheo^Gual,  who 
commanded  at  La  Guaira  when  Admiral  Knowles  attacked 
that  place  in  the  year  1743.  He  is  a  native  of  Caracas,  has 
served  in  the  regular  infantry  of  that  province,  and  enjoys 
great  popularity  in  the  country,  being  descended  from  a  noble 
and  rich  fauiily  at  La  Guaira.  General  de  Miranda  knew  him 
intimately  in  his  youth,  and  has  been  informed  since  that  time 
that  he  has  become  a  man  of  distinguished  abilities  and  conse- 
quence in  the  country. 

VOL.  VII.  T 


274  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1799. 

If  the  Right  Honourable  Minister  should  think  proper  to 
have  a  conference  on  the  subject  with  General  de  Miranda,  he 
will  do  himself  the  honour  to  wait  on  him  at  any  time  he  may 
think  convenient,  and  will  communicate  to  him  any  informa- 
tion in  his  power  relative  to  this  important  object. 

He  takes  this  opportunity  of  making  his  acknowledgments 
for  the  kind  interference  which  Mr.  Dundas  (at  the  instance  of 
a  friend)  was  so  good  as  to  employ  on  his  behalf,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  obtaining  a  passport  for  the  United  States  of  A  merica. 
He  will  always  remember  it  with  gratitude  and  respect. 

London,  September  30,  1799. 
Queen  Charlotte  Row,  No.  9.  Marylebone  New  Road. 

[Translation,  No.  1.] 
Don  Manuel  Gual  to  General  Miranda. 

Puerto  Espana,  Island  of  Trinidad,  July  12,  1799. 

My  dear  Friend — I  would  not  write  to  you,  if  it  were  possible 
for  me  to  come  and  see  you — Miranda,  if  the  ingratitude  which 
you  have  experienced  from  mankind,  if  a  love  of  study  and 
retirement  (as  I  have  seen  related  of  you  in  a  public  paper), 
have  not  rendered  you  forgetful  of  these  delightful  regions,  and 
if  the  pure  glory  of  becoming  the  deliverer  of  your  country — as 
the  American  people  wish  but  for  one — do  you  come  and  be 
that  one.  Miranda,  I  feel  no  other  ambition  than  to  see  this 
noble  enterprise  accomplished,  nor  desire  a  greater  honour 
than  to  serve  under  your  orders. 

I  enjoy  at  this  moment  the  distinction  of  being  proscribed 
by  the  Spanish  Government  as  the  author  of  the  revolution 
attempted  at  Caracas  in  the  year  1797.  Persecuted  at  Cura9oa, 
and  reclaimed  in  all  the  islands  neutral  or  friendly  to  the 
Spanish  Government,  I  came  to  seek  the  protection  which  I 
found  was  offered  to  us  in  the  Proclamations  of  the  Governor- 
General  of  this  place. 

The  paper  annexed  (No.  1)  will  convey  to  you  an  idea  of 
the  facility  of  an  enterprise  which  would  astonish  all  the  world, 


1799.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  275 

and  prove  the  glory  and  honour  of  Americans,  thanks  to  the 
hatred  which  the  Spanish  Government  inspires.  In  the  other 
(No.  2),  you  will  se6  what  are  my  wishes.  I  there  speak  to  a 
people  attached  to  their  religion,  and  anxiously  desiring  their 
independence.  Do  you  be,  if  not  the  chief,  at  least  the  agent, 
of  your  unfortunate  country,  in  carrying  into  eff'ect  the  majestic 
work  of  its  deliverance;  which,  in  order  to  be  accomplished, 
only  requires  to  be  begun.  You  need  not  entertain  a  doubt  of 
success.  The  smallest  assistance  at  the  outset  would  be  suffi- 
cient, and  it  might  be  obtained  in  these  islands  by  a  simple 
order  from  the  English  Ministers. 

The  credit  I  enjoy  among  my  countrymen,  increased  by  the 
persecution  I  now  experience  from  the  tyrannical  Government 
of  Spain  (which  seeks  to  secure  me  dead  or  alive),  may  render 
my  persecuted  person  of  some  utility.  Whether  it  be  as  an 
agent  or  as  chief  that  you  may  think  proper  to  act,  should  you 
have  an  idea  that  I  can  be  of  service,  you  may  communicate 
your  wishes  to  me  through  the  medium  of  Mr.  Picton,  Go- 
vernor-General of  this  Island.  You  may  send  your  answer  to 
this  letter  through  the  same  channel,  as  he  will  always  be 
acquainted  with  the  place  of  my  residence. 

Our  enterprise  failed  only  from  this  circumstance.  In  my 
absence  from  Caracas,  the  Government  discovered  our  plan 
through  the  imprudence  of  a  simpleton.  Many  persons  were 
immediately  arrested,  and  the  most  active  measures  were  im- 
mediately taken  both  at  La  Guaira  and  at  Caracas ;  so  that, 
finding  our  combinations  defeated,  I  was  obliged  to  make  my 
escape  with  the  view  of  seeking  succours  in  English  colonies, 
for  the  hopes  of  my  countrymen  are  still  alive.  This  is,  in  a 
few  words,  an  account  of  the  miscarriage  of  our  attempt,  since 
which  the  desire  of  independence  has  only  increased.  That 
you  may  come,  I  again  repeat  it,  and  have  the  glory  of  esta- 
blishing it,  is  the  ardent  wish  of  your  most  sincere  and  earliest 
friend  and  fellow-countryman, 

Manuel  Gual. 
T  2 


276  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1799. 

[Translation,  No.  2.] 
Memorial  of  Manuel  Gual^  'presented  to  his  Excellency  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief of  the  Windward  Islands,  through  the  medium 
of  General  Picton,  Gomrnor  of  Trinidad. 

Trinidad,  May  2,  1799. 

Sir — The  Abbe  Eaynal,  after  haviog  spoken  of  the  unfortu- 
nate expedition  of  Admiral  Anson  against  the  empire  of  Peru, 
proceeds  thus : — "  Tant  d'obstacles  a  Tenvahissement  de  TAme- 
rique  Espagnole  avaient,  dit-on,  fait  naitre  en  Angleterre, 
durant  les  derni^res  hostilites,  un  syst^me  etonnant.  Le  projet 
de  cette  puissance,  alors  maitresse  de  toutes  les  mers,  etoit  de 
s'^emparer  de  La  Vera  Cruz,  et  de  s'y  fortifier  d"*une  mani^re 
redoutable.  On  n'aurait  propose  au  Mexique  un  joug  etranger, 
pour  lequel  on  lui  connaissait  trop  d^eloignement.  Le  plan 
etait  de  le  detacher  de  la  m^tropole,  de  le  rendre  arbitre  de 
son  sort,  et  de  le  laisser  maitre  de  se  choisir  un  Souverain,  ou  de 
se  former  en  Republique.  Comme  il  n''y  avait  point  de  troupes 
dans  le  pays,  la  revolution  etait  assuree,  et  elle  se  serait  egale- 
ment  faite  dans  toutes  les  provinces  de  ce  vaste  Continent,  qui 
avaient  les  memes  motifs  de  la  desirer,  les  memes  facilites  pour 
Texecuter.  Les  efforts  de  la  cour  de  Madrid  pour  recouvrir 
ses  droits  devaient  etre  impuissants,  parceque  la  Grande 
Bretagne  se  chargeait  de  les  repousser,  a  condition  que  les 
nouveaux  Etats  lui  accorderaient  un  commerce  exclusif,  mais 
infiniment  raoins  defavorable  que  celui  sous  lequel  ils  avaient 
si  long  tems  g^mi." — Li  v.  8. 

If  I  were  permitted  to  enter  into  a  discussion  of  the  interests 
of  England,  I  should  say  that  it  would  be  infinitely  more  to 
her  advantage  to  undertake  this  great  work  at  the  present 
moment  than  it  would  have  been  at  any  former  period. 
Attached  as  the  Court  of  Madrid  is  to  the  Executive  Directory 
with  chains  which  it  cannot  break,  Spanish  America  can  only 
be  regarded  as  a  colony  of  France ;  and,  on  this  account,  has 
the  Directory  guaranteed  to  the  King  of  Spain  his  colonial 


1799.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  277 

system;  so  that  the  question  whether  the  independence  of 
Spanish  America  would  be  advantageous  to  England  is  the 
same  as  to  doubt  whether  it  would  be  for  her  interests  to  liberate 
these  immense  colonies  from  the  Directorial  power — whether  it 
would  be  for  her  advantage  to  deprive  it  of  a  source  of  riches 
on  which  it  calculates  for  the  continuation  of  the  war  against 
her — whether  it  would  be  for  her  interest  to  secure  her  own 
colonies,  and  to  ensure  the  important  harbour  of  Bahiaonda 
from  all  hostile  attempts  by  exciting  a  war,  founded  in  justice, 
on  the  territories  of  her  enemies — whether  it  would  be  for  her 
interest  to  be  certain  of  the  appro visonment  of  her  Colonies, 
and  of  a  supply  of  beasts  of  burden  on  the  eve  of  harvest,  and 
of  which  she  may  be  deprived  by  a  ferocious  decree  of  the 
French  Directory — whether  it  would  be  for  her  interest  to  give 
a  favourable  impulsion  to  a  revolution  which  the  American 
people  are  destined  to  experience,  either  from  their  own  exer- 
tions, or  by  the  intrigues  of  the  Directory — whether  it  be  for 
her  advantage  to  open  to  her  fleets  the  harbours  of  this  vast 
portion  of  the  globe,  and  to  shut  them  against  those  of  her 
enemies — in  a  word,  it  would  be  to  question  whether,  in  the 
present  day,  when  the  commerce  and  manufactures  of  Great 
Britain  have  been  extended  to  a  degree  of  which  no  example  is 
to  be  found  in  the  history  of  nations,  it  would  be  for  her  ad- 
vantage to  open  to  herself  a  thousand  new  channels  for  the 
sale  of  her  commodities,  by  increasing  to  an  incalculable  amount 
the  objects  of  consumption  and  of  production  in  America,  and 
by  aiding  her  in  overturning  a  Government  founded  in  devas- 
tation, and  enabling  her  to  establish  a  Government  which 
would  conduce  to  her  prosperity — or  whether,  on  the  contrary, 
it  would  be  more  to  her  advantage  to  sacrifice  these  great 
interests,  in  consideration  of  a  Court  which  promoted  the  inde- 
pendence of  North  America — a  Court  which  has  deserted  her 
Allies,  and  which  has  shamefully  submitted  itself  to  the  power 
of  the  French  Directory — ^finally,  in  consideration  of  a  Court 
which  may  now  be  regarded  as  null,  and  which,  by  its  impru- 


278  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1799. 

dence,  is  equally  without  the  power  of  breaking  its  chains,  or 
of  carrying  on  war. 

And  what  sacrifices  are  required  of  England,  in  order  to 
effect  so  great  a  work  ?  Your  Excellency  knows  as  well  as  I 
do — thanks  to  the  horror  inspired  by  the  Spanish  Government 
throuo-hout  the  whole  Continent  of  America — thanks  to  the 
imprudent  conduct  of  the  Court  of  Madrid,  which  has  com- 
pletely succeeded  in  irritating  the  minds  of  the  people  by  new 
impositions  and  new  taxes — thanks  to  Fortune,  who  has  placed 
nearly  all  the  arms  in  the  hands  of  Americans,  and  to  the 
number  of  discontented  who  are  known  to  be  among  the  regular 
troops  in  the  country — and  thanks  to  the  general  confusion 
which  would  certainly  prevail  in  all  the  measures  which  the 
Government  might  adopt  for  continuing  the  subjugation  of 
America — that  you  may  be  confident  that  all  that  is  necessary 
are  four  or  six  thousand  stand  of  arms,  as  many  uniforms  (if 
they  can  conveniently  be  procured),  a  few  pieces  of  field 
artillery,  a  small  quantity  of  ammunition,  about  two  hundred 
regular  troops,  in  addition  to  the  Spanish  Americans  who  may 
be  collected  here  from  the  Costa  Firma,  and  two  frigates  for  a 
few  days  only,  to  co-operate  with  the  troops  in  the  first  attacks. 
The  above  alone  would  be  sufficient  to  ensure  the  success  of 
the  expedition,  and  to  overturn  the  colossal  dominion  of  the 
Spanish  Government,  which  is  ready  to  fall  from  its  own 
weakness. 

This  is  the  assistance  which  I  ask  in  the  name  of  my  country, 
for  such  would  be  her  wishes  if  it  were  possible  for  her  to  mani- 
fest them ;  and  it  may  be  proper  for  me  to  add,  with  the  view 
of  further  promoting  the  success  of  this  great  undertaking, 
that,  in  such  a  case,  I  might  immediately  be  authorized  to 
enter  into  treaty  with  Great  Britain,  and  that  I  should  not  fail 
to  regard  it  as  my  first  duty,  as  it  would  bo  the  first  interest 
of  my  country,  to  represent  to  America  the  necessity  of  being 
just  and  generous,  and  of  continuing  to  deserve  by  an  intimate 
alliance  the  protection  of  that  great  nation,  if  her  object  is  to 


1799.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  279 

avoid  a  long  war,  and  to  fix,  at  this  moment,  her  destinies  for 
ever.  Manuel  Gual. 


EXTRACTS  FROM  PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  AUDIENCIA,  OR  SUPREME 
TRIBUNAL  OF  THE  CARACAS. 

Opinion  of  the  Audiencia  respecting  a  proposal  for  re-conquering 
the  Island  of  Trinidad, 

May  10,  1797. 

A  most  secret  letter  has  been  laid  before  the  Audiencia, 
dated  the  9th  instant,  from  the  President,  Governor,  and 
Captain-General,  enclosing  two  papers,  signed  on  the  27th  of 
March  last,  by  the  French  Pardo  (man  of  colour),  John 
Basilio  Constant,  an  inhabitant  of  the  Island  of  Trinidad,  and 
a  secret  letter  from  the  Governor  of  Cumana,  dated  the  4th  of 
April  last,  all  proposing  the  re -conquest  of  that  Island,  upon 
the  supposition  of  the  English  Government  there  being  ab- 
horred, and  of  the  number  of  discontented  Spaniards,  French, 
and  Germans  in  the  Island  being  much  superior  to  that  of  the 
garrison,  upon  which  the  President  desires  to  hear  the  opinion 
of  the  Audiencia. 

The  latter,  after  stating  a  variety  of  reflections  upon  the 
difficulty  and  the  uncertainty  of  the  success  of  the  enterprise, 
thinks  that  further  information  is  necessary,  before  a  decided 
opinion  can  be  given  on  the  subject ;  and  therefore  recommends 
that  the  Governor  of  Cumana  should  be  directed  to  inquire 
particularly  of  Don  Joseph  Bosch,  a  resident  on  the  coast  of 
Paria,  and  of  Don  Miguel  Alcala,  who  was  at  Curapano,  what 
degree  of  confidence  was  to  be  placed  in  John  Basilio  Constant, 
and  in  M.  Cadet  Blanfet,  an  inhabitant  of  the  Island,  who, 
Constant  says,  would  be  the  best  channel  for  giving  and  re- 
ceiving intelligence ;  and  how  far  the  Frenchmen,  Serre,  Bour- 
denaus,  and  Constant,  possessed  the  influence  they  were  stated 
to  have  at  Trinidad,  and  if  they  were  really  as  well  disposed 
as  they  pretended  to  be. 


280  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1790. 

Bepresentation  of  the  Audiencia  to  the  King  of  Spain,  hi  his 
Supreme  Council  of  the  Indies. 

Caraccas,  August  12,  1797. 
Mr.  DufF,  who  resided  a  long  time  ago  at  Cadiz,  as  British 
Consul,  communicated  to  his  Court  a  particular  account  of  the 
Island  of  Trinidad ;  stating  the  quality  of  the  soil,  its  produc- 
tions, the  trade  of  the  Island  with  Spain,  its  advantageous 
situation ;  and  that  all  the  provinces  within  the  jurisdiction  of 
this  A  udiencia,  in  which  provinces  there  is  but  a  small  military 
force,  would  very  soon  submit  to  the  British  Government,  if 
they  were  either  summoned  or  invited  to  it  by  a  very  small 
force  to  afford  them  protection ;  that  the  said  provinces  had, 
for  a  long  series  of  years,  been  abandoned  to  the  Guipuscoan 
Company  of  Caraccas,  which  carried  on  an  exclusive  trade,  till 
it  was  dissolved  in  the  year  1 780,  and  the  Philippine  Company 
erected  out  of  it,  with  considerable  privileges  ;  that,  during  the 
monopoly  of  the  former  Company,  the  trade  consisted  of  but  a 
few  cargoes  of  cocoa,  which  were,  for  the  most  part,  sent  to 
Holland,  whence  they  drew  their  principal  supplies  through 
the  medium  of  the  Island  of  Cura^oa,  which  trade  is  now 
become  an  object  of  great  consequence ;  that  the  commerce  of 
the  said  provinces  is  more  flourishing  than  that  of  any  other 
under  the  Spanish  dominion  in  America ;  that  their  produc- 
tions may  still  be  increased,  and  sugar  and  tobacco  cultivated 
to  great  extent ;  that  the  inhabitants  all  along  the  coast  have 
always  been  inclined  to  smuggling,  to  form  connexion  with 
foreigners,  and  are  very  impatient  of  the  restrictions  they  labour 
under ;  that  the  military  establishment  consists  of  four  or  five 
battalions  of  provisional  troops,  four  of  them  of  Militia,  one  of 
Veteran  Artillery  of  100  men,  and  many  detached  companies, 
some  of  which  are  of  mulattoes ;  that  an  advantageous  and  useful 
intercourse  with  the  whole  coast  may  be  kept  up  from  Trinidad, 
which  would  lead  to  the  most  favourable  consequences,  such  as 
great  extent  of  trade  and  other  matters,  especially  to  the  object 


/ 


1799.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  281 

most  to  be  attended  to — the  reduction  of  Cumana,  Guyana, 
and  Maracaybo,  in  none  of  which  places  would  any  resistance 
be  found,  but  quite  the  reverse ;  and  that  the  same  would  pro- 
bably happen  in  regard  to  Caraccas,  as  appears  by  the  docu- 
ment No.  2.1 

Upon  this,  and  perhaps  some  other  information,  the  opinion 
No.  3  2  ^as  formed  in  London  on  the  SOth  of  March  last,  ex- 
pressing that  the  principal  advantages  that  the  English  would 
derive  from  the  possession  of  Trinidad  were  the  excluding 
Spain  from  a  station  which  would  have  afforded  her  the  means 
of  destroying  the  English  West  India  Islands  and  their  trade ; 
the  unlimited  liberty  of  carrying  on  trade  with  the  provinces 
of  Caraccas  and  Cumana,  the  most  fertile  of  all  the  Spanish 
territory  in  America,  especially  having  the  advantage  of  pos- 
sessing Demerara ;  whence  it  may  be  said  with  truth  that  there 
is  not  a  point  between  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  and  the  mouth 
of  the  River  of  the  Amazons,  where  British  manufactures  may 
not  be  imported ;  that  the  most  important  object  is  that  the 
communication  of  the  English  with  the  Spanish  provinces 
should  be  with  a  view  to  encourage  their  discontent  against  the 
Spanish  Government,  and  to  give  every  kind  of  assistance  to 
the  disaffected ;  that  the  province  of  Caraccas  and  all  the  addi- 
tional territory  included  in  the  privilege  of  the  Guipuscoan 
Company,  between  which  and  Trinidad  a  constant  and  direct 
communication  was  kept  up,  is  said  to  be  the  most  disaffected 
part  of  Spanish  America;  that  the  jealousy  of  Spain  on  this 
subject  was  so  great,  that  the  possession  of  Demerara  by  the 
English  was  one  of  the  principal  complaints  against  them,  and 
taken  up  as  a  cause  of  the  war ;  that  this  point  is  considered 
as  affecting  the  existence  of  the  Spanish  Empire  in  America ; 
that,  at  any  rate,  the  English  should  endeavour  to  make  them- 

^  This  document  is  entitled  "  Mr.  Duff's  Communication  respecting 
the  Island  of  Trinidad." 

^  This  document  is  entitled  "  Minute  respecting  Trinidad."  In  the 
margin  it  is  called  "  Mr.  Dundas's  Instructions." 


282  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1799. 

selves  feared  by  their  enemies,  and  bring  them  to  a  peace,  by- 
giving  instructions  immediately  to  the  Governors  of  Demerara 
and  Trinidad  to  use  their  utmost  efforts  to  open  commercial 
and  political  communication  with  the  neighbouring  provinces 
of  Spanish  America ;  and  that  it  would  be  very  useful,  for  the 
purpose  of  exciting  an  alarm  at  Madrid,  to  open  the  port  of 
Trinidad  to  all  nations,  particularly  to  vessels  from  all  parts  of 
the  Continent  of  America,  both  North  and  South ;  and  to  allow 
those  from  Spanish  America  to  pass  and  repass  freely  from 
Trinidad,  granting  them  passports  without  fee. 

Five  days  after  this  opinion  was  given,  a  Proclamation  was 
issued  by  the  King  of  England,  granting  a  free  trade  between 
all  the  Colonies  and  the  Island  of  Trinidad,  and  permitting  the 
produce  of  the  latter  to  be  imported  into  England  on  the  same 
footing  as  that  of  the  other  British  colonies,  plantations,  and 
islands,  in  the  West  Indies,  as  more  fully  appears  by  the  docu- 
ment No.  4.* 

On  the  8th  of  April,  the  Minister  Dundas  wrote  to  Colonel 
Picton,  Governor  of  the  Island  of  Trinidad,  the  despatch 
No.  5,2  with  instructions  as  to  the  most  proper  system  to  be 
observed  for  drawing  every  possible  advantage  from  that  island 
in  a  political  as  well  as  a  commercial  way ;  informing  him  that 
he  (the  Minister)  had  been  assured  that  the  neighbouring 
Spanish  provinces  on  the  Continent  of  America  were,  in  a  great 
degree,  disaflfected  towards  the  Spanish  Government,  and  de- 
sirous of  being  relieved  from  an  oppressive  system  of  monopoly 
and  forced  restriction ;  in  consequence  of  which,  it  would  be 
very  serviceable  that  he  (Governor  Picton)  should  encourage 
the  inhabitants  of  Trinidad  as  much  as  possible  to  continue 
their  intercourse  with  the  Spanish  settlements ;  that,  notwith- 
standing it  could  only  be  kept  up  in  a  contraband  and  secret 
way,  if  the  facilities  afforded  by  the  local  situation  were  im- 
proved by  the  dispositions  and  wishes  of  tlie  parties,  it  would 

'  This  is  a  copy  of  the  King's  Order  in  Council. 

*  This  is  an  exact  translation  of  Mr.  Dundas's  despatch. 


1799.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  28B 

^ot  be  in  the  power  of  the  Spanish  Government  to  prevent  its 
extension,  so  highly  beneficial  to  the  commercial  interests  of 
England,  and  advantageous  to  the  inhabitants  of  New  Spain, 
at  present  dependent  upon  an  oppressive  monopoly  for  their 
supplies  from  Europe ;  with  which  view  the  King  of  England 
had  issued  the  above-mentioned  Proclamation,  which  Governor 
Picton  is  ordered  to  publish  at  Trinidad ;  and  to  encourage  the 
inhabitants  of  the  Spanish  settlements  to  resist  the  oppressive 
authority  of  the  Spanish  Government,  by  assuring  them  that 
measures  have  been  taken  to  support  them  by  means  of  the 
British  naval  force,  and  to  supply  them  with  arms  and  ammu- 
nition, merely  to  enable  them  to  maintain  their  commercial 
independence,  without  any  desire  on  the  part  of  the  King  of 
England  to  acquire  any  right  of  Sovereignty  over  them,  or  to 
interfere  in  their  civil,  religious,  or  political  rights,  unless  they 
themselves  should,  in  any  degree,  solicit  his  protection. 

The  Minister  Dundas  transmitted  these  documents  to  the 
Governor  of  Trinidad,  with  another  despatch  of  the  8th  of  April 
(No.  6^)  ;  and  the  latter,  in  consequence  of  these  instructions, 
drew  up  and  caused  to  be  printed  the  paper  No.  7,^  which 
should  be  attended  to,  for  he  therein  uses  every  means  to 
excite  your  Majesty's  faithful  subjects  in  these  provinces  to 
an  insurrection. 

The  Governor  of  Cumana,  who  has  transmitted  these  papers, 
which,  he  says,  were  found  on  board  a  small  vessel,  captured 
on  the  coast  of  that  province,  in  a  despatch  accompanying 
them  (No.  8),  expresses  an  opinion  that  they  will  not  make 
the  impression  the  English  wish  for ;  but  the  Audiencia  think 
otherwise,  especially  since  the  discovery  of  the  papers  enclosed 
in  the  Representation  (No.  233),  which  were  found  in  the  house 
of  the  conspirator  Don  Manuel  Gual,  and  in  which  are  to  be 
observed  all  the  spirit  and  force  of  those  transmitted  by  the 
Minister  Dundas,   and  of  that  printed  by  the   Governor  of 

^  This  is  an  exact  translation  of  Mr.  Dundas's  despatch. 
^  Governor  Picton's  Proclamation,  dated  June  26,  1797. 


284  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1799. 

Trinidad,  who  has  circulated  them  in  different  parts,  without 
our  beino;  able  to  prevent  it,  or  to  discover  where  they  are,  not- 
withstanding all  the  measures  taken  for  the  purpose  by  the 
Audiencia. 

Among  the  proceedings  of  the  Audiencia  of  Caraccas  relative 
to  the  matter  of  the  intended  Insurrection  in  that  country,  there 
is  a  copy  of  a  secret  letter,  dated  May  9,  1797,  addressed  to 
that  tribunal,  by  the  President  and  Captain-General,  trans- 
mitting to  them,  for  their  consideration  and  opinion,  a  royal 
order  (which  is  not  copied)  from  the  Court  of  Spain,  which  the 
letter  states  to  be  dated  December  24,  1796,  and  to  contain 
the  plan  of  the  Court  of  London  for  an  expedition  against 
New  Spain,  and  the  measures  taken  by  the  famous  Spaniard 
Miranda ;  on  which  subject  the  Audiencia  is  of  opinion  that  an 
exact  description  of  Miranda's  person  should  be  transmitted  to 
all  officers,  civil  and  military,  with  the  strictest  orders  to  arrest 
him  whenever  he  should  be  discovered  on  any  part  of  the  coast, 
as  well  as  every  foreigner  who  should  appear  in  the  least 
suspicious. 

N.B.  These  papers  have  been  transmitted  to  me  from  the 
late  Governor  of  Trinidad,  General  Picton,  who  vouches  their 
authenticity. 

Memorandum  for  the  consideration  of  the  Cabinet. 

Downing  Street,  October  3,  1799. 

I  wish  his  Majesty''s  servants  seriously  to  consider  the  ac- 
companying letter,  with  its  enclosure.  Nobody  can  wish  at 
present  to  see  any  part  of  the  habitable  world  set  adrift  on  any 
revolutionizing  system  :  but  it  is  our  duty  to  consider  well 
how  far  that  is  entirely  in  our  power  to  decide  one  way  or 
other. 

From  what  has  passed  with  America,  in  the  transactions 
which  we  have  had  with  them  relative  to  St.  Domingo,  I  am 
afraid  they  don't  look  to  future  consequences  with  the  same 


1799.]  LORD  CASTLEEEAGH.  285 

caution  as  we  do  ;  and,  if  they  can  any  where  open  to  them- 
selves a  new  market,  they  will  overlook  all  other  considerations. 
Indeed,  from  circumstances  that  have  come  under  my  obser- 
vation, I  have  reason  to  apprehend  they  are  not  without  such 
views  in  "regard  to  South  America. 

Under  these  circumstances,  I  wish  it  to  be  considered  by  his 
Majesty'*s  Ministers,  whether  it  is  best  for  us  to  do  nothing, 
and  let  it  take  its  course,  or  if  we  ought  so  far  to  interpose,  and  to 
be  a  party  in  the  business,  as  to  prevent,  as  far  as  we  can,  the 
whole  mischief  that  may  be  done,  if  this  immense  empire  is  to 
be  permitted  to  revolutionize  itself  without  guidance  or  con- 
trol, or  any  direction  given  to  their  endeavours  for  independence. 

Henry  Dundas.* 

I  have  a  very  strong  opinion  that  we  ought  not  by  any 
means  to  engage  in  the  projects  of  General  Miranda,  or  in 
those  of  the  Government  of  the  United  States  of  America,  on 
this  subject.  It  ought  to  be  a  very  clear  and  certain  prospect 
of  good  to  be  done  by  such  measures,  that  should  induce  us  to 
extend  the  spirit  of  revolutions,  and  to  involve  in  that  system 
the  whole  Continent  of  South  America.  G. 

October  5,  1799. 
Every  one,  I  suppose,  will  have  a  great  distrust  of  the 
projects  of  General  M.,  and  not  any  great  confidence  in 
those  of  the  United  States  of  America.  It  is,  in  fact,  from 
the  horror  of  a  revolution  conducted  by  either  one  or  the 
other,  and  the  apprehension  that  such  an  attempt  will  not- 
withstanding be  made,  that  I  cannot  but  join  with  Mr.  D.  in 
thinking  the  subject  well  worthy  of  consideration,  however 
strong  the  objections  to  which  every  measure  of  the  sort  must 
be  liable. 

^  On  the  same  paper  with  Mr.  Dundas's  Memorandum  are  recorded 
the  opinions  of  two  of  his  colleagues  in  the  Cabinet — Lord  Grenville, 
Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs ;  and  Mr.  Windham,  Secretary  of  State  for 
the  War  Department,  as  inferred  from  the  initials  attached  to  them. 


286  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1801. 

Might  not  some  use  be  made  of  the  danger  which  Spain  is 
thus  threatened  with  to  prevent  the  evil,  to  detach  Spain  from 
France,  and  to  give  to  those  Colonies  a  constitution  (under 
the  Spanish  Government)  with  which  they  should  be  better 
satisfied,  and  of  which  we  might  be  the  guarantee  ? 

W.  W. 

Opinion  of  Lord  Pelham  on  the  same  subject, 

September  27,  1801. 

It  appears  to  me  that  the  expedition  against  Spanish  South 
America  requires  more  consideration  than  I,  at  least,  have 
been  able  to  o:ive  to  it.  The  information  contained  in  this 
box  is  not  so  recent  as  could  be  wished.  If  the  paper, 
with  Sir  Ralph  Abercromby's  name  at  the  top  of  it,  contains 
his  opinion,  it  would  seem  that  12,000  men,  instead  of  8,000, 
are  necessary  for  such  an  enterprise ;  and  I  most  entirely 
agree  with  the  great  man  in  the  opinion  that  no  enterprise  of 
the  kind  should  be  undertaken  without  a  superior  force. 
The  example  of  Buonaparte  in  Egypt,  in  Italy,  and  now, 
in  his  preparations  for  invading  England,  is  not  to  be  dis- 
regarded. 

The  idea  of  liberating  South  America  is  certainly  not  a 
new  one  to  me  ;  but  I  think  it  one  of  those  great  measures, 
the  consequences  of  which  must  have  so  very  extensive  an 
influence  that  I  cannot  venture  to  give  my  consent  to  making 
the  attempt  without  a  further  discussion,  and  without  knowing 
the  principles  and  ulterior  views  of  those  with  whom  I  am 
to  embark  in  the  enterprise.  It  might  be  the  means  of  shut- 
ting us  completely  out  of  Europe — an  extremity  we  may  be 
driven  to,  and,  therefore,  it  might  be  wise  to  look  to  it.  But 
I  am  not  prepared  to  say  that  we  should  engage  in  an  en- 
terprise that  may  accelerate  it  by  throwing  Spain  still  more 
into  the  hands  of  France.  It  is  impossible  to  support  the 
independence  of  Old  Spain,  and  be  admitted  to  a  participation 
of  the  trade  in  New  Spain  ?  Pelham. 


1801.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  287 

Note  sent  in  circulation  in  September^  1801. 

The  measures  whicli  have  been  in  contemplation  with  re- 
spect to  South  America  having  been  postponed  on  account  of 
the  state  of  the  negociation  with  France,  it  becomes  neces- 
sary, under  present  circumstances,  to  call  the  attention  of  his 
Majesty's  confidential  servants  to  that  subject ;  and  more  espe- 
cially as  the  augmentation  of  the  French  forces  in  Spain,  in  oppo- 
sition to  the  wishes  of  the  Spanish  Government,  and  after  the  ob- 
ject for  which  they  were  originally  sent  is  declared  to  have  been 
accomplished,  cannot  fail  to  create  a  suspicion  that  the  Chief 
Consul  is  endeavourino:  to  efiect  that  which  was  in  vain  at- 
tempted  by  Louis  XIV.,  viz.,  the  consolidation  of  the  power 
and  resources  of  France  and  Spain  under  the  same  Govern- 
ment. 

But,  even  if  France  should  be  disposed  to  sufier  Spain  to 
exist  as  a  nominal  kingdom,  the  cession  of  liouisana  already 
obtained,  and  the  demand  made  on  Portugal  of  the  country 
bordering  on  the  Amazon  River,  sufficiently  disclose  the  inten- 
tions of  the  French  Government  with  respect  to  the  inter- 
mediate provinces,  if  not  the  whole  Continent  of  South  Ame- 
rica, to  excite  the  most  serious  apprehensions  on  the  part  of 
this  country. 

With  a  view  of  counteracting  projects,  the  operation  of  which 
might  prove  so  prejudicial  to  the  trade  we  have  lately  opened 
with  South  America,  and  which  might  ultimately  tend  to 
throw  all  those  resources  into  the  hands  of  France,  it  would 
appear  advisable  to  advert  to  the  information  which  has  been 
received  with  regard  to  the  provinces  upon  the  coast,  situated 
between  the  River  Orenoco  and  the  Gulf  of  Venezuela,  and 
to  consider  whether  it  may  not  be  expedient  for  the  Govern- 
ment of  this  country  rather  to  promote  the  disposition  of  the 
inhabitants  of  those  provinces  to  assert  their  independence, 
than  to  hazard  the  consequences  of  their  becoming  subjects  to 
the  French  Government. 


288  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1803, 

General  Miranda,  during  a  period  of  four  years,  has  soli- 
cited the  assistance  of  his  Majesty's  G-ovemment  towards  effect- 
ing this  object,  asserting  that  the  emissaries  of  the  French 
were  employed  to  encourage  the  people  to  look  to  the  lie- 
public  of  France  for  their  liberation,  and  that  there  was  reason 
to  apprehend,  if  we  did  not  speedily  take  measures  to  direct 
the  revolutionary  spirit  that  prevailed  in  those  countries  into  a 
proper  course,  it  would  be  perverted  by  the  French  to  their  own 
purposes,  and  would  terminate  in  effectually  excluding  the 
manufactures  of  Great  Britain  from  the  markets  of  South 
America. 

This  information  given  by  General  Miranda  has  been  con- 
firmed by  accounts  collected  through  a  variety  of  channels, 
and  particularly  by  Brigadier-General  Picton,  Governor  of 
Trinidad,  all  concurring  in  opinion  that,  from  the  disposition 
of  the  inhabitants  to  shake  off  their  present  Government,  and 
the  weakness  of  the  Spanish  force  that  could  be  brought  in 
support  of  it,  a  plan  of  operations  might  be  concerted  and  exe- 
cuted by  a  very  small  body  of  troops,  by  which  a  decisive  blow 
might  be  struck  at  the  resources  of  the  enemies  of  this  country, 
the  views  of  the  French  Government  counteracted,  and  the 
advantages  of  an  extensive  commerce  secured  to  the  mer- 
chants and  manufacturers  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland. 

For  this  purpose,  it  is  proposed  to  send  General  Miranda 
immediately  to  the  West  Indies,  and  to  instruct  General  Trigge 
to  consult  with  him  upon  the  measures  to  be  pursued,  in  order 
to  effect  the  important  objects  that  have  been  stated. 


Secret  Paper  on  South  America^  sent  by  Sir  Hom^'Popham  to 

Mr.  Secretary  Yorke. 
Copy.  London,  November  26,  1803. 

The  Continent  of  South  America  has  naturally  engaged  the 
attention  of  this  country  in  every  probable  rupture  with  Spain, 
and  in  the  year  1 790  it  was  so  seriously  taken  up,  that,  if  hos- 
tilities had  commenced,  I  have  little  doubt  but  an  armament 


1803.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  289 

of  considerable  magnitude  would  have  sailed  to  that  country  ; 
for  Sir  Archibald  Campbell,  who  expected  the  command,  con- 
sulted me  on  the  occasion,  particularly  with  respect  to  the  co- 
operation from  India,  and  all  the  previous  measures  necessary 
to  be  adopted,  that  no  time  might  be  lost  when  the  enterprise 
was  actually  decided  on. 

This  subject  has  since  been  frequently  agitated  ;  and,  as  I 
officially  knew  that  I  was  to  have  had  the  honour  of  directing 
one  part  of  an  expedition  to  that  country  during  the  late  war, 
I,  in  course,  lost  no  opportunity  of  informing  myself  on  every 
point  at  all  connected  with  an  operation  of  such  importance. 
It  is  a  topic  that  has  occasionally  occupied  the  attention  of  the 
ablest  statesmen  for  a  series  of  years ;  and,  from  the  result  of 
the  discussions  which  it  must  have  undergone  in  the  Cabinet, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  policy  and  expedience  of  the 
measure. 

The  advantages  which  this  country  would  derive  from  a  suc- 
cessful issue  are  incalculable  ;  nor  is  it  possible  to  trace  them 
in  either  a  commercial  or  political  point  of  view,  though  it  may 
be  fair  to  assert,  that  the  annual  export  from  that  country  to 
Spain,  under  all  the  disadvantages  of  a  most  arbitrary  and 
oppressive  Government,  are  fifty  millions  of  dollars  a  year 
(the  last  Return  from  Cadiz  made  in  65) ;  and  if  this  was 
only  to  be  diverted  from  its  present  channel,  without  calcu- 
lating on  the  additional  operation  of  bringing  it  to  this  country, 
I  can  scarce  venture  an  opinion  on  the  effect  which  such  a  cir- 
cumstance would  have  in  France  as  well  as  Spain,  who  can 
only  be  esteemed  the  intermediate  agent  to  that  Republic  for 
her  Colonies  in  South  America. 

It  must  be  evident  to  every  person  who  possesses  a  know- 
ledge of  the  geographical  situation  of  that  great  continent,  its 
population  and  resources,  that  any  permanent  influence  of 
Great  Britain,  whether  fixed  by  absolute  conquest,  or  conquest 
in  the  first  instance,  followed  up  by  successful  political  intrigue, 
(which  I  contend  is  authorized  by  all  usages  of  war)  must  offer 

VOL.  VII.  u 


290  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1803. 

the  greatest  commercial  advantages,  not  only  to  this  country, 
but  to  our  possessions  in  India,  by  opening  a  direct  trade  on 
each  side  of  the  Continent,  and  drawing  all  the  wealth  of 
Spanish  America  from  our  enemies,  which  has  always  been 
their  principal  support  in  every  war  with  Great  Britain. 

Without  entering  into  the  very  detailed  advantages  of  eman- 
cipating that  country,  it  may  be  proper,  in  addition  to  those 
stated,  to  calculate  on  its  eventually  annihilating  the  navy  of 
Spain,  by  cutting  off  its  greatest  nursery  for  seamen  and  its 
principal  sources  for,  foreign  timber ;  for  if  Spain  is  once  con- 
fined to  its  European  navigation  and  commerce,  she  will  not 
be  long  considered  a  maritime  power.  Her  Colonies,  also, 
both  in  the  East  and  West  Indies,  are  so  particularly  depen- 
dent on  the  intercourse  they  enjoy  with  the  great  Continent, 
that  they  must  sensibly  feel  any  alteration  in  that  Government. 

The  points  which  offered  the  fairest  promise  for  military 
establishments  in  the  South  Sea  were  Baldivia,  Valparaiso, 
Lima,  Panama,  and  Acapulco ;  and,  at  the  time  Sir  Archibald 
Campbell  consulted  me,  I  was  not  fully  competent  to  give  an 
opinion  beyond  that  of  the  navigation  from  both  countries,  and 
to  which  points  the  armaments  from  each  ought  to  be  directed ; 
but,  during  the  late  war,  when  I  had  some  slight  knowledge  of 
General  Miranda''s  project,  I  certainly  did  press  on  Mr.  Dun- 
das's  attention  the  very  great  importance  of  Rio  de  la  Plata, 
from  its  particular  situation,  its  immediate  intercourse  with 
Chili,  from  whose  coast  it  is  not  350  leagues,  and  its  presenting 
the  most  probable  point  for  the  enemy — I  mean,  France — not 
only  to  take  possession  of,  but  to  furnish  supplies  to  counteract 
all  our  operations,  and  this  certainly  with  great  facility,  if  he 
once  had  possession  of  the  Brazils  ;  and  I  do  think,  if  we  could 
previously  occupy  Buenos  Ayres,  it  would  make  any  attempt 
of  France  on  the  Portuguese  Settlements  a  serious  considera- 
tion. Mr.  Dundas  appeared  so  fully  convinced  of  the  impor- 
tance of  this  point,  that  he  assured  me  he  should  adopt  it  as  one 
in  the  enterprise,  when   it  was   undcrtakoii.  wliirli  ho  oxpectrd 


1803.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  291 

would  be  immediately  the  case  ;  and  I  should  have  instruc- 
tions to  go  there  from  the  Red  Sea  with  an  adequate  military 
force  for  the  purpose. 

Taking  up  Buenos  Ayres  as  a  principal  point  very  much 
removes,  in  my  mind,  the  necessity  of  looking  to  any  situation 
in  the  Pacific  to  the  southward  of  Lima,  if  even  it  is  absolutely 
necessary  to  go  there  ;  but  Buenos  Ayres  must  be  considered 
on  the  earliest  moment  of  a  probable  rupture  with  Spain,  as 
the  attention  of  the  enemy  will  be  called  to  that  station  in  pre- 
ference to  any  other. 

The  great  object,  however,  of  the  expedition,  and  from  which 
it  is  to  derive  its  principal  spring,  is  the  possession  of  the 
Caraccas,  which  has  already  been  given  in  military  detail  by 
General  Miranda,  who,  from  the  advices  and  intercourse  with 
that  province  and  his  family  connexions,  calculated  on  being 
able  to  collect  an  army  of  15  to  20,000  men,  increasing  as  he 
proceeds  to  the  provinces  of  Santa  Fe  and  Quito,  and  ulti- 
mately establishing  a  powerful  and  permanent  post  on  the 
Isthmus  of  Panama,  and  opening  an  immediate  communication 
with  the  Indian  expeditions  and  Indian  commerce  which  ought 
to  accompany  the  armaments  from  that  country  to  the  Pacific 
Ocean. 

The  inhabitants  may  be  considered  under  four  heads  :  the 
positive  Spaniard,  the  Creolian  Spaniard,  the  Mulattoes,  and 
the  Indians.  The  Mulattoes  are  much  connected  with  the 
Creolian  Spaniards,  who  have  ever  been  notoriously  the  most 
dissatisfied  race  in  that  country  with  the  existing  Government, 
even  as  much  so  as  the  Indians,  who  are  its  natural  enemy. 

General  Miranda's  intelligence  and  correspondence  with  that 
country  is  so  well  known  to  Government,  that  I  need  not 
quote  any  particular  circumstance,  to  prove  how  natural  it  is 
that  a  desire  of  emancipation  should  generally  obtain,  parti- 
cularly in  the  interior  provinces.  I  have  been  long  in  the 
habit  of  strict  and  confidential  intimacy  with  the  General,  and 
I  have  not  seen  any  thing,  either  in  his  papers  or  the  mode  of 

u2 


292        XETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF        Ll«03. 

carrj'ing  his  project  into  effect,  but  marks  the  strongest  com- 
mon sense,  which  never  fails  to  carry  with  it  the  most  pointed 
and  satisfactory  conviction. 

The  military  force  required  by  Miranda  for  the  operation  on 
the  northern  side  of  Terra  Firma  is  a  regiment  complete :  two 
companies  of  artillery,  and  two  squadrons  of  dismounted 
cavalry.     The  list  is  already  with  Mr.  Vansittart. 

The  naval  force  should  probably  be  three  forty-fours  on  two 
decks,  arme  en  flute,  one  of  the  armed  Indiamen,  two  smaller 
vessels,  and  a  bomb ;  but  if  this  interferes  with  the  arrange- 
ment at  the  Admiralty,  Mr.  Davison  has  offered  to  furnish, 
at  his  own  expense,  three  or  four  Indiamen  ;  one  large,  to 
mount  fifty  guns ;  three  smaller,  to  mount  thirty- six  ;  and 
two  cutters,  as  tenders  ;  the  bomb  to  be  supplied  by  Govern- 
ment, who  is  only  required  to  secure  Mr.  Davison  against  the 
failure  of  the  expedition,  by  capture  or  otherwise.  He  is  satis- 
fied, from  his  confidence  in  Miranda,  and  the  view  of  success 
which  he  has  held  out  to  him,  to  take  the  advantages  promised 
by  the  General  as  a  remuneration  for  his  advances,  and  he  will 
engage  to  have  everything  ready  in  six  months. 

An  equipment  from  the  Admiralty  is  always  to  be  preferred 
to  any  other ;  but,  in  the  present  case,  it  is  proposed  that  the 
ships  offered  for  this  service  shall  be  commanded  by  officers  in 
the  navy  regularly  appointed  in  each  class  by  commissions 
from  the  Admiralty.  It  must,  however,  be  a  satisfaction  to 
see  that  an  individual  merchant  shall  have  sufficient  zeal,  en- 
terprise, and  resources,  to  furnish  ships  for  such  an  expedition, 
and  it  will  establish  the  possibility  of  recourse  for  an  auxiliary 
marine  on  future  occasions,  probably  of  more  necessity  than 
the  present  instance. 

I  trust  it  will  appear  evident  of  how  much  importance  to  the 
success  of  this  vast  undertaking  is  even  one  day ;  for,  if  the 
enemy,  either  from  France  or  Spain,  is  able  to  land  a  Euro- 
pean force  on  the  coast,  and  by  any  immediate  sacrifices  or  con- 
cessions to  the  natives  obtain  their  favour,  the  enterprise  from 


1806]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  293 

this  country  may  have  the  greatest  difficulties  to  encounter ; 
but,  taking  it  well  concerted,  promptly  executed,  and  politically 
managed,  I  know  of  no  project  which  presents,  in  all  its  dif- 
ferent forms,  such  prospects  as  the  one  in  question. 

Take  a  review  of  the  various  channels  of  commerce  which  it 
opens  to  Great  Britain — properly  appreciate  the  ruin  which  it 
promises  to  entail  on  a  great  European  maritime  power — calcu- 
late on  the  universal  popularity  such  an  expedition  is  likely  to 
be  attended  with — and  then  see  what  is  required  to  carry  it 
into  execution. 

A  merchant,  seeing  the  probability  of  success  (and  which  is 
a  good  criterion  to  form  a  judgment  of  the  impression  it  will 
have),  offers  to  furnish  all  the  ships  to  Government  without 
any  expense,  only  requiring  a  security  against  capture  by  the 
enemy,  or  failure  by  their  superior  means.  The  General  asks 
for  1,500  men,  which,  I  contend,  is  only  a  loan  of  men  from 
the  present  establishment  for  a  few  months ;  for,  the  moment 
the  expedition  sails  and  that  it  can  be  made  public,  issue  letters 
of  service  for  a  Mexican  legion,  and  you  will  have  2,000  re- 
cruits in  a  few  weeks. 

If  there  still  exists  a  doubt  of  a  war  with  Spain,  and  which 
is  not  likely  to  be  solved  for  some  time,  can  any  eventual  ser- 
vice which  would  be  likely  to  employ  the  ships  in  question 
authorize  an  order  to  Mr.  Davison  for  their  being  prepared, 
that  the  service  may  be  so  much  advanced  when  it  is  ripe  for 
execution  ? 


On  the  Attack  of  Mexico  from  the  Eastern  Side. 

BY  WILLIAM  JACOB. 

July  11,  1806. 
In  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  the  regular  sea-breezes,  or  trade- 
winds,  prevail  from  March  to  September,  varying  their  direc- 
tisn  from  north-east  to  south-east :  the  north  winds  generally 
blow  from  September  to  March.  In  the  latter  end  of  October, 
the  whole  of  November  and  December,  and  the  beginning  of 


294  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1806. 

January,  the  north  wind  blows  with  great  violence,  so  as  to 
render  an  attempt  to  land  a  force  on  that  coast  extremely 
hazardous :  in  July,  August,  and  September,  the  time  of  the 
periodical  rains,  it  is  very  unhealthy  on  the  coast ;  and,  from 
these  considerations,  the  best  time  obviously  is  for  the  fleet  to 
rendezvous  at  Jamaica  the  beginning  of  January,  from  whence, 
in  less  than  a  month,  they  would  arrive  on  the  coast  of  Mexico, 
and  be  ready  to  commence  their  operations  in  the  month  of 
February,  the  most  favourable  period  of  the  whole  year,  for 
the  wind  is  then  usually  a  fresh  breeze  in  the  morning,  between 
north-east  and  south-east ;  and  in  the  evening,  the  land  wind 
from  the  west  prevails,  at  which  time  there  is  little  or  no  surf 
on  the  beach,  and  troops  may  be  landed  with  ease  and  safety 
on  any  part  that  may  be  deemed  most  favourable. 

To  determine  the  number  of  troops  which  the  conquest  of 
Mexico  would  require,  it  will  be  proper  to  take  a  view  of  the 
force  there,  which  can  oppose  an  invading  army  ;  and,  first,  the 
only  fortified  place  is  Vera  Cruz,  with  the  fort  of  St.  Juan  de 
Ulloa  opposite  to  it.  This  city  is  not  calculated  to  stand  a 
regular  siege :  the  walls  are  not  surrounded  by  a  ditch ;  there 
are  no  casemates  for  the  troops,  no  bomb-proof  magazine,  and, 
on  the  west  and  north  sides,  the  houses  of  the  suburbs  are  close 
to  the  glacis;  besides  which,  as  the  merchants  have  their 
depots  here,  a  few  shells  would  ensure  the  surrender. 

The  castle  of  St.  Juan  de  Ulloa,  opposite  the  town,  has 
seventy  cannon  mounted  on  the  walls,  some  18,  and  others 
24-pounders,  but  the  carriages  are  in  bad  condition  -,  a  dry 
ditch  surrounds  the  outwork,  and  on  the  north-east  side  the 
glacis  is  stockaded,  but  neither  the  magazine  nor  casemates 
are  bomb-proof.  There  is  no  other  fortified  place  on  the  eastern 
side  of  Mexico,  except  Perote,  which  is  distant  120  miles,  and 
to  which  we  shall  have  occasion  to  attend  more  minutely  in  the 
review  of  the  road  to  the  capital. 

In  considering  the  military  bodies  in  the  kingdom  of  Mexico, 
1  think  it  needless  to  take  further  notice  of  the  Militia  than  to 


1806.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  295 

state  that,  though  the  number  on  paper  is  upwards  of  50,000, 
yet  they  cannot  be  assembled  for  want  of  arms,  as  there  were 
not  twenty  thousand  muskets  in  all  the  arsenals  when  the  pre- 
sent war  began  ;  and,  further,  such  was  the  discontent  among 
the  inhabitants  when  they  were  last  attempted  to  be  assembled, 
that  it  is  fair  to  presume  they  would  be  more  dangerous  to 
the  Government  than  to  the  invaders,  were  the  same  attempt 
to  be  made  again.  The  Spanish  printed  account  in  the  Guido 
de  los  Foresteros  makes  the  establishment  of  the  regular  army 
for  Mexico  amount  to  5,417  infantry,  1,160  cavalry,  and  368 
artillery,  but  this  includes  the  garrison  of  the  Havana,  which 
takes  at  least  one-third  of  the  infantry,  and  one-fifth  of  the 
cavalry.  This  account,  besides,  professes  to  give  not  the 
actual  number  of  effective  men,  but  the  establishment  when 
complete,  which  is  never  the  case  with  the  Spanish  Colonial 
regiments. 

T  had  a  return  of  troops  in  Mexico,  which  was  in  some  in- 
tercepted letters,  from  which  I  made  the  following  extracts  ^ 
and,  being  corroborated  by  two  Spanish  ofiicers  who  had  passed 
many  years  in  Mexico,  and  by  other  accounts  which  I  have 
compared,  I  think  its  accuracy  may  be  relied  on. 

INFANTRY.  Effective.     Deficient.     Sick. 

Regiment  of  Orizava 

Vera  Cruz 

1st  Battalion,  Cordova 
2nd 


CAVALRY. 

Regiment  of  Mexico 


los  Angelos 


1,042 

835 

40 

1,227 

150 

135 

567 

122 

30 

542 

146 
753 

57 

3,378 

262 

480 

109 

54 

410 

102 

33 

4,268         964         349 
To  these  should  be  added  the  artillery  and  militia  of  Vera 
Cruz  and  St.  Juan  de  Ulloa,  which  are  two  companies  of  1 00 
men  each.    The  greater  part  of  this  force  is  on  the  eastern  side 


296  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1806. 

of  the  kingdom  ;  but  at  least  1,000  men  are  scattered  at  such 
distances  as  to  render  it  impossible  they  should  be  concentrated 
before  the  fate  of  the  capital  was  decided.  A  part  of  this  1,000 
men  is  at  Acapulco,  800  miles  distant  to  the  south,  a  part  at 
St.  Bias,  600  miles  to  the  north-west,  and  a  part  at  Charcas 
and  St  Luis  de  Potosi,  to  the  north. 

Having  thus  taken  a  review  of  the  means  of  resistance  which 
could  be  offered,  it  is  proper  to  state  some  circumstances  which 
induce  me  to  think  a  larger  force  would  be  necessary  than  may 
appear  at  first  sight.  It  may  be  proper  to  have  an  army  suf- 
ficiently numerous  to  besiege,  or  at  least  blockade,  Vera  Cruz 
and  St.  Juan  de  Ulloa,  while  another  part  pushes  on  by  forced 
marches  for  Pueblo  de  Perote.  It  would  be  absolutely  neces- 
sary to  have  the  means  of  stationing  a  body  of  horse  and  foot 
at  St.  Luis  de  Potosi,  which  would  keep  the  north  part  of 
Mexico  in  awe,  while  the  main  body  of  our  army  was  stationed 
in  the  vicinity  of  the  capital.  Detachments  might  likewise  be 
wanted  at  Terpeaca  and  Guadalaxara,  and,  although  at  a  dis- 
tance from  the  sea,  where  the  operations  of  the  army  would  be 
carried  on,  the  country  is  very  healthy ;  yet  some  allowance 
must  be  made  for  sickness  and  death,  at  the  commencement  of 
the  campaign.  Under  the  impression  of  these  considerations, 
I  should  not  think  it  judicious  to  attempt  the  conquest  with 
an  army  of  less  than  8,000  men,  exclusive  of  officers  of  the 
Staff,  and  of  sailors  and  marines.  Of  these,  at  least  1,000 
should  be  dismounted  cavalry,  who  might  soon  be  mounted  on 
horses  of  the  country.  If,  at  the  time  of  the  attack,  we  had 
a  force  in  the  South  Sea,  a  less  number  of  men  would  be  neces- 
sary to  execute  the  plan  we  are  now  considering ;  but,  if  that 
should  not  be  the  case,  a  judicious  commander  would  be  able 
to  circulate  reports  of  the  expectation  of  such  a  force ;  and  the 
report  would  prevent  the  enemy  from  weakening  the  garrisons 
of  St.  Bias  and  Acapulco.  Some  time  previous  to  the  sailing 
of  the  expedition,  or  even  before  the  force  is  assembled  at 
Jamaica,  the   Havanah  and  \'era  Cruz  should  be  blockaded 


1806.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  297 

with  more  than  usual  rigour,  and  a  small  squadron  should  be 
cruising  between  Cape  Catoche  and  Cape  Antonio,  by  which 
means  all  communication  of  our  designs,  as  well  as  all  succour, 
would  be  precluded. 

It  would  be  desirable  that  our  own  people  at  Jamaica  should 
be  misled  with  respect  to  the  point  of  attack ;  and  it  would  be 
easy  to  make  an  opinion  prevail  that  the  force  was  destined  to 
occupy  Carthagena,  or  to  force  a  passage  across  the  Isthmus  of 
Panama ;  and,  by  engaging  a  few  pilots  for  the  first,  or  guides 
for  the  second  place,  we  should  favour  the  deception,  and 
greatly  facilitate  the  real  design. 

It  will  not  be  necessary  to  take  a  large  supply  of  provisions, 
because,  as  soon  as  the  army  has  reached  Xalapa,  it  will  be  in 
a  very  abundant  country,  well  stocked  with  cattle,  and  well 
supplied  with  vegetables.  Wheaten  flour  is,  however,  by  no 
means  plentiful ;  and  a  supply  for  a  month  (after  the  landing) 
of  that  article  should  be  sent  with  the  expedition.  If  any  cir- 
cumstance should  occur  to  prolong  the  stay  of  the  army  near 
Vera  Cruz,  or  to  prevent  its  reaching  the  fertile  country,  a 
good  supply  of  cattle  might  be  obtained,  by  means  of  the  ship- 
ping, from  the  vicinity  of  Campeche,  or  the  banks  of  the  river 
Grijalva. 

As  there  is  no  fortress  but  that  of  St.  Juan  de  Ulloa  which 
would  require  to  be  attacked  with  heavy  artillery,  and  as  the 
ships'  guns  could  be  used  there,  no  other  artillery  but  field- 
pieces  would  be  necessary. 

The  common  mode  of  travelling  from  Mexico  to  Vera  Cruz 
is  on  horseback,  or  in  litters  resembling  sedan-chairs,  which 
are  carried  by  two  mules,  one  before  and  the  other  behind,  and 
the  long  poles  which  support  the  chairs  are  fastened  to  their 
sides.  By  the  same  mode,  merchandize  of  all  kinds  is  carried 
over  the  mountains,  and  the  same  method  must  be  adopted  in 
transporting  artillery. 

If  it  should  be  deemed  necessary  to  take  Vera  Cruz  and 
St.  Juan  d'UUoa  before  proceeding  to  the  capital,  the  army 


298  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1806. 

should  be  landed  in  the  Bay  of  Pampanos,  one  mile  to  the 
southward  of  the  town,  where  the  beach  is  hard,  and  the  water 
so  deep,  that  the  frigates  might  approach  near  enough  to  the 
shore  to  cover  the  landing.  The  force  in  Vera  Cruz  and 
St.  Juan  de  Ulloa  is  usually  two  battalions  of  Veterans,  each 
containing  eight  companies  of  fusileers  and  one  of  grenadiers : 
each  company  consists  of  65  men,  when  complete  ;  4  companies 
of  Militia,  of  65  men  each;  2  companies  of  Artillery,  of  100 
men  each.  The  whole  are  commanded  by  Don  Joseph  Davila, 
who  is  Governor  of  Vera  Cruz,  who  has  seen  little  or  no  mili- 
tary service,  and  is  deemed  a  man  of  no  talents. 

If  the  marines  and  seamen  of  the  squadron  were  landed 
near  Vera  Cruz,  and  were  enabled  completely  to  blockade  it, 
the  army  might  very  advantageously  be  landed  on  the  north 
bank  of  the  river  Antigua,  six  leagues  from  Vera  Cruz,  and 
march  immediately  for  Rincanada,  by  which  two  days"*  march- 
ing would  be  spared  them,  and  the  risk  and  danger  of  crossing 
a  deep  river,  150  yards  wide,  will  be  avoided,  as  well  as  the 
hindrance  which  may  occur  should  the  enemy  remove  all  the 
craft  to  the  north  side  of  the  river ;  and.,  even  were  that  not 
the  case,  if  all  the  craft  were  employed,  it  would  be  a  tedious 
operation  to  convey  a  numerous  army  with  so  few  boats  as  are 
to  be  found  there. 

At  Rio  de  Antigua  is  plenty  of  provisions,  both  fish  and 
beef,  with  vegetables,  such  as  are  usually  found  in  the  tropical 
climates.  The  water  is  abundant  and  good.  The  road  to 
Rincanada,  three  leagues  distant,  is  very  rocky :  it  winds 
round  the  hills  with  a  gentle  ascent,  is  from  12  to  15  yards 
wide.  To  Casa  di  Posta,  the  road  is  very  stony,  and  a 
continual  gradual  ascent ;  to  Plazier,  is  a  constant  ascent,  and 
through  a  country  yielding  only  very  good  water.  It  continues 
the  same  to  within  one  mile  of  Bonavista,  when,  having  reached 
a  high,  level  country,  every  production  is  most  abundant. 

Through  this  well  cultivated  country,  the  road  gradually 
mounts  to  Xalapa,  one  of  the  most  beautiful,  healthy,   and 


1806.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  299 

plentiful  spots  in  the  New  World.  This  city  contains  40,000 
inhabitants,  who  are  well  provided  with  all  the  necessaries  of 
life  from  the  surrounding  country.  It  is  the  place  where  the 
merchants  of  Vera  Cruz  have  the  residences  of  their  families, 
and  it  contains  a  considerable  number  of  people  of  the  first 
rank.  It  is  two  days^  journey  from  Vera  Cruz  for  those  who 
travel  in  litters,  and  would  be  an  excellent  place  to  refresh  an 
army  after  the  fatigue  of  ascending  the  mountains.  It  has  no 
fortifications,  and  consequently  could  make  no  resistance. 

From  Xalapa  to  Soldado  and  Jolla,  though  not  the  steepest, 
is  the  worst  part  of  ihe  road,  being  full  of  enormous  rocks, 
which  no  carriage  can  pass.  The  country,  however,  is  very 
fruitful,  and  the  climate  very  healthy ;  and  thus  continues  to 
Las  Vigas,  where  all  the  difficulty  of  the  march  terminates ; 
for  from  tliis  place  to  the  capital  the  road  is  excellent,  which 
carriages  of  all  kinds  travel  with  great  rapidity,  and  the  road 
for  two  hundred  miles  is  a  gradual  ascent. 

Las  Vigas  is  a  large  village,  containing  about  4,000  inha- 
bitants, and  the  whole  country  from  thence  to  Perote  is  well 
peopled  and  well  cultivated.  There  is  usually  a  battalion  of 
the  Veteran  Infantry  doing  duty  in  the  three  towns  of  Xalapa, 
Las  Vigas,  and  Perote.  The  castle  of  Perote  is  a  quadran- 
gular fort,  has  a  narrow,  double,  dry  ditch,  a  glacis,  stockaded, 
but  no  bomb-proof  casemates  or  outworks.  It  has  24  cannon, 
18-pounders,  but  the  carriages  are  very  old.  One  company  of 
artillery  is  stationed  here.  In  this  fortress  the  royal  treasure 
is  deposited,  until  vessels  arrive  at  Vera  Cruz  to  convey  it  to 
Old  Spain ;  and  sometimes,  during  a  war^  twenty  millions  of 
coined  dollars  have  been  kept  within  its  walls.  At  present, 
there  must  be  nearly  that  amount,  which  peace  would  convey 
to  the  treasury  of  France. 

Nopolucan  is  a  town  containing  5  or  6,000  inhabitants, 
mostly  Indians,  and  mixed  breeds.  The  road  passes  by  the 
Lake  of  Pinar ;  from  thence  to  Amozoque  it  is  level  and  rather 
sandy.     Near  Chachaparcingo  is  the  last  hill.     Pueblo  de  los 


300  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1806. 

Angelos  is  a  large,  open  city,  containiug  near  100,000  inha- 
bitants :  it  is  situated  in  a  fine  climate,  and  surrounded  with  a 
fertile  country.  One  battalion  of  Veteran  Infantry  is  usually 
quartered  in  this  city.  The  Governor,  Don  Manuel  de  Floon, 
by  birth  a  Fleming,  is  esteemed  a  good  soldier,  and  an  en- 
lightened politician.  Pueblo  de  St.  Martin  is  a  town  contain- 
ing 8,000  people.  There  is  no  other  place  of  consequence  on 
the  road  to  the  capital ;  but  the  whole  country  is  covered  with 
villages  scattered  over  it,  and  abundantly  provided  with  all  the 
requisites  to  supply  an  army. 

The  city  of  Mexico  is  a  large  place,  quite  destitute  of  forti- 
fication. It  contains  a  rich,  luxurious,  and  enervated  popula- 
tion of  200,000  souls ;  but,  as  it  is  described  by  all  travellers, 
I  have  only  to  observe  that  there  are  in  it  generally  two  bat- 
talions of  Veteran  Infantry  and  one  regiment  of  cavalry,  who 
are  considered  as  the  household  troops  of  the  Viceroy  during 
their  being  quartered  in  the  city. 

The  whole  kingdom  of  Mexico  is  under  the  viceroyship  of 
Don  Jossep  de  Yturrigarai,  who  has  obtained  it  from  favour- 
itism with  the  Prince  of  the  Peace,  and  who  is  generally  con- 
sidered to  be  a  weak  man ;  yet  in  him  is  centered  the  whole 
power,  civil,  military,  fiscal,  and  judicial.  He  is  accountable 
only  to  the  Council  of  the  Indies  in  Spain,  and  controlled  only 
by  his  own  will,  or  the  suggestions  of  his  Assessor. 

There  are  no  manufactories  of  arms  in  the  kingdom  of 
Mexico,  nor  are  the  inhabitants,  except  the  nobility,  allowed 
to  keep  any,  so  that  the  people  are  literally  an  unarmed  rabble. 

The  Route  from   Vera  Cruz  to  the  City  of  Mexico^  with  the 

Names  of  the  Posts^  and  the  Distances  in  Leagues. 

Leagues. 
From  the  City  of  Vera  Cruz  to 

Pueblo  y  Rio  de  la  Antigua     ...       6 

lliiiconada       ......       3 

Carried  over       9 


1806. 


LORD  CASTLEREAGH. 


301 


Casa  de  Posta 

Brought  up 

Leagues 
9 
3 

Plazier 

. 

4 

Casa  de  Posta 

. 

3 

Buenavista 

. 

4 

Casa  de  Posta 

. 

3 

City  of  Xalapa 
Cuesta  de  Soldado   . 

. 

2 
3 

Jolla       . 

. 

3 

Town  de  las  Vigas 
Town  of  Perote 

. 

3 
.       3 

Casa  de  Posta 

... 

4 

Venta  de  Soto 

... 

3 

Venta  de  ojo  de  aqua 
Town  of  Nopolucan 
Venta  del  Pina 

calienti    . 

.       6 
2 
2 

Town  of  Acacete 

. 

3 

Town  of  Amozoque 
Town  of  Chachaparcingo 
City  of  Pueblo  de  los  Angelos 

3 

.       2 

.       2 

Ventorrillo 

.         . 

4 

Town  of  St.  Martin 

•         •         • 

.       4 

Venta  del  grand  Puente  nuebo 

,      4 

Casas  Viejas    . 
Venta  del  Rio  Frio 

. 

.       2 
.       3 

Casas  de  las  Barrancas  de  Juanes 
Venta  de  Cordova    .... 
Chalco 

.       3 

.       2 
.       2 

Pueblo  de  Yndios    . 

. 

.       2 

Venta  de  Penon 

... 

.       2 

City  of  Mexico 

. 

.       2 

97 


A  new  road  was  begun  about  nine  years  ago  from  Mexico 


302  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1806. 

to  Vera  Cruz.  It  is  finished,  according  to  the  above  route,  as 
far  as  the  town  of  Amozoque,  and  thereby  taking  a  different 
direction  from  the  present  road,  will  render  the  whole  passable 
for  wheel  carriages ;  but  the  present  war  has  suspended  the 
work. 

Private  Annotations^  addressed  to  his  Excellency  the  Minister  of 

War,  on  the  first  Arrival  of  the  English,  under  Major-General 

Beresford,  at  Buenos  Ayres. 

Buenos  Ayres,  August  1,  1806. 

His  Excellency,  M.  Abascal,  being  appointed  Viceroy  of 
Lima,  was  obliged  to  take  his  passage  through  Portugal,  and, 
having  arrived  at  Rio  Janeiro,  gave  notice  from  thence  to  the 
Marquess  de  Sobremonte,  Viceroy  of  the  province  of  the  River 
Plata,  that  there  was  at  that  time  an  English  convoy,  whose 
destination  was  unknown,  taking  in  fresh  provisions  in  the  Bay 
of  All  Saints.  This  news  obliged  the  Viceroy  to  go  to  Monte 
Video,  taking  with  him  all  the  regular  troops  composing  the 
garrison  of  Buenos  Ayres,  and  leaving  only  one  company  of 
grenadiers  and  the  invalids. 

A  few  days  afterwards,  advice  was  received  from  Rio 
Janeiro,  purporting  that  the  English  expedition  had  gone  to 
take  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  Upon  this  notice,  the  Viceroy 
returned  to  this  capital,  leaving  all  his  forces  at  Monte  Video. 
The  Viceroy  never  thought  that  the  town  could  be  attacked, 
and  always  neglected  it.  Not  many  days  afterwards,  it  was 
known,  through  the  same  channel,  that  the  English  were 
masters  of  the  Cape. 

Acquainted  with  this  success,  four  greedy  merchants  and 
not  a  few  of  the  citizens,  disgusted  with  the  Government  of  the 
Marquess  de  Sobremonte,  wrote  to  the  English  General,  inform- 
ing him  of  the  defenceless  state  in  which  the  Viceroy  had  left 
the  town,  and  invited  him  to  come,  on  the  assurance  that  he 
would  be  very  well  received.  The  Generals  Sir  Home  Pop- 
ham  and  William  Carr  Beresford  did  not  hesitate  in  coming. 


1806.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  303 

They  knew  from  the  English  merchants,  who  have  been  here 
under  the  name  of  Americans,  that  they  had  many  friends  here, 
and  consequently  made  their  appearance  with  their  small  army 
in  the  Bay  of  Barragan.  There  they  received  accurate  informa- 
tion of  the  state  of  this  town,  and,  various  points  where  they 
might  land  being  indicated  to  them,  they  chose  that  of  Quisme. 

The  incautious  Viceroy  was  persuaded  that  this  squadron 
consisted  of  nothing  but  merchant-ships,  which  had  come  for 
the  smuofirlino:  trade.  Mr.  Santia2:o  Liniers,  who  commanded 
at  that  time  the  port  of  La  Cressenada,  made  the  Viceroy  still 
more  easy  by  writing  to  him  that  this  little  squadron  was  a 
trifling  affair,  unworthy  of  any  concern.  The  Viceroy  was 
perfectly  quiet,  till  the  English  began  to  land  on  the  23rd  of 
June  o/the  last  year,  1806 ;  and  they  soon  took  possession  of 
Buenos  Ayres,  with  no  more  troops  than  2,000  men,  on  the 
27th  of  the  same  month,  without  loss,  and  without  the  least 
resistance.  General  Beresford,  when  in  full  possession  of  the 
place,  said,  "  I  never  thought  it  to  be  true  that  there  were  not 
more  regular  troops  in  the  town  than  one  company  of  gre- 
nadiers ;  but  I.  see  that  I  was  not  deceived." 

The  English  had  been  invited  under  the  persuasion  that 
they  would  declare  the  independence  of  Buenos  Ayres ;  but 
those  who  had  so  calculated  were  mistaken.  Beresford  called 
himself  conqueror,  saying  that  the  fort  and  the  city  were  sur- 
rendered by  capitulation.  He  was  several  times  urged  with 
energy  on  the  subject  of  the  independence,  but  obstinately  re- 
fused it,  and  by  a  proclamation  declared  the  King  of  Great 
Britain  the  sovereign  of  Buenos  Ayres.  After  this  proclama- 
tion, the  very  same  persons  who  called  him  hither  took  the 
resolution  to  drive  him  out  ignominiously  with  their  house- 
brooms,  and  from  that  time  they  began  to  think  of  re-conquest. 
For  this  purpose,  the  Cabildo  wrote  to  the  Governor  of  Monte 
Video  to  send  a  corps  of  six  or  eight  hundred  men  to  protect  it 
against  the  resentment  of  the  English  General,  if  its  proceed- 
inijs  should   come  to  his   knowledge.     The  Governor  would 


304  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1806. 

ha^ve  come  himself,  but  was  prevented  by  the  Cabildo  of  Monte 
Video ;  in  consequence  of  which  circumstance,  and  various 
recommendations,  he  appointed  Don  Santiago  Liniers  com- 
mander of  the  expedition,  composed  of  about  1,000  men,  with 
whom  he  began  his  march. 

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  Viceroy.  His  Excellency  left  the 
town,  and  went  to  Castros  Hill,  about  three  leagues  distant, 
followed  by  Don  Pedro  de  Arce,  Sub-Inspector-General,  Don 
Manuel  de  Gutierrez,  and  many  others.  The  Viceroy  went  to 
the  town  of  Cordova,  160  leagues  from  this,  and  ordered  that 
place  to  be  reckoned  the  capital  of  the  Viceroyalty ;  adding, 
that  it  was  his  intention  to  send  for  troops,  in  order  to  the  re- 
conquest  of  Buenos  Ayres. 

The  Viceroy,  when  in  Cordova,  had  the  imprudence  ^to  open 
the  public  correspondence  between  Peru  and  Lima,  to  learn 
what  was  the  opinion  of  his  person  in  Buenos  Ayres.  There 
was  not  a  letter  in  which  he  was  not  considered  as  a  traitor,  a 
coward,  and  a  man  ignorant  of  all  military  principles.  He  was 
extremely  irritated  at  this  discovery,  and  his  lady  threatened 
with  gallows  and  guillotine  the  citizens  of  Buenos  Ayres, 
(naming  many)  which  menaces  were  to  be  put  in  execution  as 
soon  as  the  Viceroy  should  be  re-established  in  his  authority, 
either  by  re-conquering  the  town,  or  by  exchanging  it  at  the 
general  peace.  All  those  threats  and  impertinent  speeches 
came  daily  from  Cordova  to  this  town,  (the  correspondence 
was  very  expensive)  where  it  was  decided  not  to  receive  him 
in  his  former  command,  at  any  rate ;  and,  knowing  that  he 
was  coming  with  5,000  inexperienced  and  raw  troops,  the  citi- 
zens forwarded  the  re-conquest  of  the  town,  and  called  eagerly 
for  Liniers,  who  soon  passed  the  port  of  Los  Conchas,  where 
he  received  an  order  from  the  Viceroy  to  stop  from  the  re- 
conquest  without  his  presence,  for  which  purpose  he  was  on 
inarch  already.    But  Liniers  did  not  obey  this  order. 

The  citizens  of  Buenos  Ayres  received  every  day  precise  in- 
telligence of  his  marches :  they  called  for   Liniers  with  the 


1806.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  305 

greatest  earnestness ;  but  he,  doubtful  of  the  success  of  the 
proceeding,  wrote  to  the  Cabildo  that  the  expedition  would 
miscarry,  and  that  he  thought  it  better  to  re-embark.  This 
letter  is  in  the  possession  of  the  Cabildo.  That  body  replied 
that  he  might  return  if  he  pleased,  but  that  he  ought  to  under- 
stand that  the  re-conquest  was  unavoidable,  and  that,  if  he  was 
deficient  in  troops,  he  could  have  them  by  thousands  as  soon 
as  he  should  take  possession  of  the  suburbs  of  the  town.  At 
length,  Liniers  advanced  and  took  possession  of  the  Mataderos 
de  Miserere,  and  a  party  of  Catalanes  that  he  brought,  under 
the  name  of  Mignones,  without  orders,  and  merely  of  their 
own  motion,  attacked  the  Retiro,  garrisoned  by  60  English, 
and  defeated  and  killed  them  all.  This  success  gave  great 
courage  to  every  man,  and  the  mob  began  to  show  itself  in 
arms.  Liniers  came  to  Retiro.  Beresford  was  beaten,  and 
obliged  to  surrender  at  discretion.  After  this,  by  dark  means 
a  capitulation  was  made,  written  with  gold,  which  seduced 
Liniers  by  the  brightness  of  the  precious  metal,  (so  it  is  said) 
and  with  the  pretext  of  being  for  no  other  object  but  that  of 
exculpating  himself  with  his  nation.  When  Beresford  made 
use  of  this  capitulation,  Liniers  perceived  his  incautious  facility, 
and,  being  censured  by  the  Cabildo,  endeavoured  to  clear  him- 
self by  means  of  a  public  paper. 

When  Beresford  knew  that  it  was  difficult  to  defend  the 
town,  he  offered  independence ;  but,  having  been  answered  that 
it  was  too  late,  he  resolved  to  sack  the  town  and  to  embark  ;  but 
he  had  no  time,  and  only  plundered  the  house  of  the  Colonel 
of  Militia,  Asenenaga,  in  the  great  square  near  the  fort. 

The  higher  class  of  citizens  incited  the  lower  to  oppose  the 
entry  of  the  Viceroy  into  Buenos  Ayres ;  and,  to  succeed  the 
better,  they  persuaded  them  to  raise  Liniers  to  the  military 
command.  This  was  done,  and  it  was  declared  at  a  meeting 
of  the  Audiencia  on  the  14th  of  August,  1806,  two  days  after 
conquest.  By  this  all  the  blades  of  the  guillotine  were  blunted, 
and  all  the  ropes  of  the  gallows  broken. 

VOL.  VII.  X 


306  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1806. 

The  same  higher  class  of  the  citizens,  afraid  of  the  re- 
establishment  of  the  Viceroy  by  the  Court  of  Madrid,  roused 
Liniers,  and,  with  a  view  to  defending  the  town,  showed  him 
the  way  of  raising  troops.  It  would  be  foreign  to  these  re- 
marks to  detail  the  operations :  suffice  it  to  say  that  it  began 
about  the  middle  of  September. 

The  populace,  once  armed,  were  told  that  they  had  a  right 
to  oppose  the  tyrannical  Government  which  they  had  endured 
under  former  Viceroys,  and  which  was  worse  under  the  pre- 
sent. By  this  the  mob  was  urged  into  a  complete  state  of 
revolution ;  and,  if  the  King  had  re-established  the  Viceroy, 
God  was  pleased  that  the  King  approved  the  resolution  of  the 
Audiencia,  and  this  resolution  was  taken  under  the  critical 
circumstance  of  the  enemy  being  near  the  town. 

The  Viceroy  was  fortunate  enough  to  be  received  within 
the  walls  of  Monte  Video,  and  his  reception  ruined  that  place. 
The  English  took  the  defenceless  town  of  Maldonado.  Monte 
Video  demanded  from  Buenos  Ayres  troops  to  retake  it.  Here 
they  thought  that  this  application  was  a  treachery  instigated 
by  the  Viceroy,  who,  they  were  afraid,  (such  was  the  opinion 
of  the  public)  in  case  the  King  should  not  approve  of  the  reso- 
lution of  the  Audiencia,  might  have  orders  to  deliver  to  the 
English  the  two  towns  of  Buenos  Ayres  and  Monte  Video. 
The  troops  were  refused,  in  consequence  of  which,  the  Cabildo 
of  Monte  Video,  approved  by  the  Viceroy,  sent  to  Buenos 
Ayres  to  raise  recruits.  The  flag  was  hoisted  in  the  great 
square.  The  populace  was  against  this  step ;  and,  if  the  re- 
cruiting officers  had  not  hidden  themselves,  they  would  have 
been  assassinated.  This  is  one  of  the  causes  of  the  loss  of 
Monte  Video. 

Two  English  brigs  had  cut  off  the  navigation  of  the 
Uruguay.  The  officers  of  the  navy,  with  their  commander, 
Don  Juan  Gutierrez  de  la  Concha,  took  no  pains  upon  the 
subject.  The  Cabildo  of  this  town,  observing  their  indifference 
in  regard  to  those  small  armed  vessels,  and  their  activity  in 


1806.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  307 

taking  merchantmen  coming  from  London,  in  the  persuasion 
that  Buenos  Ay  res  was  yet  in  the  hands  of  their  nation,  wrote 
to  Don  Santiago  Liniers,  insistinoj  on  Mr.  Concha  and  his  officers 
coming  to  their  station  off  Monte  Video,  adding,  that  Buenos 
Ayres  had  seamen  of  sufficient  intellio;ence  to  fit  out  the  men-of- 
war  and  act  against  the  enemy,  the  Cabildo  engaging  to  pay 
the  King  for  them,  in  case  of  loss  in  any  w^ay  whatever. 
Liniers  answered,  declining  to  comply  with  this  order,  because 
the  blow  was  at  his  intimate  friend  Concha.  The  Cabildo  in- 
sisting, Liniers  answered  roughly,  saying  that  those  officers 
were  of  his  own  corps,  and  that  it  was  his  duty  to  support 
them ;  and  that,  if  the  Cabildo  insisted  on  its  resolution,  he 
would  march  with  them.  The  reply  to  this  was,  that  he  might 
march  if  he  pleased ;  and,  as  one  w^ord  brings  another,  the 
Cabildo  reproached  him  with  the  scantiness  of  his  military 
knowledge  and  many  other  defects.  This  discussion  became 
so  warm,  that,  at  last,  Liniers  took  the  prudent  step  of  speak- 
ing to  the  Bishop,  in  order  to  have  all  the  papers  destroyed ; 
and  this  prelate  succeeded  in  leaving  things  as  they  were  be- 
fore. Liniers  promised  that  the  officers  of  the  navy  should 
act ;  and  they  really  came  out  and  fought  with  the  brigs  ;  and, 
though  they  could  not  take  them,  they  frightened  them  at 
least,  and  one  sunk  soon  after  the  action.  Under  these  cir- 
cumstances, the  English  decided  to  attack  Monte  Video,  and 
landed  there.  The  Governor  gave  notice  of  it  to  Liniers  ;  but 
he  was  quite  insensible  to  every  thing ;  and  it  was  observed 
that,  in  the  most  critical  moments,  when  the  correspondence 
was  very  frequent,  this  did  not  prevent  him  from  going  in  the 
night  out  of  the  fort,  where  he  was  living  at  the  time ;  and  in 
one  instance  he  kept  the  Cabildo  and  the  Audiencia  waiting, 
because  he  was  not  to  be  found  to  open  the  despatches  of  that 
Governor,  and  that  he  was  in  a  kind  of  stupor.  Hence  the 
public  began  to  doubt,  and  to  be  diffident  of  the  advantages  of 
the  defence  formed  to  his  hands. 

When  the  Governor  was  reduced  to   extremity,  the  enemy 

x2 


308  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1806. 

having  opened  the  trenches,  he  demanded  some  assistance. 
This  orave  rise  to  some  meetings.  At  length,  it  was  decided 
that  Liniers  should  go,  with  2,000  men,  of  the  new  militia,  and 
all  the  regulars,  who  were  no  more  than  700,  to  the  succour 
of  the  place.  Four  days  after  this  arrangement,  Don  Pedro 
Arce  sailed  with  the  regulars,  and  landed  on  the  north  side  : 
he  marched  to  Monte  Video,  and  arrived  there  the  day  before 
the  English  took  it  by  storm.  Liniers  agreed  to  go,  on  con- 
dition that  his  command  should  be  independent  of  the  Viceroy''s. 
The  Audiencia  declined  ;  but  at  last  they  gave  him  a  despatch, 
closed  and  sealed,  to  his  Excellency,  telling  Liniers  that  there 
was  the  royal  resolution  of  his  independent  command,  with 
which  he  embarked  three  days  after  the  sailing  of  Arce.  No 
sooner  had  he  landed  than  he  sent  the  despatch  to  the  Viceroy, 
and  his  Excellency,  copying  a  supplicatory  letter  from  the 
Audiencia,  answered  that  he  would  not  consent  to  his  being 
independent.  He  received  this  answer  at  his  first  station,  after 
a  march  of  eight  leagues,  and  from  thence  he  was  about  to 
return  to  Buenos  Ayres,  leaving  behind  him  the  2,000  men, 
with  the  intention  of  remonstrating  with  the  Audiencia  upon 
the  deception  ;  but,  before  he  embarked,  he  received  a  letter 
from  the  Viceroy,  informing  him  that  the  enemy  was  in  pos- 
session of  Monte  Video.  This  ambitious  and  haughty  act  is 
one  of  the  principal  causes  of  the  loss  of  that  town.  Many 
others  will  be  found  when  this  loss  shall  become  the  subject 
of  a  trial  by  a  court-martial. 

These  proceedings  of  Liniers  induced  the  Audiencia  and  the 
Cabildo  to  send  secretly  for  Don  Bernardo  Velasco,  Governor 
and  Intendant  of  Paraguay,  in  order  to  invest  him  with  the 
command  of  the  town  and  to  get  rid  of  Liniers  :  but  shortly 
before  his  arrival.  Colonel  Don  Xavier  Elio  presented  himself 
in  Buenos  Ayres.  This  gentleman  was  commander  of  the 
fields  [?]  at  Monte  Video,  and  enjoyed  some  military  reputation. 
The  Audiencia  and  Cabildo  decided  to  place  him  by  the  side  of 
Liniers,  and  avoid  the  scandal  of  his  separation.    Accordingly, 


1806.]  LOUD  CASTLEREAGH.  309 

he  was  made  Major- General ;  but,  on  the  arrival  of  Velasco, 
he  was  sent  to  the  other  side  of  the  river,  as  commander  of  a 
corps  of  observation ;  and,  being  defeated  by  the  EngUsh  near 
Colonia  del  Sacramento,  that  corps  was  given  up,  and  Elio  re- 
turned to  Buenos  Ayres.  As  for  Velasco,  he  had  the  sub- 
inspection  and  was  made  Major-General,  so  that  every  one  had 
employment. 

What  with  the  loss  of  the  Monte  Video  river,  the  disgrace 
of  the  Marquess  de  Sobremonte,  and.  the  populace  who  were 
armed,  with  the  power  in  their  hands,  there  soon  arose  an 
outcry  for  his  deposition  :  the  mob  conceiving  that  the  oidores 
did  nothing  but  what  the  Viceroy  desired.  An  open  meeting 
of  the  Cabildo  was  summoned ;  but,  an  oidor  opposing  this 
proceeding,  the  mob  shouted,  "  Down  with  the  Audiencia ! 
death  to  the  oidores  !*"  insomuch  that  the  oidor  was  obliged  to 
make  his  escape  by  a  private  door.  It  was  impossible  to  avoid 
the  suspension  of  the  Viceroy,  the  Marquess  de  Sobremonte. 
The  oidor  Don  Manuel  de  Velasco  went  to  the  other  side  of 
the  river,  accompanied  by  a  sufficient  force,  to  intimate  the 
decree  to  the  Viceroy  ;  and,  having  brought  him  to  this 
side,  he  confined  him  in  a  country-house  near  the  town. 
Hence,  all  the  authorities  were  left  loose  and  without  suppoi-t, 
and  the  Viceroy  without  the  superiority  and  high  representa- 
tion of  his  dignity.     Bad  example  ! 

With  a  view  to  prevent  thenceforward  this  scandalous  dis- 
order, the  Audiencia  ordered  that  no  person  should  keep  arms 
in  his  house,  but  that  they  should  be  deposited  in  the  quar- 
ters. This  produced  another  popular  commotion  ;  it  was  ne- 
cessary to  repeat  the  order  ;  and  this  was  another  instance,  as 
bad  as  the  preceding. 

Don  Santiago  Liniers  has  the  misfortune  of  not  having 
learned  the  science  of  choosing  honest  and  capable  people  to  be 
about  his  person  ;  neither  has  he  the  strength  of  mind  neces- 
sary to  get  rid  of  the  bad  people  who  surround  him.  Instead 
of  taking  for  his  secretary  Don  Jose  Barrera,  chief  clerk  in  the 


310  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1806. 

Secretary's  office,  an  honest  man,  if  ever  there  was  one,  and 
very  conversant  with  the  affairs  of  the  viceroyalty,  with  the 
experience  of  thirty  years  in  the  said  office,  (the  Regent  of  the 
Audiencia  took  him  for  himself)  he  chose  Don  Saturino  Peiia, 
a  native  of  this  town,  who  knows  nothing  else  but  to  write  a 
good  hand,  and  is  a  consummate  rogue.  This  man,  associ- 
ated with  a  certain  Padillo,  a  native  of  Cochabamba,  a  person 
in  similar  circumstances,  made  himself  chief  of  a  conspiracy. 
Very  good  secretary  had  Liniers,  on  whom  the  defence  of  the 
town  could  depend  ! 

A  considerable  number  of  rich  people  took  it  into  their 
heads  to  make  a  revolution,  in  order  to  shake  off  the  yoke  of 
the  Spanish  Government,  and  to  establish  the  independence  of 
the  country.  They  gained  some  officers  of  the  new  militia : 
they  named  General  Beresford  and  Colonel  Packe  at  the  head 
of  the  conspirators.  Peiia  spoke  to  the  Alcalde,  Don  Martin 
Alzaga,  to  persuade  the  Cabildo  to  join  in  the  plot.  This 
Alcalde  answered  with  caution,  and  let  him  go  to  Luxan  to 
bring  Beresford  and  Packe,  with  the  intention  of  arresting  them 
all  on  their  arrival.  This  was  not  necessary,  for  a  trifling 
event  dissipated  the  conspiracy.  This  happened  in  the  fol- 
lowing manner. 

A  person  came  from  Rio  Grande  (a  Portuguese  settlement) 
with  despatches  for  the  Marquess  de  Sobremonte,  from  one  of 
his  correspondents  in  Rio  Janeiro ;  and  one  of  the  idle  crea- 
tures of  Buenos  Ayres  spread  about  the  news  that  the  French 
and  Spanish  fleets  had  arrived  at  Santa  Cathalina,  with  11,000 
troops ;  and  that  the  General  of  this  army  sent  an  officer  with 
the  King's  orders  and  the  public  correspondence.  This  impo- 
sition went  to  the  north  side  of  the  river,  whence  it  returned 
in  a  very  circumstantial  letter  from  an  officer  of  easy  belief. 
This  was  enough  to  intimidate  the  conspirators.  One  of  them 
discovered  himself  and  discovered  others,  who  were  arrested 
immediately.  Under  these  circumstances,  Beresford,  Packe, 
Peiia,  and  Padilla,  arrived  in  town,  and,  as  the  plot  was  known, 


1806.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  311 

they  ran  away  to  Monte  Video.  Many  declarations  were  taken 
on  the  subject,  and  the  criminals  were  sent  to  Chili  on  the 
English  approaching  this  town.  The  truth  is,  that  many 
letters  from  people  of  this  town  have  been  intercepted,  which 
were  addressed  to  the  English,  and  which  will  be  preserved  by 
the  magistrates,  to  be  made  use  of  in  better  times. 

Had  I  delivered  these  remarks  verbally,  I  should  perhaps 
have  been  asked  from  what  cause  arises  this  ardent  desire  of  a 
change  of  Government.  In  order  that  the  Court  of  Spain  may 
take  the  best  means  for  curing  this  evil,  which  spreads  now  more 
than  ever  to  all  the  Colonies,  for  it  is  certain  that  the  people 
of  this  town  and  all  those  of  Peru  know  that  they  are  not  in 
want  of  any  thing  for  defending  the  town  and  all  its  depen- 
dencies from  the  English,  French,  or  Spaniards,  and  even  from 
legions  of  devils,  and  that  they  alone  know  how  to  defend 
themselves,  without  chiefs  or  military  officers  to  direct  them, 
as  they  have  just  done,  I  shall  say,  in  a  few  words,  it  arises 
from  the  despotic  Government  established  in  this  capital. 

It  is  publicly  stated,  and  had  been  experienced,  with  grief 
and  ruin  to  some  persons,  that  the  Assessor  Don  Juan  de 
Almagro,  and  the  Secretary  Don  Manuel  Gallegos,  both  mar- 
ried here,  have  formed  the  plan  of  gaining  the  Viceroy  (a  thing 
very  easy,  from  the  authority  of  their  employments),  and  act 
as  persons  not  responsible,  the  Viceroy  being  the  man  who 
puts  his  signature.  They  behave  themselves  as  if  they  were 
atheists.  Their  relations  and  those  in  their  interest  alone 
obtain  favourable  decisions  ;  and  they  make  game  of  the  com- 
plaints preferred  by  the  injured  to  the  court  of  Madrid,  and 
augment  their  persecutions.  When  this  is  the  case,  they  re- 
fiite  the  most  just  complaints  by  false  informations,  which, 
upon  the  word  of  a  Chief,  seduced  by  the  hypocrisy  of  these 
men,  produce  their  effect  against  the  innocent  or  against  the 
unjustly  persecuted.  This  is  the  public  opinion — I  never  ap- 
proach either  of  them — and  once  only  I  went  to  the  Secretary's 
office  for  a  passport  to  go  upon  some  commission  for  the  King''s 


312  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [18C6. 

service.  They  thought  themselves  not  very  secure  among  the 
people,  and  took  their  precautions.  The  Assessor,  soon  after 
the  meeting  of  the  14th  of  August,  1806,  left  the  town,  and 
went  to  shelter  himself  under  the  Viceroy  ;  and,  when  he  was 
told  that  his  employment  was  suspended,  he  went  to  his  country- 
house,  about  100  leagues  from  this  town.  And  the  Secretary 
never  came  more  to  his  office,  and  retired  to  a  villa.  Notwith- 
standing this,  the  populace  once  cried,  "  Death  to  Gallegos  V 

I  cannot  imagine  any  other  remedy  for  the  cure  of  this  evil 
than  that  of  re-establishius:  the  ancient  mode  in  regard  to  those 
employments — that  is  to  say,  when  every  Viceroy  and  every 
Captain-General  chose  their  assessors  and  secretaries,  whose 
authority  ended  with  that  of  the  Viceroy  or  Captain-General, 
and  those  who  are  actually  employed  to  be  sent  out  of  the 
capital,  or  to  have  a  retiring  pension  assigned  them. 

Many  other  causes  of  discontent  exist ;  but  the  shortness  of 
these  notes  and  the  sailing  of  the  packet  prevent  me  from  de- 
tailing them  and  pointing  out  their  remedies.  I  shall,  how- 
ever, say  that  there  is  not  a  man  of  any  judgment  or  prudence 
but  considers  the  transactions  which  have  occurred  in  this 
town,  from  the  reconquest  to  this  day,  as  previous  dispositions 
to  its  independence.  In  order  to  arrange  the  Government, 
there  is  much  danger,  and  it  is  necessary  to  proceed  with  great 
circumspection.  The  people  know  already  that  they  want 
not  a  military  Chief,  as  they  once  thought  when  they  were 
threatened  with  this  invasion.  They  have  experienced  that, 
for  their  defence,  Liniers  and  the  collection  of  regular  Colonels 
were  of  no  use.  They  look  on  them  with  contempt  when  any 
military  question  is  in  agitation ;  and  really,  they  never  did 
any  thing  but  plunder  ;  and  they  saw  that  Don  Martin  Alzaga, 
Alcalde  of  the  first  election,  arranged  the  defence  of  the  town 
under  the  circumstances  of  all  the  military  chiefs  having  been 
beaten.  I  conclude  these  observations  with  the  following  re- 
mark :  In  order  that  the  Government  of  Buenos  Ayres  may 
be  settled,  it  is  indispensable  for  his  Majesty  to  send  as  Viceroy 


1806.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  313 

a  Lieutenant-General,  skilful,  prudent,  sagacious,  and  of  o^reat 
integrity. 

I  shall  add  another  proof  of  the  desire  of  the  rich  people  for 
a  change  of  Government.  There  is  no  doubt  that  they  were 
in  intelligence  with  the  enemy.  The  artillery  of  the  batteries 
of  the  Residencia,  Retiro,  and  Recoleta,  was  found  nailed  up ; 
and  there  is  no  doubt  that  it  was  nailed  up  on  the  2nd  of  July. 
The  Alcalde  Alzaoja  has  charo;ed  with  this  fault  Don  N.  Sam- 
pera,  captain  of  artillery  of  the  militia,  to  whose  care  the  said 
batteries  were  consigned;  and  he  acknowledged  that  he  did 
nail  the  guns  ;  but,  being  asked  by  whose  orders,  he  said  nothing 
more.  Alzaga  will  not  leave  this  matter  so  quiet.  So  Ve- 
lasquez, to  whose  care  the  stores  at  the  Retiro  were  entrusted, 
made  his  escape  on  the  morning  of  the  general  attack  of  the 
town  :  he  left  the  stores  locked  up,  and  not  a  tool  to  open  the 
doors.  Being  asked  why  he  left  the  ammunition  shut  up,  he 
answered,  that  Don  Francisco  Agustini,  commander  of  the 
artillery,  ordered  him  to  lock  up  the  doors,  and  Agustini  was 
not  in  the  Retiro  on  the  morning  of  the  attack.  He  has  been 
three  days  in  prison,  but  is  already  free .  In  the  fort  were  also 
fqund  three  guns  nailed  up,  on  the  days  of  landing.  This  can- 
not be  done  without  much  sold. 

An  artillery  officer  of  militia  was  made  flag  officer  in  the 
fort  (I  know  not  his  name).  Agustini  ordered  him,  on  the 
day  of  the  attack,  to  be  ready  to  strike  the  colours  when  he 
ordered  it.  The  officer  answered,  that  the  orders  he  had  re- 
ceived from  the  commander  of  the  fort  were  not  to  strike  unless 
the  action  was  lost.  Agustini  said,  that  on  the  bulwark  no- 
body had  to  command  but  himself.  The  officer  replied  that 
there  was  yet  time  to  discuss  this  matter  with  the  commander. 
I  do  not  say  that  there  was  any  malice  in  Agustini :  it  might 
be  the  effect  of  ignorance,  but  it  would  be  very  remarkable  in 
an  experienced  officer. 

Excepting  a  few  persons,  all  detest  the  English  Govern- 
ment, and  are  decided  to  perish  fighting  against  it.     But  all, 


314  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

all  are  inclined  to  independence,  and  the  reason  they  give  for 
it  is  the  despotism  under  which  they  have  suffered.  They 
complain  that  the  Court  of  Madrid  rewards  and  punishes 
according  to  the  information  of  the  Viceroys,  obtained  by 
intrigues,  and  despises  the  complaints  of  the  injured  and  the 
merits  of  the  subjects ;  and  that  this  evil  cannot  be  cured  but 
by  independence,  as  the  only  recourse  against  the  will  of  the 
man  who  holds  the  supreme  authority  at  so  great  a  distance  : 
and  since  the  20th  of  last  July  they  speak  with  freedom,  in 
consequence  of  the  statement  of  Liniers,  in  which  he  speaks  of 
the  Viceroy.  This  statement  is  in  the  hands  of  everybody, 
and  they  say  that  it  is  full  of  misrepresentations,  and  the 
public  openly  assert  that  there  are  many  lies  in  it  j  and  it  is 
supposed  that  the  relation  sent  to  Spain  is  of  the  same 
tenour.  The  public  had  already  shown  its  opinion  by  pas- 
quinades on  Liniers'  having  selected  as  deputies  to  the  Court 
of  Spain  M.M.  Perison  and  Altolaguirre,  the  former  of 
whom  is  brother  of  a  woman  to  whom  he  is  paying  his  ad- 
dresses, and  the  latter  uncle  of  his  deceased  wife.  They  speak 
freely  of  the  recommendations  which  they  suppose  to  have 
been  obtained  by  means  of  such  a  woman. 

A  Lieutenant-General  as  a  Viceroy  is  the  only  one  who 
can  set  to  rights  this  great  disorder,  and  restrain  an  armed 
populace  with  a  prudent  energy.  With  great  grief  of  heart  I 
see  this  country  violently  disturbed,  and  I  think  it  is  necessary 
to  accelerate  the  arrival  of  a  Viceroy  by  the  way  of  Portugal. 


Memorandum  for  the  Cabinet^  relative  to  South  America. 
[by  lord  castlereagh.] 

Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  1,  1807. 

The  late  despatches  from  Monte  Video  having  rendered  it 
necessary  to  forward,  with  the  least  practicable  delay,  supplies 
of  provisions  and  military  stores  to  that  quarter.  Lord  Castle- 
reagh deems  it  of  importance,  before  any  instructions  are  trans- 
mitted to  the  officers  in  command  for  the  ftiture  direction  of 


1807.]  I'ORD  CASTLEREAGH.  315 

their  conduct,  that  the  Cabinet  should  review  the  principles 
upon  which  this  service  has  been  undertaken ;  in  order  that 
they  may  determine  whether  it  should  be  hereafter  prosecuted 
on  the  same,  or  with  any,  and  what  modification. 

Upon  a  perusal  of  the  correspondence  in  the  ofiice,  it  does 
not  appear  that  any  original  purpose  prevailed  in  the  Councils 
of  the  late  Government,  to  commence  operations  in  South 
America ;  or  that,  when  commenced  by  the  expedition  against 
Buenos  Ayres,  they  ever  came  to  any  very  precise  determina- 
tion with  respect  to  the  principles  upon  which  they  were  to  be 
carried  on. 

In  Mr.  Windham's  letter  of  the  [blank],  any  intention  of 
countenancing  an  immediate  change  in  the  constitution  of  the 
Settlement  is  disclaimed ;  the  purposes  of  the  expedition  are 
confined  to  a  mere  military  occupation,  and  the  assurances  to 
be  given  to  the  inhabitants  limited  to  a  declaration  that  his 
Majesty  would,  upon  a  peace,  be  disposed  to  attend  to  their 
interests,  as  far  as  possible. 

It  appears  that  the  late  Ministers  were  so  little  intent  upon 
this  object,  and  so  little  prepared  to  embark  in  it  upon  any 
fixed  system  of  permanent  policy,  that  although,  as  early  as 
the  ]  0th  of  July,  they  ordered  a  detachment  to  be  prepared 
for  Buenos  Ayres,  yet  they  suffered  above  three  months  to 
elapse  after  they  received,  on  the  24th  of  June,  the  notification 
of  Sir  Home  Popham  having  proceeded  against  Buenos  Ayres, 
before  they  despatched  any  reinforcements  to  support  him,  or 
sent  him  any  instructions  whatever  for  the  direction  of  his 
conduct ;  and  they,  in  like  manner,  suffered  the  officers  in 
command  in  the  West  Indies,  whilst  Miranda's  expedition 
against  the  Caraccas  was  in  progress,  to  remain  in  total  igno- 
rance of  their  intentions ;  the  consequence  of  which  appears  to 
have  been  that  this  operation,  unsupported  by  any  effective  aid, 
proceeded  from  a  British  port,  with  just  enough  of  co-operation 
on  our  part  to  mix  us  in  the  policy  and  failure  of  the  effort,  but 
without  any  adequate  prospect  of  rendering  it  successful. 


316  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

In  this  state  things  continued  till  the  news  of  the  capture  of 
Buenos  Ayres  arrived  in  September.  The  popularity  of  this 
acquisition,  and  the  disposition  of  the  commercial  interest  to 
take  advantage  of  it,  appears  first  to  have  determined  the 
Government  to  follow  up  this  object.  Brigadier-General 
Achmuty  accordingly  proceeded,  on  the  ISth  of  October,  with 
2,900  men,  to  the  River  of  Plate,  but  without  instructions  to 
hold  out  any  particular  hopes  to  the  inhabitants,  or  to  aim  at 
more  than  a  commercial  intercourse,  under  the  protection  of  a 
military  occupation. 

Early  in  November,  Brigadier-General  Craufurd  proceeded, 
with  about  4,000  men,  to  establish  a  similar  military  occu- 
pancy on  the  western  coast  of  South  America,  in  the  province 
of  Chili ;  but  without  any  precise  object  of  attack  in  view. 

It  also  appears  that  subsequently  some  progress  had  been 
made  in  arranging,  though  not  in  executing,  an  operation 
against  Mexico,  in  which  a  force  of  about  8,000  men  (assembling 
at  Jamaica),  under  the  command  of  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,  was 
to  be  landed  in  the  vicinity  of  Vera  Cruz,  and  to  proceed,  in 
co-operation  with  a  corps  of  about  8,000,  then  to  debark  from 
India  on  the  opposite  coast,  to  establish  a  military  occupancy, 
upon  similar  principles,  in  that  rich  and  populous  kingdom. 

It  appears  that,  when  the  British  troops  first  landed  at 
Buenos  Ayres,  they  only  met  with  a  nominal  resistance :  they 
were  feebly  opposed  for  two  days  by  the  militia  of  the  country ; 
but,  so  soon  as  possession  was  taken  of  the  town,  the  inhabitants 
submitted  with  apparent  cheerfulness.  The  Governor  having 
fled,  the  Cabildo,  composed  of  the  leading  natives,  being  the 
chief  local  authority,  concerted  measures  for  preserving  order, 
&c.,  with  great  apparent  cordiality,  with  the  British  Com- 
manders, and  even  took  steps  in  concert  with  the  latter  for 
recovering  by  force  a  considerable  treasure  which  the  Spanish 
Governor  had  carried  off  with  him. 

It  is  stated  by  Sir  Home  Popham  and  other  officers,  that 
the  people  became  early  inquisitive  whether  the  English  troops 


1807.]  I^ORD  CASTLEREAGH.  317 

came  there  to  aid  them  in  throwing  off  the  Spanish  yoke.  The 
smallness  of  our  force  persuaded  them  at  first  that  our  only 
purpose  in  coming  there  must  be  to  support  the  views  of  the 
inhabitants,  and  not  to  attempt  any  conquest  on  our  own  part, 
with  means  apparently  so  inadequate.  This  point  was  pressed 
to  a  distinct  explanation  ;  but  neither  General  Beresford  nor  Sir 
Home  Popham  felt  themselves  authorized  to  hold  any  other 
language  than  that  of  taking  possession  in  the  King^^s  name, 
till  his  further  pleasure  should  be  known. 

The  principal  officers  of  the  Spanish  Government,  who  had 
retired  on  the  approach  of  the  British  force,  having  assembled 
troops  from  Monte  Video  and  also  a  proportion  of  the  militia 
of  the  country,  found  the  population  of  Buenos  Ayres,  thus 
disappointed  in  their  expectations,  ready  to  co-operate  in  our 
expulsion ;  and  the  corps  under  General  Beresford  was,  in  the 
course  of  a  month,  after  they  had  thought  themselves  securely 
established,  compelled  to  surrender. 

A  reinforcement  of  about  1,900  men,  very  ill  provided, 
soon  arrived  from  the  Cape,  but  not  in  time  to  support  General 
Beresford  :  they  were  too  weak  to  undertake  any  effectual  ope- 
rations to  recover  Buenos  Ayres,  or  take  Monte  Video,  and 
were  obliged  to  establish  themselves  at  Maldonado,  a  very 
defective  port,  there  to  await  reinforcements  from  England. 
In  this  position  they  continued  from  the  month  of  October  till 
January ;  during  which  period  the  Spanish  Government, 
having  this  unequivocal  proof  of  our  determination  to  renew 
the  attack,  was  enabled  to  arrange  their  measures  of  defence. 

Upon  the  reduction  of  Monte  Video,  General  Achmuty,.with 
a  garrison  of  about  4,500  men,  did  not  consider  himself  as 
competent  to  undertake,  until  reinforcements  should  arrive, 
any  further  operation  for  the  reduction  of  the  town  or  province 
of  Buenos  Ayres.  Some  disposition  to  desert,  in  consequence 
of  the  great  temptation  in  money,  &c.,  held  out  to  the  men, 
and  the  intrigues  of  the  priests,  had  shown  itself  among  the 
troops.    About  twenty  men  deserted  from  Maldonado,  and  were 


318  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

found  acting  as  soldiers  among  the  Spanish  garrison  of  Monte 
Video  (several  of  whom,  however,  are  stated  to  have  been  Pro- 
testants). The  General  further  expresses  considerable  anxiety 
about  his  supplies,  in  consequence  of  the  means  which  the  enemy 
liad,  by  their  numerous  cavalry,  of  confining  his  intercourse  with 
the  interior.  He  estimates  the  enemy's  force  outstanding  in 
the  field  at  about  8,000  men,  the  greater  part  of  which,  it  is 
probable,  would  retire  for  the  defence  of  Buenos  Ayres. 

Early  in  January,  upon  information  being  received  that 
Buenos  Ayres  was  retaken,  the  Fly  sloop  was  despatched  to  St. 
Jago  with  orders  to  General  Oraufurd  not  to  proceed  to  Chili, 
but  to  Eio  Janeiro,  there  to  join  General  Achmuty,  and  to  co- 
operate with  him  in  the  recovery  of  Buenos  Ayres,  with  its 
dependencies.  Before  the  Fly  arrived  at  St.  Jago,  Brigadier- 
General  Craufurd,  afraid  of  his  supplies  being  exhausted  by 
waiting  any  longer  for  Admiral  Murray,  had  sailed  on  the  3rd 
or  4th  of  January  for  the  Cape,  there  to  refresh,  and  afterwards 
to  proceed,  touching  at  New  South  Wales,  to  Chili.  Admiral 
Murray  arrived  at  Porto  Praya  seven  days  after  Brigadier- 
General  Craufurd  had  sailed,  and  followed  him  to  the  Cape. 
The  Fly  arrived  three  days  later  than  Admiral  Murray,  and 
proceeded  to  the  same  destination. 

As  General  Craufurd  was  encumbered  with  transports,  little 
doubt  can  remain  that  both  Admiral  Murray  and  the  Fly 
would  join  him  at  the  Cape,  and  consequently  that  his  force 
would  proceed  to  the  Plata ;  but,  allowing  two  months  for  the 
voyage  from  Porto  Praya  to  the  Cape,  and  from  eight  to  ten 
weeks  for  his  passage  from  the  Cape  to  South  America,  it  is 
not  to  be  expected  that  he  could  arrive  in  the  Plata  before  the 
middle  of  May,  soon  after  which  time  about  1,600  men,  sent 
out  in  March  with  General  Whitelocke,  may  also  be  expected 
to  have  arrived.  The  force  which  will  then  be  assembled  under 
General  Whitelocke  may  be  estimated  at  nearly  10,000  men, 
exclusive  of  General  Beresford'^s  corps  of  1,100  men,  now 
prisoners,  which  may  probably  he  recovered. 


1807]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  319 

With  a  force  so  considerable,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that 
Buenos  Ayres  must  again  fall  into  our  possession;  and  it  is  to 
be  hoped,  notwithstanding  General  Achmuty  carries  the  amount 
of  force  which  he  deems  requisite  to  occupy  the  country  eft'ec- 
tually  to  15,000  men,  that  the  enemy's  militia  may  be  dis- 
persed, and  tranquillity  so  far  restored  as  to  put  us  in  possession 
of  such  advantages  as  may  be  derived  from  that  country  by  a 
military  occupancy  to  be  maintained  by  force  of  arms. 

The  question  for  the  Cabinet  to  decide,  and  to  the  general 
bearino^s  of  which  Lord  Castlereao^h  is  solicitous  to  call  their 
attention,  is,  whether  the  value  of  such  an  occupancy  and  such 
a  connexion,  either  during  war,  or  upon  a  peace,  is  such  as  to 
compensate  for  the  drain  and  incumbrance  it  must  prove  upon 
our  other  military  operations  and  on  our  population ;  and,  if  not, 
whether  some  principle  of  acting  more  consonant  to  the  senti- 
ments and  interests  of  the  people  of  South  America  cannot  be 
taken  up,  which,  whilst  it  shall  not  involve  us  in  any  system  of 
measures,  which,  on  grounds  of  political  morality,  ought  to  be 
avoided,  may  relieve  us  from  the  hopeless  task  of  conquering 
this  extensive  country,  against  the  temper  of  its  population. 

It  is  not  wonderful  that  the  people  of  all  classes  should  look 
with  great  jealousy  to  the  circumstances  under  which  we  come 
amongst  them.  Our  force  is  not  adequate  to  their  reduction, 
or  effectual  protection :  they  see  no  disposition,  on  our  part,  to 
have  recourse  to  any  exertion  of  theirs  in  support  of  a  common 
interest.  We  give  them  no  assurance  of  not  being  surrendered 
upon  a  peace  to  their  former  masters — an  assurance  which 
could  alone  render  it  prudent  for  them  to  expose  themselves  to 
the  vengeance  of  a  severe  Government,  under  whose  super- 
intendence they  mast  expect  to  be  soon  replaced. 

It  is  not  meant  to  disguise  the  serious  objections  that  may 
occur  to  charging  ourselves  with  the  protection  of  the  inde- 
pendence of  this  part  of  Spanish  America,  upon  a  peace,  against 
the  parent  State,  even  supposing  all  difficulties  as  to  its  internal 
system  of  government  were  removed :  but,  unless  we  are  pre- 


320  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

pared  to  encounter  these  difficulties  upon  some  enlarged  prin- 
ciple which  shall  be  intelligible  and  captivating  to  the  country, 
the  progress  of  our  arms  cannot  well  be  expected  to  lead  to  any 
permanent  national  advantage;  and  it  may  even  be  doubtful 
whether  the  silent  and  imperceptible  operation  of  our  illicit 
commercial  intercourse  with  that  portion  of  the  world  during 
war  would  not  be  more  operative  and  beneficial,  if  we  approached 
it  only  as  traders,  than  when,  by  approaching  it  as  enemies,  a 
new  energy  is  given  to  the  local  government,  which  may  pro- 
bably enable  them  the  better  to  enforce  the  prohibitory  regula- 
tions against  our  commerce. 

Independent,  however,  of  the  effect  of  taking  upon  ourselves 
the  duty  of  guaranteeing  the  independence  of  Spanish  America, 
the  most  serious  objections  that  have  occurred  to  those  who 
have  considered  the  policy  of  countenancing  separation,  are  the 
probability  that  any  local  government  which  might  be  esta- 
blished would  become  democratic  and  revolutionary,  and  that, 
in  endeavouring  to  promote  and  combine  the  happiness  of  the 
people  with  the  extension  of  our  own  commerce,  we  might,  in 
destroying  a  bad  government,  leave  them  without  any  govern- 
ment at  all. 

To  the  two  extreme  propositions,  namely,  either  that  of 
conquest,  with  a  view  to  a  permanent  possession  in  ourselves,  or 
to  an  endeavour  to  dissolve  the  existing  government,  without 
any  precaution  as  to  the  system  which  is  to  replace  it,  there 
seems  to  be  the  most  insuperable  objections.  To  any  interme- 
diate course  of  policy,  a  variety  of  objections  must  be  expected 
to  attach,  which  would  be  at  once  conclusive  against  the  attempt, 
if  the  affairs  of  the  world  were  proceeding  in  the  ordinary 
course.  But,  while  the  territory  of  Old  Spain  is,  in  fact,  a 
French  province,  and  whilst  not  only  the  fleets  and  armies  of 
Spain,  but  of  France,  are  put  in  motion  against  us  by  the 
resources  of  Spanish  America,  we  are  driven  to  consider  whether 
those  resources  may  not  be  made  the  means  of  creating  and 
supporting  an  amicable  and  local  government,  with  which  those 


180M  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  321 

commercial  relations  may  freely  subsist  which  it  is  alone  our 
interest  to  aim  at,  and  which,  the  people  of  South  America 
must  equally  desire. 

Under  any  favourable  prospect  of  restoring  Europe  to  some- 
thing like  its  former  system,  the  temptation  to  risk  much  in 
any  attempt  of  this  nature  would  be  proportionably  diminished ; 
but,  if  we  are  to  carve  out  a  separate  existence  for  ourselves, 
and  to  seek  to  replace  those  channels  of  commerce  which  may 
be  interrupted  or  shut  against  us,  by  opening  others  less  ex- 
posed to  French  power,  new  and  greater  efforts  must  be  made. 

In  looking  to  any  scheme  for  liberating  South  America,  it 
seems  indispensable  that  we  should  not  present  ourselves  in 
any  other  light  than  as  auxiliaries  and  protectors.  In  order  to 
prove  our  sincerity  in  this  respect,  we  should  be  prepared  to 
pursue  our  object  by  a  native  force,  to  be  created  under  our 
countenance ;  and  the  particular  interest  which  we  should  be 
understood  alone  to  propose  to  ourselves  should  be  the  de- 
priving our  enemy  of  one  of  his  chief  resources,  and  the  opening 
to  our  manufactures  the  markets  of  that  jjreat  Continent. 

In  pursuing  two  objects  of  such  legitimate  advantage,  we  are 
only  bound  to  restrain  our  efforts  so  far  as  not  unnecessarily  to 
incur  the  responsibility  of  having  involved  that  country  in 
anarchy  and  confusion.  The  danger  of  such  a  result  must  be 
in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  the  change  which  will  be  requisite 
to  produce  the  object  aimed  at;  namely,  the  separation  of  that 
Continent  from  its  indirect  subjugation  to  France,  and  the 
establishment  within  it  of  a  local  government,  by  which  the 
interests  of  the  inhabitants  may  be  better  consulted  than  they 
now  are.  If  it  were  possible,  without  dissolving  the  frame  of 
the  Government,  without  destroying  the  monarchy  which  now 
exists,  to  commit  the  power  and  authority  of  the  Sovereign  to 
other  hands,  and  that  the  Prince  on  the  throne  should  live 
amongst  his  subjects,  and  have  no  longer  any  motive  to  sacri- 
fice their  interests  to  the  supposed  advantages  of  any  other 
portion  of  his  empire,  so  far  as  we  can  hope  to  effect  any  change 

VOL.  VII.  Y 


322  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

of  Government,  without  destroying  the  elements  of  autlioritj, 
such  a  transfer  of  power  does  not  appear  impracticable  or  objec- 
tionable, and  it  is  not  difficult  to  imagine  a  variety  of  indul- 
gences which  might  be  connected  with  such  a  change,  and 
which  would  interest  the  people  in  its  support. 

The  means  of  creating  and  supporting  a  military  force  would 
enable  the  Government,  without  taxation,  to  strengthen  itself, 
and  speedily  to  dispense  with  the  presence  of  a  British  army. 

If  the  change  could  be  brought  about  on  these  principles,  it 
ought  to  be  our  policy  to  support  the  pretensions  of  some 
member  of  the  Bourbon  family,  as  naturally  connected  with 
that  Monarchy,  rather  than  any  Prince  more  immediately 
connected  with  our  own  Crown. 

The  similarity  of  religion  would  render  him  more  acceptable 
to  those  of  Spanish  extraction.  Not  being  too  near  in  the 
succession  to  the  Crown  of  France,  if  established  in  Spanish 
America,  there  would  be  little  jealousy  of  the  regal  power  being 
again  merged  in  that  of  a  distant  State.  The  native  Americans 
might  perhaps  incline  rather  to  a  frame  of  government  more 
resembling  that  of  North  America,  in  which  their  numbers 
might  have  more  influence ;  but  between  such  a  system  and 
the  present  Spanish  authority  they  could  not  hesitate. 

The  practicability  of  such  an  attempt  must  be  extremely 
dubious  ;  but,  in  searching  for  some  middle  measure,  as  a  com- 
promise between  the  extreme  principles  which  have  been  above 
stated,  it  has  occurred  as  worth  considering,  whether  some 
attempt  should  not  be  made  to  sound  the  dispositions  of  the  in- 
habitants, to  state  to  them  the  principles  upon  which  we  should 
be  alone  disposed  to  co-operate  with  them  in  rendering  them 
independent,  and  to  try  whether  a  concurrence  might  not  be 
obtained,  with  a  view  to  such  a  rational  system  of  government  as 
we  might,  without  disgrace,  profess  our  determination  to  protect. 

The  degree  in  which  the  resources  of  South  America  have 
operated  in  the  last  seventeen  years,  to  exclude  the  Bourbons 
from  the  throne  of  France,  would  make  it  a  natural  object  of 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  323 

policy  to  the  family  to  lend  themselves  to  an  arrangement 
which  should  effectually  cut  off  that  hostile  supply ;  and 
were  such  an  enterprising  individual  as  the  Duke  of  Orleans, 
with  their  concurrence,  to  undertake  it,  the  object  might 
perhaps  be  accomplished,  and,  in  that  case,  must  prove  bene- 
ficial to  us. 

In  the  event  of  his  being  deemed  a  proper  person  to  look  to, 
he  might,  in  the  first  instance,  embark  in  it  only  as  a  military 
man,  governing  himself  afterwards  according  to  circumstances. 
A  great  number  of  French  officers  could  be  easily  prevailed  on 
to  embark  with  him.  It  is  probable  Miranda  might  be  induced 
to  follow  his  fortunes  ;  Dumouriez  certainly  would ;  and  we 
might  thus  obtain  the  means  of  expeditiously  creating  a  native 
force,  which  would  render  the  operation  comparatively  easy 
to  us. 

As  things  formerly  stood,  one  should  hesitate  much  in 
planting  any  thing  like  French  power  in  any  part  of  the  globe 
from  which  we  could  exclude  it;  but,  looking  at  the  mode,  the 
degree,  and  the  circumstances,  under  which  it  would  in  this 
case  exist,  the  corrections  and  checks  it  would  have  on  the 
spot,  its  separation  from  France,  at  least  whilst  France  shall 
continue  under  its  present  frame  of  government,  and  the  neces- 
sary dependence  and  intercourse  which,  for  a  great  length  of 
time,  it  must  have  with  us,  it  seems  an  instrument  which 
might  be  used  at  present  with  greater  prospects  of  advantage 
than  danger. 

The  determination  whether  we  ought  to  prosecute  the  object 
of  South  America  seriously  and  upon  system  may  perhaps,  in 
a  considerable  degree,  depend  on  the  turn  things  shall  take  in 
the  next  three  months  on  the  Continent.  Lord  Oastlereagh 
has  thought  he  ought  not,  however,  to  delay  bringing  some- 
thing in  sufficient  detail  before  the  Cabinet,  to  invite  a  general 
consideration  of  this  delicate  and  important  question.  His 
own  mind  is  by  no  means  settled  on  this  point,  and  he  begs  to 
be  understood  as  not  so  much  submitting  opinions  to  his  col-r 

Y  2 


324  LETTEHS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

leagues,  as  throwing  out  such  ideas  as  may  serve  to  provoke 
discussion. 

He  certainly  does  entertain  a  very  strong  persuasion  that  the 
policy  upon  which  we  are  now  acting  will  be  productive  of 
little  commercial  or  political  benefit,  and  must  be  felt  as  a 
great  waste  of  our  military  means.  He  is,  therefore,  desirous 
that  the  Cabinet  should  come  to  a  decision  as  early  as  possible 
of  the  views  and  plan  on  which  (finding  the  scheme  thus 
begun  by  their  predecessors)  they  are  disposed  to  recommend 
that  it  should  be  followed  up.  Till  this  is  done,  it  is  difficult 
to  submit  for  their  approbation  any  instructions  for  the  conduct 
of  the  officers  charged  with  that  service. 


MEMOIR  OF  THE  MOSQUITO  TERRITORY. 

In  the  years  1805  and  1806,  having  the  command  of  his 
Majesty ""s  naval  forces  in  the  Bay  of  Honduras,  extending 
from  the  province  of  Yucatan  to  the  extent  of  the  Mosquito 
Shore,  I  had  many  opportunities  of  remarking  and  reflecting 
on  the  importance  of  the  latter  country.  In  this  pursuit  I 
was  very  ably  assisted  by  a  reverend  gentleman  who  resided 
there  many  years,  when  it  was  formerly  in  our  possession, 
and  who,  as  respects  his  general  knowledge  of  men,  manners, 
and  things,  is  excelled  by  no  one  in  the  settlement  of  Hon- 
duras. 

In  the  several  conversations  I  had  with  this  gentleman,  he 
requested  me,  in  conjunction  with  many  others,  to  commit  to 
writing  my  own  observations  and  reflections,  as  well  as  their 
local  knowledge  of  the  importance  of  the  acquisition  of  that  ex- 
tensive territory  and  traffic  ;  all  which  was  solemnly  tendered 
to  me  by  two  of  the  Mosquito  Princes,  deputed  for  that  pur- 
pose by  the  king  of  the  country,  whose  crown  is  hereditary. 
They  were  willing,  in  the  capacity  of  plenipotentiaries,  to 
swear  fealty  to  the  Crown  of  Great  Britain,  and  off'ered  lands 
and  possessions  to  all  that  were  recommended  by  me,  who 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  325 

would  come  and  settle  among  them,  only  requiring  in  return 
protection  and  friendship.  On  those  conditions  they  were 
christened :  one  after  the  military,  the  other  after  the  naval 
commandant.  I  gave  them  assurances  that,  on  my  return  to 
England,  I  should  lay  their  propositions  and  wishes  before  the 
King^s  Government  and  the  merchants  of  Great  Britain  ;  and 
they  then  departed  to  their  own  country,  much  gratified  with 
the  hope  of  having  the  English  again  among  them. 

In  commencing  my  memoir,  I  am  not  fearful  that  my  zeal 
for  this  unhappy  and  neglected  country  can  carry  me  beyond 
the  bounds  of  rigid  truth ;  knowing,  as  I  do,  that  my  descrip- 
tion must  fall  very  far  short  of  the  actual  fact,  both  as  to  the 
produce  of  the  country,  and  the  good  disposition  and  sincere 
afiection  of  its  inhabitants  towards  the  British  nation. 

The  Mosquito  Shore  extends  from  the  Point  of  Castile,  or 
Cape  Honduras,  being  the  south  point  of  Truxillo  Bay,  to  the 
northern  branch  of  the  river  Nicaragua,  called  St.  Juan's,  on 
the  southward,  being  182  leagues  of  shore.  A  chain  of  lofty 
mountains  runs  diagonally  from  Point  Castile  to  St.  Juan''s, 
and  serves  as  a  strong  barrier  between  the  Spanish  and  the 
Mosquito  territories.  The  area  of  the  latter,  which  is  one-third 
larger  than  the  kingdom  of  Portugal,  forms  an  irregular  tri- 
angle, of  which  Cape  Gracias  a  Dios  makes  the  apex. 

No  country  enjoys  more  advantages  from  water-carriage ; 
as,  besides  nineteen  rivers  navigable  for  small  craft  up  to  the 
very  interior,  a  chain  of  lagoons  line  the  coast,  accessible  at 
the  mouths  of  the  different  rivers.  The  climate  is  mild  for 
those  latitudes  ;  and,  being  continental,  not  near  so  warm  as 
the  islands  in  the  same  parallel.  The  soil  is  so  rich,  that,  until 
three  or  four  seasons  of  rattoon  canes  have  in  some  decree 
impoverished  the  land,  no  sugar  can  be  produced.  The  first 
growths  rise  to  the  great  height  of  sixteen  or  eighteen  feet, 
and  several  inches  in  diameter,  which  naturally  impoverishes 
the  saccharine  juices.  This  fact  must  sufficiently  prove  the 
great  fertility  of  the   soil  in  producing  maize,  Indian  corn, 


326  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  11807- 

cotton,  indigo,  coffee,   and  provisions,  which  far  exceeds  any 
thing  known  in  the  West  India  Islands. 

Endless  tracts  of  pine  ridges  would  supply  an  inexhaustible 
fund  of  tar  and  turpentine,  the  trees  being  so  redundant  with 
those  liquors  that,  when  put  into  the  deepest  rivers,  they  in- 
stantly sink.  The  savannahs,  or  plains,  afford  the  richest 
pasturage.  The  rivers  and  sea-coast  are  exceeded  by  no 
country  for  the  great  abundance  of  all  sorts  of  fish,  and  which 
are  caught  with  the  greatest  facility.  Many  of  the  rivers,  by 
washing  the  sand  in  fine  sieves,  furnish  the  native  globules  of 
pure  gold.  Gold  mines,  and  those  very  rich,  have  been  here 
discovered.  I  shall  particularly  mention  one  at  Alprapayer, 
which  might  have  been  of  infinite  benefit  to  those  concerned, 
had  honesty  in  the  conducting  it  been  as  proportionably 
attended  to  as  the  mine  was  rich. 

The  woods  have  an  inexhaustible  variety  and  great  quanti- 
ties of  game,  and  plenty  of  poultry  is  every  where  to  be  found : 
the  former  is  delicious  in  its  flavour,  and  the  latter  is  easily  to 
be  obtained.  Medicinal  gums  and  drugs  are  plentifully  dis- 
persed all  over  the  country ;  there  are  the  tono,  or  elastic 
gum  ;  gum  copal,  balsam  of  capivi ;  sarsaparilla,  of  the  finest 
quality,  &c.  It  abounds  also  with  mahogany,  cedar,  zebra  or 
palinarotta  wood,  with  many  other  kinds  useful  for  every  pur- 
pose of  husbandry,  the  erection  of  buildings,  &c.  There  is 
also  plenty  of  large,  beautiful  deer,  antelopes,  buffaloes,  moun- 
tain cows,  &c.  The  coast  affords  a  superabundance  of  turtle 
from  the  middle  of  April  to  the  end  of  September,  both  by 
nets  and  on  the  beach,  of  the  very  best  quality,  together  with 
the  liawksbill  turtle,  from  whose  back  the  tortoiseshell  is  pro- 
duced. In  short,  take  the  Mosquito  Shore  in  all  points  of 
view,  it  far  surpasses  every  part  of  the  West  Indies. 

Truxillo  harbour,  being  the  northernmost  extreme  of  the 
Mosquito  Shore,  is  a  noble,  large  bay,  where  are  the  commodi- 
ous harbours  of  little  and  big  Puerto  Novo,  and  where  large 
vessels  may  lie  in  perfect  safety.     This  bay  abounds  with  fish. 


1807]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  327 

game,  wood,  and  excellent  water.  Luke's  Key,  or  Island,  lies 
at  the  entrance  of  Truxillo  Bay ;  the  islands  of  Bonacca, 
Helum,  Morat,  and  Rattan,  with  Barbareith,  lie  off  Truxillo. 
Rattan  and  Bonacca,  on  account  of  the  goodness  of  the  soil, 
the  salubrity  of  the  air,  the  pureness  of  the  water,  and  the 
convenience  of  very  fine  harbours,  and  fish,  wild  hogs,  cocoa- 
nuts,  &c.,  with  which  they  abound,  are  proverbially  called  in 
that  country  the  garden  of  the  West  Indies,  and  the  key  to 
Spanish  America  and  New  Gibraltar. 

Cape  Gracias  a  Dios  is  a  noble,  extensive  harbour,  where 
Commodore  Parry  anchored,  in  the  year  1782,  with  his 
squadron,  consisting  of  a  50-gun  ship  and  some  heavy  frigates. 
This  bay  is  open  to  no  winds  but  a  south-east.  The  Cape 
Keys  lies  off  this  place,  abounds  with  turtle  all  the  year  round. 
Distant  from  thence  about  fifteen  leagues  is  Pearl  Key  Lagoon, 
which  has  small  keys  all  round,  and,  lying  off  it,  form  good 
anchorage.  Bluefields  has  a  bar;  at  high  water,  there  is 
sixteen  feet  over  it.  When  inside,  it  forms  a  noble  basin  of 
water,  capable  of  holding  a  thousand  sail  of  shipping.  It  may 
be  proper  in  this  place  to  observe  that,  on  account  of  the 
number  of  fresh  water  rivers  emptying  themselves  into  the 
harbours  on  the  Mosquito  Shore,  none  but  copper-bottomed 
vessels  ought  to  be  employed  in  them,  or  even  in  navigating 
those  seas.  There  is  another  river,  which  lies  under  False 
Cape  northerly,  called  Crouch  river,  where  there  is  from  nine 
to  eleven  feet  of  water  over  its  bar. 

The  soundings  along  the  Mosquito  Shore  are  very  regular  ; 
you  are  to  stand  no  nearer  than  five  fathoms,  nor  more  than 
ten  to  twelve  off  from  Potock  to  the  Cape.  Off  False  Cape 
there  is  a  dangerous  shoal,  called  Cape  Bank ;  and  there  is  a 
chain  of  reefs  and  keys,  with  passages  between,  towards  the 
Cape.  The  north  extreme  commences  at  Carratasco  reef,  nearly 
abreast  of  Potock,  which  reef  makes  in  the  form  of  a  half 
circle  towards  the  sea,  and  three  keys  a  good  distance  further 
out.     The  best  book  of  directions  for  the  Bay  and"  Mosquito 


328  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

Shore  is  EarPs,  which,  if  there  is  no  error  in  the  publisher,  is 
from  his  own  actual  observations,  and  in  most  instances  has 
been  found  sufficiently  correct.  As  Bluefield's  Blufi*  fully 
commands  the  entrance  of  the  harbour,  a  small  force  stationed 
there  would  keep  off  a  great  and  numerous  enemy. 

The  pirates  who  anciently  infested,  in  a  peculiar  manner, 
the  American  seas,  appear  to  have  been  the  first  of  our  coun- 
trymen who  were  acquainted  with  the  Mosquito  Shore.  The 
difficulty,  or  rather  impossibility,  at  that  time  of  large  vessels 
pursuing  them  into  the  rivers,  on  account  of  the  shifting  bars, 
and  sometimes  the  shallowness  of  the  water,  rendered  them 
safe  harbours ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  lagoons,  running 
from  twenty,  thirty,  and  fifty  leagues  withinside  the  beach, 
afforded  them  proper  retreats  for  victualling  and  refitting. 
Here  arose  the  necessity  of  friendly  intercourse  with  the 
Indians,  which,  in  process  of  time,  extended  to  a  commercial 
communication,  productive  of  benefit  to  both  parties :  and 
hence  originated  among  the  natives  the  first  knowledge  of 
arms. 

After  the  pirates  were  extirpated  from  these  parts,  succeeded 
the  unhappy  English  sufferers  who  escaped  from  Spanish 
cruelty  in  the  Bay  of  Campeachy,  seeking  here  an  asylum  ; 
and,  as  they  fled  from  an  enemy  to  whom  the  Mosquito  In- 
dians have  an  unconquerable  and  hereditary  aversion,  added  to 
their  good  opinion  of  the  English,  they  were  received  as  their 
brethren,  lands  assigned  to  them,  and  a  colony  established.  From 
this  small  colony  they  took  their  first  hints  of  establishing  a 
police ;  and  this  era  marks  the  first  dawning  of  civilization. 
The  warmest  friendship  subsisted  between  them.  So  fraught 
were  they  with  the  ideas  of  English  honour,  probity,  and  jus- 
tice, and  the  dignity  of  a  British  king,  that,  in  the  year  1687, 
the  then  Mosquito  king,  with  the  full  consent  of  his  tribes, 
made  a  formal  and  voluntary  cession  of  the  Mosquito  Shore  to 
the  King  of  England ;  and,  although  the  Indian  crown  is 
hereditary,  yet  no  public  act  of  his  was  acknowledged  valid 


1807.]  LOED  CASTLEREAGH.  329 

until  his  title  was  recognised  and  ratified  by  the  Governor  of 
Jamaica,  or  the  Superintendent  of  the  Shore,  acting  under  the 
Governor  of  that  island.  The  late  King  George,  who  was 
murdered  by  his  own  subjects  at  Black  River,  was  crowned  Chief 
of  the  Mosquito  Shore,  at  the  chief  settlement.  Black  Kiver, 
by  Captain,  afterwards  Colonel,  Laurie,  in  March,  1777,  where 
a  fort  had  been  erected  at  the  end  of  the  war,  in  1763 ;  and, 
with  a  single  company  of  the  49th  Regiment,  assisted  by  the 
Indians,  the  turbulent  spirit  of  the  Spaniards  was  so  quelled, 
that  the  colony  was  in  a  state  of  perfect  safety. 

Lord  Halifax,  at  that  time,  by  letter  declared  that  the  Mos- 
quito shore  was  a  British  settlement ;  and  Lord  Dartmouth, 
in  the  year  1775,  ordered  a  legislative  council  to  be  chosen 
there.  In  consequence  of  the  Governor  of  Jamaica's  commis- 
sion, a  Court  of  Common  Pleas  was  established  in  1776; 
hence  it  was  deemed  a  part  of  the  British  territories,  and  in 
commissions,  «Szic.,  joined  with  Bonacca  and  Rattan,  as  depending 
on  and  annexed  to  the  government  of  Jamaica.  However  matters 
may  now  be  contradicted,  it  is  certain  that,  in  Lord  Hills- 
borough's administration,  a  particular  commission  did  actually 
pass  through  his  office,  erecting  this  Government  independent  of 
Jamaica,  in  the  person  of  the  Superintendent  and  Council.  It 
was  afterwards  revoked  ;  lest,  as  it  was  alleged,  it  might  give 
umbrage  to  the  Governor  of  that  island,  who  afterwards,  con- 
struing (it  is  supposed  through  error)  the  1 7th  Article  of  the 
Treaty  of  Versailles  into  an  acknowledgment  of  a  Spanish 
territorial  right,  directed  the  fort  at  Black  River  to  be  razed, 
caused  the  ordnance  to  be  conveyed  to  Jamaica,  and  ordered 
off  the  detachment  of  British  soldiers  conmianded  by  Colonel 
Laurie.  Thus  were  the  Mosquito  Indians  abandoned,  and  of 
course  all  control  over  the  acts  and  proceedings  of  their  Go- 
vernment resigned  by  England.  From  that  time  up  to  the 
present,  the  natives  have  themselves  defended  the  coast,  and 
successfully  resisted  the  attacks  of  their  hereditary  and  impla- 
cable enemies  the  Spaniards,   resolved,  to  a  man,  to  shed  the 


330  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

last  drop  of  their  blood,  rather  than  subject  themselves  to  their 
authority,  or  recognise  them  as  friends. 

On  the  Mosquito  Shore  were  eleven  tribes  of  Indians  inhabit- 
ing different  districts,  viz.,  the  Patooks,  Ramas,  Cocorracks, 
Woolways,  Tonglaws,  Uticaws,  Towacaws,  Parramacaws, 
Poyers,  Mosquito  Sambais,  and  Samboes.  The  Patook  men 
were  extirpated  by  Spanish  perfidy,  the  particulars  of  which 
act  of  atrocity  are  too  well  known  and  notorious  to  render  it 
necessary  to  detail  them  here.  The  Ramas  inhabit  the  most 
southern  part  between  St.  Juan's  and  Bluefields,  and,  at  vari- 
ous periods  of  the  year,  carry  on  a  considerable  traffic  with  the 
Spaniards.  It  would  be  very  desirable  to  make  friends  of 
these  people,  as,  through  their  country,  a  passage  might  easily 
be  found  to  the  rich  cities  of  Leon  and  Grenada.  The  Cocor- 
racks are  denominated  wild  and  tame,  to  distinguish  the  civi- 
lized from  the  uncivilized.  The  Woolways,  aback  of  Pearl 
Key  Lagoon  and  Brangman's  Bluff,  with  the  Tonglaws,  Uti- 
caws, Towacaws,  Parramacaws,  and  Poyers,  from  Wankis 
River  to  the  Great  Rocks,  are  the  inhabitants  of  the  interior. 
These  six  nations  form  a  barrier  between  the  Spaniards  and 
the  whole  of  the  Mosquito  territory. 

The  Mosquito  Samboes  inhabit  the  coast  from  Bluefields  to 
Tibuppy,  under  the  orders  of  two  of  their  own  chiefs,  called 
the  Admiral  and  the  Governor.  They  were  ever  considered 
the  best  tribes  of  Mosquito  men,  from  their  industry,  good 
order,  and  quiet  disposition  ;  but  they  were  not  liked  by  the 
Samboes,  who,  some  years  ago,  with  their  late  murdered 
king  at  their  head,  extirpated  nearly  the  whole  of  them,  and 
hung  their  chiefs.  The  Samboe  race  of  Mosquito  men  inhabit 
the  country  from  Sandy  Bay  to  Polock,  tolerably  numerous, 
rather  indolent,  most  of  their  labour  being  performed  by  their 
wives.  There  is  no  mode  of  ascertaining  their  numbers  ;  but, 
from  many  circumstances,  it  might  be  inferred  that  500  men 
might  be  induced  to  follow  an  army  without  injury  to  their 
own  country.     They  are  particularly  useful  as  woodsmen,  and 


1807.]  LOKD  CASTLEREAGH.  331 

skilful  in  hunting,  striking  fish,  managing  bateaux  canoes, 
dories,  pitpans,  &c.,  either  on  rapid  rivers,  or  in  high  surf- 
beaches.  They  entertain  an  idea  that,  in  whatever  services 
their  relations  or  friends  may  lose  their  lives,  or  die,  such  must 
be  paid  for,  and  it  has  been  regularly  demanded,  even  in  battle. 
When  satisfactory  answers  have  not  been  given,  they  have 
been  known  to  retreat  in  the  most  dangerous  and  disorderly 
manner ;  as,  on  the  contrary,  if  they  had  been  promised  pay- 
ment, they  might  have  materially  assisted  in  defeating  the 
Spanish  dragoons  in  the  plain  of  either  Wutigulpha  or  Mati- 
gulpha.  Those  people  worship  evil  spirits,  giving,  as  a  reason 
for  doing  so,  that  good  ones  will  do  them  no  harm,  and  they 
are  afraid  the  evil  ones  will.  Among  the  worst  is  the  Wool- 
saw — the  Devil.  Immediately  on  any  of  their  people  dying, 
they  desert  the  habitation,  and  build  themselves  a  new  settle- 
ment. 

The  difference  of  complexion,  so  observable  between  the 
Samboe  and  all  the  other  tribes,  I  account  for  by  the  fate  of  a 
Guinea  ship,  wrecked  on  their  coast,  when  all  the  males  were 
murdered,  and  the  females  taken  as  wives,  of  whom  they  take 
as  many  as  they  are  able  to  support,  the  first  wife  usually 
enjoying  the  pre-eminence,  living  together  in  nmch  apparent 
harmony,  taking  it  by  turns  to  attend  each  other  at  the  deli- 
very of  their  children,  whom,  as  soon  as  born,  they  take  and 
throw  themselves  into  the  coldest  rivers,  and  it  is  surprising 
no  accidents  or  ill  effects  are  ever  produced  by  this  practice, 
either  on  the  mother  or  the  new-born  babe,  to  whom,  as  it 
grows  up,  they  are  extremely  indulgent :  it  is  very  rarely  that 
they  chide,  and  they  never  beat  them. 

Innumerable  other  observations  suggest  themselves  to  me,  as 
connected  with  this  important  subject.  I  will  wave  narrating 
them  :  first,  because  I  am  anxious  to  avoid  spinning  out  my 
memoir  to  a  tedious  length ;  and,  secondly,  because  I  am  con- 
fident the  sketch  I  have  given  must  bring  home,  with  irresistible 
force,  to  the  intelligent  and  reflecting  mind,  this  positive  and 


332  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OE  [1807- 

incontrovertible  fact,  viz.,  that  the  Mosquito  territory,  on 
account  of  the  excessive  richness  of  its  soil,  the  luxuriance  of 
its  woods,  the  great  salubrity  of  its  air,  the  most  remarkable 
excellence  of  its  provisions  and  water,  with  its  almost  unri- 
valled harbours  for  shipping,  with  which  the  shore  abounds, 
would,  under  the  polishing  hand  of  British  protection,  soon 
shine  forth  one  of  the  brightest  jewels  in  the  British  diadem  ; 
and  I  do  insist  that  Spain  might  suffer  a  mortal  wound  in  her 
American  interest,  by  accepting  the  Indian  offer,  and  by  a 
comparatively  small  force  being  stationed  there. 

J.  Wright,  late  Commander  H.M.S.  Swift. 


Memoir  on  Spanish  America,  and  the  Viceroy alty  of  Mexico 

in  particular, 

BY  THE  DUKE  OF  ORLEANS. 

The  object  of  this  Memoir  is  threefold  :  first,  to  prove  that 
scarcely  any  combination  of  events  whatever  can  prevent  a 
revolution  from  taking  place  in  Spanish  America ;  for,  if  things 
are  allowed  to  go  on  as  they  do  at  this  moment,  a  formidable 
convulsion  must  take  place  in  that  country,  and  that  nothing 
but  the  timely  and  well  directed  interference  of  Great  Britain 
can  rescue  that  important  quarter  of  the  globe  from  falling  a 
prey  to  Jacobinism,  and  save  the  world  from  the  dreadful  con- 
sequences which  would  inevitably  follow  that  lamentable  event ; 
secondly,  to  show  the  advantages  which  are  to  be  expected 
from  such  interference  on  the  part  of  Great  Britain :  and, 
lastly,  to  point  out  the  means  by  which  an  enterprise  at  the 
same  time  the  most  brilliant  and  the  most  important  can  be 
carried  into  execution,  together  with  the  measures  necessary 
to  protect  that  immense  country  against  the  dreadful  calamities 
of  a  revolution  that  would  be  equally  injurious  to  the  country 
and  to  the  real  interests,  not  only  of  Great  Britain,  but  of  all 
the  Sovereigns  of  Europe. 

The  illiberal  policy  of  Spain  towards  her  transatlantic  pos- 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  333 

sessions  is  well  known,  but  it  is  not  equally  understood  that  the 
system  can  now  no  longer  be  kept  up,  and  that  nothing  what- 
ever can  protract  the  existence  of  Spanish  America  under  its 
present  Government.  The  power  of  Spain  over  America  is 
decreasing  every  day  ;  for  that  country  is  unable  to  furnish  the 
means  of  supporting  the  trade  ;  Spain  cannot  send  the  troops 
required  both  to  keep  the  inhabitants  in  subjection,  and  to 
repel  the  invasion  of  a  foreign  enemy  :  in  fact,  she  reigns  over 
America  only  by  the  suflerance  of  other  powers,  and,  above  all, 
by  that  of  Great  Britain.  The  proprietors  in  Spanish  Ame- 
rica are  all  natives  ;  and,  with  the  exception  of  the  Viceroys, 
Governors,  and  a  few  officers,  the  whole  force  of  the  country  is 
in  the  hands  of  the  inhabitants  themselves.  This  is  one  of 
the  principal  causes  that  render  it  impossible  for  the  King  of 
Spain  to  go  on  with  the  system  that  he  has  hitherto  pursued 
in  the  Government  and  administration  of  that  country.  At 
the  same  time,  it  is  evident  that,  the  moment  he  relinquishes 
that  system,  he  must  also  relinquish  the  sovereignty  of  his 
American  dominions ;  and  the  time  is  actually  come  when 
he  can  maintain  that  sovereignty  no  longer ;  it  must  be  super- 
seded— the  thing  is  unavoidable ;  but  it  may  be  superseded 
in  various  ways  ;  and,  as  I  have  said,  the  object  of  this  Memoir 
is  to  prove  that  a  due  sense  of  her  dignity  and  real  interests 
must  induce  Great  Britain  to  take  the  lead,  and  avert  the 
great  dangers  that  would  attend  an  event  of  so  much  magni- 
tude and  political  importance,  were  it  to  take  a  wrong  turn,  by 
adopting  such  measures  as  will  direct  this  revolution — for  such 
only  can  it  be  termed — into  the  channel  that  alone  can  con- 
duct it  to  a  fortunate  termination,  in  a  manner  at  once  honour- 
able, easy,  and  of  incalculable  advantage  to  her  resources  and 
power.  Therefore,  the  question  is,  not  whether  the  Conti- 
nent of  Spanish  America  and  its  appendages  can  remain  any 
longer  in  that  state  of  comparative  nullity  to  which  it  has 
been  confined  till  the  present  time,  nor  whether  its  separation 
from  Spain  can  or  ought  to  be  prevented  ;  but   the  real  ques- 


334  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

tion  is  this — What  course  shall  the  important  event  of  the 
revolution  of  that  country  take? — what  country  shall  next  reap 
the  immense  harvest  which  it  now  offers  ! — and  what  country 
shall  derive  from  it  the  means  of  striking  a  blow  at  their  ad- 
versaries'* power  ?  Shall  it  be  France,  or  shall  it  be  Great 
Britain  I  Such  is  really  the  question,  on  the  decision  of  which 
may  rest  the  fate  of  the  world. 

The  French  may  secure  the  disposal  and  command  of 
Spanish  America,  at  a  much  cheaper  rate  than  is  generally  be- 
lieved. A  few  important  and  well  known  garrisons  on  the 
Spanish  shores  would  give  them  the  command  of  the  whole 
Continent  and  of  its  resources  :  indeed,  the  acquisition  of  Loui- 
siana would  have  been  sufficient  to  ensure  them  the  conquest 
of  the  whole ;  but,  be  that  as  it  may,  the  subjection  of  the 
coast  of  Spain  to  the  French  Government  is  too  complete  to 
allow  one  doubt  that,  whenever  France  chooses  to  put  gar- 
risons into  the  principal  forts  of  Spanish  America,  the  King 
of  Spain  will  submit  to  her  demands.  It  is  well  known,  also, 
that  small  expeditions  may  at  all  times  escape  the  vigilance 
even  of  British  cruisers  ;  and  if  once  the  French  obtain  posses- 
sion either  of  Vera  Cruz,  of  the  Isthmus  of  Panama,  or  the 
Rio  de  la  Plata,  or  the  Brazils,  they  will  soon  revolutionize  the 
whole  country  in  their  own  way.  The  commanders  of  the 
French  army  of  St.  Domingo,  should  there  be  any  part  of  it 
left,  may  likewise,  and  will  probably,  be  employed  to  such  pur- 
poses. The  blockade  of  St.  Domingo  can  never  be  depended 
upon,  on  account  of  the  winds  and  currents  of  those  seas  ;  be- 
sides, tlie  distance  from  St.  Domingo  to  Vera  Cruz  is  a  very 
short  one,  since  both  wind  and  stream  are  constantly  favourable, 
and  the  French  would  always  have  it  in  their  power  to  take 
shelter  in  a  friendly  harbour,  all  along  the  coast  of  Cuba. 

If  a  French  force  is  once  landed  on  the  Spanish  American 
Continent,  the  business  is  settled;  and  Moreau,  Massena, 
Augereau,  or  any  such  person,  will  soon  be  Consul  of  Mexico 
or  Peru,  and  assist  the  favourite  system  of  upstarts,  by  direct- 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  335 

in^::  the  orreat  streno-th  and  resources  of  those  countries  aojainst 
the  British  Empire  and  the  whole  system  of  regular  govern- 
ments. Revolutionary  governments  can  never  be  sufficiently 
secure  at  home  to  indulge  their  subjects  in  the  encouragement 
of  industry  and  trade,  and  in  an  increase  of  their  wealth  by 
fair  means  ;  they  know  no  other  way  of  acquiring  wealth  but 
that  of  conquest  and  devastation. 

Jamaica  and  the  other  islands  are  objects  neither  remote 
nor  difficult  of  access,  in  consequence  of  the  constant  regularity 
of  the  currents  and  winds,  and  of  the  numerous  shoals  that 
have  rendered  it  utterly  impracticable  to  destroy  the  French 
privateers  in  those  seas.  We  have  all  read  of  Flibustiers 
and  Buccaneers ;  but  on  what  an  enlarged  scale  would  this 
buccaneering  system  be  carried  on,  if  the  resources  and  popu- 
lation of  Spanish  America  were  allowed  to  be  at  the  command 
and  disposal  of  the  modern  freebooters,  and  to  be  combined 
under  the  influence  of  France,  and,  by  her  activity,  with  the 
seeds  of  revolution  and  disorganization  now  existing  in  the 
West  Indies  ! 

However  strange  the  assertion  may  be,  it  is,  nevertheless, 
a  true  one,  that  Mexico  is  nearer  to  India  than  Suez  and 
Egypt ;  and,  therefore,  from  the  facility  of  navigating  the 
South  Sea,  from  the  abundance  of  all  sorts  of  stores  adapted 
to  the  construction  and  armament  of  vessels,  from  the  immense 
wealth  and  considerable  population  of  that  country,  some  dan- 
gerous blows  may  be  aimed  at  the  British  power  in  India  from 
Spanish  America.  These  considerations  acquire  a  still  greater 
degree  of  weight,  when  we  find  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  and 
Manilla,  the  two  central  rendezvous  between  Europe,  India, 
and  America,  in  the  hands  of  the  French,  or  at  least  in  those  of 
their  vassals,  the  Dutch  and  Spaniards :  but  I  go  still  further,  and 
assert  that  the  establishment  in  America,  at  once  regular  and 
independent,  and  hostile  to  the  modern  system  of  Jacobinism, 
can  alone  prevent  the  thread  of  connexion  between  that  country 
and  Spain  being   cut  by  the  inhabitants  themselves,  the  con- 


336  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

sequence  of  which  would  be  the  introduction  of  Jacobinism, 
whether  the  French  have  a  footing  in  the  country  or  not ; 
and  that  alone  would  be  sufficient  to  secure  to  France  an 
intimate  connexion  with  that  country,  if  not  the  conquest  of  it. 

Commercial  considerations  alone  cannot  prevent  the  esta- 
blishment of  a  revolutionary,  democratic,  military  Government, 
which  will  always  be  hostile  to  Great  Britain.  Another  con- 
sequence very  injurious  to  the  interests  of  Great  Britain  would 
also  take  place,  if  things  were  allowed  to  go  on  in  that  manner ; 
this  is  no  less  than  the  increase  of  democratic  interest  in  the 
United  States,  and,  consequently,  the  extension  of  French 
influence  over  them.  This  would  probably  produce  the  loss  of 
Canada  and  the  British  continental  possessions  in  America. 
It  is,  therefore,  extremely  probable  that,  unless  Great  Britain 
secures  in  due  time  the  resources  and  power  of  Spanish  Ame- 
rica, she  will  not  only  lose  the  immense  advantages  which  she 
might  derive  from  them,  but  they  will  be  most  actively  em- 
ployed against  her,  and  she  will  lose  with  them  and  by  them 
the  whole  of  her  American  empire.  On  the  contrary,  if 
Great  Britain  herself  gives  the  impulse ;  if  she  establishes  in 
Spanish  America  an  independent  and  regular  Government, 
upon  the  solid  basis  of  an  hereditary  monarchy,  she  will  secure 
for  her  own  use  all  the  resources  of  those  countries  ;  because 
governments  of  that  description  will  ever  look  to  her  for  that 
support  and  defence,  and  they  will,  consequently,  maintain 
with  her  an  alliance  as  close  as  circumstances  will  allow. 

Besides,  regular  Governments  are  always  found  to  act  re- 
specting alliances  upon  the  real  interests  of  the  countries  over 
which  they  preside;  and  these  are,  in  our  days,  with  regular 
Governments,  stronger  motives  than  the  ties  of  blood  or  con- 
sanguinity ;  and  no  doubt  the  interest  of  America  is  an  oftensive 
and  defensive  alliance  with  Great  Britain. 

The  advantages  which  Britain  will  derive  by  rescuing  Ame- 
rica from  the  clutches  of  Jacobinism,  and  by  establishing  in 
those  countries  regular  Governments  on  a  solid  basis,  will  be 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  337 

easily  perceived  and  briefly  enumerated.  In  the  first  place, 
it  would  deprive  the  enemies  of  Britain  of  all  means  of  attack 
against  the  British  possessions  in  America.  After  the  loss  of 
his  continental  possessions  in  America,  the  King  of  Spain  will 
be  unable  to  preserve  either  Cuba  or  Porto  Eico.  He  can 
neither  garrison  them,  nor  pay  the  expenses  of  their  Govern- 
ment. These  islands  would  fall  under  the  dominion  of  Britain, 
and  these  acquisitions  would  secure  to  her  the  command  of  the 
whole  archipelago  of  the  West  Indies,  and  render  her  empire 
in  America  as  invulnerable  as  it  is  in  India,  and,  perhaps,  still 
more  so. 

It  seems  unnecessary  to  dwell  upon  the  commercial  advan- 
tages that  Great  Britain  would  derive  from  this  important 
change  in  the  Government  of  Spanish  America  ;  still  I  must 
be  permitted  to  say  that  they  appear  to  be  such  as  to  exceed 
all  calculation.  It  would  throw  the  whole  of  the  West  India 
trade  into  the  hands  of  Britain  ;  it  would  render  the  trade  of  the 
eastern  coasts  of  the  United  States  entirely  subservient  to  that 
of  Great  Britain  ;  and  the  supplies  of  corn,  timber,  &;c.,  from 
the  Spanish  continent  would  establish  such  a  competition  in 
the  market  as  to  render  their  trade  completely  dependent  on 
the  will  of  Britain.  This  would  compel  them  to  sue  for  her 
alliance,  and  to  purchase  it  at  almost  any  price.  I  do  not 
speak  here  of  Louisiana,  and  the  countries  upon  the  banks  of 
the  Mississippi :  there  must  be  a  rivalship  between  these  and  the 
eastern  States,  which  will  daily  increase  their  dependence  upon 
Great  Britain.  The  trade  of  Spanish  America  would  also  fall 
upon  Britain  :  whatever  the  Americans  may  do,  no  article  of 
their  produce  can  find  a  market  in  this  country,  as  neither 
corn,  timber,  nor  any  article  produced  by  the  [Jnited  States, 
is  deficient  in  Spanish  America.  This  country  is  even  so  well 
supplied  with  all  these  articles  as  to  be  able  to  furnish  a  large 
proportion  of  them  for  the  West  India  congumption  and  at  a 
cheaper  rate.  The  inhabitants  of  that  country  require  only 
for  their  own  use  dry  goods  and  British  produce.     The  nature 

VOL.  VII.  z 


338  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807 

of  things  would,  therefore,  reduce  the  Americans  to  be  mere 
carriers  of  goods  for  Great  Britain,  and  consequently  their 
trade  would  always  be  limited  to  the  extent  allowed  by  her. 
The  trade  of  Spanish  America  thus  possessed  by  Great  Britain 
would  also  supply  her  with  all  sorts  of  timber  for  the  construc- 
tion of  her  ships,  and  chiefly  with  those  valuable  sorts  of  wood 
hitherto  unemployed  by  any  nation  except  the  Spaniards 
themselves.  It  is  to  these  sorts  of  wood  that  the  durability  of 
their  ships  of  war  is  to  be  ascribed.  Cedar,  now  so  scarce, 
mahogany,  and  various  other  kinds  of  timber,  equally  valuable, 
although  not  equally  well  known,  might  then  be  procured  in 
any  quantity,  at  a  cheap  rate.  This  would  be  equally  advan- 
tageous to  trade,  as  these  sorts  of  wood  are  the  finest  for  arti- 
cles of  furniture. 

Copper  and  hemp  might  also  be  procured,  the  former  imme- 
diately, and  in  great  abundance.  The  cultivation  of  the  latter 
might  be  easily  encouraged,  and  in  a  very  short  time  be  car- 
ried to  any  extent  by  Britain.  These  supplies  from  Spanish 
America  would  enable  Britain  to  support,  without  any  embar- 
rassment, the  interruption  or  loss  of  the  Baltic  trade,  should 
that  event  ever  take  place  hereafter.  The  produce  of  the  gold 
and  silver  mines,  which  is  now  an  article  of  trade,  would  then 
be  at  the  disposal  of  Britain. 

It  is  out  of  my  power  to  calculate  the  consequences  of  such 
events.  They  must  evidently  be  productive  of  prodigious  ad- 
vantages to  Britain.  She  would  then  be  placed  almost  be- 
yond the  reach  of  hostile  projects  in  Europe ;  and,  this 
becoming  daily  more  and  more  evident,  her  importance  would 
rise  in  proportion,  and  she  would  then  be  enabled  to  take  in 
continental  transactions  that  part  which  becomes  her  power 
and  rank.  Of  what  consequence  would  it  then  be  to  shut  all 
the  harbours  of  Europe,  when  she  is  possessed,  for  the  con- 
sumption of  her4)roduce,  of  such  an  emporium  as  America ! 
Who  could  ever  cherish  a  hope  of  wresting  from  her  the  com- 
mand of  the  seas,  when  her  empire  in  Asia  and  America  would 


1807.]  LOED  CASTLEREAGH.  339 

be  placed  beyond  the  possibility  of  attack  ;  and,  when  the 
trade  and  resources  of  these  countries  would  amply  afford  the 
means  of  supporting  the  burdens  of  her  naval  and  military 
establishments  ?  The  security  of  the  British  Empire  in  America 
would  also  enable  Great  Britain  to  reduce  her  establishment 
in  that  part  of  the  world,  and  this  would  afford  the  means  of 
considerably  increasing  her  disposable  force  in  Europe,  and 
diminishing  greatly  the  loss  of  men  she  has  hitherto  suffered 
from  the  West  India  climate  ! 

Besides,  I  have  no  doubt  that  great  bodies  of  auxiliary 
troops  might  be  procured  in  Spanish  America,  and  might  be 
advantageously  employed  to  relieve,  to  a  still  greater  extent, 
Britain  from  the  burden  of  furnishing  garrisons  for  America. 

Great  as  these  advantages  may  appear,  there  are  others  of 
less  magnitude,  but  of  no  less  importance,  in  the  present  crisis. 
The  diminution  of  the  importance  of  the  Spanish  empire  is  one 
of  them.  Spain  is  and  will  remain  totally  dependent  on  France  ; 
the  loss  of  America  will  deprive  her  of  the  remains  of  her  former 
greatness  ;  and  the  consequences  of  this  change,  even  within 
her  own  confines,  must  be  very  injurious  to  France,  who  has 
at  present  the  command  of  her  resources  and  power.  When 
Spain  loses  America,  the  loss  will  be  complete  and  irrecover- 
able :  no  negociation,  no  treaty,  can  restore  that  sovereignty  to 
her.  There  is  for  Spain  no  chance  of  trade,  no  chance  of  com- 
mercial connexions  with  her  former  possessions,  as  there  was 
for  Great  Britain  after  the  loss  of  her  Colonies,  nor  can  there 
be  any  comparison  between  the  two  situations ;  since,  in  the 
one  instance,  colonies  established  by  Britain  herself  were  lost ; 
whereas,  in  the  other,  Spain  would  only  be  deprived  of  a 
country  she  had  formerly  conquered.  Spain,  confined  in  her 
European  dominions,  would  fall  a  prey  to  all  kinds  of  embar- 
rassments and  difficulties  :  her  sources  of  revenue  being  dried 
up,  she  will  be  unable  to  support  her  expensive  court,  her 
navy,  and  even  her  army. 

If  any  event  can  give  to  Spain  a  due  sense  of  her  present 

z2 


340  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

state  of  degradation,  and  restore  her  to  her  former  energy,  it 
is  the  loss  of  America.  After  that  event,  the  interests  of 
France  and  Spain  will  become  daily  more  clashing.  Spain 
will  have  no  money  to  bribe  French  rulers,  and  they  will  find 
her  a  burdensome  and  useless  ally. 

The  means  of  carrying  this  enterprise  into  execution  are, 
first,  to  give  a  solemn  pledge  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  Con- 
tinent of  Spanish  America  that  it  is  not  intended  either  to  con- 
quer their  country,  or  to  subject  it  to  any  European  sovereign  ; 
that,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  from  a  due  sense  of  the  impossibility 
of  any  European  sovereign  governing  their  country,  under 
the  present  circumstances,  that  Britain  is  induced  to  interfere 
in  her  affairs  ;  that,  on  the  one  hand,  the  subjection  of  Spain  to 
France,  and,  on  the  other,  the  ascendency  of  Britain  over  the 
seas,  makes  it  impossible  for  the  King  of  Spain,  or  any  other 
European  sovereign,  to  govern  them,  and  to  protect  them 
against  their  natural  enemies  ;  that  the  command  Britain  lias 
over  the  seas  covers  them  against  any  attack  from  Europe ; 
that  the  only  object  of  her  interference  in  their  affairs  is  to 
preserve  them  from  the  impending  danger  of  anarchy  and 
French  oppression,  to  which  they  must  otherwise  be  abandoned, 
through  the  treachery,  or  at  least  the  impotence,  of  the  Spanish 
Government ;  that  that  would  be  equally  injurious  to  them- 
selves and  to  Britain,  since  they  would  be  ransacked  and  plun- 
dered, whilst  the  wealth  and  resources  wrested  from  them  would 
be  turned  against  herself,  who  is  the  only  power  that  can  assist 
them  in  carrying  on  their  trade,  either  in  time  of  war  or  time 
of  peace ;  that,  to  attain  the  proposed  object,  it  is  the  intention 
of  the  King  of  Great  Britain  to  establish  in  their  country  re- 
gular monarchical  Governments,  in  the  person  of  a  prince  or 
princes  to  reside  in  their  country,  who  should  pledge  themselves 
to  the  forfeiture  of  their  American  sovereignties,  if  they  ceased 
to  reside  in  America,  or  if  they  assumed  any  European  sove- 
reignty. It  would  be  also  necessary  for  such  a  prince  to  pledge 
himself  that  the  interior  government  and  administration  of  the 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  341 

country  should  be  altered  as  little  as  possible.  He  should  pro- 
mise freedom  of  cultivation  of  trade,  and  of  intercourse  with 
foreign  nations  indiscriminately ;  though  under  the  usual  re- 
strictions of  Custom-House  duties,  &c.  Ample  security  should 
also  be  given  on  the  score  of  religion. 

Secondly,  the  prince  intended  to  be  the  sovereign  of  Mexico 
should  be  sent  there  with  a  force  comparatively  small,  but  suffi- 
cient to  take  post  on  the  coast,  to  protect  his  person,  and  to 
assist  his  operations  in  the  manner  that  shall  be  hereinafter 
explained. 

It  is  not  for  me  to  suggest  what  prince  Great  Britain  ought 
to  present  to  the  Mexicans.  This  important  investiture  must 
rest  with  the  King  and  his  Government,  to  bestow  as  in  old 
feudal  times.  There  are  many  princes  who  might  be  thought 
of,  and  no  doubt  some  might  be  found  in  his  Majesty \s  family 
who  are  equal  to  this  enterprise,  and  capable  of  rendering  this 
great  service  to  their  Royal  Father,  to  their  country,  and  to 
the  great  cause  of  royalty  now  at  stake,  by  opposing  the  pro- 
pagation of  republican  principles,  and  by  founding  in  America 
an  hereditary  monarchy,  whose  interests  would  ever  be  con- 
genial to  those  of  Great  Britain. 

The  adoption  of  such  measures,  at  a  time  when  the  inhabit- 
ants of  South  America  are  ready  to  grasp  at  any  thing  to  ob- 
tain a  change  from  their  present  situation,  would  probably 
meet  with  their  unanimous  concurrence.  It  is,  however,  cer- 
tain that,  should  they  be  left  to  themselves,  they  would  fall 
into  Jacobinism,  and  a  revolution  would  then  take  place  on 
the  basis  of  those  principles  ;  and  this  is,  above  all,  what  must 
be  prevented  by  Great  Britain.  The  proposal  I  have  above 
suggested,  coming  from  Britain,  supported  by  her  powerful 
resources,  will  open  to  them  an  easy  road  to  the  grand  object 
they  have  at  heart— namely,  to  become  independent  of  Spain  ; 
to  obtain  a  Government  of  their  own ;  free  trade,  free  cultiva- 
tion, and  a  free  disposal  of  their  property.  It  is  probable  they 
will  prefer  what   is  certain,  immediate,   and  easily  attained, 


342  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

(although  it  may  not  comprise  all  they  wish  for)  to  what  is 
distant,  difficult,  and  at  least  very  uncertain,  in  the  execution. 

Besides,  the  bulk  of  the  people  will  be  aware  that  they  can 
pass  from  their  present  state  to  the  proposed  one,  without  any 
convulsion,  and  without  exposing  themselves  to  the  excesses  of 
the  lower  classes,  who  are  very  numerous  in  Mexico,  that  city 
containing  upwards  of  200,000  inhabitants.  The  Nobles  will 
be  glad  to  have  a  Court,  at  which  they  can  shine,  and  to  have 
a  sovereign  interested  in  keeping  up  their  rank  and  superiority 
over  the  other  orders  of  society.  They  are  too  proud  to  ac- 
knowledge any  one  of  themselves  to  be  their  sovereign,  and 
therefore  a  foreign  prince  must  be  sent  there,  to  allay  their 
mutual  jealousies  and  Jjretensions.  The  Clergy  could  be  as 
easily  reconciled  to  the  new  order  of  things ;  and,  in  fact, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  they  w^ould  accept  it  with  as  much 
alacrity  and  as  much  unanimity  as  it  is  possible  to  expect  from 
the  passions  prevalent  among  mankind. 

It  is  proposed  that  the  first  enterprise  should  be  directed 
against  Mexico,  in  preference  to  any  other  place,  for  various 
reasons :  first,  because  it  is  the  most  vulnerable  point ;  it  is 
the  most  populous  country,  and  it  is  also  that  part  where  the 
strongest  disposition  will  be  found  to  that  order  of  things  which 
it  is  the  interest,  and  no  doubt  the  wish,  of  Great  Britain  to 
maintain  and  defend.  The  Mexican  nobles  are  the  most  an- 
cient in  Spanish  America ;  they  went  over  under  the  reigns  of 
Charles  the  Fifth  and  Philip  the  Second ;  whereas,  those  of 
Caracas  and  Santa  Fe  de  Bogota  and  of  the  other  provinces 
went  over  at  a  much  later  period,  and  at  a  time  when  many 
could  pass  for  nobles  without  being  really  such.  It  seems, 
therefore,  advisable  to  attempt  the  enterprise  first  at  that  place, 
where  it  appears  easy  to  accomplish  it,  and  also  most  easy  to 
direct  it  into  a  proper  channel.  Let  it  not  be  forgotten  that 
the  first  outset  must  determine  the  success  of  the  whole.  If 
the  revolution  commences  upon  the  principles  of  democracy, 
the  whole  of  the  Continent  will  fall  at  once  into  that  system  of 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  343 

delusion  and  disappointment ;  but  if  it  commences  upon  the 
principles  of  monarchy,  it  is  also  more  than  probable  that  the 
other  provinces  will  likewise  follow  that  example ;  and,  at  all 
events,  it  will  be  much  easier  to  compel  them  to  do  so. 

2ndly.  Mexico  is  the  key-stone  of  the  arch :  when  that  is 
removed,  all  the  other  parts,  being  unconnected,  must  fall  to 
pieces.  It  commands  both  seas,  and  facilitates  every  operation 
which  it  may  be  thought  advisable  to  undertake  afterwards. 
Besides,  there  is  another  consideration  of  great  moment  in 
favour  of  Mexico,  w^hich  is  that,  Mexico  once  carried,  the 
Havannah  must  fall,  and  perhaps  even  without  firing  a  shot ; 
since  it  is  from  Mexico  alone  that  Cuba  is  and  can  be  supplied 
with  soldiers,  money,  and  ammunition.  Even  supposing,  what 
I  do  not  admit,  that  the  Havannah  should  resist  after  the  fall 
of  Mexico,  it  must  be  confessed  that  a  prodigious  assistance 
would  be  derived  from  that  kingdom  for  the  conquest  of  Cuba, 
which,  I  hope  and  trust,  would  ever  after  remain  a  British  island. 

Srdly.  Should  the  Spaniards  hear  of  an  expedition  against 
their  possessions  in  America,  Mexico  is  not  the  point  which 
they  would  consider  threatened,  and  it  is  not  in  Mexico  they 
would  prepare  for  defence.  I  can  support  this  assertion  by  the 
most  direct  proof.  I  was  in  the  Havannah  in  1 799,  when 
the  great  expedition  against  Holland  was  fitting  out  in  this 
country.  The  Court  of  Spain  mistook  the  object,  and  imme- 
diately sent  orders  to  Cuba,  Porto  Rico,  and  La  Guayra,  to 
prepare  for  an  attack.  The  Governors  of  those  places  were 
then  authorized  to  go  to  any  expense  they  deemed  necessary, 
and  accordingly  they  did  it  to  an  immense  amount,  though  not 
any  where  in  the  most  judicious  manner ;  and  the  Court  of 
Spain  was  so  far  from  apprehending  an  attack  upon  Mexico,  at 
least  in  the  first  instance,  that  they  gave  orders  to  the  V  iceroy 
of  Mexico  to  send  to  the  Havannah  all  the  troops,  recruits, 
and  ammunition,  he  could  spare. ^     If  the  Court  of  Spain  did 

^  There  were  not  500  Spanish  soldiers  in  the  island  of  Cuba  in  1798 
and  1799,  and  there  were  upwards  of  2,000  Mexican  soldiers. 


344  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1S07. 

not  think  Mexico  threatened  by  the  great  armament  of  1799, 
they  will  be  still  more  led  astray,  when  the  armament  intended 
against  them  is  so  inconsiderable  as  the  one  now  proposed ; 
and  therefore  it  is  of  the  utmost  consequence  that  it  should  be 
kept  here  a  profound  secret. 

Lastly,  there  is  another  consideration  of  great  moment, 
which  is  the  difficulty  and  danger  the  Spaniards  have  in 
assembling  the  Mexican  militia.  The  population  is  too  great. 
The  militia  was  assembled  in  spring  1 798  by  the  then  Viceroy, 
Marquess  de  Brancforte,  and  they  amounted  to  about  60,000 
men ;  but  such  was  the  ferment  and  agitation,  that  he  dared 
not  collect  them  in  large  bodies,  and  was  obliged  to  disband 
them  in  the  greatest  hurry.  He  then  retired  to  a  small  camp 
volantf  not  trusting  himself  to  reside  as  usual  in  the  city  of 
Mexico,  where  he  never  appeared  without  being  surrounded  by 
a  numerous  and  well  selected  body  of  guards. 

Should  this  plan  be  adopted,  I  most  readily  offer  to  his 
Majesty's  Government,  as  well  as  to  the  Prince,  who  may  be 
intended  as  the  future  sovereign  of  Mexico,  my  personal  as- 
sistance and  services.  I  shall  rejoice  if  the  knowledge  I  may 
possess  of  that  country  enables  me  to  be  useful  upon  this  inte- 
resting occasion.  Notwithstanding  the  relationship  between 
the  King  of  Spain  and  myself,  on  the  one  hand,  his  conduct 
towards  my  mother,  my  brothers,  and  myself,  on  the  other, 
the  line  he  has  adopted  towards  all  the  Jacobin  Governments, 
including  the  present  usurper  of  the  throne  of  France,  make 
it  not  only  lawful  but  honourable  for  me  to  engage  in  any  hos- 
tility against  his  Government ;  and  I  own  it  would  be  a  grati- 
fication to  me  to  be  employed  actively  against  a  sovereign  of  a 
country  whose  policy  it  has  always  been  to  show  the  greatest 
enmity  to  my  family  since  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  or,  in  other  words,  since  the  accession  of  the  Duke  of 
Aujou,  Philip  the  Fifth,  to  the  throne  of  Spain. 


1807.]  LOKD  CASTLEREAGH.  345 

ON  THE  ESTABLISHMENT   OF   NAVAL  STATIONS, 

AND  SURVEY  OF  THE  STATES  OF  AMERICA. 

BY  GENERAL  DUMOURIEZ. 

PREMIERE    SECTION. 
STATIONS  NA VALES. 

Le  syst^me  de  guerre  maritime  d'une  puissance  navale  aussi 
formidable  que  FAngleterre,  attaquee  par  la  ligue  de  toute 
TEurope,  est  d'interrompre  la  communication  de  ce  Continent 
avec  les  trois  autres,  poui*  forcer  ses  ennemis  par  leur  privations 
a  sentir  la  necessite  de  rouvrir  leurs  ports  a  notre  commerce, 
a  attribuer  leur  besoins  et  leurs  calamites  au  Tyran  qui  les 
egare  et  qui  les  ruine,  et  a  revenir  a  nous  qui  pouvons  seuls  les 
aider  a  sortir  de  leur  esclavage. 

II  existe  dans  FOcean  Atlantique,  entre  TEurope  et  les 
autres  parties  du  monde  quatre  stations  intermediaires  de  re- 
lache  pour  la  grande  navigation,  par  consequent  de  croisi^re 
fixe  pour  les  escadres  que  nous  devons  etablir  pour  resserrer  le 
blocus  de  FEurope,  et  couper  sa  communication,  au  moins  en 
flottes,  escadres,  ou  convois. 

La  guerre  dont  nous  sommes  menaces  avec  les  Etats  Unis 
de  TAmerique  est  un  motif  de  plus  et  tres  pressant  de  nous 
hater  de  nous  etablir  dans  ces  quatre  stations  de  mani^re  a 
empecher  le  mouillage  et  le  ravitaillement  des  vaisseaux  enne- 
mis, qui,  apr^s  une  longue  navigation,  approchent  des  atterages 
d'^Europe,  trouvent  dans  ces  quatre  stations  des  ressources  et 
de  rafraicbissements  necessaires  pour  achever  leur  voyage. 
Nos  croiseurs  etablis  dans  ces  stations  seront  a  portee,  1°.,  de 
soumettre  les  neutres  aux  lois  de  visites  prescrites  par  les 
Ordonnances — 2°.,  de  prendre  tons  les  vaisseaux  ennemis  qui 
chercheront  a  s'echapper  de  ces  stations,  soit  en  partant  de 
TEurope,  soit  de  retour — 8°.,  de  repousser  les  flottes  ou  escadres 
qui  voudront  forcer  le  passage,  ou  attaquer  les  mediocres  garni- 
sons  que  nous  tiendrons  dans  ces  stations,  soit  separement,  s'ils 


346  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

sont  egales  en  force  a  Tennemi,  soil  en  se  reunissant  ensemble 
et  a  d'autres  de  nos  escadres  parties  des  cotes  de  PEurope,  sur 
Tavis  de  la  route  de  Tennemi. 

Trois  de  ces  stations  appartiennent  aux  Portugais,  dont  les 
malheurs  ont  resserre  les  liens  de  notre  alliance,  et  qui  out  un 
interet  encore  plus  grand  que  nous  a  la  defense  de  ces  stations 
qui  couvrent  le  Bresil,  le  seul  asyle  du  Portugal  qui  n'a  a 
craindre  que  de  T  Europe  une  attaque  qui  pourrait  le  livrer  au 
ressentiment  de  Buonaparte. 

On  ne  pent  pas  se  fier  enti^rement  a  I'ignorance  et  a  la 
paresse  des  Portugais  pour  la  defense  de  ces  stations ;  mais  on 
doit  pouvoir  compter  sur  leur  cooperation,  sur  laquelle  on  doit 
faire  expliquer  le  Prince  Eegent,  pour  qu'il  donne  les  ordres 
les  plus  precis  a  ses  sujets  de  cooperer  de  tons  leurs  moyens  a 
cette  defensive. 

Dix  mille  hommes  au  plus,  et  peut-etre  un  tiers  de  moins, 
doivent  suffir  pour  prendre,  garnisoner,  et  conserver,  pendant 
toute  la  guerre,  ces  quatre  stations  qui  sont 

Madeire. 

On  vient  deja  de  s^emparer  de  cette  Isle,  du  consentement 
du  Prince  Regent.  Elle  est  essentielle  pour  nous  assurer 
rimportation  des  vins  qui  nous  sont  si  n^cessaires,  et  pour  nous 
ouvrir  une  communication  avec  le  Portugal.  Cest  le  pont  par 
ou  pourra  un  jour  entrer  la  maison  de  Braganze.  Mille  hommes 
de  gamison  suffisent  dans  cette  Isle  lorsqu''on  aura  mis  en  bon 
etat  les  forts  et  batteries,  et  qu''on  se  sera  assure  de  la  dispo- 
sition des  habitans. 

Lea  Azores, 

De  ces  Isles  Portugaises  la  seule  h.  occuper  h  cause  de  son 
port,  est  risle  de  Terceira :  elle  est  la  residence  du  Gouveme- 
meut,  et  la  ville  d''Angra  est  la  capitale  des  newfs  Isles  qui 
forraent  le  petit  Archipel,  qui  n'^est  eloign^  du  Cap  d''Espichel, 
h.  rembouclmre  du  Tage,  que  de  250  licues.  Une  gamison  de 
cinq  cent  hommes  dans  chacun  des  deux  forts  do  St.  Sebastien 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  347 

et  de  St.  Jean  Baptiste  suffit  par  assurer  cette  place,  a  Taide 
des  troupes  Portugaises,  en  ayant  soin  de  mettre  en  etat  de 
defense  les  forts  et  batteries  de  cette  Isle,  sans  negliger  celles 
de  San  Miguel  et  de  Fayal. 

Puisque  nous  avons  etabli  une  station  navale  et  une  garni- 
son  a  Madeire,  les  A9ores  deviendraient  la  route  pour  les  vais- 
seaux  de  guerre  ou  marchands  des  ennemis,  soit  seuls,  soit  en 
convois,  si  nous  negligions  de  mettre  cette  garnison  de  mille 
homraes  dans  Terceira,  et  d'y  etablir  une  station  navale.  Cette 
station  est  done  une  consequence  necessaire  de  celle  de  Madeire. 

Les  Isles  du  Cap  Verd. 

Ces  Isles  sont  surtout  interessantes  pour  la  navigation  aux 
Indes  Orientales.  Souvent  on  les  reconnait ;  on  y  fait  eau  et 
on  y  prend  quelques  rafrachissements.  lis  forment  un  Archipel 
de  10  Isles :  il  existe  une  bonne  rade  et  un  port  dans  celle  de 
St.  Vincent,  mais  les  etrangers  ne  la  frequentent  pas ;  elle  est 
sans  habitans  et  sans  ressources,  cependant  nos  croiseurs  de 
cette  station  doivent  y  veiller.  Le  seul  port  important  est 
Porto  Praya :  c''est  dans  cette  rade  que  le  bailli  de  Suffren 
attaqua  sans  succes  la  flotte  de  Tlnde,  commandee  par  FAmiral 
Johnstone. 

J'ignore  s'il  y  a  un  fort  ou  une  batterie  sur  Tlslet  a  TOuest 
de  Tentree  de  la  Baye ;  mais  c^est  certainement  le  point  a  oc- 
cuper  pour  la  protection  de  la  rade  interieure,  en  pla9ant  une 
batterie  a  la  pointe  du  Sud  qui  y  correspond,  et  une  garnison 
dans  la  citadelle  a  FEst  de  la  ville.  Mille  hommes  de  nos 
troupes  suffisent  pour  assurer  cette  station :  on  en  detachera 
jdeux  cens  pour  occuper  le  fort  St.  Philippe  et  veiller  sur  la  rade 
de  St.  Yago  conjointement  avec  les  Portugais. 

Le  Gouvernement  ne  negligera  pas  d'envoyer  a  poste  fixe 
dans  chacune  des  4  stations  un  ingenieur  et  des  officiers  et 
ouvriers  d'artillerie,  pour  mettre  en  etat  de  defense  les  forts  et 
batteries,  car  on  ne  pent  pas  compter  pour  cet  objet  essentiel, 
ni  sur  le  zele,  ni  sur  Fhabilite  des  Portugais,  ni  meme  sur  leur 


348  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

bonne  volont^,  lorsqu'ils  apprendront  que  Tarm^e  Portugaise 
est  incorporee  dans  les  armees  de  Buonaparte. 

Isles  Canaries. 

Le  plus  importante  des  quatre  stations  intermediaires  a  oc- 
cuper  d'*apr^s  notre  systeme  de  guerre  maritime,  est  celle  de 
Canaries.  Leur  proximite  de  Cadix  exige  que  Tescadre  que 
nous  y  aurons  soit  toujours  respectable,  Quatre  de  ces  Isles, 
Teneriffe,  Canarie,  Formentera,  et  Gomera,  meriteraieut  d'etre 
occupees  par  des  garnisons,  parcequ'elles  presentent  de  bons 
mouillages ;  mais,  pour  diminuer  Temploi  de  troupes  de  terre, 
sur  quoi  il  est  necessaire  d^economiser,  on  pent  reduire  la  defen- 
sive de  ces  Isles  a  une  seule  garnison,  celle  de  Ste.  Croix  de 
Teneriffe,  le  principal  port  des  Canaries. 

L'occupation  de  Ste.  Croix  est  une  expedition  assez  forte,  et 
qu'il  ne  faut  pas  manquer  une  seconde  fois.  On  y  trouvera  les 
Espagnols  prepares  de  longue  main  a  la  defense,  et  surtout 
animes  par  le  mauvais  succ^s  de  la  tentative  de  L.  Nelson,  et 
par  nos  honteux  revers  de  Buenos  Ayres.  On  ne  peut  done 
tenter  cette  attaque  avec  moins  de  six  mille  hommes  bien  com- 
mandes.  Mais  certainement  ce  nombre  de  nos  braves  soldats, 
secondes  par  une  forte  escadre,  suffit  pour  cette  importante 
conquete. 

Apr^s  avoir  desarme  les  autres  Isles,  avoir  assemble  dans 
Ste.  Croix  les  otages  necessaires  pour  assurer  la  fidelite  des 
habitans,  le  Gouverneur  qu''on  laissera  dans  Ste.  Croix  avec 
une  garnison  d'au  moins  trois  mille  hommes,  cherchera  h. 
gagner  les  esprits,  et  a  tourner  Paffection  des  habitans  de  ces 
Isles  vers  leur  incorporation  a  Tempire  Britannique,  qui  main- 
tiendra  leur  religion,  leurs  loix,  leurs  propridt^s,  avantages 
qu''ils  ne  peuvent  plus  attendre  du  Gouvernement  Espagnol, 
plonge  dans  Tesclavage  le  plus  honteux,  et  pr^t  a  subir  une 
revolution  encore  plus  terrible.  Sous  le  pavilion  Anglais,  le 
commerce  et  la  culture  fleuriront  dans  ces  Isles  Fortunees.,  aux 
quelles  il  ne  manque  qu"'un  bon  gouvernement  et  de  la  libertd 


1807.]  LOED  CASTLEREAGH.  349 

pour  meriter  le  nora ;  ils  deviendront  Tasyle  des  Grands 
d^Espagne,  esclaves  sur  le  Continent,  et  des  vrais  Espagnols 
attaches  a  Thonneur  du  nom  Castillan.  Dans  des  circonstances 
plus  favorables  c''est  des  Canaries  que  rentreront  en  Espagne, 
avec  Tappuy  de  TAngleterre,  les  vengeurs  de  la  Monarchie. 

Ainsi  Foccupation  des  Canaries,  necessaire  pour  notre  sys- 
t^me  de  guerre  maritime,  puisqu'elle  completera  Tinterception 
de  la  navigation  entre  les  cotes  d'Europe  et  les  trois  autres 
parties  du  monde,  est  tout  aussi  necessaire  en  grande  poli- 
tique parcequ''elle  conduira  par  la  suite  a  raffranchissement  de 
TEspagne,  et  a  une  paix  -glorieuse  et  utile,  par  laquelle,  si  nous 
ne  conservons  pas  la  propriete  des  quatre  stations  indiquees 
dans  cette  section,  nous  aurons  au  moins  obtenu  par  les  stipu- 
lations du  traite  de  paix  qu'on  ne  nous  dictera,  et  que  notre 
courage  aura  rendues  egales  et  justes,  la  continuation  d^un 
commerce  libre  dont  les  avantages  seront  accrus  et  assures  par 
le  bonheur  et  les  profits  que  les  habitans,  surtout  les  Canariens, 
auront  retire  de  leur  soumission  temporaire  au  gouvernement 
d^une  nation  active,  industrieuse,  qui  continuera  avec  eux  des 
relations  d''amiti^  et  de  commerce  fondees  sur  Tinteret  re- 
ciproque. 

DEUXIEME    SECTION. 

LES  DEUX  AMERIQUES. 

Cest  ici  que  s''ouvre  le  plus  grand  interet  de  TAngleterre. 
Buonaparte,  a  la  tete  d'armees  jusqu''a  present  invincibles  et 
innombrables,  s''est  deborde  sur  TEurope  comme  un  fleuve, 
dont  la  fureur  renverse  toutes  les  foibles  digues  qu'on  luy  oppose 
successivement.  II  n''en  reste  qu'une — PEmpire  Britannique  : 
toutes  les  Puissances  du  Continent,  plus  par  peur  que  par 
seduction,  s^empressent  a  obeir  a  ses  ordres,  a  se  ranger  sous 
ses  drapeaux  pour  renverser  cet  Empire.  Nous  n'avons  plus 
un  allie  en  Europe,  car  le  chancelant  Roy  de  Suede  ne  pent 
pas  Mre  regarde  comme  tel :  ou  il  se  rangera  avec  les  autres, 
ou  il  tombera  bientot,  victime  de  la  vengeance  du  Tyran  de 


350  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

TEurope,   chef  de  la  ligue  g^ndrale  contre   nous.     Nous  ne 
voyons  plus  en  Europe  que  des  ennemis. 

C'est  en  Am^rique  que  nous  devons  a  Tavenir  chercher  des 
allies,  que  nous  devons  m^me  les  creer,  comma  Buonaparte 
cree  de  nouvelles  Puissances,  de  nouveaux  peuples  en  Europe. 
Nous  avons  a  cet  egard  par  nos  forces  navales  les  memes  faci- 
lit^s  que  luy  par  ses  forces  terriennes.  Nous  sommes  exemptes 
d'employer  com  me  le  Demiourgos  des  moyens  odieux  et  re- 
voltans.  Nous  ne  pouvons  pas  pretendre  comme  luy  a  la  souve- 
rainete  universelle.  Nous  ne  faisons  que  seconder  la  disposition 
des  peuples,  aider  leur  libre  arbitre  et  leur  emancipation,  ecarter 
les  calamites  que  leur  apporterait  leur  soumission  a  ce  fleau 
de  rhumanite,  assurer  leurs  proprietes,  leurs  loix,  leurs  moeurs, 
vivifier  leur  territoire  par  un  commerce  solide  et  continu,  qui 
en  meme  terns  assure  notre  empire  naval,  le  debouche  de  nos 
manufactures  et  de  nos  denrees,  et  forc^ment  ramenera  un  jour 
a  nous  TEurope,  par  la  necessite  de  se  procurer  les  precieux 
metaux  et  les  autres  productions  des  deux  Ameriques,  qu'*elle 
ne  pourrait  plus  recevoir  que  par  notre  canal,  au  moins  tant 
que  durera  cette  guerre  a  mort,  qui  ne  pent  finir  que  par  notre 
destruction,  ou  par  celle  de  la  tyrannic  qui  n'a  plus  que  nous  a 
devorer. 

AMERIQUE  DU  SUD. 
Cinq  parties  principales  dans  TAmerique  du  Sud  exigent 
Tenti^re  application  de  nos  ressources  politiques  et  navales,  non 
pas  pour  en  acquerir  la  souverainet^,  comme  Buonaparte  Texerce 
sur  tous  les  Etats  de  sa  creation — Dieu  nous  garde  d'une  in- 
justice aussi  absurde  ! —  mais  pour  nous  y  donner  Tinflu- 
ence  de  la  bienfaisance  par  Tappuy  de  notre  marine  contre  le 
tyran  universel,  et  par  un  commerce  ^galement  lucratif  et  ne- 
cessaire  aux  Am^riquains  qu'a  nous -memes.  Ces  cinq  parties 
sont : — 1«>.,  le  Br^sil;  2°.,  le  Rio  de  la  Plata;  3°.,  le  Perou  ; 
4*>.,  la  Terre  Ferme,  ou  the  Main;  5°*,  la  Guyanne  Fran- 
9aise. 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  351 

Le  Bresil. 

La  timide  hardiesse  qui  a  determine  le  Regent  de  Portugal 
a  abandonner  ses  ^tats  d'Europe  et  a  etablir  le  si^ge  de  son 
gouvernement  au  Bresil,  a  fait  de  cette  colonic  une  terre  sacree, 
que  notre  honneur  et  notre  interet  nous  obligent  egalement  a 
proteger  et  a  defendre  de  toutes  nos  forces.  Nous  ne  pouvons 
empecher  le  total  aneantissement  de  notre  commerce  et  con- 
server  notre  superiorite  navale  qu'en  soutenant  le  seul  allie  qui 
nous  reste,  et  en  elevant  le  Bresil  au  degre  d'importance  et  de 
dignitd  dont  est  suceptible  une  contree  aussi  etendue,  et  aussi 
douee  des  dons  de  la  Nature,  qui  ne  demande  que  des  bras  que 
lui  fournira  Te migration  continuelle  des  Portugais  d'Europe,  et 
de  Factivit^  et  de  Tindustrie  que  nous  devons  leurs  inspirer  par 
tous  les  mojens  qui  tiennent  a  Pamour  propre  et  a  Tint^ret. 

La  cause  du  Bresil  est  si  bien  identifie  avec  la  notre  meme, 
que  nous  ne  pouvons  nous  livrer  a  aucune  n^gociation  de  paix 
avec  TEurope  avant  d'avoir  assure  le  sort  du  Bresil  et  de  la 
maison  de  Bragance :  si  nous  nous  rendions  coupables  ou  de 
la  lachete  ou  de  Fimprevoyance,  dans  un  traite  de  paix, 
d'abandonner  le  seul  allid  qui  nous  reste,  ou  de  stipuler  pour 
luy  de  mani^re  a  le  laisser  par  ce  traite  dans  Tetat  de  faiblesse 
et  nullite  ou  est  a  present  le  Bresil,  nous  signerions  notre 
deshonneur  et  notre  propre  mine. 

Mon  assertion  ne  tend  point  a  perpetuer  la  guerre,  mais  a 
en  assurer  le  succes,  et  a  la  terminer  par  une  paix  solide  et 
glorieuse.  C'est  la  Tavantage  que  le  gouvernement  eclaire 
d'une  nation  puissante,  noble,  et  genereuse  pent  retirer  de  la 
translation  de  la  Maison  de  Bragance  au  Bresil.  Que  PAngle- 
terre  annonce  qu^elle  ne  fait  pas  la  guerre  pour  la  cause  de  la 
Maison  de  Bourbon — a  la  bonne  heure  :  quoiqu''il  y  ait  eu  des 
epoques,  que  les  inconstances  peuvent  encore  ramener,  ou  la 
declaration  contraire  eut  ete  conform e  a* la  saine  politique; 
mais,  pour  la  Maison  de  Bragance,  nous  ne  pouvons  jamais 
nous  departir  de  sa  cause,  ni  sacrifier  ses  inter^ts  sans  immoler 


352  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

notre  honneur,  notre  commerce,  notre  sup^riorite  navale,  par 
consequent  notre  existence. 

Hatons  nous  done  de  mettre  le  Bresil  en  ^tat  non  seulement 
de  ne  rien  craindre,  mais  encore  de  nous  aider.  Une  annee 
bien  employee  suffit  pour  produire  cette  regeneration  de  la  na- 
tion Portugaise.  Si  nous  la  livrons  a  elle-meme,  elle  deviendra 
plus  dangereuse  qu'^utile,  et  elle  finira  par  se  joindre  centre 
nous.  Si  nous  ne  changeons  pas  la  face  de  TAmerique  du  Sud 
cette  annee,  nous  Taurons  ensuite  toute  enti^re  centre  nous. 
Que  de  secours  et  d''avantages,  au  contraire,  nous  en  retirerions 
si  nous  reussissons ! 

I.  II  faut  commencer  par  engager,  forger  meme,  le  Regent  a 
mettre  les  cotes  du  Bresil  en  etat  de  defense — par  le  rassem- 
blement  d'*une  armee  bien  payee,  bien  disciplinee,  commandee 
par  de  bons  officiers  Strangers  ou  Portugais,  organisee  en 
divisions  et  en  brigades,  placee  dans  les  Capitaineries  fronti^res 
du  Rio  de  la  Plata  et  de  la  Guyanne,  soutenue  par  des  milices 
reguli^res  des  diverses  capitaineries,  bien  commandees,  bien 
exercees,  soldees  pendant  le  mois  de  leur  rassemblement  en 
terns  de  paix,  et  pendant  leur  service  en  terns  de  guerre,  quand 
la  necessite  Texigera. 

Get  etat  militaire,  modifie  de  manifere  a  ne  pas  contrarier 
les  travaux  des  cultivateurs  et  des  artisans,  comme  dans  les 
Golonies,  relevera  Tamour  propre  national,  et  donnera  une  sub- 
sistance  honorable  a  quantite  de  pauvre  noblesse,  attirera  beau- 
coup  de  Portugais  et  meme  d'Espagnols  d'Europe,  et  assurera 
Texistence  d''une  foule  d'individus  a  charge  a  la  societe,  faute 
des  metiers  ou  de  moyens.  Gette  armee  ainsi  reglee  fournira 
les  garni  sons  des  cotes,  et  aura,  outre  Tartillerie  des  places,  une 
artillerie  de  campagne  h>  pied  et  a  cheval. 

II.  Mettre  en  etat  de  defense  les  principales  places  suscep- 
tibles  d''attaque  par  mer,  ou  par  consequent  des  garnisons  sent 
necessaires,  en  ayant  soin  d''assigner  a  chacune  de  ces  places 
un  nombre  suffisant  de  milices  des  capitaineries  correspondantes, 
pour  diminuer  la  dissemination  des  troupes  de  ligne  sur  une 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  353 

aussi  grande  etendiie  de  cotes,  et  pouvoir,  en  cas  de  besoin,  les 
rassembler  en  trois  corps  d'armee  a  Rio  Janeiro,  a  la  Bahia, 
et  au  Para,  pour  se  porter  en  force  sur  le  cot^  attaque.  Les 
points  a  mettre  en  ^tat  de  defense  sont,  du  Sud  au  Nord — 

1°.  St.  Vincent,  place  fronti^re  du  cote  du  gouvernement 
de  Buenos  Ay  res. 

2°.  L'Isle  Ste.  Catherine,  importante  parce  que  le  Gouverne- 
ment Portugais  en  a  fait  Fentrepot  exclusif  du  commerce. 
Cette  precaution  fiscale,  qui  tient  a  beaucoup  de  prejuges,  qu^il 
faut  esp^rer  que  la  residence  de  la  cour  a  Rio  Janeiro  et  Tin- 
t^ret  bien  entendu  du  commerce  feront  abolir,  est  tr^s-nuisible 
a  Tactivite  du  commerce  et  a  la  prosperity  du  Bresil,  qui  ne 
fleurira  que  lorsque  Tentr^e  libre  aux  vaisseaux,  au  moins 
Anglais,  sera  accordee  dans  tons  les  ports  de  cette  immense 
contree,  qui  a  besoin  d'une  vivification  rapide  dans  toutes  ses 
parties. 

S°.  Rio  Janeiro  est  tres-fort :  il  T^tait  deja  lorsque  du 
Guay-Trouin  s'en  empara.  Comme  il  est,  au  moins  a  present, 
la  residence  de  la  Cour  et  le  principal  depot  de  la  marine,  il 
convient  de  le  rendre  inattaquable. 

4°.  Spiritu  Santo,  assez  bon  port,  qui  couvre  au  Nord  la 
residence  royale  de  Janeiro. 

5°.  Porto  Seguro,  tr^s-bon  port. 

6°.  St.  Jorge,  ou  Camanu,  bon  port  dans  la  capitainie  de  los 
Ilheos. 

7°.  La  Bahia,  ou  San  Salvador,  la  capitale  de  tout  le  Bresil, 
la  seconde  residence  rovale  et  la  plus  naturelle,  puisqu''elle  est 
centrale. 

8°.  Fernambouc,  ou  Olinde,  que  les  Hollandais  ont  Evacuee 
la  derni^re,  place  tr^s-importante. 

9°.  Rio  Grande. 

10°.  Marahon,  ou  Flsle  St.  Louis,  autrefois  possed^e  paries 
Fran^ais,  qui  ne  manqueraient  pas  de  reclamer  un  jour  leurs 
vieux  droits,  si  on  les  laissait  se  renforcer  dans  la  Guyane. 

11°.  Para,   qui  doit  etre  un  grand  d^partement  militaire, 

YOL.  VII.  A  A 


354  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

d''oii  doit  partir  la  grande  expedition,  tant  par  terre  que  par 
mer,  pour  chasser  les  Fran^ais  de  la  Guyane  et  de  Cayenne. 

12°.  L'Isle  de  Joannes  vis-a-vis  de  Cayenne,  qu'il  faut 
craindre  de  voir  occupee  par  les  Fran9ais,  qu''on  en  chasserait 
difficilement. 

III.  Le  Prince  Reijent  a  emmend  au  Br^sil  un  fonds  de 
marine,  qu'*il  faut  qu^'l  augmente  dans  la  proportion  qu'exige 
la  grande  etendue  de  ses  cotes.  Elle  doit  6tre  naturellement 
divisee  en  trois  departements,  d'*au  nioins  cinq  ou  six  vaisseaux 
chacun,  outre  les  fregates  et  autres  batiments  armes :  au  sud, 
celui  de  Rio  Janeiro ;  au  centre,  celui  de  la  Bahia ;  au  nord, 
du  Fenambouc,  ou  Maranon,  ou  Para,  selon  le  plus  ou  moins 
de  facilit^s  qu'on  trouvera  a  ^tablir  ce  departement. 

Le  Bresil  vivifie  par  la  presence  d'*un  Gouvernement  pater- 
nel,  avec  une  bonne  oeconoraie,  est  en  ^tat  de  supporter  d^s  h, 
present  cette  depense,  puisque  son  revenu  ne  sera  plus  ddtourn^ 
et  enfoui  en  Europe.  L''Angleterre  doit  inspirer  a  cette  Cour 
cet  esprit  de  vigueur  et  d^ordre  ut^cessaire  pour  son  existence, 
et  qui  interesse  aussi  la  notre.  Loin  de  nous  cet  ^goisme  mal 
calculi,  qui  entretient  Tapathie  et  la  faiblesse  dans  ses  allies 
pour  les  rendre  plus  dependants  !  Nous  n'avons  rien  a  risquer 
du  Bresil  dans  IMtat  le  plus  prosp^re,  et  nous  avons  les  plus 
grands  avantages  a  en  tirer,  si  nous  contribuons  par  nos  con- 
seils  et  nos  secours  k  en  faire  une  grande  puissance  en  Am^- 
rjque. 

Le  seul  moyen  qui  reste  a  la  famille  de  Bragance  pour 
rentrer  en  Portugal  est  de  gouverner  et  vivifier  le  Bresil  avec 
autant  d''activite  que  si  elleavait  enti^rement  renonce  a  Tespoir 
de  retourner  en  Europe.  Je  viens  d^esquisser  les  arranojenients 
qu''elle  a  a  y  faire.  lis  suffisent  avec  Talliance  Anglaise,  centre 
toute  attaque  partant  de  T Europe ;  mais  elle  a  autour  d''elle 
deux  voisins  tr^s-dangereux.  Voicy  ce  que  j'ay  ecrit  dans  un 
ouvrage  intitule  Etat  present  du  Portugal^  imprim^  a  Ham- 
bourg,  ^d.  in  4to.,  p.  80. 

*'  Si  le  Bresil  ^tait  attaqu^  ^  la  foia  avec  vigueur  par  les 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  355 

Fran^ais  du  cote  du  Para,  du  Maranon,  et  du  Rio  Negro,  et 
par  les  Espagnols  du  cot^  du  Rio  San  Pedro,  en  se  portant  sur 
St.  Paul  et  sur  la  capitainerie  de  St.  Vincent,  la  defense  serait 
fort  difficile,  et  d'autant  plus  embarrassante  que  cette  colonic 
serait  attaquee  par  ses  endroits  les  plus  importans,  qui  sont  les 
Mines :  le  secours  des  Anglais  n'y  serait  pas  fort  utile,  n'em- 
ployant  que  des  flottes,  et  il  serait  ^galement  dangereux  pour 
les  Portugais  d'y  introduire  des  troupes  Anglaises  de  d^barque- 
ment ;  c'est  certainement  ce  a  quoi  ils  ne  se  resoudraient  qu'a 
la  derniere  extr^mit^.  Mais  les  Portugais  n'ont  pas  ce  danger 
a  craindre  tant  que  les  Colonies  Fran^aises  et  Espagnoles  ne 
seront  pas  plus  garnies  de  troupes  et  en  meilleur  ^tat  qu''elles 
ne  le  sont  actuellement." 

Depuis  1797  tout  est  change.  Le  Bresil  est  devenu  un  but 
d'attaque  pour  les  deux  nations  reunies  sous  le  joug  de  Buona- 
parte. Le  Vice-roi  du  Perou  recevra  les  ordres  de  Madrid 
pour  attaquer  le  Bresil  sur  toute  sa  frontiere  occidentale  ; 
le  Vice-roi  de  Buenos  Ayres  aura  ordre  d'attaquer  toute  la 
frontiere  meridionale ;  et  les  Franyais  recevront  des  renforts 
a  Cayenne  pour  envahir  les  provinces  du  Nord.  Peut-etre 
Tescadre  sortie  de  Rochefort  est-elle  deja  chargee  de  ce  ren- 
fort.  Pour  prevenir  cette  attaque  environnante,  il  est  neces- 
saire,  1°.  de  changer  Tetat  politique  des  provinces  meridionales 
Espagnoles,  et  de  les  diviser  de  la  Metropole,  ce  qui  amenera 
necessairement  par  la  suite  la  meme  revolution  au  Perou.-^ 
2°.  chasser  pour  jamais  les  Fran9ais  de  la  Guyane  et  de  Cay- 
enne. C'est  ce  que  nous  allons  examiner  dans  les  Paragraphes 
suivanta, 

Jtio  de  la  Plata, 

Cest  TAngleterre  seule  qui  pent  produire  cette  revolution 
salutaire,  en  fomentant  et  soutenant  Temancipation  que  desi- 
rent  les  indigenes.  L'experience  du  passe  prouve  que  la  force 
est  inutile,  insuffisante  et  imprudente  pour  operer  ce  grand 
projet.  Quand  meme,  par  un  armement,  qui  derangerait  pai-tout 
ailleurs  le  syst^me  de  guerre  maritime,   qui  seule  convient  a 

A  A  2 


356  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

TAngleterre,  on  parviendrait  pour  la  troisi^me  fois,  k  occuper 
Monte  Video,  on  ne  ferait  que  rendre  implacables  les  indigenes, 
les  aguerrir,  et  s'attirer  une  guerre  continentale  a  deux  mille 
lieues  de  nous,  qui,  quel  que  fut  son  succ^s,  epuiserait  nos  forces 
de  terre,  et  ddtournerait  nos  forces  navales  de  leur  veritable 
destination.  Je  prie  le  Gouvernement  de  relire  plusieurs 
meinoires  tr^s-detailles,  que  je  lui  ai  donnes  a  ce  sujet. 

Ketablissement  de  la  Oour  de  Portugal  a  Rio  Janeiro  pent 
avoir  une  influence  favorable,  en  cas  qu^il  ne  paraisse  pas  que 
cette  Cour  tra^vaille  pour  elle-meme.  Le  parti  de  la  liberte  est 
encore  fort  dans  les  Colonies  du  Sud  ;  mais  il  a  deja  ete  ebranle 
par  nos  maladresses  ;  il  s''est  deja  franchement  reuni  au  parti 
Espagnol  pour  nous  chasser  de  son  territoire,  lorsque  nous 
nous  y  sorames  pr^sentes  comme  ennerais,  comme  conquerans. 

II  existe  une  haine  nationale  encore  plus  forte  entre  les  Es- 
pagnols  et  les  Portugais  qu''entre  les  Fran9ais  et  les  Anglais. 
Les  indigenes  s'opposeraient  avec  autant  de  violence  aux  Por- 
tugais, s'*ils  s'*imaginaient  qu''en  s'immis9ant  dans  leurs  affaires 
ils  ont  la  pretention  ou  Tarri^re-pensee  de  les  soumettre  un 
jour  a  leur  Gouvernement,  que  les  Fran^ais  s''opposeraient  aux 
Anglais  «'ils  tentaient  d'envahir  quelqu'^une  de  leurs  Provinces. 

Qu''en  n'*imagine  pas  non  plus  arreter  cette  antipathie  en 
presentant  aux  indigenes  le  fantome  d'Infant  Don  Pedro,  qui, 
ifldependamment  de  la  faiblesse  de  ses  facult^s  morales,  tient  de 
trop  pr^s  aux  deux  maisons  royales  d'Espagne  et  de  Portugal 
pour  contenter  ce  peuple  nouveau,  qui  a  besoin  d'un  Roy 
Homme  et  independant. 

La  proposition  de  ce  simulacre  de  Roy  serait  une  fausse 
demarche,  qui  serait  rejetee  par  les  indigenes,  romprait  toute 
n^gociation  en  les  ali^nant,  les  r^unirait  tous  k  leur  mc^tropole, 
et  tournerait  leur  activity  et  leurs  passions  vers  une  guerre  dan- 
gereuse  pour  le  Bresil. 

On  ne  pent  reussir  h.  accomplir  le  grand  oeuvre  de  T^man- 
cipation  de  cette  Colonic,  et  de  la  jonction  de  ses  inttirets  h. 
ceux  de  TAngleterre  et  du  Portugal,  que  par  une  n^gociation 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  357 

de  TAngleterre  seule,  franche,  simple,  conforme  aux  idees  de 
liberie  de  ces  peuples  et  aux  interets  mutuels  du  commerce 
entr'eux  et  FAngleterre.  Get  interet,  sous  plusieurs  rapports, 
sera  en  contradiction  avec  celui  des  Portugais  :  ainsi  ce  serait 
une  grande  raaladresse  de  le  faire  entrer  dans  cette  negocia- 
tion. 

Elle  doit  etre  tout  militaire  et  tr^s-courte.  II  faut  proposer 
aux  indigenes  un  prince  qui  leur  convienne  encore  plus  par  ses 
qualites  personnelles  que  par  son  illustration,  qui  soit  en  etat 
de  leur  inspirer  de  la  confiance,  et  d'etendre  le  bienfait  de 
Femancipation  sur  le  Chili,  le  Perou,  et  la  Terrafirma.  J'ai 
dit  tout  ce  que  je  pense  a  cet  egard  :  j^ajoute  seulement  que 
pour  la  surete  du  Bresil  et  pour  celle  de  notre  commerce  dans 
tout  le  Continent  meridional  de  TAmerique,  il  faut  d^s  cette 
annee  et  le  plus  tot  possible  entreprendre  cette  negociation  et 
la  pousser  avec  franchise,  adresse,  et  vivacite. 

Le  Perou, 

L'emancipation  du  Perou  suivra  naturellement  un  jour  celle 
des  Provinces  du  Sud ;  mais  elle  ne  pent  avoir  lieu  que  lors- 
que  le  Prince,  digne  du  choix  des  indigenes,  reunissant  les 
esprits  par  une  grande  capacite  et  une  grande  activite,  se  mon- 
trera  a  la  tete  des  indigenes  libres  aux  peuples  du  Chili  et 
du  Perou,  et  leur  ouvrira  la  porte  a  raffranchissement  et  au 
bonheur.  Cette  revolution  sera  rapide  parceque  la  volonte 
gen^rale  compriraee  aura  toute  la  force  de  Fexplosion. 

Mais  ce  ne  pent  etre  ni  par  conquete  ni  par  la  violence  qu'on 
pent  faire  reussir  ce  grand  projet.  11  ne  faut  pas  non  plus 
compter  sur  les  Portugais  pour  Tappuyer.  Outre  la  haine 
nationale  qui  rendrait  leur  intervention  nuisible,  le  Bresil  pourra 
bien,  avec  beaucoup  d'activite  de  la  part  de  son  Gouverne- 
ment,  en  deux  ou  trois  ans,  se  mettre  en  etat  de  r^sister  a  une 
attaque :  mais  de  tres  long  tems  il  ne  sera  pas  assez  fortement 
organise  pour  envahir  ses  voisins ;  et  une  annee  de  guerre,  ou  le 
moindre  desastre  au  commencement  de  son  etablissement,  luy 


358  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

ferait  perdre  tout  le  fruit  de  son  travail,  et  le  plongerait  dans 
un  ^tat  de  faiblesse  qui  nuirait  a  sa  propre  defense. 

C/est  done  uniquement  par  la  negociation  Anglaise  avec  les 
indigenes  de  Buenos  Ayres,  par  Tappuy  de  nos  escadres,  par 
le  benefice  mutuel  de  notre  commerce,  que  T^mancipation  pent 
passer  du  Rio  de  la  Plata  an  Chili,  au  Perou,  et  a  Terra  Firme, 
qui  par  leur  arrangement  naturel,  doivent  former  une  souve- 
rainete,  alliee  de  TAngleterre  et  du  Portugal.  II  u'j  a  pas 
un  autre  canal. 

Dans  cet  etat  de  clioses,  et  avec  ce  plan  digne  des  vues  sages, 
prudentes,  et  prevoyantes  d'un  Gouvernement  qui  veut  tra- 
vailler  en  grand,  il  serait  temeraire  et  inconsequent  de  pro- 
jeter  des  expeditions  centre  les  cotes  du  Chili  et  du  Perou 
par  la  mer  du  Sud.  Quel  en  serait  le  resultat  ?  Nous  n'^avons 
aucune  Colonic  a  portee  de  soutenir  des  operations  hostiles. 
Et  contre  qui  cette  operation  hostile  ?  contre  des  riverains 
tranquilles,  qui  ne  nous  ont  jamais  fait  aucun  mal.  Faire  re- 
volter  les  Indos  bravos  de  Chili  ?  a  quoi  bon,  puisque  nous  ne 
pourrions  pas  appuyer  leur  revolte  ?  Bruler  et  piller  des  ports 
et  des  batimens  de  commerce  ?  quel  profit  retirerait  la  nation 
de  ces  expeditions  de  corsaires,  qui  ne  pourraient  enrichir  que 
quelques  avanturiers  en  fletrissant  notre  pavilion  ? 

Prenons  le  contre-pied  de  la  conduite  de  Buonaparte :  il  est 
le  fleau  de  TEurope;  montrons-nous  les  bienfaiteurs  de  TAme- 
rique.  Detruisons  ses  calomnies  par  une  conduite  noble  et 
sage.  Voila  ce  que  nous  present  notre  veritable  interet.  Ainsi 
point  d'^expeditions  hostiles  sur  les  cotes  de  la  mer  du  Sud, 
contre  une  nation  que  nous  devons  regarder  d''avance  comma 
notre  alliee  future. 

La  Tierre  Firme,  oti  The  Main. 

Cette  grande  partie  de  cote,  qui  s^tend  de  TOrenoque 
jusqu^a  risthme  de  Panama,  doit  etre  m<5nag^e  avec  la  meme 
douceur  et  la  meme  prudence  que  le  Chili  et  le  P^rou,  par  le 
meme  principe.     Heureusement  les  projets   rcvolutionnaires, 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  359 

concus  avec  tant  d'audace,  executes  avec  tant  de  faiblesse  par 
le  General  Miranda,  ont  echoue.  S'il  eut  eu  du  succes,  cette 
revolution  contra  laquelle  tons  les  honnetes  gens,  tons  les  pro- 
pri^taires,  se  sont  re  voltes,  quels  que  fussent  leurs  opinions  et 
leur  desir  de  liberte,  fut  devenue  un  chaos  aussi  effrayant  que 
celle  de  St.  Domingue.  Ce  chef  n'avait  ni  la  consistance,  ni 
les  talents  propres  a  la  regulariser.  Nous  connaissons  les  re- 
sultats  des  syst^mes  speculatifs  de  liberte.  La  revolution 
Fran^aise  et  celle  d'Hayti  sont  un  grand  livre  ouvert  sous  nos 
yeux :  ecrit  avec  du  sang,  il  doit  nous  faire  trembler. 

Le  General  Miranda  vient  d'arriver  a  Londres  ;  qu^on  se 
garde  de  ses  sophismes  et  de  ses  propositions,  et  qu'on  juge  de 
s"a  conduite  avant  de  Fecouter.  Veuton  etablir  une  republique 
sur  ce  Continent  ?  En  supposant  qu'on  puisse  soumettre  a  cette 
opinion  les  quatre  castes  de  ses  habitans,  et  qu''elles  ne  se  detrui- 
sent  pas  entr'elles  comme  celles  d'Hayti ;  ou  elle  sera  faible ; 
alors,  par  la  conformite  d'opinion,  elle  se  jettera  entre  les  bras 
des  Etats  Unis ;  ou  elle  sera  forte,  alors,  qui  garantira  nos 
Antilles  1 

Laissons  dormir  tout  projet  sur  la  Tierra  Firrae,  comme  un 
Appendice  successif  a  Temancipation  du  midy  de  TAmerique. 
Travaillons  sur  les  memes  principes  partout.  Ne  cherchons 
point  a  etablir  la  monarchie  d'un  cote,  la  republique  de  Fautre. 
En  agissant  aussi  contradictoirement,  nous  perdrions  la  con- 
fiance  partout,  et  nous  ne  reussions  nulle  part.  Le  sort  de 
la  Tierra  Firme  doit  etre  le  meme  que  celui  de  Buenos  Ayres, 
du  Chili,  et  du  Perou,  et  doit  en  etre  la  consequence. 

La  Guyane  Fran^aise. 

La  surete  du  Br^sil  exige  n^cessairement  que  des  cette  annde 
les  Portugais  fassent  tous  leurs  efforts  pour  chasser  entiere- 
ment  les  Fran9ais  de  cette  Colonic,  et  ne  leur  laisser  aucun 
^tablissement  sur  le  Continent  de  FAmerique  du  Sud.  Si  on 
retardait  cette  expedition,  on  donnerait  le  terns  a  Buonaparte 
d^  faire  passer  les  renforts  que  certainement  il  y  destine,  de- 


360  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

puis  que  le  Regent  a  pris  le  parti  de  transferer  son  Gouverne- 
ment  au  Bresil.  Si  une  fois  ces  secours  etaient  arrives,  non 
seulement  cette  expedition  deviendrait  plus  dangereuse  et  plus 
meurtri^re,  mais  Cayenne  deviendrait  le  foyer  de  fr^quentes 
hostilites  contre  les  capitainies  septentrionales  et  contre  les 
mines  de  Rio  Negro.  Les  Fran^ais  pourraient  faire  des  ^ta- 
blissements  sur  PAmazone  et  TOrdnoque,  communiquer  par 
derri^re  les  etablissements  An£:lais  et  Portuijais  avec  les  Es- 
pagnols,  et  prendre  ces  etablissements  a  revers.  II  ne  faut 
done  pas  leur  donner  le  tems  de  s'y  fortifier  et  d'y  preparer  des 
coups  de  main  imprevus.  On  doit  tout  craindre  de  leur  genie 
audacieux,  de  leurs  inclinations  avanturi^res,  et  des  longues 
vues  de  leur  Empereur. 

L"*  Angleterre  a  le  m^me  inter^t  que  le  Prince  Regent  a  cette 
prompte  expedition,  pour  detruire  ce  repaire  de  corsaires  place 
a  la  porte  de  Surinam  et  dela  Trinite,  qui  en  sont  continuelle- 
ment  inqui^tees.  En  outre,  ce  serait  la  mine  de  son  alli^,  qui 
tient  a  la  sienne  propre. 

La  Guyane   Fran^aise   n''est  d''aucune  consequence :    tons 

les  etablissements,  qu'*on  a  faits  avec  beaucoup  dYclat  et  de 

depense,  en  dilFerents  tems,  ont  manque  de  succ^s,  parce-que 

les  Fran9ais  n''ont  jamais  eu  ni  le  genie  ni  le  caractfere  propres 

a  former  des  Colonies.     La  destination  qu'on  a  donnee  depuis 

la  Revolution  a  ces  etablissements  de  terre  ferme,  dont  on  a 

fait  des  prisons  d'Etat,  suffirait  pour  en  eteindre  toute  vivifica- 

tion.     Cette  Colonic  ne  consiste  done  que  dans  Tisle  et  la  ville 

de  Cayenne. 

Cayenne.^ 

Cette  ville  est  plus  peuplee  qu''a  Tepoque  de  la  monarchie. 
Le  port  en  est  assez  bon.     La  ville  est  forte.     Les  approches 

^  Le  Comte  de  Behague,  Lieutenant  General  Fran9ais,  plein  d'hon- 
neur,  de  probite,  de  zele,  et  de  talents,  a  d'excellents  plans  et  de  tres- 
bons  memoires  sur  Cayenne  et  la  Guyanne,  oii  11  a  commande.  Le 
Gouverneraent  ne  peut  que  tirer  un  parti  tres-utile  de  ses  lumieres,  s'il 
le  consulte  sur  cette  Colonie,  ainsi  que  sur  Bres't,  Bellisle,  et  la  Mar- 
tinique, ou  il  a  pareillement  commande. 


1807.]  XORD  CASTLEREAGH.  361 

soiit  difficiles,  parce-que  Tinterieur  du  pays  est  bas,  inonde,  mal- 
sain,  sans  eau  douce,  et  couvert  de  mangliers.  Les  habitans 
sont  tous  soldats,  marins,  corsaires.  La  piraterie  qui  les  en- 
richit,  leur  donne  en  meme  terns  une  ob^tination,  une  audace, 
qui  doivent  faire  attendre  une  defense  opiniatre  :  ainsi  il 
taut  preparer  Texpedition  en  consequence.  Elle  doit  etre  cora- 
posee  d"'une  assez  forte  escadre  Anglo-Portugaise,  et  d'au  moins 
buit  mille  hommesde  troupes  de  terredes  deux  nations.  Desbati- 
mens  amies  doivent  s'emparer  et  rester  stationnes  dans  les  deux 
rivieres  Cayenne  et  Mahuri,  qui  forment  Tisle,  et  la  renfer- 
ment.  Une  division  de  ,rarmee  doit  s'emparer  de  St.  Joseph, 
a  la  pointe  de  la  Libert  e,  s'y  ret  rancher,  et  etablir  des  batteries 
pour  bruler  les  vaisseaux  dans  le  port.  Peut-etre  peut-on 
aussi  etablir  des  batteries,  soutenues  par  Tescadre,  sur  les  Islots 
de  Maret,  pour  achever  de  fermer  Tentree  et  la  sortie.  Oes 
islots  ne  sont  pas  a  plus  de  1,200  toises  de  la  ville.  Le  reste 
de  Parmee  combinee  doit  descendre,  ou  par  Tinterieur  de  la 
riviere  Cayenne  sous  Maringoin  et  la  Montague  des  Tigres  a 
une  lieue  au  Sud-Est  de  la  ville,  ou  sous  la  Pointe  Merciere, 
a  Tembouchure  du  Mahuri,  sous  la  montagne  du  meme  nom, 
ou  dans  Fanse  de  Montjoli,  au  Sud-Est  a  deux  lieues  de  la 
ville,  ou  sous  la  montagne  de  Rodomontabo,  ou  sous  la  mon- 
ta2:ne  du  Pont  a  TEst  et  a  une  lieue  et  demie  de  la  ville.  La 
descente  pent  se  faire  en  un  seul  point  ou  en  plusieurs  a  la 
fois,  selon  la  disposition  de  Fennemi,  sa  force,  et  son  plus  ou  moins 
d''obstination  a  defendre  les  approches  de  la  place.  Aussitot 
descendue,  Farmee  doit  se  placer  sur  les  deux  monts  Baduel  et 
Dupont,  pour  resserrer  la  place  et  commencer  le  siege.  Les 
vivres  et  munitions  seront  apportees  par  eau  du  quartier  de 
St.  Joseph,  qui  servira  de  place  d''armes  dans  la  petite  crique 
au  Sud  du  mont  Baduel  et  de  Fescadre  dans  FAnse  de  la  mon- 
ta«:ne  du  Pont. 

L"'enceinte  de  la  place  est  faible  entre  le  Bastion  royal  au 
Nord-Est,  et  le  Bastion  Dauphin  au  Sud-Est.  A  la  verite, 
tout  ce  front   est  commande  par  la  citadelle  ;  mais,  une  fois 


362  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

force,  Parraee  se  logera  fort  a  son  aise  dans  la  ville,  sous  la 
citadelle  meme,  a  Tabri  de  son  feu  par  sa  propre  elevation. 
Je  doute  que  les  assieges  puissent  risquer  de  defendre  la  cita- 
delle, lorsqu'ils  auront  perdu  les  inagazins,  THopital,  les 
Casernes,  et  surtout  Teau  :  car  il  ne  leur  restera  plus  alors 
qu'une  citeme.  Alors  vraisemblablement  les  habitans  qui  se 
seront  retires  avec  la  garnison  dans  la  citadelle  la  forceront  de 
se  rendre,  pour  ne  pas  etre  entierement  mines  ou  passes  au  fil 
de  Tepee. 

D^s  que  la  ville  sera  prise,  il  sera  necessaire  d'en  evacuer 
tons  les  habitans  Fran^ais,  car  c'est  une  detestable  population, 
composee  de  toute  la  canaille  de  la  France  et  des  Antilles. 
II  faudra  y  etablir  des  families  Portugaises  emigrees  d'Europe, 
J  faire  une  station  navale,  ou  Portugaise  ou  mi-partie,  et  y 
laisser  une  garnison  d'au  moins  deux  mille  hommes,  aprfes  avoir 
remis  les  fortifications  en  bon  etat. 

Cette  Isle  ne  doit  dans  aucun  cas,  ni  par  aucun  traite,  etre 
rendue  aux  Fran^ais ;  elle  fait  la  surete  du  Bresil  et  de  la  Gu- 
yane  Anglaise.  Les  deux  Rois  allies  s'arrangeront  sur  sa 
propri^t^  a  Taimable.  St.  Joseph  doit  etre  fortifi^  avec  le 
plus  grand  soin,  parce  qu"'il  domine  la  navigation  du  port. 
Peut-etre  aussi  jugera-t-on  convenable  de  fortifier  un  des  Islots 
de  Maret  pour  defendre  les  approches  a  Tavenir. 

Lorsqu'*on  a  reussi  a  emanciper  les  indigenes  de  Buenos 
Ayres,  et  par  suite  ceux  du  Perou,  et  qu'^on  a  pris  pour  toujours 
la  Colonie  Fran^aise  de  Cayenne,  le  Brt^sil  jouira  d'une  paix 
profonde;  le  Prince  Regent  pourra  tourner  ses  vues  vers 
TEurope;  et  c'est  dans  le  Bresil  qu'il  preparera  une  flotte  et 
une  armee,  pour  retourner  un  jour  d^livrer  sa  patrie  avec  le 
secours  de  son  puissant  allid. 

TROISIEME   SECTION. 

AMERIQUE  DU  NORD. 

Si  Ton  a  d^montr^  quMl  est  indispensablement  necessaire  que 
le  Gouvernement  entame  et  suive,  sans  perdre  de  terns,  la  n^go- 


1807.]  I^ORD  CASTLEREAGH.  363 

ciation  la  plus  active  avec  les  Colons  Espagnols  de  TAmerique 
du  Sud,  pour  produire  sur  ce  continent  une  revolution  politique 
qui,  en  les  affranchissant  du  joug  de  leur  Metropole  opere  la 
surete  du  Bresil,  et  nous  ouvre  un  grand  commerce  qui  nous 
dedommao'erait  largement  de  notre  interdiction  des  ports  de 
TEurope ;  il  est  encore  plus  aise  de  prouver  que  notre  interet 
est  encore  plus  grand  de  tenter  les  memes  moyens  aupres  des 
Colons  de  TAmerique  Espagnole  du  Nord,  parce  que  la  souve- 
rainete  qui  s'etablirait  au  Mexique  assurerait  le  sort  de  nos 
Colonies  des  Antilles ;  parce  que  notre  commerce  doublerait 
d'etendue;  parce  que  le^  Mexique  est  plus  a  port^e  de  nous; 
puisque  surtout  cette  puissance  terrienne^  tenant  a  nous  pour 
la  surete  desa  propre  existence,  confinant  les  parties  mdridionales 
des  Etats-Unis,  ayant  sur  pied  une  armee  de  terre  qu^elle  pent 
armer  et  entretenir  sur  les  fronti^res  du  Nord  pour  couvrir  le 
Nouveau  Mexique,  tiendrait  en  respect  les  Am^ricains,  qui,  se 
livrant  aux  suggestions  de  la  politique  Fran^aise,  nous  niena- 
cent  d'une  guerre  embarrassante  dans  notre  position  critique, 
pendant  que  nous  avons  deja  toute  TEurope  contre  nous. 

Dans  TAmerique  du  Sud,  si  nous  rt^ussissons  a  j  op^rer 
une  revolution  salutaire  et  raisonnable,  nous  serous  parvenus 
a  pacifier  cet  immense  Continent,  a  nous  y  assurer  un  com- 
merce qui  nous  laissera  peu  de  regrets  sur  la  suspension  de 
celui  de  PEurope,  a  lier  par  un  interet  commun  entr'eux  et 
avec  nous  les  deux  grandes  puissances  de  ces  deux  Continents, 
a  donner  une  grande  existence  a  notre  fidele  alliee  la  maison  de 
Bragance,  et  a  luy  faciliter  les  moyens  de  former  une  marine  et 
une  arm^e  avec  lesquelles  elle  puisse  un  jour  rentrer  en  Por- 
tugal, et  nous  aider  a  briser  la  tyrannie  de  PEurope. 

Mais  nous  n'*aurions  rempli  que  la  moitie  de  notre  but  si 
nous  ne  travaillons  pas  avec  la  meme  prudence,  la  meme  bien- 
faisance,  et  le  meme  succ^s,  dans  PAmerique  du  Nord,  en 
affranchissant  le  Mexique  et  contenant  au  moins  les  Etats 
Unis,  soit  en  les  for^ant  a  une  paix  encore  plus  salutaire  pour 
eux  que  pour  nous,  soit  en  les  divisant  et  operant  chez  eux 


364  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

une  revolution  int^rieure,  qui  ne  peut  que  toumer  a  notre 
avantage,  si  c'est  nous  qui  la  dirigeons  et  si  nous  sommes  assez 
moderes  pour  nous  abstenir  de  toute  idee  de  conquete,  nous 
contentant  de  notre  suprdmatie  navale,  seul  but  raisonnable 
dVne  grande  nation  coramer9ante  et  insulaire. 

Le  Mexique. 

Cette  partie  de  TAmerique  Espagnole  est  encore  mieux  dis- 
posee  a  une  revolution  politique  que  celle  du  Sud.  II  y  a 
plus  de  frequentation  avec  les  etrangers,  plus  de  lumi^res,  des 
idees  plus  lib^rales.  Son  6tat  militaire  et  civil  est  mieux  com- 
post, et  c'est  pr^cis^ment  ce  qui  facilitera  son  insurrection  et 
hatera  son  Emancipation  quand  Timpulsion  sera  donn^e.  Les 
Espagnols  d''Europe  y  sont  en  petit  nombre,  d6testEs  comma 
des  insect es  devorants,  et  le  voeu  general  est  de  s^en  debarrasser. 
Le  Gouvernement  a  continuellement  a  lutter  contre  Tesprit 
d'inqui^tude  et  de  mutinerie  des  indigenes.  Son  palais  est 
une  citadelle  assez  forte,  mais  serait  un  faible  asyle  contre  une 
population  de  plus  de  200  mille  ames.  II  n'y  a  pas  plus  de 
quatre  a  cinq  mille  soldats  Espagnols  naturels  r^pandus  dans 
le  Mexique.  Les  indigenes  forment  une  arm^e  reguli^re  de 
trente  mille  hommes,  et  le  sort  du  pays  est  dans  leurs  mains. 
II  faut  aussi  mettre  en  ligne  de  compte  une  seconde  arm^e 
aussi  forte,  de  commis,  gardes,  employes  aux  fermes  et  aux 
Douanes,  que  Tactivite  continue  de  leur  service  accoutume  aux 
armes,  et  qui  formeraient  un  secours  tr^s  utile  dans  une  insur- 
rection parce  qu'ils  Fetendraient  partout.^ 

Une  autre  troupe  auxiliaire  ce  sont  les  pretres  et  les  moines 
indigenes,  qui  detestent  le  haut  clergd  compost  d'Espagnols 
naturels,  les  hommes  de  loy,  et  les  riches  proprietaires,  qui  voy- 
ent  avec  indignation  toutes  les  places  honorifiques,  lucratives, 
et  de  confiance,  remplis  par  des  avanturiers  d'Europe,  qu'ils  m^- 

^  Don  Joseph  de  Pavia,  que  je  ne  peux  trop  recommander  au  Gouverne- 
ment pour  ses  quaHtes  morales,  son  esprit,  ses  talents,  et  22  ans  d'exp6- 
rience,  fonde  sur  cette  seconde  armee  Tespoir  d'un  sneers  immanquable. 


1807.]  LOKD  CASTLEBEAGH.  365 

prisent,  et  qui,  a  leur  tour,  les  traitent  avec  dedain,  les  pillent, 
et  les  vexent. 

Les  rapports  que  le  Gouveruement  a  re9us  par  plusieurs 
voyageurs  sont  tr^s-contradictoires,  et  n'ont  pu  jusqu'*a  present 
fixer  ses  irresolutions  et  le  determiner  a  former  ou  adopter 
aucun  plan.  Le  terns  est  venu  ou  il  faut  prendre  un  parti  tres- 
decide ;  j'en  ai  developpe  plusieurs  motifs  dans  les  memoires 
que  j'ai  donne  en  diffi^rents  tems  sur  cette  mati^re,  qui  sont 
tons  entre  les  mains  de  mylord  Castlereagh.  Notre  position 
critique  avec  TAmerique  Unie  est  un  motif  de  plus  pour  entre- 
prendre  Femancipation  du  Mexique.  II  faut  necessairement 
nous  en  faire  un  allie  et  creer  dans  cette  nouvelle  souverainete 
un  frein  ou  un  ennemi  centre  les  Etats-Unis. 

C'est  en  monarchic  que  nous  devons  operer  partout.  Si 
des  Miranda  ou  autres  avanturiers  nous  faisaient  adopter  le 
systeme  republicain  ou  celui  de  conquete,  c'est  contre  nous- 
memes  que  nous  travaillerions  si  nous  reussissions,  ce  que  le 
mauvais  succes  de  Miranda  a  Cumana  rend  au  moins  tres 
douteux. 

Nous  aurions  produit  un  chaos  de  crimes  et  de  sang  com  me 
la  revolution  d'Haiti,  ou  un  Etat  allie  naturellement  aux  Etats 
Unis,  pour  lesquels  nous  aurions  travaille ;  nous  aurions  cree  de 
nouveaux  allies  aux  Frangais,  qui  par  la  cession  que  Buona- 
parte vient  de  se  faire  faire  des  Florides,  deviendraient  leurs 
voisins  et  leurs  agitateurs,  ce  que  nous  avons  interet  d'em- 
pecher. 

Pour  chef  de  cette  monarchic,  le  choix  du  Prince  qu'il  faut 
y  presenter  n'est  pas  indifferent.  II  faut  qu'il  soit  du  sang  des 
Bourbons,  tant  pour  flatter  la  vanite  des  descendants  des  an- 
ciens  conquerants  du  Mexique,  que  pour  contenter  leur  amour 
pour  cette  auguste  maison.  II  faut  qu'il  ne  soit  pas  etranger  a 
leur  idiome  et  a  leurs  moeurs :  il  faut  qu'il  soit  deja  connu 
d''eux,  et  que  luy-meme  les  connaisse ;  il  faut  que  ce  soit  un 
homme  fait,  qu''il  ait  de  grandes  connaissances,  pour  pouvoir 
suppleer  par  son  genie  a  tout  ce  qui  manque  au  premier  mo- 


366  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

ment  de  la  creation  d^une  nouvelle  souverainete,  qui  ne  doit 
pas,  s'il  est  possible,  paraitre  une  revolution  turbulente,  mais 
une  translation  volontaire  du  pouvoir  souverain  dans  une 
branche  de  la  meme  maison,  avec  la  condition  de  la  residence ; 
il  faut  surtout  que  par  son  caract^re  et  ses  habitudes,  autant 
que  par  interet  et  par  reconnaissance,  il  soit  naturellenient 
notre  allie  et  que  nous  puissions  compter  sur  luy.  Toutes  ces 
conditions  se  trouvent  dans  le  Prince  que  j'ai  indique,  et  dans 
luy  seul,  en  Europe :  ainsi  le  choix  n'est  pas  douteux,  et  con- 
vient  eo-alement  aux  indifjenes  et  a  rAnojleterre. 

Pour  reussir  a  placer  de  gre  a  gre  ce  nouveau  souverain  sur 
ce  nouveau  trone,  nous  n'avons  ni  le  terns  ni  les  moyens  d'en- 
tamer  une  nogociation  preliminaire.  Notre  conduite  dans  le 
Rio  de  la  Plata  nous  a  ferme  toute  correspondance  amicale 
avec  TAmerique  Espagnole ;  nous  nous  y  sommes  fait  hair 
sans  nous  faire  craindre :  nous  n'avons  done  qu''un  moyen 
ouvert,  tant  pour  reparer  notre  honneur  que  pour  ramener  a 
nous  ces  peuples  alienes — c'est  de  brusquer  la  negociation  en  la 
rendant  imposante  par  une  force  armee,  qui  puisse  faire  craindre 
nos  hostilites,  en  nous  abstenant  cependant  d'en  commettre,  a 
moins  que  la  negociation  ne  soit  entierement  rompue. 

Si  nous  avions  eu  une  conduite  et  un  succ^s  different  dans 
le  Rio  de  la  Plata,  quatre  fregates  et  une  simple  garde  d'hon- 
neur  de  deux  ou  trois  mille  hommes  auraient  suffi  pour  pre- 
senter ce  Prince  aux  Mexicains.  Le  Vice-roi  et  les  Espagnols 
naturels  n'^auraient  pu  rien  opposer  h.  un  mouveraent  universel 
et  spontane.  lis  n^ont  pas  acquis  plus  de  force  depuis ;  la 
disposition  generale  est  la  meme :  mais  nos  disgraces  leur  ont 
procure  les  moyens  d''ecarter  toute  communication  amicale, 
et  nous  ne  pouvons  plus  parvenir  jusqu'au  peuple  Mexicain,  ni 
luy  jusqu**^  nous. 

Pour  retablir  la  communication,  il  faut  qu"*il  nous  voye  en 
force  sur  ses  cotes.  Pour  relever  la  confiance  il  faut  qu''il 
connaisse  que  ce  n'*est  point  comme  ennemis  que  nous  venons, 
mais  pour  le  soutenir  dans  son  noble  dessein  d'affranchissement. 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  367 

Ce  peuple,  une  fois  persuade,  redoublera  de  courage  et  de  vo- 
lonte ;  notre  force  lui  paraitra  la  sienne  propre,  et  n"'envisagera 
plus  ni  obstacle,  ni  opposition,  ni  danger  a  Pexecution  de  son 
plan  d'emancipation. 

La  menace  d'une  guerre  prochaine  contre  TAmerique  nous 
oblige  des  cette  annee  d"'exp^dier  des  forces  considerables  de 
terre  et  de  mer  aux  Indes  Occidentales,  tant  pour  proteger 
notre  commerce  que  pour  mettre  en  etat  de  grande  defense  nos 
Colonies  des  Antilles,  la  Canada,  la  Nouvelle  Ecosse,  et  pour 
menacer  les  ports  et  les  cotes  des  Etats-Unis.  Ce  supplement 
de  forces,  qui  ne  pent  pas  etre  de  moins  de  vingt-cinq  mille 
hommes  de  troupes  de  terre,  se  divise  naturellement  en  deux 
portions.  Tune  de  dix  mille  hommes  pour  Hallifax  et  Quebec, 
Tautre  de  quinze  mille  pour  les  Antilles. 

Cette  disposition  nous  donne  le  moyen  de  faire  tr^s-prompte- 
ment  Texpedition  du  Mexique,  et  le  differents  points  d'attaque 
et  de  defense  dont  les  quinze  mille  hommes  expedies  aux  An- 
tilles seront  charges  nous  donnent  occasion  a  des  rassemble- 
ments  et  des  mouvements,  qui  en  couvriront  le  secret  jusqu"*  a 
son  execution.  H  y  a  les  Florides  a  occuper  pour  empecher 
les  Fran^ais  de  s'y  etablir,  la  Louisiane  a  attaquer  si  la  guerre 
delate  contre  les  Etats-Unis,  des  expeditions  a  faire  contre 
risle  de  Cuba,  la  Martinique,  la  Guadeloupe,  meme  les  faux 
projets  de  Miranda  contre  la  Terra-firme  peuvent  servir  de 
pretexte  a  nos  mouvements. 

La  Jamaique  est  le  point  naturel  de  rassemblement  et  de 
depart  pour  toutes  ces  expeditions.  C'est  le  plus  favorable 
pour  Toperation  du  Mexique.  Douze  mille  hommes  et  le 
nombre  correspondant  de  batiments  de  guerre  propres  pour  la 
navigation  de  ces  parages  forment  une  force  suffisante  pour 
cette  entreprise. 

Le  Prince  doit  etre  embarque  sur  cette  flotte,  et  pendant  le 
sejour  a  la  Jamaique,  necessaire  pour  y  completer  les  preparatifs, 
il  y  attirera  de  Tlsle  de  Cuba,  de  la  Terra-firme,  et  du  Mexique, 
toutes  ses  anciennes  relations,  pour  grossir  son  cortege,  et  il 


368  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

enverra  d'avance  des  emissaires  pour  preparer  les  voyes  par 
des  proclamations,  qui  garantiront  les  indigenes  coutre  la  crainte 
de  tout  projet  de  conquete  et  hostilite  de  la  part  de  la  force 
Anglaise  qui  paraitra  sur  leurs  cotes,  laquelle,  au  contraire 
ii'*est  envoyee  que  pour  cooperer  avec  eux  a  leur  affranchisse- 
ment. 

Le  Prince  doit  etre  pourvu  en  partant  d'Europe  de  moyens 
pecuniaires  suffisants  pour  tenir  a  la  Jamaique  et  sur  le  Conti- 
nent Mexiquain  un  etat  convenable  a  sa  grande  destination,  et 
pour  les  d^penses  necessaires  pour  soutenir  ses  adherents,  et  en 
acquerir  de  nouveaux.  11  doit  porter  avec  luy  des  armes,  des 
munitions,  quelques  canons  de  campagne,  obusiers,  mortiers 
de  petit  calibre,  &c.,  pour  pouvoir  organiser  sa  force  armee 
en  mettant  pied  a  terre.  Cette  depense  n'est  qu''un  pret  ou 
une  avance  que  lui  fera  le  Gouvernement,  et  cette  depense 
pent  servir  autre  part  si  Tentreprise  echoue. 

Le  Prince  doit  avoir  auprfes  de  lui  un  agent  diplomatique 
Anglais,  pour  garantir  dans  Topinion  des  indigenes  Mexiquains 
tous  les  arrangements  et  transactions  qu'il  jugera  necessaires  de 
passer  pour  le  succes  de  son  entreprise.  Get  agent  sera  pourvu 
d^avance  d'un  caractere  diplomatique  pour  resider  aupr^s  du 
nouveau  souverain,  qu"'il  ne  [quittera  ?]  qvi'h.  Mexico,  lorsque  le 
Prince  y  sera  entre,  que  le  gouvernement  Espagnol  sera  ren- 
verse,  et  que  la  raajorite  de  la  nation  aura  accept e  et  reconnu 
sa  souverainete.  Les  bases  du  traite  seront  tr^s-faciles  entre 
deux  nations  de  bonne  foy,  qui  ont  besoin  Tune  de  Tautre,  et 
que  rinteret  politique  et  commercial  invite  mutuellement  a  une 
alliance  offensive  et  defensive.  Ges  bases  seront  arretees  d'avance, 
avant  le  depart  du  Prince,  entre  le  Gouvernement  et  lui.  On 
les  modifiera  sur  les  lieux  selon  les  circonstances. 

D^s  que  Texpedition  sera  entic^rement  prete,  elle  se  rendra 
directement  a  la  Vera  Cruz  comme  le  port  le  plus  prbs,  et  la 
route  la  plus  directe  et  la  plus  commode  pour  la  capitale,  qu''il 
faut  atteindre  le  plus  tot  possible.  Je  S9ais  par  les  rap- 
ports le  plus  r^cents  qu'*k  re9u  le  Gouvernement,  que  c'est  le 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  369 

point  ou  les  Espagnols  ont  prepare  la  plus  grande  defense ; 
que  vingt-cinq  mille  horames,  de  tres-belles  troupes  en  appa- 
rence,  tres-bien  organisees,  sont  disposees  par  echelons  entre  ce 
port  et  Mexico ;  que  si  on  voulait  penetrer  de  vive  force  de  la 
Vera  Cruz  a  la  capitale  en  conqmrants^  cette  distance  de  plus 
de  deux  cent  quarante  milles,  et  cet  obstacle,  seraient.des  em- 
pechements  trop  forts  pour  etre  surmontes,  meme  par  une  force 
double  de  celle  de  Texpedition  proposee. 

Mais  je  S9ais  aussi  qu^excepte  les  officiers  generaux  et  supe- 
rieurs  et  peut-etre  deux  ou  trois  mille  Espagnols  naturels,  cette 
armee  est  composee  d'indigenes,  de  ces  memes  hommes  qui  ont 
le  plus  grand  interet  personnel  a  raftranchissement  de  leur 
patrie,  et  qui  en  retireront  le  plus  grand  benefice,  puisqu'il  les 
portera  a  tons  les  emplois  civils,  militaires,  honorifiques,  et 
lucratifs,  qu''occupent  a  present  les  Europeens  a  leur  grand 
regret. 

Cest  done  a  la  Vera  Cruz  que  I'armee  Anglaise  doit  de- 
scendre.^  S*il  y  a  resistance,  elle  s^en  emparera  de  vive  force  ; 
mais  en  protestant  par  une  proclamation  du  General  a  Tappuy 
de  celles  du  Prince  qu^il  n''est  pas  venu  dans  Tintention  de 
garder  pour  T Angleterre  cette  place  ni  aucune  autre  sur  le  Con- 
tinent Mexicain ;  qu''il  a  ordre  de  n'y  sejourner  que  le  terns 
necessaire  pour  aider  les  indigenes  a  fonder  leur  gouvernement 
avec  solidite  et  a  completer  leur  affranchissement. 

Des  que  le  Prince  sera  descendu,  il  rassemblera  sous  la  pro- 
tection de  Tarmee  Anglaise  ses  partisans,  en  grossira  le  nombre, 
les  organisera  en  troupes  reguli^res,  appellera  aupres  de  sa  per- 

^  II  y  a  sur  cette  cote  plusieurs  autres  points  de  descente,  tels  que 
Panuco,  Rio  San  Pedro,  Villarica,  la  riviere  de  Grijalva,  Tabasco,  Tru- 
xillo,  &c. ;  mais  j'ai  suivi  I'opinion  du  Capitaine  Don  Joseph  de  Pavia,  qui 
a  longtems  commande  une  fregate  dans  ces  parages.  II  m'a  assure  que  le 
vrai  point  de  descente,  pour  faire  une  grande  sensation  sur  les  indigenes, 
et  pour  les  determiner,  est  la  Vera  Cruz,  que  cette  place,  meme  en  cas  de 
mauvaise  volonte  de  leur  part,  ne  pent  pas  resister  a  une  attaque  serieuse, 
et  qu'il  re  pond  sur  sa  tete  du  succes  et  des  suites.  II  faut  entendre  et 
consulter  ce  bon  officier. 

VOL.  vn.  B  B 


370  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OE  [1807. 

Sonne  tons  les  officiers  civils  et  ecclesiastiques  qui  voudront  se 
joindre  a  lui,  ou  qui  luy  seront  proposes  par  les  indigenes  de 
son  parti,  et  se  disposera  a  marcher  le  plus  rapidement  possible 
sur  Mexico,  pour  ne  pas  laisser  refroidir  le  zMe  de  ses  adhe- 
rents, et  pour  augmenter  la  confusion  et  le  discredit  du  Gou- 
vernement  Espagnol.  Sa  prudence,  son  audace,  sa  popularite, 
et  ses  talents,  feront  le  reste. 

Le  General  Anglais  aura  ordre  de  lui  fournir  sur  sa  requi- 
sition le  nombre  de  troupes  qu''avec  son  conseil  et  le  voeu  de 
ses  partisans  il  jugera  necessaire  pour  son  escorte,  sa  surete,  et 
sa  dignite.  II  est  a  presumer  qu'il  n''aura  besoin  que  de  quelque 
cavalerie,  quelque  infant erie  legere,  et  quelques  canoniers.  Ce 
General  restera  a  la  Vera  Cruz,  ou  a  portee  de  Tescadre,  avec 
le  reste  de  Farmee,  observant  de  la  niaintenir  dans  la  plus  ex- 
acte  discipline,  traitant  les  habitans  comme  des  allies,  dont  il 
cherchera  a  gagner  la  confiance. 

Tel  est  le  plan  d'apres  lequel  je  crois  que  doit  etre  conduite 
la  revolution  du  Mexique  :  j'ose  ne  pas  douter  du  succ^s.  Elle 
n'^occasionnera  ni  emploi  de  troupes,  ni  depenses  extraordinaires, 
puisque  dans  tons  les  cas  il  faut  necessairement  envoyer  une 
force  dans  les  Antilles  ;  elle  ne  coutera  que  tr^s-peu  d'hommes, 
puisqu'il  ne  s'agit  pas  de  conquerir,  et  que  tout  au  plus  la  prise 
de  la  Vera  Cruz  coutera  un  pen  de  sang  si  on  s'y  trouve  forc^. 
Elle  ne  retiendra  pas  longteras  dans  ces  parages  Tarmee  et 
Tescadre  quel  qu'en  soit  le  succes,  car,  en  trois  semaines  au  plus 
la  revolution  sera  faite  ou  riianqu^e ;  ainsi  elle  ne  suspendra 
pa«  de  plus  d'un  mois  les  autres  operations  auxquelles  ces  forces 
auront  ete  destinies. 

Si  elle  r^ussit,  le  nouveau  Souverain  fera  passer  une  partie  de 
son  armee  au  Nouveau  Mexique  pour  tenir  en  bride  les  Am^ri- 
quains,  et  il  pr^parera  a  la  Havane  une  expedition  pour  aller 
se  remettre  en  possession  dela  Louisiane,  etsauver  les  Florides 
des  griffes  de  Buonaparte.  Par  la  il  paralysera  toutes  les  Pro- 
vinces nidridionales  des  Etats  Unis,  qui  sent  les  seules  qui  de- 
sirejit  la  guerre,  les  seules  qui  m^ritent  notre  vengeance. 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  371 

Si  la  revolution  n'a  pas  lieu  en  entier,  elle  pourra  devenir 
partielle,  et  s'etendre  en  de9a  ou  au  dela  du  Yucatan ;  ou,  si 
elle  manque  en  entier,  toutes  les  cotes  du  Mexique  et  du 
Golphe  seront  ouvertes  a  notre  ressentiment  et  deviendront  la 
proye  de  nos  expeditions  partielles.  Peut-etre  meme,  dans  le 
cas  absolu  de  guerre,  pourra-t-on  etablir  dans  Plsle  des  Sacri- 
fices une  garnison  et  une  station  fixe  d'une  escadrille,  pour 
couper  toute  communication  entre  le  Mexique  et  FEurope,  et 
par  la  ramener  par  force  les  indigenes  au  projet  d'emancipation, 
qu"'ils  auront  eu  Fimprudence  de  rejeter,  lorsqu'elle  leur  aura 
ete  ofFerte  de  bonne  foj.  - 

En  cas  que  le  Prince  soit  oblige  de  renoncer  a  ce  glorieux 
projet,  il  se  trouvera,  dans  le  cours  de  la  guerre,  des  moyens 
de  Tinderaniser,  soit  par  la  cession  de  la  Louisiane  et  des  Flo- 
rides,  soit  par  un  etablissement  sur  la  Tierra  Firme.  L'une 
ou  Fautre  le  mettrait  a  meme  de  reprendre  un  jour  ce 
projet,  qu'il  ne  faut  jamais  abandonner.  Ce  Prince  resterait 
done  attache  a  Farmee  des  Antilles,  car  notre  Roy  et  notre 
Gouvernement  pensent  trop  noblement,  et  notre  nation  est  trop 
genereuse  pour  sacrifier  un  Prince  interessant  apr^s  Favoir  mis 
en  avant. 

II  est  d''autant  plus  important  de  se  presser  d'envoyer  aux 
Antilles  des  troupes  et  une  forte  escadre  et  de  commencer  les 
operations  par  Fexpedition  du  Mexique,  qu*'on  doit  etre  tres- 
convaincu  que  Buonaparte  s'en  occupe  tres-serieusement,  et 
qu^il  est  meme  a  craindre  que  la  destination  de  Fescadre  de 
Rochefort  ne  soit  de  jeter  une  forte  garnison  dans  la  Vera 
Cruz,  et  d'en  tirer  le  tr^s  gros  numeraire,  qui,  sans  ce  secours 
ne  pent  pas  passer  en  Europe. 


Bt.  Hon.  N.  Vansittart  to  Lord  Castlereagk. 

Great  George  Street,  June  2,  1807. 
My  dear  Lord — I  take  the  liberty  of  sending  you  a  letter  I 
have  just  received  from  General  Miranda.     I  have  not  seen 

B  B  2 


372  LETTEES  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

that  to  De  Rouvray  which  he  refers  to ;  but  I  have  no  doubt, 
if  it  contains  any  thing  material,  De  Rouvray  will  communi- 
cate it  to  your  Lordship. 

I  am,  my  dear  Lord,  yours  sincerely,     N.  Vansittart. 
I  presume  you  must  have  letters  from  Trinidad  of  a  much 
later  date. 

General  Miranda  to  the  Rt.  Hon.  Nicholas  Vansittart. 

Trinidad,  ce  9  Mars,  1807. 

Mon  tres-cher  Ami — Ayez  la  bonte  de  remettre  la  lettre  ci- 
jointe  a  de  Rouvray,  et  de  lire  son  contenu,  qui  vous  mettra  au 
fait  de  Petat  actuel  des  choses  dans  cette  partie  du  monde. 

Envoyez-nous,  je  vous  en  prie,  au  plustot  possible,  une  reso- 
lution definitive  quelconque.  Le  Nouveau  Monde  se  perdra 
aussi  bien  que  le  Continent  Europeen,  si  on  persiste  a  se  con- 
duire  comme  on  Ta  fait  jusques  ici.  On  se  decourage  ici ;  on 
croit  que  TAngleterre  n'a  pas  de  moyens  pour  soutenir  cette 
grande  lutte ;  et  on  finit  par  se  persuader  qu'il  faut  absolument 
se  soumettre  aux  volont^s  de  la  France,  pour  y  pouvoir  exister. 
Cest  la  doctrine  la  plus  pernicieuse  et  la  plus  detestable  qu"'on 
puisse  adopter ;  mais  elle  se  propage  malheureusement  ici 
par  Tinsouciance  que  TAngleterre  raontre  a  Pegard  du  Nouveau 
Monde,  qui  depuis  longtemps  lui  tend  les  bras,  lui  ofire  son 
commerce  et  ses  richesses,  et  qu'elle  semble  dedaigner  et  me- 
priser  absolument ;  tandis  qu'elle  donne  des  secours  et  cherche 
avec  empressement  Talliance  des  Russes,  des  Tartares,  et  des 
Turcs,  pour  qu'ils  viennent  a  son  secours,  &c.  Je  vous  assure 
que  ce  sont  des  raisonnements  que  j'ai  entendu  faire  ici  a  des 
habitans  de  la  Province  de  Caracas,  qui  aiment  leur  indepen- 
dance,  qui  abhorrent  les  Fran^ais  et  le  systbme  actuel  de  Bona- 
parte, et  qui  d(^'sirent  sinc^rement  de  s'allier  avec  TAngleterre 
pour  se  soustraire  absolument  au  Gouvernement  Espagnol  et 
Fran9ais. 

Adieu — k  vous  trfes-sinc^rement, 

Miranda. 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  373 

Ce  7  Avril,  1807. 

PS.  Les  Depeches  que  je  viens  de  recevoir  du  Comte  de 
Rouvray  et  de  Mr.  TurnbuU  me  laissent  encore  dans  Faff  reuse 
incertitude  oil  je  me  trouve  depuis  longtems :  ayez  la  bonte 
done,  mon  cher  ami,  de  m'en  tirer  au  plus  tot,  et  de  m''annoncer 
enfin  Tenvoy  des  secours  qui  doivent  produire  Find^pendance  et 
la  liberte  de  mon  pays,  ainsi  que  la  prosperite  et  la  gloire  du 
votre. 

Par  les  renseignements  que  j*'ai  re^us  derni^rement  de  la 
Cote  Firme,  ainsi  que  de  la  Province  de  Caracas,  il  paroit  que 
tons  les  esprits  sont  encore  bien  disposes  en  notre  faveur,  mais 
que  le  retard  des  secours  promis  par  FAngleterre  les  font 
vaciller  dans  ce  moment,  et  les  jeteront  bientot  (je  crains) 
dans  le  desespoir.  Je  yous  laisse  a  penser  le  reste,  et  les  con- 
sequences fatales  qu^un  delai  pareil  pourroit  nous  amener  pour 
le  malheur  de  tons. 

La  catastrophe  recente  de  Buenos  Ayres  doit  ouvrir  les 
yeux  du  Ministere  sur  les  idees  absurdes  de  conquete  que 
quelques  gens  ont  toujours  eues  en  vue  sur  FAmerique  meri- 
dionale.  Je  ne  me  suis  pas  plus  trompe  sur  ce  point-la  que 
sur  la  facilite  qu'il  y  auroit  de  penetrer  dans  le  pays,  toutefois 
que  Findependance  et  la  liberte  des  habitants  soient  la  base  de 
cette  entreprise,  devenue  cependant  plus  et  plus  difficile  qu'elle 
Fetoit  il  y  a  un  ou  deux  ans.  Ne  perdons  pas  plus  de  terns,  j& 
vous  en  prie. 

A  vous  toujours,       M A. 


General  Dumouriez  to  Lord  CastlereagJu 

11,  Leicester  Square,  le  4  Juin,  1807. 
Mylord — Je  crois  vous  prouver  mon  attachement  particulier 
pour  vous,  et  mon  z^e  pour  votre  patrie,  devenue  la  mienne 
depuis  quatre  ans,  en  vous  exposant  tous  les  motifs  a  Fappui  de 
Fimportante  proposition  que  je  vous  ai  faite.  Je  S9ais  que 
vous  avez  ete  cantent  de  ma  premiere  note :  je  vous  prie  de 
lire  cette  seconde  avee  la  meme  indulirente  attention. 


374  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

J'*aurai  Thonneur  de  me  rendre  demaiu  matin  a  2  li.  k  votre 
office. 

Je  suis  avec  tout  le  respect  possible  votre  tr^s-sinc^re  ser- 
viteur,  DuMOURlEZ. 

Note. 

4  Juin,  1807. 

Toutes  les  nouvelles  apportees  par  le  Diom^de  soiit  en  faveur 
de  la  proposition  du  voyage  du  Due  d''Orleans.  II  n'^existe  en 
troupes  reglees  qu''environ  deux  mille  hommes,  encore  ce  ne 
sout  que  de  troupes  coloniales.  Le  Vice-roi  est  arrete,  et  c^est 
deja  une  esp^ce  de  revolte  contre  les  agents  de  la  Metropole. 
Le  reste  de  Tarmee  est  un  ramassis  de  colons  sans  ordre  et  sans 
union.  Liniers,  qui  parait  s'etre  empare  de  toute  Tautorite, 
est  un  avanturier  Fran^ais  royaliste^  que  le  Due  d'Orleans  pent 
gagner  ou  abattre  facilement.  Vous  tenez  deja  la  colonie 
du  St.  Sacrement,  ou  ce  Prince  sera  a  portee  de  pratiquer  avec 
les  habitants  de  la  Capitale.  Si  Buenos  Ayres  est  en  votre 
possession  a  son  arrivee,  je  regarde  la  revolution  comme  tres- 
facile,  tr^s-prompte,  et  tr^s-assur^e,  parce  qu''elle  fixera  toutes 
les  irresolutions. 

Cette  Revolution  devient  plus  necessaire  que  jamais  pour 
votre  surete  et  votre  commerce,  car  vous  voila  d^ja  avec  deux 
places  a  garder,  Montevidio  et  le  Sacrement.  Ilfaudra  encore 
occuper  St.  Gabriel  et  meme  Maldonado,  sans  compter  la  gar- 
nison  nombreuse  qu'exigera  Buenos  Ayres.  Par  la  paix  avec 
les  habitans,  vous  vous  reduirez  a  votre  seule  garnison  de 
Monte  Video.  Cette  paix  ne  peut  toe  solide  que  par  Teman- 
cipation  du  pays,  et  cette  emancipation  ne  peut  avoir  lieu  que 
par  un  Prince  de  la  Maison  de  Bourbon,  substitue  aux  droits 
de  Charles  Quint,  par  la  descendance  directe  d**  Anne  d'*Autriche. 
Ce  droit  a  une  force  trfes  r^elle  sur  les  descendants  des  guerriers 
qui  ont  conquis  cet  immense  pays  au  nom  de  cet  Empereur. 
Tons  ces  titres  sont  r(5unis  dans  le  Due  d'Orleans  et  dans  lui 
seul,  puisque  la  bonne  politique  exclut  necessairement  la 
brancbe  ain<5e. 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  375 

L'int^ret  de  T  Angleterre  pour  determiner  ce  voyage  n'est  pas 
douteux  sous  les  trois  points  de  vue  politique,  commercial,  et 
militaire.  La  deliberation  ne  peut  etre  suspendue  que  par  des 
circonstances  etrangeres  a  cet  interet  decisif.  Elles  ne  peuvent 
^tre  que  relatives  a  FEurope. 

Serait-on  arrete  par  le  desir  de  manager  TEspagne  ?  a  quoi 
bon  cette  condescendance  ?  n'est-elle  pas  totalement  asservie  a 
Buonaparte,  au  point  d'envojer  80,000  homraes  a  600  lieues 
de  ses  frontieres  malgre  sa  penurie  en  troupes  et  en  argent,  et 
malgre  son  veritable  interet,  qui  exigerait  qu^elle  reunit  toutes 
ses  forces  de  terre  et  de  mer  pour  aller  sauver  ses  colonies, 
dans  lesquelles  ses  bons  amis  les  Fran^ais  eux-memes  aug- 
mentent  continuellement  un  germe  de  rebellion,  qui  linira  tou- 
jours  par  les  detacher  de  la  Metropole,  en  votre  faveur  si  vous 
protegez  cette  revolution,  a  votre  detriment  si  elle  se  fait  sans 
vous? 

Cette  Revolution  est  deja  ecrite  dans  le  livre  des  destins ; 
elle  sera  oii  Anglaise,  ou  Fran^aise,  ou  Ameriquaine.  Ces 
deux  derniers  modes  sont  centre  vous,  et  vous  tenez  les  pre- 
miers dans  vos  mains.  La  condescendance  pour  FEspagne  ne 
peut  done  plus  vous  arreter.  Buonaparte  en  aurait  seul  le 
profit ;  il  rirait  de  cette  faiblesse,  dont  personne  ne  vous  s^aU" 
rait  crre. 

o 

Votre  resolution  peut-elle  etre  suspendue  par  Hncertitude 
des  grands  evenements  qui  doivent  decider  dans  le  Nord  de 
TEurope  le  sort  du  Continent  et  du  monde  entier  ?  bien  loin 
d''etre  arretee  par  cette  crise,  c''est  un  motif  de  plus  de  hater  la 
revolution  de  FAmerique  du  Sud.  Vous  n'etes  entrave  par 
personne  ;  vous  n'^avez  pas  besoin  d'un  bataillon  ni  d'un  vais- 
seau  de  plus  pour  Feftectuer :  au  contraire,  vos  depenses  di- 
minuent  et  son  succes  vous  rend  la  disposition  de  vos  troupes. 

Si  une  bataille  generale  decide  sur  la  Vistule  le  sort  de 
FEurope  en  faveur  de  Bonaparte,  ou  si  la  crainte  de  cet  evene- 
ment  force  FEmpereur  de  Russie  a  faire  la  paix  avec  ce  conque- 
rant,  alors,  livres  a  vous-memes  (car  vous  ne  serez  point  com- 


376  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

pris  dans  la  paix  du  Continent)  ne  serez-vous  pas  trop  heureux 
de  vous  etre  approprie,  avant  la  defection  de  vos  allies,  par  la 
Revolution  Ameriquaine,  le  d^bouche  de  votre  commerce  et  de 
vos  manufactures,  au  moment  ou  TEurope  vous  sera  ferm^e,  et 
le  numeraire  de  ces  contr^es  avee  lequel  Buonaparte  vous  fait 
la  guerre  ? 

Supposons  qu^il  vous  fasse  la  grace  de  vous  admettre  k  une 
paix  universelle  —  supposons  qu'en  consequence  vous  soyez 
alors  obliges  d'abandonner  les  indigenes  a  leurs  propres  forces, 
comme  Louis  XIV.  fut  force  d'abandonner  son  petit-fils  Phi- 
lippe v.,  la  chose  sera  faite ;  et  certainement  toutes  les  Puis- 
sances de  FEurope,  vous  except^s,  ne  sont  pas  en  etat  de  faire 
rentrer  TAm^rique  sous  la  domination  de  TEspagne,  des  qu'elle 
s'^en  sera  affranchie. 

D'ailleurs,  que  la  Russie  fass6  sa  paix  particuli^re,  ou  que 
vous  soyiez  compris  dans  une  paix  generale,  vous  ne  pouvez 
regarder  tons  les  arrangements  pacifiques  de  Bonaparte  k  votre 
egard  que  comme  une  suspension  d'armes  qu'il  employera 
contre  vous.  II  profitera  de  tons  ses  avantages,  profitez  done 
de  tons  les  votres. 

Au  reste,  en  admettant  Phypoth^se  de  la  paix  et  du  tri- 
omphe  complet  de  ce  Conqu^rant,  on  n^  croit  pas ;  et  si  les 
ministres  veulent  lire  avec  attention  le  Jugement  stir  Bonaparte 
qui  n'est  point  un  pamphlet  des  invectives  et  de  colore  mais 
une  suite  de  raisonnements  consequents,  ils  verront  qu'il  y  a 
des  ressources  immenses  pour  abattre  le  Geant,  si  on  employe 
bien  les  diversions.  L'^mancipation  de  TAm^rique  du  Sud  en 
est  une  tr^s-importante.  Elle  est  facile  a  eprouver ;  tons  les 
moyens  sont  sur  les  lieux ;  et  il  ne  faut  de  plus  que  Tenvoi 
d^un  seul  homme  que  la  Providence  a  place  dans  les  mains  du 
Gouvemement  Anglais. 

Note  sur  le  Mejcique. 

Juin  12,  1807. 

Dans  la  Note  du  22  Avril,  sur  la  continuation  de  la  guerre 

de  terre  et  de  mer,  voicy  le  paragraphe  intitule  Mexique, 


1807]  LORD  CASTLEREAGII.  377 

"  Le  coup  le  plus  terrible  que  TAngleterre  puisse  porter  a 
Buonaparte  est  de  separer  les  possessions  Espagnoles  de  leur 
metropole,  non  pas  en  tentant  follement  de  les  asservir,  mais 
en  y  pla9ant  une  Dynastie  qui  les  garantisse  egalement  et  de 
Tindependance  Americaine  et  de  rinfluence  et  du  joug  de  la 
France.  Toutes  les  pertes,  toutes  les  genes  que  Buonaparte 
parviendra  a  faire  supporter  au  commerce  et  aux  manufactures 
Anglaises  en  Europe  seront  reparees  au  centuple  par  la  creation 
d'une  nouvelle  puissance,  alliee  necessaire  de  FAngleterre,  et 
qui  par  ses  consommations,  dependra  de  son  commerce  et  de  ses 
manufactures. 

"  Le  projet  d^arracher  le  Mexique  a  la  Monarchic  Espagnole 
ne  doit  point  etre  envisage  comme  une  conception  devastatrice 
et  de  haine  centre  cette  Monarchie.  C'est  un  acte  de  pre- 
voyance  digne  du  gouvernement  d^une  nation  prudente  et  re- 
flecliie.  Les  progr^s  de  la  population  et  de  la  culture  de  la 
Louisiane  depuis  son  union  avec  les  Etats-Unis  annoncent  Tin- 
vasion  prochaine  du  Mexique,  d^s  que  les  nouveaux  etablisse- 
ments  qui  s'etendent  deja  a  la  droite  du  Mississippi,  dans  les 
riches  plaines  des  Cenis,  se  repandront  jusqu^au  Rio  del  Norte. 
Alors  les  fronti^res  du  Mexique  seront  bientot  franchies  par 
les  avanturiers  Ameriquains,  a  moins  que  le  Mexique  n'ait 
un  Souverain  residant  sur  les  lieux,  qui  puisse  rassembler 
sur  les  raemes  frontieres  des  forces  indio^^nes  bien  conduites. 
Toutes  les  nations  de  TEurope  seront  alors  interessees  a  borner 
les  conquetes  des  Ameriquains  sur  le  golphe  de  Mexique,  TAn- 
gleterre  surtout.  La  revolution  du  Mexique  est  inevitable  un 
jour;  il  est  done  important  d'empecher  qu^elle  ne  devienne 
Americaine  ou  democratique,  de  la  prevenir,  de  la  preparer  a 
Tavantage  de  TAngleterre,  pendant  qu''elle  est  en  guerre  avec 
FEspagne  subjuguee  par  la  France. 

"  L'avantage  d'une  pareille  revolution  est  incalculable ;  son 
execution  est  tr^s-facile,  sa  depense  n'est  qu^une  mise  en  dehors, 
un  pret  a  la  nouvelle  Dynastie,  dont  on  serait  bientot  rem- 
bourse ;  le  succ^s  est  infaillible.    C'est  ce  que  je  m'offre  a  do- 


378  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

moiitrer,  si  le  projet  est  adopte  par  le  Gouverncment.  Manille, 
Cuba,  Porto  Rico,  suivront  le  sort  du  Continent,  et  auront  une 
autre  destination  suivant  les  circonstances." 

Pendant  que  j'envoyaia  cette  note  de  Stralsund,  on  appre- 
nait  en  Angleterre  Tarmement  du  General  Miranda  a  New 
York  ;  on  s^ait  a  present  qu'il  est  arrive  a  Tlsle  de  la  Mar- 
guerite, sur  la  cote  de  Cumana,  et  quMl  est  debarque  k  Barce- 
lona, dans  la  Province  de  Caracas.  Miranda  est  ne  dans  cette 
Province,  de  parents  obscurs  ;  il  a  re^u  une  education  distin- 
guee.  Etant  entre  dans  le  Regiment  de  la  Princesa,  en  gar- 
nison  a  la  Havane,  il  en  a  ete  chasse  pour  contrebande,  et  s''est 
sauve  en  Europe.  Apr^s  plusieurs  voyages  en  Russie  et  en 
Angleterre,  il  a  ete  attire  en  France  par  le  fameux  Petion,  et 
Texaltation  de  ses  sentiments  republicains  Fa  fait  nommer  en 
1792  Marechal  de  camp.  Devenu  par  la  rapidite  des  change- 
ments  qui  avaient  lieu  dans  les  armees  Commandant  de  celle 
de  Flandre  en  1793,  il  a  occasionne  par  une  traliison  la  perte 
de  la  bataille  de  Nerwinde.  Chasse  ensuite  de  France,  pen- 
dant les  differentes  phases  de  la  revolution,  il  s'est  refugie  en 
Angleterre,  ou  son  esprit  et  ses  intrigues  lui  ont  donne  un 
libre  acc^s  pres  du  Gouvernement,  aupr^s  duquel  il  a  sollicite 
depuis  trois  ans  les  moyens  d'aller  revolutionner  les  Indes 
Espagnoles,  en  debutant  par  Caracas,  sa  patrie.  Tel  est 
rhomme  dans  lequel  on  parait  avoir  mis  trop  de  confiance,  en 
protegeant  sous  main  et  aidant  d'argent  son  projet,  sans  en 
examiner  les  consequences. 

Depuis  trois  ans  on  menageait  TEspagne,  et  on  rejetait 
toute  proposition  de  tenter  quelque  entreprise  contre  les  Indes 
Espagnoles,  d'abord  dans  Tespoir  d'amener  par  ces  egards  la 
Cour  de  Madrid  k  une  exacte  neutralite,  peut-etre  aussi  faute 
de  plans,  enfin  par  dgard  pour  la  Russie,  qui  exigeait,  dit-on, 
que  r Angleterre  respectat  les  possessions  de  TAmerique  Espag- 
nole,  vraisemblablement  par  jalousie  sur  la  navigation  de  la 
Mer  du  Sud.  Cette  condescendance  pour  la  politique  Russe 
est  une  faiblesse  qui  n'aurait  pu  ^tre  excusable  que  dans  le  cas 


1807.]  I-ORD  CASTLEREAGH.  379 

oil  on  eut  eu  lieu  d'esperer  de  ramener  par  rinfluence  de  la 
Russie  la  Cour  de  Madrid  non-seulement  k  une  iieutralite 
exacte,  mais  a  une  jonction  de  ses  forces  avec  celles  du  Portugal, 
de  la  Russie,  et  de  TAngleterre,  pour  former  les  Pyrenees  aux 
Frangais,  et  s''afFranchir  du  joug  de  Buonaparte. 

Com  me  cet  espoir,  s'il  a  eu  lieu,  a  ete  totalement  illusoire, 
la  condescendance  pour  la  protection  accordee  a  TEspagne  par 
la  Russie  est  deplacee,  surtout  a  Fepoque  ou  cette  Cour  parait 
abandonner  les  plans  vigoureux  qu'elle  avait  adoptes,  se  rap- 
procher  de  la  France  par  la  Prusse,  ne  presenter  a  Tavenir 
qu'une  mediation  dangereuse,  et  ne  respirer  que  la  paix.  Une 
pareille  politique  ne  merite  pas  des  menagements  desavan- 
tageux,  et  TAngleterre  rentre  dans  tons  ses  droits  de  nuire  a 
Buonaparte  en  arrachant  a  TEspagne  ses  possessions  d'ou  il 
tire  tout  For  qu'il  employe  contre  PAngleterre. 

Mais  si  le  Gouvernement  a  commis  I'erreur  de  se  laisser  lier 
les  bras  sur  cet  article  par  la  cour  de  Russie,  quelle  inconse- 
quence n''a-t-il  pas  comraise  en  protegeant  les  projets  revolu- 
tionnaires  d'un  avanturier  !  La  Russie  jetera  les  hauts  cris 
sur  cette  expedition,  et  il  n''y  a  pas  d'excuse  a  donner  de  la 
p^t  de  FAngleterre  ;  car  Miranda  a  fait  ses  propositions  au 
Gouvernement  Anglais:  c''est  de  Londres  qu'il  est  parti;  c*'est 
de  Londres  qu''il  a  emporte  au  moins  60,000  lb.  st.  pour  faire 
son  armement.  On  aura  beau  nier  cette  mission  qu''on  croit 
tres-secrete,  la  Cour  de  Russie  doit  la  regarder  comme  un  grief, 
et  en  portera  des  plaintes  auxquelles  on  n'aura  rien  a  repondre. 

Mais  cette  expedition  en  elle-meme  est  nuisible  :  elle  est  la 
seule  maniere  de  revolutionner  les  Indes  Espagnoles  qu'on  ne 
devait  pas  tenter.  Miranda,  parti  d'Angleterre  avec  de  Far- 
gent,  est  alle  faire  a  New  York  un  armement  d'Americains. 
Son  plan  est  fonde  sur  des  principes  democratiques ;  c'est  pour 
les  Etats-Unis  de  FAmerique  qu'il  travaille  :  s'il  reussit  non 
seulement  cette  revolution  sera  democratique,  mais  elle  sera 
Americaine.  Parite  de  principes,  liaisons  de  commerce,  se- 
cours  prompts,  tout  Fattache  k  FAmerique,  tout  le  rend  de- 


380  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

pendant  des  Etats-ITnis,  et  c^est  au  moment  ou  on  est  en  con- 
testation avec  ces  Etats,  ou  peut-etre  on  est  menace  d^une 
rupture  par  rapport  aux  violences  commises  contre  TEtat  de 
New  York,^  qu'on  se  suscite  ce  nouveau  sujet  de  querelle,  qu''on 
ouvre  cette  nouvelle  carri^re  k  Tambition  des  Americains  ! 

Dans  quelle  partie  se  fait  cette  expedition  ?  Dans  le  point 
le  plus  rapproche  de  la  Grenade,  de  Tabago,  de  la  Trinidad. 
Si  elle  reussit,  Tamelioration  de  ces  Colonies,  la  liberte  de  leur 
commerce,  seront  dans  la  dependance  d'un  avanturier,  dont 
rinteret  sera  d'attirer  les  Ameriquains,  et  qui  aura  sur  son 
flanc  gauche  Tappuy  de  Curasao,  d'ou  il  recevra  les  secours  des 
HoUandais  et  des  Fran^ais,  qui  I'exciteront  et  le  soutiendront 
contre  TAngleterre.  D'apres  la  connaissance  des  principes 
personnels  de  cet  avanturier,  et  du  lieu  de  son  depart,  du 
choix  du  point  de  debarquement,  des  dangereux  resultats  de  sa 
reussite,  le  Gouvernement  aurait  tort  de  laisser  operer  cette 
revolution,  que  pour  Finteret  il  doit  etoufFer  dans  sa  naissance. 

En  meme  temps  quHl  doit  par  ses  escadres  fermer  a  Miranda 
toute  communication  avec  les  Etats-Unis,  et  intercepter  tons 
les  convois  du  Congr^s  et  de  Curasao,  en  lui  enlevant  Tlsle 
de  la  Marguerite  et  Fenfermant  dans  la  Province  de  Caracas ; 
en  meme  tems  il  doit  opposer  le  plus  promptement  possible, 
dans  un  autre  point  de  ce  Continent,  aux  principes  revolution- 
naires  democratiques,  qu'il  j  aura  deja  rdpandus,  d'^autres  prin- 
cipes revolutionnaires  royalistes  qui  remplissent  le  meme  but, 
de  separer  ces  Colonies  de  la  M^tropole — separation  qui  est 
inevitable,  qui  est  commencee  depuis  Texpedition  de  Miranda, 
et  qu'il  faut  diriger  puisqu'elle  est  entamee. 

Les  habitans  des  Indes  Espagnoles  n'ont  point  du  tout  un 
caractfere  analogue  k  une  revolution  democratique :  attaches  a 
leur  religion,  a  leurs  usages,  ils  ont  un  devouement  particulier 
pour  le  gouvernement  monarchique,  qui  seul  leur  convient,  qui 
seul  pent  rallier  ensemble  les  quatre  castes  qui  composent  leur 

*  Ces  violences  ne  sont  pas  injustes;  elles  sent  conformes  au  droit  de 
la  mer,  mtMS  elles  sont  envenim^es  par  I'inimitie  du  President  Jefferson. 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  381 

population,  Espagnols  naturels,  Creoles,  Indiens,  et  Noirs  ou 
sang  mele.  Aveugles  par  leur  haine  contre  le  gouvernement 
de  la  Metropole,  il  est  possible  qu'ils  embrassent  avec  fureur 
les  moyens  qu^un  avanturier  democrate  pent  leur  presenter : 
mais  ils  tomberaient  dans  tous  les  malheurs  de  Fanarchie.  Si 
on  leur  presente  un  Prince  de  la  maison  de  Bourbon,  qui  a  des 
droits  a  les  gouverner,  que  ce  Prince,  s'engageant  a  resider 
parmi  eux,  leur  offre  Timage  d'un  royaume  indigene,  et  d'une 
existence  nationale  :  alors  leur  amour-propre  naturel,  qui  anime 
egalement  les  quatre  castes,  les  ramenera  sur-le- champ  a  leur 
caract^re,  a  leurs  principes,  leur  fera  abhorrer  Tanarchie  demo- 
cratique  et  Favanturier  qui  leur  apporte  ce  funeste  present,  et 
les  raillera  sous  les  etendards  d''un  roy  legitime  d'un  sang 
qu''ils  cherissent,  et  autour  d''un  trone  dont  la  splendeur  flat- 
tera  leur  vanite. 

Cest  dans  le  Mexique  meme  qu"*il  faut  presenter  un  Prince 
de  la  maison  de  Bourbon,  qui  ne  soit  ni  de  la  branch e  Espag- 
nole,  ni  de  la  branclie  Fran^aise,  ayant  un  droit  direct  k  la 
couronne  de  France.  Ce  Prince  doit  etre  connu  d''avance  par 
sa  bravoure  et  ses  talents  ;  il  doit  s^avoir  la  langue  Espagnole  ; 
ikdoit  avoir  deja  passe  les  mers,  etre  acclimate,  dans  la  force 
de  Tage,  n'^etre  pas  stranger  aux  Americains  Espagnols.  Toutes 
ces  qualites  se  trouvent  reunies  dans  le  Due  d'Orleans,  qui  a 
en  outre,  aux  yeux  de  la  nation  Anglaise,  le  merite  de  s'etre 
accoutume  depuis  cinq  ans  aux  moeurs,  aux  usages,  a  la  langue 
du  pays  qui  lui  a  fourni  un  genereux  asyle,  qui  est  aime  et 
estime  du  Roy,  des  Princes  de  la  famille  Roy  ale,  et  de  toute  la 
Nation.  Son  caractere  moral,  sa  probite  delicate,  ses  connais- 
sances  etendues,  la  valeur  brillante  qu'il  a  deploy ee  a  la  guerre, 
sa  Constance  dans  Tadversite,  toutes  ses  qualites  naturelles  et 
acquises,  lui  donnent  un  droit  incontestable  au  choix  du  Gou- 
vernement, pour  aller  fonder  un  Royaume  en  Amerique,  qui 
assure  a  TAngleterre  un  allie  solide  et  necessaire  et  un  de- 
bouche  certain  pour  son  commerce  et  ses  manufactures.  Mon 
amitie  pour  ce  Prince  respectable,  qui  a  fait  avec  moi  son  brillant 


382  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

apprentissage  de  guerre,  ne  m'aveugle  pas,  et  si  j'en  connaissais 
un  plus  propre  a  remplir  ce  but,  je  le  proposerais  sans  balancer. 

Aucun  Prince  n'est  plus  en  6tat  de  reunir  les  esprits  des 
difierents  habitans  de  TAmerique  Espagnole  sous  une  royaute 
sage,  independante  de  FEspagne,  de  detruire  les  projets  demo- 
cratiques  de  Tavanturier  Miranda,  d'aneantir  son  parti,  de 
former  une  armee  indigene  pour  s'opposer  aux  progr^s  des  Ame- 
ricains  dans  le  golphe  de  Mexique,  d'aiderles  Anglais  a  chasser 
les  Hollandais  et  les  Fran9ais  des  Antilles.  L'Angleterre 
pent  compter  sur  la  solidite  de  son  alliance,  parce  que  ses  liens 
politiques  seront  encore  plus  forts  que  sa  reconnaissance. 

Ses  droits  k  occuper  le  nouveau  Royaume  des  Indes  sont 
aussi  reels  que  ceux  de  la  branche  Espagnole  de  Bourbon. 
D^s  que  la  politique  nouvelle  occasionnee  par  la  revolution 
Fran9aise  oblige  a  demembrer  ces  Etats  d'outre-mer  de  la 
Monarchic  Espagnole,  comme  on  a  separe  par  la  guerre  de  la 
Succession  Theredite  de  la  France  de  celle  de  TEspagne,  il  est 
plus  proche  h^ritier  par  Anne  d'Autriche  de  cette  partie  de  la 
succession  de  Charles  Quint,  dont  cette  meme  politique  exclut 
necessairement  la  branche  ainee  des  Bourbons,  k  cause  de  son 
droit  direct  a  la  couronne  de  France. 

On  ne  pent  pas  craindre  Teventualite  de  Textinction  de 
cette  branche  ainee  soutenue  par  quatre  Princes,  dont  I'aine, 
Louis  XVIII.  a  une  femme  hors  d'age  d'avoir  des  enfans, 
dont  le  second,  Monsieur,  est  veuf;  le  troisi^me  le  Due  d'An- 
gouleme  a  une  jeune  epouse,  le  quatribme,  le  Due  de  Berry,  n'a 
que  29  ans  et  pent  etre  mari^. 

Cependant,  pour  tout  prevoir  en  une  affaire  de  cette  impor- 
tance on  peut  prendre  d''avance  des  mesures  sur  le  cas  de  cette 
Eventuality  comme  on  Ta  fait  dans  le  traits  d'Utrecht,  en  sti- 
pulant  que  dans  le  cas  oil  la  couronne  de  France  reviendrait  par 
droit  d'hert^'diti^  au  Due  d'^Orleans  devenu  roy  du  Mexique,  il 
serait  oblige  a  remettre  cette  dernibre  couronne  k  un  de  ses  freres 
ou  de  ses  collat^raux,  de  mani^re  k  ce  que  dans  aucun  terns  ces 
deux  couronnes  ne  puissent  etre  r^unies  sur  la  meme  tete. 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  383 

Quant  a  rexecution  de  cette  entreprise,  le  Due  D"* Orleans 
est  le  plus  propre  de  tons  les  Princes  a  en  diriger  toutes  les  par- 
ties et  tous  les  mouvements  dans  le  plus  grand  detail  si  le 
Gouvernement  faisait  d'avance  un  traite  eventuel  avec  luy,  et 
mettait  a  sa  disposition  une  somme  de  500,000  lb.  st.  avec  la 
facilite  de  rassembler  une  force  de  6,000  hommes  parmi  les 
Ecossais  et  le  Irlandais  Catholiques,  et  parmi  les  Italiens,  Por- 
tugais,  Espagnols,  &c.,  qu'il  pourrait  attacher  a  sa  fortune.  Son 
point  de  rassemblement,  d'entrepol,  de  depart,  serait  une  des 
Antilles  a  son  choix.  Le  pretexte  de  rarmement  pourrait 
^tre  Tattaque  de  Martinique,  de  Cuba,  ou  de  Porto  Rico,  pour 
masquer  le  plus  longtems  possible  le  vrai  but  de  Texpedition. 

Ce  Prince,  ajant  passe  dix-huit  mois  a  la  Havane,  a  certaine- 
ment  combine  d'avance  tous  les  moyens  de  penetrer  dans  le 
Mexique,  connait  le  fort  et  le  faible  de  cet  empire,  ainsi  que  les 
dispositions  de  ses  liabitans.  On  pent  s'en  rapporter  avec  con- 
fiance  au  plan  qu'il  tracera,  et  que  lui  seul  en  Europe  est  en 
etat  d'executer  par  ses  talens,  sa  naissance,  sa  vigueur  person- 
nelle,  et  par  le  secours  de  ses  deux  freres,  leur  liaison  avec 
FAngleterre,  leur  habitude  de  braver  les  dangers,  et  surtout  leur 
:ynion  qui  de  trois  tetes  n'en  fait  qu'une  et  presente  trois  succes- 
seurs  pour  achever  Tentreprise  en  cas  qu'il  arrivat  malheur  k 
Tun  d'eux  dans  son  execution. 

En  adoptant  ce  plan,  TAngleterre  aussi  aura  fait  un  Roy, 
aura  revolutionne  le  globe  d'une  maniere  plus  glorieuse  et  plus 
utile  que  Bonaparte,  auquel  elle  aura  porte  un  coup  terrible 
en  lui  enlevant  les  tresors  du  Nouveau  Monde,  et  laissant 
a  sa  charge  la  Nation  Espagnole,  dont  une  partie  emigrera 
pour  aller  retrouver  la  liberte  dans  une  nouvelle  patrie. 
Quant  a  la  Cour  de  Madrid,  on  pourra  la  ramener  a  une  poli- 
tique saine  et  vigoureuse  par  Fespoir  qu'on  lui  fera  entrevoir  de 
lui  reserver  ses  possessions  de  TAmerique  du  Sud,  a  condition 
qu'elle  secouera  avec  energie  le  joug  de  Buonaparte  et  s'alliera 
solidement  avec  FAngleterre  et  le  Portugal. 

La  Russie,  par  la  mollesse  de  sa  politique,  a  perdu  le  droit 
d'intervenir  dans  la  disposition  du  sort  de  FAmerique  Espa- 


384  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

gnole :  le  Gouvemement  n^est  nullement  oblige  de  lui  aiinoncer 
ses  projets  a  cet  dgard,  puisque  les  liens  qui  etaient  le  pretexte 
de  sa  condescendance  se  relachent  de  jour  en  jour,  et  changent 
la  nature  des  obligations  mutuelles.  Cependant,  pour  guerir 
sa  jalousie  et  diminuer  Tombrage  qu'*elle  pourrait  prendre  de  la 
creation  d'un  nouvel  Etat  dans  la  Mer  du  Sud,  il  sera  possible, 
lorsque  Pexpedition  sera  en  train,  et  pas  plus  tot,  d'entrer  en 
n^gociation  avec  le  cabinet  de  Petersbourg,  pour  luy  demontrer 
que  son  interet  sur  cette  mer  est  purement  commercial,  et  vu 
la  nature  ingrate  de  ses  ports  au  Nord-Est  de  son  Empire,  ne 
pouvant  foumir  qu''une  navigation  bomee,  son  plus  grand 
avantage  est  que  toutes  les  cotes  de  TOuest  du  Continent  Ame- 
ricain  Espagnol  seroient  vivifiees  par  un  gouvernement  solide 
et  par  un  Souverain  residant  sur  ce  Continent. 

L''^tendue  naturelle  du  nouvel  Empire  que  FAngleterre  pent 
fonder  en  Amerique  sous  le  nom  de  Royaume  de  Mexique  doit 
comprendre  toutes  les  bandes  des  cotes  du  golphe  de  ce  nom 
depuis  le  Rio  del  Norte  au  nord  jusqu''a  la  Guyane,  jadis  Hol- 
landaise,  au  sud,  ainsi  que  toutes  les  Isles  de  ce  golphe  apparte- 
nantes  a  TEspagne  excepte  Cuba,  qui  serait  cedee  a  TAngle- 
terre,  et  Porto  Rico,  pour  en  faire  le  prix  d'une  alliance  etroite 
avec  le  Dannemark,  en  cas  qu''on  reussisse  a  ramener  la  Russie 
a  des  principes  energiques,  et  a  former  la  Ligue  du  Nord. 
C'est  ainsi  que  TAngleterre  pent  lier  les  interets  des  deux 
Hemispheres,  et  reunir  a  son  avantage  contre  Tennemi  commun 
les  Puissances  les  plus  s^par^es  par  leur  position  g^ographique. 

Extrait  d*une  Lettre  d  M.  Windham. 

Le  21  Juin,  1806. 
....  faire  un  Roy  du  Mexique ;  par  cette  creation  acqu^rir 
un  allie  puissant,  qui  par  la  suite  contienne  les  Ameriquains, 
vous  aide  k  chasser  les  Fran^ais  et  les  IloUandais  des  Antilles, 
vous  ouvre  un  D^ouch^  pour  vos  manufactures,  et  vous  d^ 
dommage  au  centuple  des  genes  qu'elles  souffrent  en  Europe. 
Par  cette  exp<$dition,  aussi  brillante  que  solide,  aussi  facile  que 
lucrative,  vous  acquerrez,  sans  tirer  un  coup  de  fusil,  la  domi- 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  385 

nation  du  Golphe  du  ^lexique  par  la  possession  de  la  Havane, 
celle  des  Philippines  et  de  la  Mer  du  Sud  par  Foccupation  de 
Manille,  que  le  nouveau  Roy  vous  cedera  pour  prix  de  son 
exaltation.  Vous  ne  pouvez  les  acquerir  par  ce  mojen,  en  pro- 
fitant  des  circonstances  qui  ne  se  representeront  jamais,  ou  qui 
tourneront  centre  vous  si  on  les  laisse  echapper.  Le  commerce 
de  ces  deux  mers  sera  dans  vos  mains ;  les  richesses  metalli- 
ques  de  FAmerique  Espagnole  arriveront  en  Angleterre ;  vous 
en  priverez  FEspagne  et  Buonaparte.  Oette  revolution  nume- 
raire cliangera  la  politique  dfe  TEurope 


Memorandum  relative  to  Spanish  America. 
BY  LORD  CASTLEREAGH. 

[1^0  date.] 

The  liberation  of  South  America  must  be  accomplished 
through  the  wishes  and  exertions  of  the  inhabitants  ;  but  the 
change  can  only  be  operated,  in  the  first  instance,  either  speedily 
or  with  safety  to  those  who  may  be  disposed  to  concur  in  it, 
imder  the  protection  and  with  the  support  of  an  auxiliary 
British  force  ;  the  principles  upon  which  it  is  sent  being,  how- 
ever, from  the  first,  distinctly  declared. 

This  force,  with  a  view  to  Mexico,  should  not  be  less  than 
10,000  men.  It  should  assemble  at  Jamaica  in  October,  so  as 
to  be  prepared  to  land  on  the  Spanish  Main  by  the  1  st  of 
December.  A  small  force  at  Trinidad,  to  give  the  impulse  at 
the  same  time  to  the  Caraccas,  might  be  advantageous.  The 
officer  who  is  to  command,  or  some  other  confidential  person, 
should  precede  the  troops.  His  early  departure  may  be  mate- 
rial to  superintend  preparations,  communications  with  the 
interior,  &ic.  The  corps  to  be  composed  two-thirds  of  British, 
and  one- third  of  the  Black  West  India  Regiment:  the  British 
troops  to  be  selected  from  those  corps  that  have  been  seasoned 
to  a  tropical  climate,  replacing  them  by  others.  The  following 
arrangement  is  suggested  for  assembling  the  force  required. 

VOL.  vn.  c  c 


386  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

The  four  regiments  in  reserve  at  Gibraltar,  under  Major- 

General  Spencer,  to  be  ordered  on  this  service — one  regiment 

from  Madeira,  replacing  it  by  the  4th  Veteran  Battalion  from 

Ireland,  1,061   strong.     A  battalion  of  the   60th  is  now  on 

passage  from  the  Cape  to  the  West  Indies,  where  we  have,  at 

this  moment,  (exclusive  of  5,000  men  at  Jamaica,   and  the 

battalion  of  the  60th  on  passage  from  the  Cape)  19,422  men — 

the  usual  force  in  that  quarter  not  exceeding  15  or  16,000 

men.     If  3,000  men  are  sent  out  from  hence  in  the  autumn 

to  the  West  Indies,  four  Black  and  three  European  regiments 

may  be  drawn  from  thence.     The  numbers  will  then  stand  thus ; 

Four  regiments  from  Gibraltar   .         .       4,000 

One  ditto,  from  Madeira    .         .         .       1,000 

Four  Black  regiments         .         .         .       4,000 

Three  European         ....       3,000 

12,000 
Cavalry  dismounted  ....  1,200 
Artillery 


13,200 
If  war  with  America  should  cease  to  be  apprehended,  three 
regiments  more,  or  3,000  men,  may  be  drawn  from  thence. 
The  4,000  men  to  be  sent  from  home  will  be  replaced  by  the 
usual  annual  draft  of  fifteen  men  per  company  from  the  Irish 
Militia,  the  vacancies  in  which  will  again  be  filled  up,  as  here- 
tofore, without  ballot,  and  at  a  low  bounty.  The  force  for 
home  defence  will  then  stand  as  at  present.  Should  reinforce- 
ments be  required  for  North  America  or  the  East  Indies,  they 
can  be  furnished.  It  will  in  that  case  dnly  remain  to  be  deter- 
mined, according  to  the  circumstances  of  tlie  moment,  whether 
Sir  John  Moore'^s  corps  (which  cannot  be  considered  as  sepa- 
rated from  our  system  of  home  defence)  shall  be  recalled. 

Much  facility  would  be  given  to  the  above  arrangements, 
and  the  composition  of  the  Irish  army  improved,  were  some 
fencible  regiments  raised  in   Scotland,  for  service  in  Ireland, 


1807.] 


LORD  CASTLEREAGH. 


387 


which  would  enable  us  to  bring  over  a  proportion  of  the  Irish 
Militia  to  Great  Britain. 

[The  following  calculations,  in  the  handwriting  of  Lord 
Castlereagh,  likewise  without  date  and  without  title,  appear  to 
be  closely  connected  with  the  subject  of  the  preceding  memo- 
randum.] 

No.  1. 


Now  at  Gibraltar. 

6th       1  Battalion 

982 

29th     1 

do. 

825 

82nd    1 

do. 

943 

42nd    1 

do. 

983 

48th     1 

do. 

.     1,004 

50th     1 

do. 

.       973 

57th     1 

do. 

975 

61st      1 

do. 

.     1,061 

82nd    1 

do. 

.       953 

^1  Royal 

Vet.  Bat. 

476 

Artillery 

• 

800 
9,975 

Now  under  orders  t 

%t  Corh 

9th       1  Battalion  . 

1,196 

40th     1 

do. 

1,048 

60th     5t? 

I   do. 

971 

91st     1st 

do. 

1,001 

4th  Vet. 

do. 

1,069 

2  Companies,   95th 

200 

2  do.  of 

Artillery  . 

200 
5,685 

Ma?/  he 

added  fr  on 

I  Cork. 

5th       1  Battalion   . 

1,000 

S8th     1 

do. 

1,020 

71st     1 

do. 

968 

Of  this  force  Spencer  would 
>  probably  carry  from  4  to  5,000 
men  to  Cadiz. 


2,988 


Were  the  whole  of  this  force 

sent,  it   might   perhaps   afford 

the  means  of  striking  a   blow 

•  against  the  Russian  fleet  in  the 

Tagus,  on  its  way. 

If  not,  it  would  assemble 
12,000  men  upon  Cadiz. 


c  c  2 


388 


LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF 


[1807- 


Total  Force. 
At  Gibraltar  . 
Under  orders  . 


May  go 


9,975 
5,685 

15,660 

2,988 

18,648 


This  arrangement  withdraws 
8,000  men  from  Ireland.  There 
are,  however,  three  2nd  Batta- 
lions on  passage  to  Ireland, 
consisting  of  2,000  men. 

The  reduction  in  Ireland  is 
therefore  only  6,000,  leaving 
an  army  there  of  53,000  men. 


No.  2. 

Supposing  the  force  in  No.  1  detached  to  Spain,  and  they 
should  find  on  their  arrival  that  no  opening  for  service  there 
presented  itself — South  America  might  be  approached  on  the 
side  of  Monte  Video,  and  the  Caraccas  or  Mexico  by  inde- 
pendent corps,  according  to  the  following  arrangement :  the 
former,  as  early  as  the  troops  could  reach  their  destination,  that 
is,  by  the  middle  of  September ;  the  latter,  as  soon  as  the  sea- 
son would  admit  of  operations,  that  is,  in  the  month  of  No- 
vember or  December. 


5th 


Corps  for  Monte  Video. 
1  Battalion   .     1,000 


6th  1 

29th  1 

32nd  1 

40th  1 

42nd  1 

48th  1 

60th  1 


do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 


2  Companies,  95th 
1   Reg.  dismounted 

Cavalry   . 

3  Comps.  Artillery 


982 
825 
943 

1,048 
983 

1,004 
973 
200 

700 
300 

8,958 


This  Corps,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  the  Cavalry,  would  be 
taken  from  the  force  assembled 
at  Gibraltar,  and  on  the  Spanish 
coast. 

After  the  occupation  of  Monte 
Video,  4  or  5,000  men  might 
be  withdrawn  to  support  the 
operations  on  the  Spanish  Main, 
and  might  arrive  in  the  course 
of  December  or  January. 


1807.] 


LOED  CASTLEREAGH. 


389 


Corps  for  the  Caraccas  or  Mexico. 


60th     5th  BattaUon 

971 

61st      1 

do.      . 

1,061 

Srd       I 

do.     . 

971 

7th       1 

do.     • 

1,025 

8th       1 

do.      . 

985 

13th     1 

do.      . 

916 

23rd     1 

do.      . 

983 

1st  West 

India  Reo^ 

907 

4th 

do. 

979 

6th 

do. 

914 

8th 

do. 

997 

60th,  3  Battalions   . 

989 

2   Reg.    dismounted 

Cavalry   . 

1,400 

3  Comps.  Artillery 

300 

y      From  Gibraltar  and  Spain. 

From  Madeira,  replaced  by 
4th  Veteran  Battalion. 

^  Corps  under  General  Prevost 
may  safely  be  ordered  on  this 

y  service,  if  no  change  for  the 
worse  takes  place  in  our  rela- 
tions with  America. 


From  the  Garrisons  in  the 
West  Indies. 


From  home. 

From  North  America. 


13,398 

No.  3. 
According  to  disposition  proposed  in  No.  1  and  2,  the  Gar- 
rison of  Gibraltar  will  remain  as  follows  : 


9th 

1  Battalion 

38th 

do. 

57th 

do. 

71st 

do. 

82nd 

do. 

91st 

do. 

Artillery 


1,1961 
1,020 
975 
968 
953 
1,001 
700 


This  arrangement  supposes 
the  1st  Veteran  Battalion  to 
come  home,  and  the  4th  ditto 
to  proceed  to  Madeira,  to  re- 
lieve the  3rd  Regiment  at  Ma- 
deira. 

6,813  J 

The  force  actually  at  home  will  then  stand  nearly  as  follows  : 
Great  Britain   ....     128,000 

Ireland 53,000 

Islands 8,000 

189,000 


390  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

of  which 

Regulars      .         .         .     99,000 

Militia         .         .         .     90,000 

189,000 


General  Dumouriez  to  Lord  Castlereagh, 

11,  Leicester  Place,  le  26  Juin,  1807. 

Mjlord — Je  respecte  vos  occupations  et  je  ne  sollicite  plus 
une  eiitrevue  inutile.  Je  vais  passer  uu  mois  a  Tlsle  de  Wight, 
pour  prendre  les  bains  de  mer,  et  pendant  cette  absence  je  vous 
demande  la  permission  de  vous  adresser  de  tems  en  tems  mes 
reflexions  relatives  aux  circonstances. 

Deux  affaires,  sur  lesquelles  j'ai  pris  la  liberte  de  vous  don- 
ner  nion  opinion,  tournent  d'une  manibre  bien  contraire  a  ce 
que  m''a  dict^  mon  experience  \  et  je  crains  bien  que  le  resultat 
n'*en  soit  facheux  pour  les  interets  de  T  Angleterre  et  n'occasionne 
des  regrets  et  de  Tembarras  a  un  ministere  que  je  respecte  et 
que  je  voudrais  voir  repousser  par  des  succ^s  glorieux  les 
attaques  de  ses  ennemis. 

La  premiere  est  Tevacuation  d*'Alexandrie,  pour  laquelle,  a 
la  verite,  il  fallait  un  plus  grand  courage  que  pour  s'obstiner  a 
soutenir  cette  place,  qui  coutera  bien  du  sang  et  de  Targent, 
non-seuleraent  sans  utilite,  mais  au  detriment  de  ce  qu'il  ^tait 
plus  essentiel  de  faire  ailleurs  de  vos  braves  troupes  sacrifices 
mal-a-propos  en  Egypte. 

La  seconde  est  la  tentative  que  j'ai  proposee  de  Temancipa- 
tion  de  TAmerique  Espagnole  par  le  moyen  le  plus  simple  et  le 
nioins  hazardeux.  Je  n'ai  rien  a  ajouter  aux  motifs  que  j''ai 
detailles  pour  cette  entreprise,  et  je  ne  peux  pas  repondre  aux 
objections,  puisqu''elles  ne  m''ont  pas  ^te  communiquees.  Mais 
j''ai  appris  depuis  ma  derni(>re  note  que  je  ne  suis  pas  le  seul 
qui  ait  attache  un  grand  prix  a  ce  projet ;  et  je  suis  glorieux 
de  89a voir  qu'un  grand  homme,  Timmortel  Pitt,  s''en  etait  pro- 
fondement  occupe  il  y  a  trois  ans,  et  qu'il  avait  m^me  destine 
le  Capitaine  Doyle  et  une  autre  pcrsonno  h,  aller  sur  les  lieux, 


1807.]  LORD    CASTLEREAGH.  391 

pour  constater  les  dispositions  des  habitans  et  les  moyens  de 
reussir.  Sir  Sidney  Smith  et  Mr.  Huskisson  ont  connaissance 
de  ce  qui  a  ete  agite  alors  sur  cette  affaire. 

Je  regrette  infiniment  que  cette  proposition  ait  ete  rejetee, 
parce  que  j'y  ai  vu  la  gloire  du  Gouvernement,  le  salut  des 
troupes,  la  surete  et  Taugmentation  de  votre  commerce,  et  de 
vos  manufactures,  et  surtout  Fepuisement  des  ressources  pecu- 
niaires  de  votre  mortel  ennemi.  Mon  age  me  met  a  Pabri 
d'etre  soup9onne  d'aucun  interet  personnel ;  ainsi  mon  z^le  a 
cet  egard  est  aussi  pur  que  Tentreprise  m'a  paru  grande  et 
utile. 

Je  compte  partir  du  4  au  6  Juillet  pour  Tlsle  de  Wight,  et 
partout  je  conserverai  pour  vous  la  plus  respectueuse  amitie,  la 
plus  sensible  reconnaissance,  et  le  plus  vif  interet.  Cest  avec 
ces  sentiments  sinc^res  que  j'ai  Thonneur  d'etre,  &c., 

Le  Genl.  Dumouriez. 


On  the  Declaration  of  Independence  hy  the  Provmces  of  Rio  de 

la  Plata, 

BY  GENERAL  DUMOURIEZ. 

30  Juin,  1807. 

On  assure  que  les  provinces  du  Rio  de  la  Plata  se  sont  de- 
clarees  independantes  :  il  paraitrait  inexcusable,  dans  les  circon- 
stances  presentes,  de  ne  pas  tirer  parti  de  ce  grand  evenement, 
pour  le  bien  de  TAngleterre,  de  TEurope,  et  du  monde. 

Cette  rebellion  a  du  etre  prevue.  Le  Gouvernement  actuel, 
les  Gouvememens  qui  Font  precede,  ont  du  s'y  attendre.  L'etat 
de  TAmerique  Espagnole,  les  dispositions  de  ses  habitans,  leur 
etaieut  connues.  lis  ont  su  que  ces  vastes  pays  etaient  murs 
pour  des  revolutions  ;  qu'ils  voulaient  a  tout  prix  se  separer  de 
leur  metropole;  que  Finfluence  des  Puissances  Europeennes 
pourrait  modifier  les  consequences  de  cette  separation,  mais  non 
la  prevenir ;  qu'il  dependait  de  F Angleterre  de  la  faire  tourner 
au  profit  de  son  commerce,  de  sa  puissance,  de  la  civilisation 
generale ;  mais  que  si  le  Gouvernement  de  la  Grande-Bretagne 


392  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

demeurait  passif  durant  ces  commotions,  il  en  resulterait  de 
nouveaux  essais  de  Democratic,  le  bouleversement  des  proprietes, 
le  regne  des  barbares  en  Amerique,  et  Tetablissement  du  pou- 
voir  de  Buonaparte  dans  cette  partie  du  monde. 

Ces  considerations  et  les  avis  non  suspects  qui  lui  parvenaient 
avaient  frappe  le  Ministere  a  jamais  regrettable,  qui  sauva 
FAngleterre  des  attaques  de  la  Demagogic,  qui  en  cut  sauv^ 
TEurope,  si  cela  eutete  au  pouvoir  des  hommes;  et  il  voulait 
en  preserver  ces  belles  et  riches  contrees  de  TAmerique.  On 
assure  que  Mr.  Pitt  ne  differa  de  contribuer  a  leur  affranchisse- 
ment  que  pour  se  meuager  le  tems  d'en  faire  comprendre  la 
necessite  aux  Ministres  d'une  ofrande  Puissance  alliee  de 
TAngleterre,  et  qui  croyait  faussement  avoir  un  interet  oppose. 
Une  partie  des  vues  salutaires  de  Mr.  Pitt  fut  alors  com- 
muniquee  a  quelques  personnes :  des  A  gens  furent  designes  et 
sur  le  point  de  partir  (dans  Pete  de  1805),  pour  verifier  les 
dispositions  des  habitans,  et  s''assurer  du  concours  de  ceux  qui 
desiraient  Tetablissement  d"'une  monarchic  independante.  Ce 
ftit,  dit-on,  Tinfluence  du  Ministre  de  cette  Puissance  alliee  qui 
fit  differer  leur  depart.  La  maladie  de  Mr.  Pitt,  sa  mort, 
doublement  lamentable  dans  les  circonstances  ou  le  monde  etait 
place,  les  vues  de  ses  successeurs  immediats  (si  difierentes  des 
siennes),  arreterent  la  marche  de  ce  grand  projet.  II  n^  eut 
d'execute  sous  les  successeurs  de  cet  Homme  d'Etat  que  I'en- 
treprise  sur  Buenos  Ayres  par  Sir  Home  Popliam  et  le  General 
Beresford. 

Une  v^rite  que  Thistoire  conservera,  et  qui  ne  fait  surement 
aucun  tort  ni  a  la  bravoure  du  petit  nombre  des  troupes  em- 
ployees ^  cette  entreprise,  ni  aux  talens  des  ofiiciers  qui  la 
dirig^rent,  c''est  que  le  succbs  de  ce  coup  de  main  avec  une 
poignee  d''hommes,  qui  n'dprouva,  pour  ainsi  dire,  aucune  resie- 
tance,  demontra  que  les  habitans  voulaient  s''affranchir,  et  que, 
croyant  les  Anglais  venus  pour  les  y  aider,  ils  ne  voulurent  pas 
se  d^fendre.  Dfes  que  le  G^n^ral  eut  pris  possession  de  la 
ville,  on  lui  proposa  de  favoriser  raffranchissement ;  il  rejeta 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  393 

cette  demande  faute  d'instructions.  Les  Chefs  qui  la  lui 
avaient  faite  s'eloignerent ;  on  se  souleva,  et,  apres  un  bien  petit 
nombre  de  jours,  Buenos  Ayres  fut  reprise. 

S'il  etait  vrai  qu'on  eut  encore  attaque  cette  place  depuis,  et 
que  les  forces  de  sa  Majeste  Britannique,  parties  de  Monte 
Video,  s'en  fussent  eraparees  de  nouveau,  apres  un  bombarde- 
ment,  ce  serait  une  grande  faute,  une  faute  d'autant  plus 
grande  que  Texperience  d'un  soulevement  aussi  recent  centre 
elles  aurait  du  avertir  de  ne  la  pas  commettre. 

Les  Provinces  du  Kio  de  la  Plata  contiennent  un  million 
d'habitans,  sans  compter  les  Indiens  non  civilises.  Comment 
imaginer  qu'on  pourra  les  conquerir  avec  le  peu  de  troupes 
Anglaises  dont  il  serait  possible  de  disposer  pour  cette  guerre 
etrange,  impolitique,  meurtriere,  et,  pour  le  moins,  inutile  aux 
interets  de  la  Grande-Bretagne  ! 

A  quoi  cette  conquete  servirait-elle  ?  On  ne  pourrait  garder 
ce  pays  parce  que  on  ne  garde  point  malgre  lui  m\  pays  eloigne, 
qui  peut  mettre  sur  pied  quatre-vingt  mille  soldats,  chasseurs 
par  habitude,  braves,  et  susceptibles  de  s^aguerrir. 

On  le  rendrait  done  a  la  paix  !  C'est  tout  ce  que  Buona- 
parte desire,  pour  s''y  faire  ceder  des  places  sous  pretexte 
d'eteindre  la  rebellion,  et  d''en  empecher  d'autres ;  pour  y 
ctablir  ses  Agens,  et  y  murir  une  revolution  dans  le  sens  du 
Jacobinisme,  dont  il  est  (suivant  Texpression  du  Grand  Homme 
qu'il  faut  toujours  citer),  the  child  and  champion. 

II  y  reussirait  d'autant  mieux  que  T Angleterre  serait  devenue 
plus  odieuse  aux  habitans.  lis  n''ont  pas  encore  oublie  le  sac 
de  leurs  villes  par  Drake  et  Morgan.  La  guerre  actuelle  fait 
de  nouveau  saigner  ces  plaies.  Les  Moines  declament  en  chaire 
centre  les  Anglais,  qu'ils  appellent  heretiques,  et  qui  leur  don- 
nent  beau  jeu,  s^ils  ne  s'occupent  que  de  lever  des  contributions 
et  de  faire  des  conquetes.  Un  cri  s^est  eleve  dans  le  parti  tres 
puissant  qui  veut  Faffranchissement ;  car  ses  Chefs  n'avaient 
pas  ignore  le  plan  de  Mr.  Pitt,  et  lorsque  le  General  a  qui 
Buenos  Ayres  venait  de  se  rendre  a  rejete  leurs  propositions, 


394  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

ils  se  sont  cru  trahi  par  TAngleterre.  Enfin,  si  la  guerre  con- 
tinue eutre  les  troupes  de  sa  Majeste  Britannique  et  les 
habitans,  TAngleterre  n^aura  bieutot  plus  un  seul  partisan  dans 
toute  TAmerique  Espagnole. 

Le  precedent  Gouvernement  s"'est  bien  abus^  quand  il  a  cru 
gagner  Taffection  des  habitans  en  diniinuant  les  droits  payes  aux 
Douanes,  et  en  ofFrant  a  ce  pays  la  perspective  d''un  grand  com- 
merce— Imo.  La  contrebande  des  Anglais  et  des  Anglo-Amdri- 
cains  etait  si  active  et  tellement  secondee  par  les  Agens  meme 
du  Fisc,  que  ces  droits  ne  pesaient  presque  pas  sur  le  pays, 
2do.  Les  Espagnols  de  TAra^rique  ont  encore  nioins  d'idees  de 
commerce  que  ceux  d'Europe. 

Ce  qu'on  pent  appeller  le  Parti  Anglais  sur  le  Rio  de  la  Plata, 
se  reduit  a  quelques  negocians  etrangers  au  pays,  et  qui  le  ver- 
raient  volontiers  se  soumettre  a  la  nation  la  plus  commer^ante 
du  monde,  dans  Tespoir  de  partager  ses  benefices.  Un  autre 
parti  tres  faible  (si  Ton  voulait  s'entendre)  serait  celui  qui 
tienne  pour  la  metropole.  II  ne  serait  compost  que  du  petit 
nombre  d'Espagnols  envoy^s  d'Europe  pour  occuper  les  grandes 
places  dans  TAdministration,  la  Magistrature,  et  TEglise. 
D^ja  Liniers  en  a  fait  arreter  quelques-  uns  :  on  se  debarrasse- 
rait  de  tons  en  les  renvoyant  en  Espagne.  Mais  la  division 
entretenue  dans  les  esprits  par  Tind^cision  que  les  Gdneraux 
Anglais  ont  fait  paraitre  donne  actuellement  de  la  force  a  ce 
parti.  Les  Moines  et  les  gens  timides  sont  pour  lui,  parce- 
qu''ils  craignent  de  retomber  sous  la  domination  de  TEspagne, 
et  ils  seraient  patriotes  demain,  s'*ils  avaient  une  preuve  au- 
jourd'hui  que  TAngleterre  favorisat  T^mancipation. 

Les  Patriotes^  au  Rio  de  la  Plata,  et  dans  toute  TAm^rique 
Espagnole,  se  divisent  en  deux  classes ;  ceux  qui  veulent  une 
monarchie  et  un  Roi  residant  parmi  eux,  et  ceux  qui  voudraient 
un  Gouvernement  populaire  et  Vanarchie.  Les  Patriotes  de  la 
premiere  classe  comprennent  au  Rio  de  la  Plata  tons  les  hommes 
considerables  par  leur  naissance,  leurs  propri^t^s,  leur  educa- 
tion, les  descendans  de  Mendoce,  d'Ayolas,  de  Salazar,  &c. 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  395 

Ce  sont  eux  dont  les  Chefs  firent  des  propositions,  pendant 
Toccupation  de  Buenos  Ayres.  lis  ont  depuis  long-terns  des 
Agens  en  Angleterre ;  et  ils  croient  aujourd'hui  avoir  ete 
trompes  par  eux  ou  par  elle. 

Les  Patriotes  de  la  seconde  classe  n'ont  pas  besoin  d'etre  de- 
crits :  il  suffit  de  dire  que  les  emissaires  de  Buonaparte  en 
augmentent  incessamment  le  nombre,  et  que  si  FAngleterre  eut 
ete  secretement  leur  alliee  (ce  qu'il  serait  absurde  de  supposer) 
elle  n'aurait  pu  suivre  un  plan  qui  favorisat  leurs  projets  siuistres 
mieux  que  le  plan  de  conquerir  qu'elle  a  suivi. 

Le  grand  objet  pour  tons  les  Patriotes  est  Temancipation. 
Si,  dans  Petat  de  rebellion  ou  sont  les  provinces  du  Rio  de  la 
Plata,  on  ne  leur  laisse  d'autre  route  pour  y  arriver  que 
Tanarchie,  ils  s'y  pr^cipiteront ;  les  uns  de  projet  form^,  les 
autres  par  desespoir,  et  parcequ'ils  ne  pourront  demeurer 
neutres  au  milieu  d'une  multitude  en  armes. 

II  est  done  terns,  il  est  plus  que  terns,  de  venir  au  secours 
des  Patriotes  qui  veulent  la  monarchie :  il  faut  leur  donner  un 
Roi.  La  possession  de  Monte  Video  sera  d'un  grand  a  vantage 
pour  y  parvenir.  Cest  la  qu'il  pourra  etre  envoy^  d'abord — 
c'est  de  la  qu'il  r^pandra  ses  proclamations — la  qu'il  formera 
son  arm^e — et  c'est  sous  les  murs  de  Monte  Video  qu'on 
accourra  so  soumettre  a  sa  bienfaisante  autorite. 

Que  ce  monarque  puisse  jamais  avoir  un  interet  qui  separe 
sa  cause  de  celle  de  FAngleterre  est  impossible  a  supposer.  II 
sera  son  allie  le  plus  fidele,  par  la  meilleure  des  raisons,  qui  est 
qu'il  ne  pourra  subsister  que  par  son  alliance. 

Cest  de  cette  alliance  etroite  et  necessaire  que  decoulera 
pour  la  Grande-Bretagne  un  immense  accroissement  de  com- 
merce, de  ressources,  et  de  puissance.  L'emancipation  gagnera, 
de  proche  en  proche,  toutes  les  provinces  de  PAmerique  Es- 
pagnole,  et  tout  ce  vaste  empire  demeurera  ouvert  aux  Anglais, 
lis  Fauront  fonde,  et  il  sera  aussi  utile  a  leur  independance 
politique  et  a  leur  grandeur,  que  les  Etats  fond^s  par  Buona- 
parte le  sont  au  soutien  de  sa  tyrannie. 


396  LETTEKS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

Mais  si  des  considerations  telles  que  celle  de  la  distance 
des  lieux  et  du  defaut  de  nouvelles  recentes  empechaient  de 
risquer  h.  present  Tembarquement  d'un  Prince  pour  Monte 
Video,  est-il  possible  qu''il  y  en  ait  une  seule  qui  detourne  d'y 
envoyer  un  Agent,  ou  plusieurs  Agens,  comme  Mr.  Pitt  avait 
projete  d^s  1805,  qui  soient  charges  de  paroles  pour  Liniers 
et  les  Chefs  du  parti  monarchique,  qui  fassent  connaitre  avec 
prudence  les  intentions  du  Gouvernement  et  celles  du  Prince 
qu'il  aura  design^,  et  dont  le  General  qui  commande  a  Monte 
Video  soit  charge  de  proteger  les  demarches  I  On  ne  le  croit 
pas,  et  comme  cette  mesure  pent  avoir  un  trfes-heureux  r^sultat, 
sans  qu'*elle  paraisse  presenter  d'inconveniens  possibles,  c'est  sur- 
tout  pour  obtenir  qu''elle  soit  prise,  qu\>n  a  redige  ces  Meraoire. 


Account   of  the   Second  Attack   of  Buenos  Ayres. 
BY  DON  BERNARDO  VELASQUEZ,  INTENDANT  OF  PARAGUAY.* 

Buenos  Ayres,  July  12,  1807. 
My  dear  Buonaventura — I  do  not  know  if  a  letter  will  reach 
your  hands  which  I  wrote  to  you  about  a  month  ago,  and 
which  was  delivered  to  a  naval  oflficer,  who  went  disguised  by 
land  to  embark  for  Europe  in  one  of  the  ports  of  Brazil.  Since 
war  was  declared  against  the  English,  this  river  has  been  con- 
tinually blockaded  by  their  vessels ;  and  if  we  have  rarely  any 
opportunity  to  write  to  Europe,  I  have  not  been  able  to  avail 
myself  of  it,  because  I  have  been  500  leagues  from  this  capital. 
In  the  letter  entrusted  to  the  naval  officer,  I  gave  you  notice 

*  From  Lord  Castlereagh's  Memorandum  on  Cabinet  Measures  re- 
specting South  America  (see  vol.  viii.,  p.  98),  it  appears  that  this  Nar- 
rative was  one  among  other  letters  from  Spanish  officers  then  recently 
intercepted,  and  that  the  writer  was  second  in  command  under  General 
Liniers  at  Buenos  Ayres.  The  paper,  by  the  same  writer,  giving  details 
of  the  occupation  of  that  city  by  General  Beresford  (introduced  at  p.  302), 
no  doubt  formed  part  of  the  same  capture ;  and  these  communications 
were  probably  translated  by  some  Spaniard  in  this  country,  so  imperfectly 
acquainted  with  English,  that  it  has  been  necessary  to  take  great  liberties 
with  his  language  before  it  could  be  presented  to  the  public. 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  397 

that  the  English  took  possession  of  Monte  Video  on  the  Srd  of 
February,  and  that,  in  consequence  of  this  loss,  the  people  of 
Buenos  Ayres,  who  ascribe  to  Sobremonte  all  their  misfor- 
tunes, cried  against  him  and  against  the  Audiencia,  and  the 
latter,  being  intimidated,  decreed  the  suspension  of  Sobremonte 
from  all  kind  of  command.  The  10th  of  March,  I  received  at 
the  Assumption  the  official  declaration  of  the  said  suspension, 
and  an  order  from  the  Royal  Audiencia,  in  which  they  stated 
that  the  defence  of  the  capital  was  depending  on  my  coming 
here.  This  order,  I  think,  was  not  communicated  to  Liniers 
at  the  time,  and,  it  seems,  was  not  very  agreeable  to  him, 
when  he  knew  of  it  afterwards. 

By  the  same  Audiencia  I  was  made  Sub-Inspector  and 
Major-General  of  all  the  troops,  an  employment  which  gave 
me  very  unpleasant  moments,  because  the  military  regimen  is 
entirely  abandoned  here,  because  it  is  impossible  to  enforce  it  in 
corps  without  chief  officers,  and  consequently  without  subordina- 
tion. Luckily,  they  have  undertaken  with  emulation  the  ma- 
nagement of  the  arms,  evolutions,  and  continual  exercise  in  firing. 

The  English  in  Monte  Video  received  succours  as  well  from 
the  Cape  as  from  Europe.  On  the  28th  ultimo,  more  than 
seventy  sail  appeared  before  this  capital,  and  on  the  29th  they 
made  good  their  landing  about  twelve  or  thirteen  leagues  to 
the  south  of  this  capital.  On  the  1st  we  went  to  meet  them 
with  our  battalions  of  Volunteers,  whose  strength  was  not 
5,000  men,  infantry,  and  1,500  cavalry,  and  a  competent  corps 
of  artillerymen,  for  the  service  of  40  pieces  of  light  artillery. 

We  drew  up  our  troops  in  order  of  battle,  at  the  distance  of 
three  quarters  of  a  league  from  here,  and  the  following  day  we 
saw  the  enemy  passing  in  front  of  us,  and  turning  in  search  of 
an  easy  passage  over  the  Riachuelo,  a  small  river,  which  was 
behind  us,  with  the  intention  of  coming  directly  to  the  capital. 
Knowing  his  idea,  we  changed  our  position,  and,  repassing  the 
bridge,  which  was  behind  us,  we  marched  quick  to  receive  them 
at  the  entrance  of  the  town. 


398  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

I  arrived  there  with  only  a  battalion  of  Vizcaynos,  one  of 
Arribefios,  and  a  squadron  of  hussars,  with  six  pieces  of  the 
light  artillery.  At  the  same  time,  Liniers  arrived  there. 
Hardly  were  those  pieces  established  on  a  small  hill,  called  the 
yard  of  the  Matadero,  or  del  Miserere,  when  at  a  short  dis- 
tance a  column  of  the  enemy  was  observed  coming  towards  that 
point  through  the  hedges  of  prickly  pear,  from  a  wood  all 
about  the  capital.  The  artillery  for  some  time  made  a  very 
good  fire  of  grape-shot,  near  the  enemy  ;  but  he,  having  gained 
by  the  protection  of  the  hedges  of  prickly  pear  an  advantageous 
post,  directed  upon  us,  without  being  observed,  a  good  many 
volleys  of  musketry,  which  obliged  our  troops  to  abandon  that 
point  —  after  having  succeeded,  however,  by  this  manoeuvre 
in  stopping  the  enemy,  who  would  undoubtedly  have  taken 
possession  of  the  town  that  very  evening,  if  our  arrival  at  the 
Matadero  had  been  delayed  by  half  an  hour.  All  that  you 
shall  hear  different  in  a  comma  from  this  simple  statement,  do 
not  believe. — Let  me  go  on. 

The  nights  of  the  2nd,  3rd,  and  4th,  were  employed  in  put- 
tins:  in  each  of  the  entrances  of  the  streets  leadino;  from  the 
Great  Square  towards  the  fields,  two  heavy  guns,  the  troops 
on  the  terraces  of  the  same  streets,  and  in  opening  ditches  at 
150  yards  from  the  Square.  Another  part  of  the  troops  was 
destined  to  skirmish  in  the  cross-lanes. 

The  5th,  the  enemy  attacked  the  town  in  three  columns,  by 
the  north,  south,  and  west,  dividing  themselves  between  the 
eight  streets  which  lead  to  the  Square.  At  6  o'^clock  began  an 
infernal  fire,  as  well  from  the  artillery  as  from  the  musketry  of 
the  terraces.  This  produced  all  the  effect  which  ought  to  be 
expected  from  so  advantageous  a  situation,  where  the  soldier 
could  load  his  musket  undiscovered,  and  was  to  be  seen  only 
at  the  moment  of  charging.  The  last  terraces  garrisoned  with 
musketry  were  distant  not  more  than  400  paces  from  the 
Square,  and  at  this  distance  every  Englishman  was  killed  in 
the  streets.     After  a  few  hours'*  firing,  there  began  to  come 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  399 

into  the  town  a  good  many  prisoners,  in  crowds  of  40,  50,  100, 
and  more,  carried  by  our  skirmishing  parties.  In  short,  at 
8  o''clock,  p.m.,  or  a  little  after,  the  firing  ceased,  for  want  of 
enemies.  At  this  moment,  we  numbered  1,800  prisoners,  155 
officers,  among  them  one  General  and  some  Colonels. 

At  sunset  on  the  6th,  an  English  officer  came  to  speak  to 
Liniers.  He  made  some  propositions,  of  which  some  were 
accepted,  some  were  modified  or  refused,  and  some  dictated 
to  him.  The  amount  of  them  is,  that  the  hostilities  will  be 
stopped  from  that  moment  in  the  river  Plata ;  that,  on  both 
sides,  there  should  be  a  mutual  restitution  of  prisoners,  and 
those  to  be  embarked  in  the  space  of  ten  days,  carrying  with 
them  the  arms  they  had  actually — that,  in  two  months,  the 
town  of  Monte  Video  was  to  be  restored  in  the  same  state  it 
was  in  at  the  time  it  was  taken.  This  last  proposition  was 
very  hard  to  the  enemy  :  however,  he  was  obliged  to  accede  to 
it  after  a  defeat  so  astonishing,  which  cost  him  1,080  odd  men 
killed,  a  great  number  of  wounded,  little  less  than  2,000  pri- 
soners ;  155  officers,  and  a  great  many  missing.  In  short, 
in  nine  hours,  an  English  army  of  from  9  to  10,000  men,  ac- 
cording to  the  statement  of  all  the  prisoners,  was  destroyed  by 
5,000  citizens.  I  assure  you  that  I  cannot  find  in  the  natural 
order  of  things  a  sufficient  cause  of  so  unexpected  and  happy 
an  event,  which  cannot  be  ascribed  but  to  a  decided  favour  of 
Heaven. 

In  the  very  few  meetings  in  which  the  defence  of  the  capital 
was  discussed,  my  opinion  was  always  (considering  the  troops 
we  had)  not  to  expose  them  in  the  open  field,  and  that  we 
could  not  receive  any  benefit  from  them  but  in  the  ditches  and 
clefts  which  surround  the  town,  and  in  the  streets.  Many 
proofs  we  have  of  the  advantages  resulting  from  such  positions, 
though  taken  in  indispensable  cases.  It  is  a  point  of  faith,  that 
if  the  English  had  attacked  us  in  the  plain,  on  the  1st,  when 
we  came  to  give  them  battle,  we  should  have  clothed  in  mourn- 
ing all  tliis  America ;  we  should  have  been  destroyed,  without 


400  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

being  able  to  preserve  a  single  man,  because  we  had  on  our 
back  an  impenetrable  river.  I  never  thought  that  we  should 
pass  to  the  other  side  of  this  river ;  and  when  we  marched  to- 
wards it,  I  thought  it  was  with  the  idea  of  having  it  as  a  bul- 
wark on  our  front.  I  say  that  I  take  as  a  point  of  faith  that 
we  should  have  been  destroyed  completely;  and  I  repeat 
it  again,  because  it  is  also  a  point  of  faith  that  these  troops, 
without  being  sheltered,  cannot  stand  a  second  volley  of 
shot. 

On  the  side  of  the  English  there  has  been  very  little  skill, 
and  no  combination  whatever.  They  did  not  attack  us,  when 
they  could  have  destroyed  us  in  the  field,  and  after  that  they 
attempted  the  rash  undertaking  of  forcing  the  town  when  its 
entrances  were  garrisoned  as  I  have  said.  If  their  three 
columns  had  maintained  and  fortified  themselves  in  the  points 
they  took  on  the  entrance  of  the  town,  without  firing  a  mus- 
ket, in  less  than  four  days  we  should  have  been  obliged  to  de- 
liver to  them  our  arms,  because  we  had  no  provisions  in  the 
town  to  feed  the  troops  and  inhabitants,  and  it  was  very  easy 
for  the  enemy  to  prevent  the  entering  of  500  bullocks  which 
were  slaughtered  every  day  to  feed  the  people.  But,  fortu- 
nately, they  came  persuaded  that  here  there  was  not  any  re- 
sistance to  meet  with,  and  in  this  persuasion  they  began  to 
plunder,  without  any  discipline,  and  in  the  most  atrocious  and 
barbarous  manner  killing  several  citizens  of  both  sexes  and  of 
all  ages.  By  these  means,  spreading  themselves  about  in  small 
parties,  they  were  taken  by  our  soldiers.  Our  people — that  is 
to  say,  the  country  people — have  also  resorted  to  plunder,  and 
the  soldiers  profit  by  the  robberies  of  the  prisoners. 

Many  are  the  mournings  worn  by  the  inhabitants  of  this 
capital,  in  consequence  of  the  action  of  the  5th  instant.  But  its 
memory  will  rest  for  ever,  on  account  of  the  complete  defeat  of 
a  strong  expedition,  composed  of  select  troops,  of  wliich  their 
own  officers  said  that  they  were  not  only  the  best  of  England, 
but  of  all  the  world.     They  are  mistaken. 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  401 

The  number  of  vessels  richly  laden,  which  were  waiting  for 
the  surrender  of  this  capital,  is  very  great.  They  did  expect 
to  land  their  merchandize,  whose  value,  it  is  stated,  amounts 
to  more  than  twelve  or  fourteen  millions  of  dollars.  It  is  not 
a  little  disappointment  to  go  back  to  London  with  their 
cargoes. 

I  have  not  yet  made  any  question  about  my  return  to  Para- 
guay, notwithstanding  that  I  think  I  shall  do  it  in  a  very 
short  time.  My  stay  here  during  the  present  Government 
cannot  produce  to  me  but  disgust,  because  I  cannot  see  with 
indifference  the  disorganization  of  this  capital  in  all  its  branches. 
This  is  the  25th. 

Since  ten  or  twelve  days,  I  feel  myself  almost  good  for  no- 
thing, and  unable  to  take  the  pen.  Thank  God  that  the  vessel 
destined  to  carry  the  correspondence  had  been  detained  more 
than  I  thought,  and  what  deservedly  interesting  news  !  All 
my  disease  seems  to  be  no  more  than  a  cold ;  but  I  have  suf- 
fered a  painful  illness,  and  even  at  this  day  I  feel  myself  very 
much  incommoded,  owing  to  so  many  cold  and  damp  nights  I 
have  to  pass  in  the  open  air. 

Let  us  come  back  again  to  the  defence  of  the  capital,  whose 
news  will  be  very  much  celebrated  in  Spain,  and  will  make  noise 
in  all  the  provinces  of  the  world,  as  one  of  the  most  memorable 
military  achievements  of  these  times.  We  cannot  form  any 
other  idea  of  it,  if  we  consider  ten  thousand  Englishmen,  well 
armed,  and  commanded  by  Generals  and  a  great  number  of 
officers,  in  whose  countenances,  at  least,  there  appears  a  martial 
spirit,  have  been  defeated  by  five  thousand  citizens  (the  num- 
ber of  muskets  in  Buenos  Ayres  at  that  time  was  not  above 
that)  in  such  a  manner  that  they  were  obliged  to  restore  so 
important  a  town  as  Monte  Video.  I  cannot  know  in  what 
expressions  the  King  will  be  informed  of  this  transaction.  In 
such  cases  as  this,  there  are  sometimes  injurious  exaggerations. 
If  they  relate  of  heroism,  of  courage  from  the  town-militia, 
besides  that  they  are  very  credible  by  the  result,  the  Govern- 

VOL.  VII.  D  D 


402  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

ment  will  be  deceived,  and  may  disregard  the  security  of  these 
provinces,  trusting  to  the  valour  and  the  patriotism  of  the 
citizens.  If  it  was  my  province  to  give  my  opinion  on  the 
subject,  I  would  say  that  they  have  shown  their  patriotism 
and  their  love  for  their  sovereign,  and  that  they  have  shaken 
off  with  courage  the  yoke  which  the  English  were  to  impose 
upon  them :  but  that,  notwithstanding  this  behaviour,  I  am  of 
the  opinion  that  half  the  number  of  troops  which  attacked  this 
capital  would  make  themselves  masters  of  it,  supposing  the 
same  defenders,  equally  armed  and  disciplined — a  thing  which 
cannot  subsist  long,  because  it  is  necessary  that  all  the  people 
give  up  their  arms,  in  order  to  attend  to  their  own  private 
business.  I  never  can  consider  as  an  instance,  which  can  give 
any  rules  of  defence,  this  which  we  have  made  so  complete  of 
this  capital.  I  will  rather  say  that  ten  thousand  English 
sheep  came  to  present  their  throats  to  the  knife ;  and,  in  a 
word,  I  could  say  that  the  River  Plata,  the  key  to  so  vast  and 
rich  dominions,  is  defenceless,  incapable  of  resisting  a  small 
force,  and  that  in  all  its  provinces  there  is  not  to  be  found  a 
military  man.  This  is  the  state  of  the  Viceroy alty,  and  Peru 
is  the  same,  and  miracles  are  not  to  be  found  every  day.  If 
the  war  continues,  if  the  English  undertake  another  trial 
against  Buenos  Ayres,  and  if  from  Spain  cannot  come  troops 
to  defend  it,  we  must  give  it  up. 

Nothing  have  I  told  you  about  my  Paraguay,  and  now  I 
have  not  time  nor  head  to  explain  the  motives  of  satisfaction  I 
have  in  that  country  ;  being  the  foremost,  the  blind  obedience, 
particular  esteem  and  respect,  shown  to  me  by  every  class  of 
that  people.  Nothing  is  wanting  there  for  the  service  of  a 
regular  table.  There  are  many  and  well  assorted  shops.  The 
Government  House  is  very  good  ;  the  salary  is  ^4,600,  enough 
to  satisfy  a  person  who,  like  me,  only  wishes  for  a  commodious 
existence.  The  climate  is  excellent :  it  is  true  that,  in  the 
months  of  December,  January,  and  February,  we  feel  strong 
heats,  though  I  fancy  not  so  great  as  in  some  days  in  Madrid. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  403 

The  rest  of  the  year  is  delicious.  In  the  winter,  after  dinner, 
I  ride  :  I  alight  about  a  league  from  the  town ;  I  take  the 
musket,  and  in  a  short  time  I  kill  no  less  than  half  a  dozen 
partridges.  Some  of  my  companions  make  good  game  of 
pigeons,  ducks,  and  several  other  kinds  of  birds.  The  river  is 
prodigiously  abundant  in  fish.  Commonly,  some  vessel  is  at 
anchor  at  about  200  paces,  in  sight  of  my  house.  I  order  to 
carry  a  chair  there  in  the  afternoon,  when  I  do  not  ride.  From 
thence,  with  the  greatest  easiness,  I  throw  the  line,  and  catch 
monstrous  fishes.  These  are  the  amusements  of  the  after- 
noons ;  the  mornings  are  occupied  more  seriously. 

A  Iready  my  head  is  fatigued.  Tell  whatever  you  please  to 
your  amiable  partner  and  my  respected  friend,  without  for- 
getting the  little  Charles,  whom  I  consider  as  a  little  man  of 
courage.  I  do  not  know  what  I  can  say  to  Pepe — you  shall 
see  him — A  Dieu.  Yours  always,  Bernardo. 


General  Miranda  to  Lord  Castlereagh, 

27,  Grafton  Street,  Fitzroy  Square,  January  3,  1808. 
My  Lord — After  a  boisterous  passage  of  forty-four  days 
from  Tortola,  I  arrived  at  Portsmouth  in  the  frigate  Alexan- 
dria ;  and  having  obtained  the  necessary  passports  and  passes 
of  the  Custom-House  for  my  equipage  and  suite,  I  proceeded 
to  London,  where  I  arrived  on  Friday  evening. 

I  had  the  honour  to  call  on  your  Lordship  this  morning,  to 
deliver  the  enclosed  despatches  from  Governor  Hislop,  of  Tri- 
nidad, and  from  Mr.  Cochrane  Johnstone,  M.P.  Having 
some  important  communications  besides  to  submit  to  his  Ma- 
jesty's Ministers,  I  should  be  very  glad  to  know  when  it  will 
be  convenient  for  your  Lordship  to  receive  me. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &;c.,     Fran,  de  Miranda. 

General  Hislop  {Governor  of  Trinidad)  to  Lord  Castlereagh, 

Trinidad,  October  20,  1807. 
My  Lord — The  important  object  which  General  Miranda's 

d  d2 


404  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

visit  to  this  island  originally  had  in  view,  and  from  a  conside- 
ration of  the  knowledge  which  his  Majesty's  Ministers  have 
thereof,  1  have  deemed  it  proper  to  apprize  your  Lordship  of 
the  resolution  which  he  has,  in  the  present  situation  of  public 
affairs,  adopted  of  departing  from  hence  for  England  without 
further  delay,  he  having  done  me  the  honour  of  consulting 
with  me  on  the  expediency  thereof,  and  my  opinion  on  that 
measure  perfectly  coinciding  with  his,  however  earnestly  it 
were  to  have  been  wished  that  he  had  previously  received  his 
letters  which  the  second  August  packet  ought  to  have  brought 
him.  It  is,  notwithstanding,  to  be  feared  that  he  will  have  to 
leave  them ;  as  the  packet  has  been  arrived  at  Barbadoes  these 
seventeen  days  past,  we  fear  tliere  is  no  boat  there  to  bring 
down  our  mail ;  and,  it  being  intended  that  the  convoy  with 
with  which  he  goes  shall  leave  this  on  the  23rd  instant  for 
Tortola,  he  has  taken  a  passage  in  a  ship  bound  to  Bristol, 
and  is  anxious  that  he  may  not  be  detained  there  under  the 
Alien  regulations,  conceiving  that  his  earliest  presence  in  Lon- 
don may  be  of  consequence. 

During  General  Miranda's  residence  here,  I  have  enjoyed 
much  of  his  private  society,  and  I  have  received  occasionally 
confidential  communications  from  him,  touching  the  important 
enterprise  he  has  so  long  had  in  contemplation.  I  should  by 
no  means  do  justice  to  him,  did  I  let  pass  the  present  opportu- 
nity of  mentioning  to  your  Lordship  the  undeviating  proofs  of 
zeal  and  anxiety  he  has  evinced  for  the  honour  and  success  of 
his  Majesty's  arms,  as  well  as  for  the  welfare,  prosperity,  and 
glory,  of  the  British  Empire,  towards  which  both  his  heart 
and  mind  are  as  strongly  bent  as  those  of  the  most  loyal  and 
faithful  of  his  Majesty's  subjects. 

I  trust  that  the  many  months  of  uncomfortable  state  of 
suspense  that  he  passed  here  will,  in  some  degree,  find  a 
compensation  by  the  information  he  has  thereby  been  en- 
abled to  acquire  of  the  precise  situation  of  matters  on  the 
neighbouring  Continent,  and  of  which  he  may  hereafter  avail 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  .  405 

himself  with  advantage  to  the  general  object  of  his  ultimate 
wishes. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c.,     T.  HiSLOP. 

The  Honourable  A,  Cochrane  Johnstone  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Tortola,  jN'ovember  15,  1807. 

My  Lord —  I  cannot  avoid  taking  the  liberty  of  introducing 
to  your  Lordship  the  bearer  of  this — General  Miranda ;  be- 
cause I  am  confident  that  the  adoption  of  his  plan  for  giving 
freedom  to  South  America  would  be  the  means  of  producing 
such  a  commercial  intercourse  with  our  country  as  would  enable 
us  to  view  with  indifference  any  attempt  on  the  part  of  France 
against  England.  No  peace  should  be  made  with  that  country 
till  this  great  national  object  was  accomplished. 

I  have  the  honour  to  remain,  with  much  respect,  &;c., 

A.  Cochrane  Johnstone.. 


General  Miranda  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

London,  January  10,  1808. 

My  Lord — The  emancipation  of  South  America  has  been  a 
subject  introduced  by  me,  and  received  by  the  English  Ministers 
as  far  back  as  the  year  1790,  under  the  promise  of  granting 
their  independence  on  the  same  conditions  that  France  and 
Spain  did  with  the  English  Colonies  in  North  America  ;  when 
the  Convention  with  Spain  about  Nootka  Sound  put  an  end  to 
the  measures  adopted  at  that  period,  for  putting  this  plan  into 
execution.     (See  Note  A.) 

France  undertook  it  soon  after,  in  the  year  1793,  with  the 
view  of  giving  them  an  absolute  independence  in  the  same 
manner ;  but  the  exaggerated  doctrines  propagated  at  that 
moment  by  the  anarchical  party  in  France  put  a  stop  to  it, 
through  my  own  persuasion  and  efforts :  demanding  further 
explanations  about  the  real  state  of  St.  Domingo,  that  I  appre- 
hended would  have  contaminated  the  South  American  Continent, 
and,  instead  af  bringing  liberty,  would  have  introduced  anarchy 


406  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

and  coufusiou.  The  retreat  of  the  French  annies  from  the  Low 
Countries,  that  followed  soon  after,  put  an  absolute  stop  to  it. 

As  soon  as  Spain  abandoned  the  Coalition  and  renewed  her 
connexion  with  France,  I  turned  my  views  again  towards 
England,  and  soon  after  quitted  the  army  of  the  Republic. 
At  my  arrival  in  London,  in  1798,  the  British  Government, 
under  the  same  Ministry  of  Mr.  Pitt,  renewed  the  negociations, 
with  the  intention  of  putting  the  same  plans  in  execution, 
assisted  by  the  co-operation  of  the  United  States  of  North 
America,  that  were  invited  to  furnish  a  land  force  of  10,000 
men ;  while  Great  Britain  would  have  found  the  money  and 
ships  necessary  for  carrying  into  execution  this  grand  operation. 
The  President  Adams  disappointed  us,  however,  on  this  occa- 
sion, and  the  subject  was  postponed. 

In  the  beginning  of  1801,  during  Mr.  Addingion's  admini- 
stration, the  same  negociations  were  renewed ;  the  projects  of 
Government  to  be  recommended  to  the  people  of  South  Ame- 
rica and  the  military  operations  were  combined  and  agreed ; 
and  the  expedition  was  on  the  point  of  sailing,  when  the  pre- 
liminaries of  the  Peace  of  Amiens  put  a  stop  to  it.  The  ope- 
ration, of  course,  was  again  suspended,  until  an  opportunity 
should  occur  to  put  them  in  execution  at  a  future  period. 

On  the  declaration  of  war  against  France  in  1803,  the  same 
plans  were  resumed,  and  preparations  made  by  the  Admini- 
stration for  the  purpose  of  carrying  them  into  execution,  the 
moment  that  a  declaration  of  war  against  Spain  should  take 
place.  This  event  occurred  in  1804,  during  Mr.  Pittas  third 
[second]  Administration ;  when  preparations  were  immediately 
resumed,  and  an  extensive  and  detailed  plan  was  arranged  with 
Lord  Melville  and  Sir  Home  Popham  for  the  same  purpose. 
(See  Note  B.) 

These  measures,  however,  were  suspended  by  the  manoeuvres 
of  France  and  by  Russian  intrigue,  when  the  pressure  of  the 
South  American  exiles  from  the  provinces  of  Caraccas  and 
Santa  F^,  residing  in  the  United  States  of  America  and  in 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  407 

the  Island  of  Trinidad,  forced  me  to  quit  this  place,  and  to 
attend  to  their  call,  with  the  view  of  obtaining  some  assistance 
from  the  United  States  of  America  (which  were  at  that  time 
expected  to  be  involved  in  a  war  with  Spain,  on  account  of  the 
differences  respecting  Louisiana),  having,  previous  to  my  de- 
parture, obtained  permission  and  assurances  from  Great  Britain 
of  being  supported,  in  case  of  success,  in  our  independence, 
agreeably  to  our  primitive  stipulations. 

The  failure  of  this  attempt  was  owing  not  only  to  the  bad 
faith  of  the  agents  of  the  American  Government,  who  betrayed 
the  secret  to  our  enemies,  but  to  the  infamous  and  treacherous 
conduct  of  the  American  officers,  entrusted  with  the  direction 
of  the  ships  composing  the  expedition.     (See  Note  C.) 

The  subsequent  attempt  upon  the  coast  of  Caraccas  in  the 
districts  of  Coro,  in  August,  1806,  supported  by  some  ships 
belonging  to  a  squadron  of  the  Windward  Islands,  under  Sir 
Alexander  Cochrane,  with  whom  a  formal  stipulation  in  favour 
of  Great  Britain  was  agreed  and  signed,  would  have  succeeded, 
if  the  Commanders  of  the  navy  had  not  peremptorily  refused 
to  continue  any  operations  whatever  on  that  coast,  and  forced 
us  to  retire  (see  Note  D),  under  the  apprehension  that  the 
preliminaries  of  peace  with  France  must  have  been  signed  by 
Lord  Lauderdale  at  Paris  by  that  period.  By  the  evidence  of 
those  that  were  on  the  spot  at  that  time,  and  by  the  inter- 
cepted correspondence  from  the  principal  agents  of  the  Spanish 
Government  in  the  province,  it  appears  that  the  point  of  the 
coast  was  judiciously  chosen  ;  their  own  evidence  says  :  "  The 
situation  is  the  most  advantageous  of  any  that  he  could  possibly 
have  chosen  on  all  these  coasts,  on  account  of  the  Peninsula  of 
Paraguana,  where  they  may  form  a  second  Gibraltar,  as  long 
as  they  are  masters  of  the  sea  ;  so  that  this  spark  of  fire,  which 
appeared  nothing,  may  ultimately  devour  the  Continent,  if  the 
English  give  him  any  assistance  f — and  that  the  distress  of  the 
Captain- General  and  Intendant,  for  want  of  money,  was  so  great, 
that  it  forced  them  to  adopt  the  odious  and  violent  measure  of 


408  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

seizing  some  of  the  sacred  property  of  the  Church,  with  all  the 
deposited  money  belonging  to  the  poor,  the  dead,  &c. 

So  that,  if  Great  Britain  had  given  us  a  decided  support  of 
any  kind,  not  only  those  provinces,  but  the  rest  of  the  Conti- 
nent of  South  America,  would  have  been  now  totally  emanci- 
pated from  the  dominion  of  Spain,  as  appears  particularly  by 
the  letters  of  Don  Dionisio  Franco,  Administrator  of  the 
Province,  and  Lieutenant  Murray,  R.N. 

By  those  documents,  as  well  as  by  the  information  I  have 
been  collecting  at  the  Island  of  Trinidad  during  the  last  twelve 
months,  it  appears  that  the  dispositions  of  the  people  of  the 
provinces  of  the  Caraccas  and  Sante  Fe  in  favour  of  indepen- 
dence is  the  same,  but  their  anxiety  very  much  increased  with 
the  rumours  transmitted  both  from  Spain  and  France,  that  the 
Island  of  Puerto  Rico  and  the  province  of  Caraccas,  by  secret 
stipulations  with  Spain,  are  already  ceded  to  France.  And  as 
Ions:  aofo  as  the  time  I  was  at  Coro,  I  found  there  a  letter  from 
the  Secretary  of  Government  at  Caraccas,  mentioning  that 
"  France  was  to  conquer  Portugal  and  cede  it  to  Spain,  in  ex- 
change for  that  province."*^ 

These  apprehensions  are  greatly  increased  by  seeing  180 
French  troops  already  established  at  the  capital  of  Caraccas, 
while  Old  Spain  appears  to  be  in  the  hands  and  possession  of 
France.  In  this  alarming  situation  for  that  country,  I  have 
come  here  to  claim  from  his  Majesty ""s  Ministers  that  assistance 
so  long  ago  and  so  repeatedly  promised,  of  supporting  their 
independence  ;  as  it  is  natural  for  them  to  suppose  that  orders 
from  Spain  will  soon  arrive  calculated  to  promote  the  Gallic 
interest,  and  the  submission  of  the  whole  province  to  their  new 
masters,  if  measures  are  not  soon  adopted  in  the  country  for 
an  effectual  and  successful  opposition. 

This  step,  in  my  opinion,  would  be  absurd  in  the  highest 
degree,  were  the  inhabitants  of  those  provinces  to  venture,  un- 
supported and  unprepared,  to  contend  with  France  and  Spain 
united,  without  an  efficient  maritime  and  land  support.  In  which 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  409 

case,  I  should  imaj^ine  it  more  prudent  on  their  part  to  make 
the  best  terms  and  arrangements  with  France,  rather  than  to 
make  themselves  the  victims  of  French  rapine  and  conquest. 

This  very  same  distressing  circumstance  I  conceive  to  be  in 
favour  of  the  independence  now ;  as  dangers  and  difficulties 
must  always  unite  men  ;  and  I  do  not  perceive,  by  what  I 
know  of  the  province  at  the  time  I  quitted  Trinidad,  that  there 
is  any  difference  in  opinion  for  emancipation,  if  independence  is 
fairly  and  openly  offered  to  them,  and  the  delicate  point  of 
their  religion  respectfully  attended  to.  The  late  events  at 
Buenos  Ayres  are  certainly  unfavourable,  as  they  encourage 
the  agents  of  Government  to  oppose  resistance,  and  the  strangers 
in  the  country  to  aspire  to  those  high  and  supreme  situations 
that  Liniers  and  his  followers  have  obtained  in  another  quarter; 
for  which  purpose  I  should  think  that  the  force  to  be  employed 
now  to  ensure  this  operation  ought  to  be  greater  than  any  we 
have  mentioned  yet. 

The  population  of  the  Colombian  Continent  is  considered  by 
the  best  authorities  not  to  exceed  twenty  millions,  nor  to  be 
less  than  fifteen,  disseminated  over  four  grand  divisions. 

1,  Mexico  and  Guatimala,  as  far  as  the  Isthmus  of  Panama, 
seven  millions;  2,  Santa  Fe,  Caraccas,  and  Quito,  four  millions ; 
8,  Peru  and  Chili,  four  millions ;  4,  Buenos  Ayres  and  Tucu- 
men,  three  millions.  The  total  mass  of  this  mixed  population 
appears  to  be  chiefly  composed  of  native  Indians,  free  people  of 
colour,  slaves,  and  whites.  The  Indians  and  slaves,  it  is  sup- 
posed, compose  two  thirds ;  the  people  of  colour  and  the  whites 
the  other  third  part.  By  this  statement,  that  appears  to  me 
the  most  probable,  it  is  evident  that  each  of  these  departments 
or  divisions  is  susceptible  of  having  a  separate  Government 
on  a  substantial  basis  in  point  of  territory  and  population. 

I  don't  perceive,  from  the  information  I  have  been  able  to 
collect  these  twenty  years  past,  that  the  people  of  the  country 
have  shown  a  predilection  for  any  particular  form  of  Govern- 
ment.   All  their  wishes  have  tended  to  obtain  an  independence 


410  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

from  Europe,  and  to  preserve  in  the  change  the  solid  and 
essential  principles  of  civil  liberty,  such  as  the  Swiss  and  Dutch 
people  have  enjoyed  for  many  centuries,  with  universal  happi- 
ness and  respectability. 

I  do  not  believe  that  this  point  would  be  difficult  to  settle  by 
persimsioii,  as  the  people  are  mild  and  uncorrupt  yet ;  but,  if 
compulsion  was  to  be  employed,  in  any  manner  whatever,  the 
result  would  be  opposition  and  intestine  divisions.  When  we 
consider  the  great  advantage  that  they  possess,  in  having  a 
uniform  and  general  code  of  good  laws,  one  and  the  same  lan- 
guage, one  and  the  same  religion,  one  and  the  same  form  of 
administration,  the  difficulty  of  changing  without  convulsions 
is  greatly  diminished  and  little  to  be  apprehended.  Depons, 
in  his  judicious  and  accurate  observations  on  Terra  Firma, 
remarks  that  the  Cabildos,  or  municipal  organization  of  the 
civil  Government  of  South  America,  are  the  most  popular  and 
best  calculated  to  administer  and  govern  the  country.  (See 
Depons,  torn.  2,  art.  Cabildos.     Paris,  1806.) 

The  department  of  Oaraccas,  Santa  Fe,  and  Quito,  may  be 
called,  from  the  similarity  of  its  position  and  physical  structure, 
the  Switzerland  of  South  America — totally  separated  from 
Mexico  by  the  Isthmus  of  Panama ;  from  Peru  by  the  Cordil- 
lera of  the  Andes;  and  from  the  Brazils  by  the  immense 
rivers  Amazons  and  Orinoco  :  a  circumstance  that  will  remove 
any  apprehensions  about  interfering  in  the  arrangements  that 
may  now  take  place  at  the  Brazils. 

If  we  meet  with  success  in  this  province,  and  the  regulations 
immediately  introduced  are  wise  and  acceptable  to  the  people, 
we  may  expect  to  see,  in  a  very  short  time,  the  imitation  in 
Mexico,  through  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  and  Guatimala ;  in 
Peru,  through  Quito ;  and  ultimately  at  Buenos  Ayres, 
through  Peru  and  Chili. 

The  land  and  naval  force  that  I  conceive  sufficient  to  carry 
into  execution  this  plan,  beginning  with  the  province  of  Caraccas, 
is  10,000  men  of  all  arms,  and  a  competent  naval  force  to  co- 


]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  411 

operate  with  it — leaving  the  military  details  of  this  operation 
for  another  Memoir,  which  I  shall  be  immediately  in  readiness 
to  submit  to  your  lordship. 

The  greatest  danger  I  at  this  moment  apprehend  is  the 
arrival  of  some  French  Chief  in  this  province,  with  a  military 
force  and  a  set  of  intriguers  well  calculated  to  delude  the  simple 
South  Americans,  as  they  probably  have  done  by  this  time  at 
Buenos  Ayres.  To  avoid  such  peril  and  dangers,  celerity  in 
the  execution  of  the  plan  is,  I  should  conceive,  the  most  essen- 
tial and  material  point ;  as  that  country  is  in  the  utmost 
danger  at  this  moment. 

Let  me  be  permitted  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  actual  state 
of  the  trade  between  South  America  and  the  mother-country, 
carried  on  under  the  American  flag,  through  the  exclusive 
interest  of  the  Intendants  and  Governors  of  those  provinces. 
It  appears,  by  a  voluminous  correspondence  lately  intercepted 
in  a  packet  from  Europe,  and  in  my  possession,  that  the  pro- 
ductions of  South  America  are  now  cheaper  in  Spain  than  they 
ever  were  in  times  of  peace  ;  and  that  the  people  of  South 
America,  as  well  as  the  European  Spanish  merchants,  complain 
very  highly  about  it. 

The  specie  and  money  transactions  also,  between  Mexico, 
the  Havanna,  Carthagena,  &c.,  are  chiefly  carried  on  by  the 
American  merchants,  which  immense  profits  have  turned  them 
from  friends  to  be  enemies  of  our  independence.  They  will 
not  be  brought  back,  I  presume,  to  our  friendship  and  interest, 
till  they  shall  see  themselves  deprived  of  that  immense  trade 
that  they  now  almost  exclusively  enjoy. 

In  times  when  crime,  usurpation,  and  vice  are  upon  the 
throne,  and  virtue  is  seen  oppressed  almost  everywhere  on  the 
Continent,  let  me  be  allowed  to  say  a  few  words,  in  answer  to 
some  illiberal  insinuations  that,  I  find,  have  been  thrown  to 
the  public.  My  personal  views  and  interest  will  be  highly 
gratified,  and  my  labours  perfectly  rewarded,  when  I  shall  see 
the  people  of  those  provinces  enjoying  a  sufficient  portion  of 


412  LETTERS  AXD  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

rational  civil  liberty,  and  a  solid,  permanent  form  of  Govern- 
ment that  will  preserve  it  and  promise  them  happiness.  The 
situation  of  a  private  citizen  then  will  be  to  me  not  only  a  con- 
genial and  eligible  one,  but  of  a  good  example,  I  hope,  to 
others,  by  showing  that  the  true  character  of  a  patriot  consists 
in  being  submissive  to  the  laws  of  his  country,  and  a  useful 
member  of  the  society  to  which  he  belongs. 

I  have  gone  rapidly  and  with  brevity  through  the  narration 
and  statement,  presuming  that  the  annexed  documents  (par- 
ticularly the  plan  presented  to  Mr.  Pitt  and  Lord  Melville  in 
1804)  will  supply  the  deficiencies ;  and  I  have  to  apologize  to 
your  lordship  for  the  unavoidable  delay,  my  papers  not  having 
come  to  hand  till  Thursday  last. 

The  documents  I  have  now  by  me  are  numerous  and  inte- 
resting ;  but  the  apprehension  of  being  diffuse  and  tedious  has 
made  me  select  a  few  only,  leaving  the  others  for  the  inspection 
of  any  confidential  person  that  your  lordship  shall  think  proper 
to  appoint  for  their  examination.  For  the  sake  of  brevity  and 
despatch  I  have  also  transmitted  some  originals,  whose  preser- 
vation being  absolutely  necessary  to  me,  I  request  your  lord- 
ship will  have  the  goodness  of  returning,  after  the  inspection 
of  his  Majesty ""s  Ministers. 

T  have  the  honour  to  be,  with  the  highest  consideration  and 
respect,  &;c.,  Fran,  de  Miranda. 

Note  A. 
Note  delivered  to  Mr,  Pitt^  at  his  request^  desiring  to  know  what 
were  Don  Francisco  de  MirandcCs  views^  soon  after  the  Con- 
tention with  Spain,  about  Nootka  Sound, 

London,  January  28,  1791. 
Sir — My  only  views  now  are,  as  they  always  were,  to  pro- 
mote the  happiness  and  liberty  of  my  own  country — South 
America — excessively  oppressed;  and,  in  so  doing,  to  offer 
also  great  commercial  advantages  to  England,  as  stated  in  the 
proposal  presented  on  the  5th  of  March,  1790. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  413 

Upon  these  principles,  I  should  be  very  happy  to  oiFer  and 
continue  my  services  to  England ;  that,  in  pursuing  the  advan- 
tages already  obtained  by  the  last  Convention,  some  judicious 
arrangements  may  be  made,  so  as  to  forward  and  bring  to  matu- 
rity, at  some  fiiture  period,  the  same  generous  and  benevolent 
plan  above-mentioned,  for  the  happiness  and  prosperity  of  South 
America,  and  for  the  grandeur  and  opulence  of  this  nation. 

Very  few  individuals  of  the  ex- Jesuits,  natives  of  Chili  and 
Mexico,  now  exiled  and  ill  used  in  Italy,  might  be  of  very 
great  service,  both  for  the  purpose  of  directing  the  new  settle- 
ments and  commercial  intercourse  to  be  formed  between  the 
English  and  the  natives  upon  the  granted  coasts  of  South 
America,  and  for  establishing  some  communications  with  the 
great  Spanish  towns  on  that  Continent,  by  means  of  their  own 
relations  and  friends. 

My  intention  being  purely  patriotic,  with  the  view  only  of 
offering  services  to  my  country,  and  promoting  the  interests 
and  advantages  of  Great  Britain,  as  perfectly  compatible,  ser- 
vices should  not  be  requested  from  me  against  Spain  with  any 
other  motive  ;  it  being  a  point  of  delicacy  with  me,  though 
authorized  by  the  rights  of  nations  and  the  example  of  great 
and  virtuous  men,  in  modern  and  ancient  times. 

Francisco  de  Miranda. 

Note  B. 
General  Miranda  to  the  Right  Hon.  William  Pitt. 

Grafton  Street,  ce  13  Juin,  1805. 
Monsieur — La  demande  que  j'ai  eu  Thonnour  de  vous  sou- 
mettre  par  Sir  Evan  Nepean,  tendante  a  vous  demander  la 
permission  de  partir  incessamment  pour  la  Trinidad,  n'a  pour 
objet  que  de  me  reunir  a  des  compatriotes  qui  se  trouvent 
actuellement  dans  cette  isle,  et  qui  attendent  avec  la  plus  vive 
impatience  mon  arrivee,  pour  donner  la  main  a  Toeuvre  impor- 
tante  de  leur  emancipation  quails  sont  tout-pret  de  commencer 
par  eux-memes ;   voyant  que  les  secours  promis  par  T  Angle- 


414  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

terre  souffrent  un  delai  trop  long,  tandis  que  le  moment  actuel 
est  a  leur  avis  le  plus  propice  qu'on  sauroit  en  sauhaiter. 

La  meme  personne  qui  m'a  transmise  votre  reponse  sur  cet 
objet  m'a  fait  sentir  que  ce  n'*etoit  pas  en  r^alite  la  faute  de 
bonne  volonte  de  votre  part  qui  causoit  ce  retard,  mais  les  de- 
marches inconsiderees  de  quelquesuns  de  nos  compatriotes  qui 
faisoient  hesiter  le  Gouvernement  dans  ce  moment  sur  la  deci- 
sion de  cette  affaire. 

Je  ne  doute  pas,  Monsieur,  que  dans  la  nature  des  ^v^ne- 
mens  humains,  et  dans  le  cours  de  Taffaire  qui  nous  occupe 
depuis  un  si  grand  nombre  d'*annees,  la  mecbancete  ou  meme 
la  calomnie  ne  soient  pas  venues  troubler  la  marcbe  et  em- 
pecher  une  conclusion  heureuse ;  mais  ce  qui  m^afflige  reelle- 
ment  c"*est  la  magnitude  de  Tobjet  et  Tinteret  immediat  d'une 
grande  portion  de  Tesp^ce  humaine  qui  doivent  en  etre  la 
victime.  Ainsi,  permettez  done  (je  vous  un  supplie),  que  je 
l^ve  toutes  les  doutes  et  toutes  les  difficultes  a  cet  egard^  en 
offrant  les  preuves  les  plus  evidentes,  et  en  me  soumettant  a  un 
examen  quelconque  pour  detruire  ces  perfides  insinuations.  Je 
les  appele  ainsi,  puisque  n^aj^ant  jamais  departi  un  instant  des 
principes  politiques  et  moraux,  qui  formerent  notre  premiere 
liaison  politique  en  1790,  je  n'aurai  pas  la  moindre  difficulte  a 
detruire  Fombre  meme  du  soup9on  ou  de  Tincons^quence  dans 
une  inculpation  quelconque.  Quand  on  a  passe  25  ans  de  sa 
vie  occupe  constamment  d'un  seul  et  meme  objet,  et  que  cet 
objet  est  Tetude  des  principes  sages  qui  conduisent  les  hommes 
au  bonlieur,  pour  les  appliquer  au  bien  de  sa  patrie,  on  ne  doit 
pas,  ce  me  semble,  douter  de  ses  propres  principes :  ni  rougir 
d'*avoir  pass^  la  vie  dans  des  honteuses  occupations.  A  cet 
effet  j''ai  Thonneur  de  vous  proposer  la  mesure  suivante. 

Qu''on  nomme  deux  ou  trois  personnes  de  votre  confiance,  ^ 
qui  on  transmettra  toutes  les  charges  qu''on  puisse  trouver  sur 
mon  compte  ou  celle  de  mes  compatriotes,  et  qui  portent  in- 
compatibilite  aux  propositions  et  aux  renseignemens  que  j''ai  eu 
rhonneur  de  presenter  au  Gouvernement  de  S.M.B.  sur  Tind^- 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  415 

pendance  et  remancipation  des  Colonies  H.  Americaines,  a  dif- 
ferentes  epoques — et  si  on  trouve  apres  cet  examen  que  ces 
inculpations  sont  destituees  de  fondement,  Tobstacle  sera  cer- 
tainement  aplani  et  la  confiance  mutuelle  retablie,  pour  le  bien 
d'une  partie  considerable  du  monde  civilise. 

Je  n'ignore  pas  qu'un  jeune  Allemand,  nomme  Duperou,  et 
que  je  fis  venir  ici  de  Paris,  ayant  ete  corrompu  par  des  eaiigres 
dans  ce  pays,  il  y  a  sept  ans,  fut  conseille  d'enlever  quelques 
MSS.  relativement  a  la  population  de  TAmerique  meridionale; 
ainsi  que  quelques  extraits  d'autres  papiers,  qui  tombaient  par 
hazard  entre  les  mains  d'une  personne  honnete,  qui  les  fit  bruler 
apres  ;  qu'il  fit  en  outre  des  fausses  denonciations  a  la  police  de 
Londres  contre  moi,  se  voyant  arrete  ici  par  les  intrigues  de 
ces  memes  emigres  qui  Tavoient  seduit  auparavant;  et,  qu''a 
la  fin,  se  precipitant  d'un  crime  dans  un  autre,  il  parvint  jusqu*  a 
faire  des  vols  dans  les  chemins  publics  de  la  France,  &c. — mais 
cet  accident  ne  doit  pas  afFecter  la  probite  de  mes  compatriotes, 
qui  le  connurent  par  un  pur  hazard,  ni  de  moi,  qui  Fayant  cru 
reconnoissant,  lui  ai  confie  quelques  papiers  pour  les  copier 
chez  moi. 

Deux  autres  faits  portant  des  allusions  pen  favorables  a  ma 
moralite  sont  aussi  arrives  a  ma  connaissance,  mais  qui  ne 
m'out  paru  meriter  pour  lors  une  refutation  publique.  Dans 
Tannee  1801  (le  13  du  mois  Juillet),  T Attorney-General  Law, 
dans  un  proces  qui  ne  me  regardoit  directe  ni  indirectement, 
s''est  permis  de  dire  que  "le  General  Miranda  serviroit  contre 
son  pays  la  France,  TAngleterre,  ou  la  Russie,  selon  qu'on  les 
payeroit  mieux."  S'il  Fa  dit  comme  une  vague  conjecture, 
c'est  une  reflexion  illiberale  et  deplacee — si,  au  contraire,  on  la 
prend  dans  un  sens  affirmatif,  Fune  et  Fautre  supposition 
seroient  evidemment  fausses,  et  Fauteur  un  lache  calomniateur. 

Milord  Bute  encore,  pretendant  connoitre  ce  qui  se  passe 
dans  FEspagne  et  dans  ses  Colonies  mieux  que  personne,  fut 
tres  occupd,  il  y  a  six  ans,  a  propager  Fidee  que  j'etois  un  avan- 
turier,  puisque  j'avais  fait  la  contrebande  dans   FAmerique 


416  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

meridionale.  On  pourroit,  avec  une  meilleure  logique,  proaver 
a  sa  Seigneurie  qu'une  decision  judiciaire  du  Conseil  Supreme 
des  Indes  declaroit  tout  le  contraire  dans  Tannee  1799,  me 
justifiant  de  toutes  ces  charges  ainsi  que  mes  associes  dans  la 
propre  cause,  le  Gouverneur  de  la  Havanne  Cagigal,  et  le 
Viceroi  de  Santa  F^,  Espeleta ;  qui  n^etoient  pas  des  atan- 
turiers  pour  cela.  Un  homme  de  Page  et  du  rang  du  Marquis 
de  Bute,  parlant  et  raisonnant  de  la  sorte,  fait  reellement  pitie, 
et  merite  plutot  le  mepris. 

L"*importance  de  Tobjet,  ainsi  que  ma  delicatesse  envers  les 
personnes  respectables  qui,  m'*ont  honore  de  leur  amitie,  et 
seconde  avec  leurs  efforts  pendant  cette  longue  et  penible  nego- 
ciation,  exigent  encore  cette  demarche  de  ma  part.  Cest  une 
justification  enfin  que  j'offre  et  que  je  dois  a  ma  patrie,  a  mes 
compatriotes,  a  mes  amis,  et  au  Gouvernement  meme  qui  m'a 
donne  asile  et  un  honorable  support.  Sous  tous  ces  rapports 
je  ne  peux  pas  douter,  Monsieur,  que  vous  ne  m'accordiez  cette 
juste  et  honorable  demande,  comme  unique  moyen  de  satisfaire 
une  inculpation  fondee,  avec  les  preuves  justificatives  neces- 
saires,  ou  de  condamner  a  un  infame  mepris  des  obscurs  et  vils 
calomniateurs,  s'il  y  en  a. 

Je  suis  avec  profond  respect  et  la  plus  haute  consideration, 
&;c.  Exact  copy.  M A. 

Note  0. 
Extracts  of  two  letters  from  Mr.  8.  G.  Ogden  to  General  Miranda. 

New  York,  July  28,  1806. 
My  dear  General — It  is  with  the  greatest  pleasure  I  now 
address  you,  and  am  happy  to  have  it  in  my  power  to  inform 
you  that  your  friend  Colonel  Smith  and  myself  have  at  length 
triumphed  over  our  enemies  and  the  oppression  of  the  Govern- 
ment. After  a  trial  which  lasted  twelve  days,  two  inde- 
pendent juries  of  our  country  last  week  rendered  a  verdict 
of  I^ot  Guilty  in  both  cases.  We  thus  both  stand  free  and 
honourably  acquitted^  and  our  persecutors,  the  President  Madi- 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  417 

son,  &;c.,  remain  covered  with  the  disapprobation  of  the  inde- 
pendent people  of  America,  and  the  disgrace  brought  on  them 
by  their  unjust  proceedings. 

I  have  heard,  with  great  regret,  my  dear  friend,  the  great 
disappointments  and  disasters  you  have  met  with,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  unjustifiable  and  highly  reprehensible  conduct  of 
the  two  Lewises.  I  can  easily  conceive  all  you  must  have 
suffered  in  consequence  of  those  two  men,  and  no  one  more 
heartily  reprobates  their  conduct,  as  represented  to  me,  than 
myself.  I  trust,  however,  notwithstanding  those  transient  dis- 
appointments, there  is  an  all-wise  Providence,  that  will  guide 
your  footsteps  to  the  wished-for  point,  and,  as  your  cause  is 
that  of  liberty  and  patriotism,  that  you  may  arrive  at  the 
climax  of  your  wishes. 

New  York,  September  6,  1806. 

A  few  days  since,  the  former  commander  of  the  Leander 
(Captain  Thomas  Lewis)  returned  here  a  perfect  vagabond  and 
outcast  from  society.  His  brother,  J.  Lewis,  also  returned 
here  from  St.  Domingo,  in  the  ship  Emperor,  making  a  very 
bad  voyage  from  St.  Domingo  about  a  month  since.  I  have 
now  heard  from  themselves  all  that  could  be  offered  in  their 
defence,  for  their  extremely  unjustifiable  and  improper  conduct 
in  regard  to  you.  It  is  impossible  it  can  be  more  entirely  dis- 
approved of  by  you  than  it  is  by  me. 

When  I  think  how  much  you  must  have  suffered  from  the 
ignorance  and  villany  of  Thomas  Lewis,  it  really  makes  my 
blood  boil  with  indignation.  I  could  scarcely  have  believed 
any  man  capable  of  conduct  so  base  and  infamous.  His  brother, 
Jacob  Lewis,  is  also  unpardonable  for  having  deceived  you,  and 
not  joining  you  in  the  Emperor,  after  having  solemnly  promised 
you  to  do  so ;  and  even  starting  from  Port  au  Prince  with  that 
intention,  when,  lo !  a  newspaper,  saying  the  Colonel  and  my- 
self were  prosecuted  by  the  Government,  induces  him  to  turn 
back  and  abandon  one  of  the  most  laudable  enterprises  ever 
undertaken  by  man.     The  very  reasons  which  caused  him  to 

VOL.  vn.  E  E 


418  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

return  would  have  induced  me  to  persevere.  Suffice  it  to  say 
my  confidence  has  been  completely  destroyed  in  those  men. 
I  consider  the  conduct  of  Thomas  Lewis  of  the  most  infamous 
kind,  and  that  of  Jacob  Lewis  arising  from  pusillanimity  and 
want  of  judgment. 

I  have,  in  my  own  mind,  my  dear  General,  little  doubt,  not- 
withstanding all  these  past  provocations  and  disappointments, 
but  that  your  heroic  perseverance  in  the  cause  of  liberty  will  lead 
to  the  wished-for  goal  of  success.  The  people  of  this  country 
will  rejoice,  and  are  almost  unanimously  in  your  favour.  Even 
the  President  himself,  although  a  low  and  petty  policy  induced 
him  to  prosecute  Smith  and  myself,  in  his  heart,  I  am  sure, 
wishes  your  success ;  and  I  am  not  without  hopes  may  yet, 
seeing  their  past  errors,  be  induced  to  act  a  dignified  part  in 
regard  to  your  views,  and  shake  off  the  fetters  continually  bound 
round  them  by  the  French  and  Spanish  Ministers. 

It  was  always  my  intention  to  give  to  you  the  sole  and  com- 
plete control  of  the  Leander  and  all  the  property  in  her,  to  cut 
and  do  with  them  as  you  might  think  proper  to  ensure  your 
success.  I  have  taken  on  myself  the  chance  of  the  expedition. 
Should  it  fail,  I  engaged  to  take  no  compensation.  Should 
you  be  successful,  our  contract  is  not  on  paper,  but  more  deeply 
engraven  in  the  breasts  and  honour  of  both  parties. 

Depend  upon  it,  I  will  never  forsake  the  cause  I  have  once 
espoused,  and  think  honourable  and  just.  All  the  little  energy 
I  possess  shall  be  devoted  to  you,  and  I  have  it  in  my  power 
to  interest  such  strong  friends  as  will  enable  me  completely  to 
fulfil  your  views.  I  shall  be  governed,  in  a  great  measure,  in 
my  future  conduct  by  the  accounts  I  am  now  waiting,  with  the 
greatest  anxiety,  to  receive  from  you. 

Your  sincere  friend,         Samuel  G.  Ogdem 

Colonel  Smith  to  General  Miranda. 

New  York,  August  15,  1806. 
My  dear  Friend — By  the  enclosed  letter,  you  will  notice 
the  solicitude  of  Mr.  Barker  to  be  with  you  :  his  family  are 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  419 

respectable,   and  his  appearance  and   manners   much  in  his 
favour. 

We  have  been  severely  persecuted  since  your  departure.  The 
Administration,  under  the  influence  of  the  French  Minister, 
absolutely  were  determined  to  sacrifice  me,  deprived  me  of  an 
office  worth  ^6,000  a-year,  and  instituted  a  suit  which,  after 
putting  me  to  immense  expense,  and  themselves  to  a  much 
greater,  they  were  foiled  in,  by  the  unanimous  verdict  of  a  jury, 
as  you  will  observe  in  the  enclosed  paper.  When  the  verdict 
of  Not  Guilty  was  given,  the  whole  Court  burst  into  loud  ap- 
plause, and  the  country  at  large  rejoice  and  wish  you  prosperity. 
Grod  bless  you!  Yours  truly,  W.  S.  Smith. 

Note  D. 
Rear-Admiral  the  Honourable  Sir  Alexander  Cochrane^  to 
General  Miranda. 
Northumberland,  Carlisle  Bay,  Barbadoes,  June  9,  1806. 
Sir — Whereas  you  have  represented  to  me  that,  in  carrying 
into  effect  the  expedition  under  your  command,  you  have  met 
with  some  difficulties  from  the  defection  of  the  force  you  ex- 
pected to  join  you  at  St.  Domingo ;  and,  conceiving  it  may  be 
mutually  advantageous  to  Great  Britain  and  the  provinces  of 
South  America,  which  you  are  about  to  attempt  to  liberate 
from  the  dominion  of  Spain ;  and  having  received  your  state- 
ment of  the  various  plans  that  have  from  time  to  time  been  in 
agitation  between  you  and  the  British  Ministry,  in  all  which 
the  same  object  has  been  kept  in  view ;  but,  from  particular 
circumstances  incident  to  the  moment,   they  have  not  been 
carried  into  eff'ect — in  consideration  thereof,  and  judging  that 
I  may  thereby  promote  what  seems  to  have  commanded  the 
attention  of  the  British  Government,  I  agree  to  support  your 
landing  in  any  part  of  America  between  Trinidad  and  the  coast 
opposite  to  the  Island  of  Aruba,  with  such  a  naval  force  as  I 
can  afford,  which  will  be  at  least  a  sloop  of  war  and  two  brigs, 
'  Commander-in-Chief  on  the  Islands  Station. 

E  E  2 


420  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

and  probably  a  frigate,  if  one  can  be  spared  from  the  attention 
which  I  must  necessarily  give  to  the  convoys  and  protection  of 
the  Colonies  within  the  district  of  my  command.  I  do,  more- 
over, assure  you  of  such  support  as  it  may  be  in  my  power 
occasionally  to  give ;  and,  should  a  Spanish  naval  force  arrive 
in  those  seas,  I  will  use  my  best  endeavours  to  prevent  their 
doing  any  injury. 

At  the  same  time,  I  am  free  to  confess  that,  while  I  grant 
you  such  essential  support,  and  the  permission  you  have  re- 
ceived to  recruit  your  force  here,  as  well  as  at  Trinidad,  I  do 
expect  that,  in  the  event  of  your  being  successful,  and  any  of 
the  provinces  on  the  Main  become  independent  of  Spain,  you 
engage,  in  their  name,  to  grant  to  Great  Britain  positively, 
and  to  no  other  power  (the  United  States  of  America  excepted, 
if  you  shall  so  incline),  the  same  privileges  of  trade  as  the  in- 
habitants of  the  said  provinces — that  is  to  say,  that  the  vessels 
belonging  or  subject  to  any  other  power  or  State,  who  are  not 
now  giving  aid  to  the  expedition,  shall  not  enjoy  the  same  im- 
munities with  Great  Britain  ;  and  that  they  shall  be  subject  to 
an  additional  duty  of  10  per  cent,  on  all  goods  they  either  im- 
port or  export,  over  and  above  that  to  be  paid  by  Great  Britain ; 
and  that  none  of  the  coalesced  powers  acting  against  Great 
Britain,  or  that  may  hereafter  become  so  during  the  war,  shall 
be  permitted  to  enter  or  trade  with  any  of  the  ports  of  the  said 
provinces.  That  this  agreement  shall  subsist  and  be  in  force 
until  a  Treaty  of  Commerce  shall  be  concluded  between  Great 
Britain  and  the  provinces  so  liberated  from  the  Spanish  Govern- 
ment; for  which  purpose  Commissioners  shall  be  nominated 
by  each  party,  within  twelve  months  after  the  Definitive  Treaty 
of  Peace  between  Great  Britain  and  the  Powers  now  at  war 
with  her  shall  be  signed. 

It  is  farther  agreed  that  British  subjects  shall,  in  every 
instance,  be  assisted  by  the  Government  of  the  said  provinces 
in  the  recovery  of  their  legal  and  just  debts ;  and  that,  in 
security  thereof,  they  may  hold  lands,  houses,  or  estates,  under 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  421 

the  same  privileges  with  the  natives  of  the  said  provinces;  and 
that  they  shall  be  suffered  to  sell  and  dispose  of  the  said 
property,  both  real  and  personal,  in  like  manner  with  them  ; 
and  that,  in  so  doing,  they  shall  not  be  subject  to  any  tax, 
duty,  or  imposition,  whatever. 

It  is  also  to  be  understood  that  Consuls  or  Vice-Consuls 
may  be  appointed  to  such  provinces,  cities,  towns,  «Sz;c.,  as  the 
British  Government  may  think  proper,  enjoying  every  privi- 
lege or  immunity  now  granted  to  Consuls  belonging  to  Great 
Britain  by  the  most  favoured  nations  of  Europe. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c., 

Alexander  Cochrane. 

General  Miranda  to  Bear-Admiral  the  Hon.  Sir  Alexander 

Cochrane, 

Barbadoes,  June  9,  1806. 

Sir — Having  deliberately  perused  the  foregoing  proposals,  I 
hereby  bind  and  oblige  myself,  as  far  as  my  authority  can  ex- 
tend, to  see  the  same  carried  into  execution,  and  that,  to  all 
intents  and  purposes,  the  same  shall  be  ratified  and  made 
binding  on  those  provinces  that  may  become  independent  of 
Spain.  I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &;c., 

Fran,  de  Miranda., 

Captain  George  Dundas^  R.N.^  to  General  Miranda, 

Elephant,  off  Aruba,  September  22,  1806; 
Sir — I  am  honoured  with  your  note  delivered  to  me  by- 
Colonel  Smith,  and  am  sorry  that  your  dispositions  in  regard 
to  returning  to  Trinidad  should  in  any  respect  have  altered 
since  I  had  the  honour  of  conferring  with  you  on  the  subject 
yesterday.  From  what  at  that  time  passed,  I  naturally  con- 
cluded your  Excellency  had  seen  in  a  proper  point  of  view  the 
necessity  of  immediately  quitting  this  place,  and  returning  with 
the  expedition  to  Trinidad.  In  consequence,  I  have  wrote  to 
the  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  and  also  to  Sir  Alexander 
Cochrane,  informing  them  of  such  your  resolution. 


422  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

I  am  sorry  to  add  farther  that,  should  your  Excellency  not 
be  willincr  speedily  to  quit  this  place,  the  British  naval  force 
must  be  altogether  withdrawn  ;  and  that  it  will  not  be  in  my 
power  to  issue  any  farther  supply  of  provisions  than  what  are 
now  granted  for  merely  carrying  the  expedition  to  some  port  of 
safety.  That  port  appeared  in  your  opinion  of  yesterday  to  be 
best  found  in  Trinidad. 

The  vessel  for  England  might  remain  till  to-morrow ;  but  I 
am  truly  anxious  to  despatch  the  schooner  to  Admiral  Coch- 
rane this  eveninor. 

o 

I  have  the  honour  to  remain,  with  much  regard,  your  Ex- 
cellency''s,  &c.,  George  Dundas. 


RIVTER  DE  LA  PLATA.* 

The  excellent  maps  which  have  been  published  in  Spain 
and  copied  in  this  country  leave  nothing  to  be  said  as  to  the 
breadth,  shape,  soundings,  &c.,  of  the  River  de  la  Plata. 

The  city  of  Monte  Video  is  situated  on  the  north  side  of  the 
river,  at  the  distance  of  about  35  leagues  from  the  Cape  of 
Santa  Maria,  at  the  foot  of  a  very  gentle  declivity,  which  falls 
from  the  interior  towards  the  coast.  Its  population  consists  of 
7  or  8000  souls.  It  is  the  only  port  for  ships  of  the  line  in 
the  river,  but  the  entrance  is  difficult,  and  requires  a  very  ex- 
perienced pilot.  The  fortifications  consist  in  an  irregular  wall, 
two  bastions  on  the  side  of  the  river,  and  a  citadel  with  four 
bastions  on  the  land  side  towards  the  north.  At  the  entrance 
of  the  port  there  are  some  exterior  batteries,  which  used  to  be 
mounted  with  forty  or  fifty  pieces  of  cannon,  but  they  have 
always  been  considered  as  much  too  low. 

The  coast  above  and  below  Monte  Video  is  very  low,  flat, 
and  of  easy  access  for  a  disembarkation  in  boats  or  small  ves- 
sels.    The  garrison  consists  of  one  battalion  of  the  fixed  regi- 

*  This  paper,  without  date  or  name,  is  evidently  by  a  foreigner  well 
acquainted  with  the  subjects  of  which  it  treats. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  423 

ment  of  infantry  of  Buenos  Ay  res,  of  a  regular  regiment  of 
dragoons,  and  of  a  regiment  of  disciplined  militia,  called  volun- 
teers, composed  of  cavalry  and  infantry.  This  force  is  in  part 
distributed  in  detachments  in  the  environs. 

MALDONADO. 
More  to  the  eastward,  on  the  same  side  of  the  river,  about 
twenty  leagues  before  you  come  to  Monte  Video,  is  situated 
Maldonado.  It  contains  about  3  or  4,000  souls  ;  and  in  the 
port,  which  only  admits  of  small  vessels,  is  the  island  of  Gor- 
riti.  The  garrison  consists  of  360  men  of  the  militia  of  the 
country.  All  along  this  coast  a  disembarkation  in  small  ves- 
sels could  be  made  without  danger. 

BUENOS  AYRES. 

Buenos  Ayres,  the  capital  of  the  vice-kingdom  of  its  name, 
is  situated  on  the  south  coast  of  the  Eiver  de  la  Plata,  at  about 
60  leagues'  distance  from  the  Cape  of  San  Antonio,  and  about 
40  leagues  from  Monte  Video.  In  front  of  Buenos  Ayres,  the 
river  is  nearly  1 2  leagues  broad  ;  but  the  water  is  so  shallow  as 
only  to  admit  of  small  vessels,  at  least  without  great  danger. 
The  city  is  about  three  miles  broad,  and  nearly  the  same  in 
length.  The  ground  upon  which  it  stands  is  flat,  and  elevated 
above  the  bed  of  the  river  20  or  25  feet,  to  which  you  descend 
by  a  variety  of  issues,  formed  by  a  continuation  of  the  streets 
to  the  water's  edge. 

Upon  the  side  fronting  the  river  is  the  only  fortification, 
and  which  is  called  "  II  Fuerte  ;"  being  a  sort  of  small  citadel, 
the  usual  residence  of  the  vice-king,  and  the  depository  of  the 
royal  treasure.  This  fortification,  which  is  very  ancient,  and 
formed  of  brick,  is  a  regular  square,  with  four  bastions  and 
curtains,  and,  from  the  salient  angle  of  one  bastion  to  another, 
about  40  toises.  The  artillery  consists  of  40  or  50  pieces  of 
241b.  The  population  of  Buenos  Ayres  is  not  less  than 
60,000  souls,  including  nearly  10,000  blacks. 


424  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF 

The  forces  are  as  follows  : — 


[1808. 
Horse.       Foot.      Total. 


Buenos  Ayres 


Monte  Video 

Frontera, 

Colonia, 

Maldonado 


The  fixed  regiments, 
called  Veterans,  but 
in  fact  composed 
mostly  of  natives, 
and,  consequently, 
unused  to  real  ser- 
vice      1,527     1,800    3,327 

Disciplined  Militia     .       720     1,010     1,730 

A  regiment  of  dra- 
goons         800  800 

A  body  of  disciplined 

volunteers     ...       720        690     1,410 


>  Cavalry  and  infantry 


Total  of  forces  in  or  near  Buenos  Ayres 

Force  of  the  horse  militia  of  the  provinces  adjacent  and 
under  the  Government  of  Buenos  Ayres,  but  at  great 
distances  from  each  other,  principally  belonging  to 
the  Paraguay  and  Tucuman — most  excellent  horse- 
men, but  without  discipline 


THE  ATTACK  ON  BUENOS  AYRES. 


1,924 


3,767    3,500    9,191 


9,191 


9,000 


18,191 


The  force  destined  to  the  attack  on  Buenos  Ayres  should 
consist  of  12  to  14,000  men,  and  be  composed  as  follows  : — 

Battalion  Infantry 10,000 

Light  Infantry  and  flying  Artillery  .         .         .       2,000 

Dismounted  Light  do.  ....       2,000 


Total,     14,000 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  425 

A  stand  of  arms  for  20,000  infantry  and  10,000  cavalry,'  so 
that  a  native  force  might  be  immediately  and  properly  or- 
ganized. The  fleet  supporting  the  attacking  army  should 
have  a  larger  proportion  than  usual  of  frigates  and  small 
vessels. 

The  first  disembarkation  and  attack  might  certainly  take 
place  at  Monte  Video,  as  is  evident  from  what  has  been  already 
said ;  but,  in  case  of  any  tolerable  resistance,  time  would  be 
lost,  and  the  vice-king  of  Buenos  Ayres  completely  on  his 
guard  :  it  might,  therefore,  be  more  advisable  to  direct  the 
first  operations  against  the  capital. 

The  shallowness  of  the  water  opposite  to  Buenos  Ayres  not 
permitting  the  approach  even  of  small  vessels,  the  nearest 
point  where  vessels  of  14  or  16  guns  might  cover  the  disem- 
barkation of  the  troops  in  boats  is  about  a  mile  and  a  half  from 
the  city,  at  a  sort  of  bay  called  La  Recoleta,  where  the  shore 
is  of  easy  access,  and  the  country  forms  part  of  the  before 
mentioned  plain  upon  which  Buenos  Ayres  stands. 

About  eight  leagues  before  you  arrive  at  the  city,  you  have 
the  Bay  of  Barragan,  where  frigates  can  anchor,  and  which 
would  undoubtedly  be  an  excellent  place  of  disembarkation,  if 
the  ground  over  which  you  must  advance  were  not  at  times, 
after  great  rains,  so  boggy  as  to  be  absolutely  impassable. 
The  best  place  of  disembarkation  would,  however,  indubitably 
be  about  26  leagues  from  the  city,  in  the  Bay  of  Barrombon, 
if  the  namgation  of  the  south  channel  of  the  river  can  he  recon- 
noitred and  fully  understood. 

In  the  dry  season,  which  begins  in  the  month  of  December 
and  ends  with  the  month  of  February,  there  is  no  obstacle  of 
consequence  to  impede  the  march  of  the  army  to  Buenos 
Ayres,  as  the  rivers  which  cross  this  part  of  the  country  and 
enter  into  la  Plata  are  either  dry  or  fordable  without  difficulty. 
The  peculiar  advantage  of  this  disembarkation  is  that  it  would 
take  place  in  the  flat  country,  occupied  by  the  Indians,  called 
Pampas,  the  constant  enemies  of  the  Spaniards,  whether  they 


426  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

should  be  in  open  warfare  at  that  particular  time,  or  should 
have  concluded  a  peace  they  never  meant  to  keep  longer  than 
might  suit  their  convenience.  The  character  of  these  Indians 
is  bad,  and  they  must  never  be  trusted  but  with  great  caution  ; 
but  their  detestation  of  the  Spaniards  would  naturally  lead 
them  to  favour  the  English ;  and,  in  return  for  the  most 
trifling  articles  of  English  manufacture,  particularly  of  glass 
and  steel,  they  would  furnish  the  camp  with  a  superabundance 
of  cattle,  and  with  horses  sufficient  to  mount  any  body  of 
cavalry. 

The  march  to  the  city,  through  an  open  country,  offers  no 
difficulty :  nor  is  it  possible  the  Spaniards  should  collect  any 
force  capable  of  impeding  the  progress  of  the  English  army. 
The  expedition  should  sail  for  the  River  of  Plata  in  the 
month  of  September,  so  as  to  arrive  there  about  the  month  of 
December,  the  beginning  of  the  dry  season. 

The  same  detail  is  entered  into  with  regard  to  the  second 
part  of  the  expedition  destined  against  the  kingdom  of  Chili, 
and  also  with  regard  to  the  third  part,  intended  to  land  on  the 
coast  of  Atacama,  or  at  the  ports  of  lea  or  Arica,  and  to  act 
against  the  centre  of  Peru,  so  as  to  attack  nearly  at  the  same 
time  the  two  extremities  of  the  Government  of  the  vice- king  of 
Buenos  Ayres.  The  attack,  however,  upon  the  kingdom  of 
Chili  is  not  considered  as  absolutely  necessary  to  the  success 
of  the  other  expeditions. 


Mr.  J.  D.  B,  Gordon  to  Lord  Castlereagh, 

3,  Beaufort  Buildings,  Strand,  January  26,  1808. 
My   Lord — In  compliance  with  your   Lordship^s   request, 
stated  in  your  letter  of  the  1 7th  December  ultimo,  I  have  en-   , 
closed  for  your  perusal  a  description  of  the  country  between  ^' 
New  Vera  Cruz  and  Mexico,  in  New  Spain,  with  an  account 
of  several  of  the  principal  towns,  military  force,  points  of  de- 
fence, manners  and  customs  of  the  inhabitants,  &ic.,  accom- 


1808.]  LOED  CASTLEREAGH.  427 

panied  with  plans  of  the  country  as  high  up  as  the  city  of 
Puebla,  together  with  a  plan  of  the  city  and  harbour  of  New 
Vera  Cruz.  These,  with  the  description  I  have  mentioned, 
I  was  enabled  to  obtain  during  a  residence  of  six  years  in 
Mexico  and  the  adjacent  country,  where  I  was  sent  for  the 
purpose  of  instructing  myself  in  the  language,  and  receiving  the 
principal  part  of  my  education  :  for  which  purpose  I  was  thir- 
teen months  in  an  Apostolic  College,  under  the  care  of  the 
principal  guardian,  recommended  by  the  Count  de  la  Cortina 
(a  private  correspondent  of  the  late  ever  to  be  lamented  Mr. 
Pitt).  This  guardian  particularly  instructed  me  in  the  nature 
of  their  religion,  and  in  the  art  of  pleasing  and  gaining  the 
friendship  of  the  inhabitants ;  and,  when  I  travelled  up  the 
country,  he  and  the  Count  de  la  Cortina  were  my  protectors, 
and  furnished  me  with  presents  to  give  to  the  Indians. 

In  the  year  1805  I  intended  leaving  this  country  for  Eng- 
land, and  was  completely  furnished  with  every  information  in 
writing  requisite  for  the  Government  of  my  own  country  to  be 
acquainted  with  ;  but,  unfortunately,  by  receiving  a  letter 
from  England,  I  was  taken  into  custody,  and,  for  self- 
preservation,  was  under  the  painful  necessity  of  committing 
my  journals  to  the  flames.  I  was  two  months  confined  in  a 
dungeon,  and  seven  months  under  an  arrest  in  the  Artillery 
Barracks  of  New  Vera  Cruz,  but  was  released  at  last  throuo^h 
the  interference  of  the  vice-queen,  with  whom  I  was  acquainted, 
and  their  not  being  able  to  substantiate  any  charge  against  me. 

At  last,  on  the  28th  day  of  April,  1807,  I  was  permitted  to 
take  my  passage  to  Europe,  under  the  character  of  a  naval 
officer,  with  the  hopes  of  being  regularly  exchanged  at  Cadiz, 
where  I  arrived  on  the  12th  day  of  August  ultimo  ;  and  im- 
mediately el  Sehor  Marquess  del  Socorro  delivered  me  up  to 
H.  Archdeckin,  Esq.,  his  Britannic  Majesty's  agent  for  pri- 
soners of  war  ;  but  the  Naval  General  Moreno  (Commander-in- 
Chief  of  his  Catholic  Majesty's  fleet  in  that  port)  objected  to 
my  being  exchanged,  and  through  his  means  a  consultation  was 


428  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

held  relative  to  the  business,  when  it  was  determined  that,  on 
account  of  my  having  been  so  long  in  Peru  and  Mexico,  el 
Seiior  Marquess  del  Socorro  should  acquaint  the  Court  of 
Madrid  of  the  circumstance  ;  and  the  Court  determined  that  I 
should  be  kept  in  confinement  during  the  war.  When  I  was 
made  acquainted  with  this  determination,  I  immediately  wrote 
to  John  Hunter,  Esq.,  his  Britannic  Majesty^s  Commissary 
General  for  prisoners  of  war  at  Madrid,  whose  answers  and  the 
determination  of  his  Catholic  Majesty  I  have  taken  the  liberty 
of  enclosing  for  your  lordship's  perusal.  This  harsh  determi- 
nation induced  me  to  attempt  making  my  escape  to  our  fleet 
off  Cadiz,  which  I  effectuated  in  an  open  boat  on  the  12th  day 
of  October  ultimo,  and  furnished  Admiral  Purvis  with  the 
state  of  the  French  and  Spanish  fleet  in  that  harbour  j  and, 
after  remaining  on  board  the  Atlas  six  days,  I  took  my  pas- 
sage to  England  in  his  Majesty ""s  ship  Prevoyante. 

Your  lordship  will  see,  by  the  following  information,  of  what 
service  I  can  be  to  my  country,  in  whose  cause  I  am  anxious 
to  exert  the  best  of  my  abilities. 

I  hope  your  lordship  will  excuse  any  defect  that  may  appear 
in  the  enclosed  information  :  as  I  left  England  when  a  child, 
I  am  not  acquainted  with  the  due  forms  and  etiquette  in  ad- 
dressing your  lordship. 

I  have  the  honour  to  remain,  &c., 

J.  D.  R.  Gordon. 

STATE  OF  MEXICO. 

New  Vera  Cruz  is  the  principal  sea-port  in  the  Gulph  of 
Mexico.  The  number  of  its  inhabitants  is  computed  to  be 
between  11  and  12,000,  one  third  of  which  are  Spanish  Creoles 
and  Europeans ;  the  remainder  are  of  all  the  various  castes 
between  blacks  and  whites.  They  are  considered  to  be  the 
most  wealthy  people  in  the  world  in  times  of  peace,  as  Vera 
Cruz  is  the  key  of  all  the  commerce  of  Mexico  and  Europe ; 
but  in  time  of  war  this  wealthy  population  labours  under  the 


18Q8.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  429 

greatest  distress,  as  they  have  at  that  time  very  little  commu- 
nication with  Europe ;  and,  being  so  contiguous  to  our  pos- 
sessions in  the  West  Indies,  are  greatly  annoyed  by  our  crui- 
sers on  that  station.  They  are  also  heavily  oppressed  by  the 
tyranny  of  their  civil  government,  which  authorizes  the  troops 
to  have  so  much  power  over  them  that  they  treat  them  with 
the  greatest  contempt,  and  insult  them  on  every  occasion.  The 
lower  class  of  people  in  particular  are  frequently  subject  to 
their  attacks  in  the  streets,  and  have  forcibly  taken  from  them 
such  articles  as  they  may  be  carrying  to  and  from  the  market. 
The  battalion  of  troops,  called  el  Batallon  fixo  de  Vera  Cruz, 
is  composed  of  1,020  pardoned  convicts.  Their  oflScers  give 
them  a  good  example ;  for,  when  Mr.  Edward  Watson,  of  his 
Majesty'^s  ship  Fortune,  was  a  prisoner  among  them,  they 
robbed  him  of  ^^45.  These  braw  officers  are  not  admitted 
into  any  genteel  society,  but  are  looked  upon  with  horror. 
They  have  likewise  200  regular  artillerymen,  and  100  militia. 
The  former  are  continually  employed  in  the  artillery  services 
of  the  city,  and  in  keeping  in  order  and  packing  up  the  artillery 
stores  that  are  conveyed  to  Acapulco  and  San  Bias,  where 
great  part  of  them  are  embarked  for  Monterey,  the  capital  of 
the  Spanish  settlements  on  the  coast  of  California,  to  defend 
them  against  the  wild  Indians.  The  latter  are  employed  in 
the  small  garrisons  along  the  coast.  They  have  also  300  black 
soldiers,  who  guard  the  city  jail.  They  have  between  eleven 
and  twelve  hundred  cavalry,  called  the  Provincial  Dragoons  of 
Vera  Cruz,  who  are  composed  of  the  labourers  and  farmers 
within  20  or  25  miles  of  the  city  :  there  are  only  200  of  them 
on  duty  at  a  time,  the  remainder  being  engaged  in  their  own 
family  concerns. 

Vera  Cruz  is  one  mile  in  length,  and  three  quarters  of  a  mile 
in  breadth  :  it  has  a  slio;ht  stone  wall  round  it  full  of  small 
embrasures  for  musketry,  and  seven  round  towers  from  12  to 
15  feet  high,  containing  each  five  embrasures  for  ordnance. 
The  fort  of  Santiago,  on  the  south-east  angle  of  the  wall,  is 


430  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

the  only  fort  of  the  seven  that  is  mounted  with  cannon.  It 
has  four  gates,  one  of  which  towards  the  sea  goes  out  to  the 
pier,  and  has  a  strong  guard  to  prevent  contraband  trade. 

On  the  south-west  angle  of  the  city  are  the  cavalry  and  in- 
fantry barracks,  which  can  contain  7,000  troops.  On  the 
south-east  angle,  between  fort  Santiago  and  fort  St.  Catherine, 
lies  the  Artillery  Ground,  with  the  artillery  storehouses,  and 
opposite  to  them  the  Artillery  Barracks,  with  accommodation 
for  500  men.  Adjoining  the  wall  towards  the  sea  are  the 
Treasury  Offices,  and  the  Arsenal,  or  Naval  Storehouse,  which 
is  well  supplied. 

The  city  has  a  cathedral  and  seven  convents,  the  riches  of 
which  were  conveyed  up  the  country  to  Xalapa,  on  the  12th 
of  March,  1807,  as  it  was  reported  that  there  was  a  small 
expedition  fitting  out  at  Jamaica,  for  the  purpose  of  attacking 
Vera  Cruz.  At  the  same  time,  the  Viceroy  gave  very  strict 
orders  to  the  merchants  to  take  the  same  precaution  with  all 
their  effects  ;  but,  as  their  removal  would  have  been  attended 
with  much  expense,  his  orders  were  not  complied  with.  His 
Excellency  therefore  declared  in  the  royal  Audiencia  that  no 
blame  could  be  attached  to  him,  should  they  be  totally  ruined. 

The  city  is  abundantly  supplied  with  all  sorts  of  provisions 
from  the  adjacent  country ;  it  produces  nothing  of  itself,  being 
situated  on  a  sandy  beach.  It  is  bounded  on  three  sides  by 
high  banks  of  sand,  which  would  afford  great  shelter  to  a  be- 
sieged army.  The  place  is  scantily  supplied  with  good  water, 
which  has  induced  the  inhabitants  to  have  large  cisterns  con- 
structed in  their  houses  to  receive  the  rain-water  in  the  rainy 
season,  which  supplies  them  in  the  dry  season. 

The  city  is  defended  principally  by  the  Castle  of  San  Juan 
de  Ulloa,  which  is  situated  on  a  small  island,  one  mile  distant, 
close  by  which  a  first-rate  ship  of  war  can  be  moored,  as  the  Spa- 
niards have  fixed  very  strong  brass  rings  in  the  rock  under  the 
castle  for  that  purpose.  This  famous  fortress  contains  213  pieces 
of  artillery,  of  various  calibres,  from  nine  to  thirty -six  pounders  ; 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  431 

but  their  carriages  are  in  a  very  rotten  and  decayed  state.  It 
is  garrisoned  by  only  400  men,  and  is  abundantly  supplied  with 
artillery  stores  of  every  kind,  independently  of  brass  and 
copper  bars  to  the  value  of  three  milKons  of  dollars.  Three 
seventy-fours  would  be  a  sufficient  force  to  make  it  surrender 
in  a  very  short  time.  The  south,  the  west,  and  north-west 
batteries  are  50  feet  in  height ;  the  west  and  north  north-west 
.1 4  feet  from  the  surface  of  the  water ;  but  I  could  not  obtain 
the  height  of  the  east,  east  south-east,  and  south-east  batteries. 
These  batteries  are  constructed  on  arches,  and  their  base- 
ments are  formed  for  store-houses,  barracks  for  troops,  accom- 
modations for  the  officers,  and  Hkewise  dungeons  for  prisoners. 
These  basements  are  not  very  strong  ;  and  when  there  is  any 
artillery  exercises,  the  whole  Castle  is  materially  affected.  It 
is  supplied  every  morning  with  fresh  provisions  from  Vera 
Cruz,  excepting  when  the  heavy  north-west  gales  prevail  and 
prevent  all  intercourse  with  the  city ;  consequently,  the  gar- 
rison at  that  time  experiences  much  inconvenience.  It  is  sup- 
plied with  water,  by  means  of  a  very  large  cistern,  which  fills 
during  the  rainy  season,  that  begins  from  the  middle  of  June 
to  the  middle  of  July,  and  ends  in  September.  Some  of  the 
most  distinguished  families  of  the  city  are  likewise  supplied 
with  water  from  this  cistern. 

The  harbour  is  not  more  than  half  a  mile  in  width  at  the 
entrance,  with  sufficient  depth  of  water,  eleven  to  twelve 
fathoms,  but  gradually  decreasing  as  you  approach  the  castle, 
close  to  which  it  is  eight  and  nine  fathoms  in  depth.  No  ship 
can  lie  nearer  to  the  town  than  half  a  mile,  as  the  water 
rapidly  decreases  in  depth  from  that  distance,  and  at  low  water 
there  is  little  more  than  one  fathom  close  to  the  wharf  or  quay. 
It  is  sheltered  from  the  north-west  winds  by  the  point  of  Del- 
gado,  which  forms  with  the  city  the  Bay  of  Bergara,  where 
the  water  is  so  shallow,  that  none  but  vessels  of  small  draught 
can  enter  it.  Point  Homos,  about  three  quarters  of  a  mile 
south-east  of  the  city,  forms  another  bay,  having  a  narrow 


432  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

and  intricate  passage  from  the  harbour,  and  being  interspersed 
with  shoals,  which  render  the  navigation  dangerous.  In  enter- 
ing the  harbour,  it  is  necessary  to  have  the  assistance  of  pilots 
belonging  to  the  city. 

Old  Vera  Cruz  is  situated  fifteen  miles  north-west  of  New 
Vera  Cruz,  close  to  the  north  bank  of  the  river  Antigua,  four 
miles  from  its  junction  with  the  sea.  It  contains  between  2  and 
3,000  inhabitants,  consisting  chiefly  of  mulattoes,  with  a  few 
European  families  and  some  Creoles.  Those  of  the  lower 
class  are  chiefly  employed  in  the  business  of  agriculture  in  the 
neighbourhood,  and  in  the  making  of  bricks,  which  are  mostly 
sent  down  the  river  Antigua,  and  along  the  coast  of  New  Vera 
Cruz,  in  flat-bottomed  boats  (which  the  Spaniards  call  pira- 
guas) during  the  summer  months,  when  the  weather  is  serene. 
In  winter,  the  intercourse  between  the  two  cities  by  water  is 
entirely  interrupted,  owing  to  the  great  surf  along  the  coast. 
No  other  vessels  but  these  flat-bottomed  boats  can  navio^ate 
this  passage,  as  the  water  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Antigua 
is  not  more  than  four  feet  in  depth.  All  the  traffic  carried  on 
by  New  Vera  Cruz  with  Mexico  and  other  inland  towns  passes 
through  the  city,  and  is  conveyed  across  the  river  Antigua  in 
large  canoes ;  it  is  carried  forward  to  and  from  Mexico  on 
mules,  which  are  chiefly  used  here  as  beasts  of  burden.  This 
part  of  the  country  abounds  also  in  horses,  but  they  are  of 
a  small  breed,  yet  capable  of  enduring  much  fetigue,  and  are 
chiefly  employed  for  agricultural  purposes. 

In  this  city  are  very  commodious  barracks,  which  are  occu- 
pied by  some  artillerymen  and  a  detachment  of  provincial 
cavalry  from  New  Vera  Cru2 :  these  barracks  are  capable  of 
containing  3,000  men  and  900  horses. 

The  river  Antigua,  on  the  bank  of  which  this  city  is  seated, 
derives  its  source  from  Mount  Orisaval,  a  considerable  distance 
up  the  country  ;  it  is  not  more  than  half  a  mile  in  width  at 
its  junction  with  the  sea,  and  is  navigable  no  higher  tlian  Old 
Vera  Cruz  ;  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  below  which  is  situated 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAOTT.  433 

on  the  river  a  small  fort,  mounted  with  three  pieces  of  cannon 
only. 

Between  Antigua  river  and  New  Vera  Cruz,  is  a  fine,  firm-, 
sandy  beach,  well  calculated,  with  the  assistance  of  flat- 
bottomed  boats,  for  the  disembarkation  of  an  army  of  15  or 
20,000  men,  with  the  greatest  facility,  provided  the  wind  was 
moderate  ;  but,  when  it  blows  fresh  from  the  north-west, 
(which  is  the  only  strong  wind  that  prevails  in  this  country) 
it  would  prevent  boats  from  approaching  the  shore. 

The  lower  class  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  country  have  not 
the  smallest  idea  of  patriotism,  but  are  entirely  guided  by 
motives  of  interest ;  and,  were  Europeans  wishing  to  gain  their 
affections,  no  better  mode  could  be  adopted  than  that  of  making 
them  presents  of  such  articles  as  ribbons,  silk  stuffs,  small 
crucifixes,  silk  stockings,  linens,  and  such-like  European  manu- 
factures ;  and,  if  these  things  are  offered  them  for  what  they 
conceive  to  be  a  cheap  rate,  they  are  almost  as  well  pleased  as 
by  getting  them  without  purchase. 

In  case  of  an  army  having  once  made  good  a  landing  in 
this  countrj^,  it  may  be  necessary  to  say  something  on  the 
important  subject  of  the  religion  of  the  people;  as  a  knowledge 
of  that  subject,  and  an  acquiescence  in  the  forms  of  their  devo- 
tion, are  the  principal  objects  to  be  attended  to  for  gaining  their 
esteem  and  affection. 

They  are  of  the  Roman  Catholic  persuasion,  but  have  no 
idea  of  the  principles  of  their  religion,  and  are  entirely  guided 
by  enthusiasm  and  attachment  to  the  outward  signs  of  their 
faith,  such  as  hearing  mass,  crossing  themselves,  counting  their 
beads,  and  attending  their  processions  through  the  streets ; 
and  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  greater  the  art  displayed  in 
giving  beauty  and  gracefulness  to  the  image  of  the  saint  used 
in  the  procession,  the  warmer  is  their  enthusiasm ;  yet,  without 
the  least  reverence  for  the  virtues  of  the  saint  whom  they  are 
worshipping,  they  are  entirely  engrossed  by  the  attractions  of 
his  representation.     Their  priests  are  men,  whose  good  offices 

VOL.  vn.  F  F 


434  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

should  be  particularly  courted  by  the  leaders  of  a  European 
army,  as  they  have  such  an  ascendency  over  the  laity,  that, 
were  their  affections  once  gained,  those  of  the  latter  would 
immediately  follow.  The  means  that  I  should  recommend  in 
preference  for  gaining  the  good-will  of  the  priests  would  be, 
first,  to  be  very  attentive  to  their  conversations  on  religion, 
and  by  no  means  to  interrupt  them  at  that  time,  but  to  listen 
with  the  utmost  patience,  and  even  to  give  them  hopes  that  at 
some  future  period  you  may  become  a  convert ;  secondly,  to 
be  much  in  their  society,  riding  out  with  them,  and  at  their 
houses,  and  inviting  them  to  come  to  you  in  return,  making 
them  presents,  and  also  receiving  theirs,  with  seeming  marks 
of  esteem  and  affection,  as,  in  this  country,  they  have  not  the 
least  idea  of  being  averse  to  lay  themselves  under  an  obliga- 
tion ;  and,  were  they  even  loaded  with  presents  of  the  greatest 
value,  they  would  accept  of  them  all,  and  consider  them  as 
merely  so  many  marks  of  attention  and  kindness ;  thirdly,  to 
attend  as  often  as  possible  their  religious  ceremonies,  and  to 
show  great  outward  devotion  at  that  time,  and,  while  in  their 
cathedrals  and  convents,  to  be  always  silent  and  uncovered, 
as  nothinor  tends  to  alienate  their  affections  so  much  as 
the  smallest  disrespect  or  contempt  for  the  forms  of  their  re^ 
ligion. 

The  education  and  studies  of  the  generality  of  the  priests 
are  entirely  confined  to  theology,  and  show  that  they  have  no 
idea  of  political  subjects,  but  conceive  them  to  be  far  beneath 
their  notice  ;  nor  have  they  any  knowledge  of  commercial  or 
any  other  subjects  unconnected  with  their  religion.  The  whole 
of  their  time  is  devoted  to  their  ecclesiastical  ceremonies,  and 
acts  of  gambling  and  lasciviousness ;  and  it  may  be  remarked 
that  the  priests  have  so  screened  themselves  from  the  obloquy 
that  might  be  thrown  against  them  by  the  laity,  for  being 
guilty  of  acts  of  debauchery,  that  they  have  established  a  new 
doctrine  among  themselves,  when  they  assert  from  the  pulpit 
that  it  is  a  mortal  sin  to  censure  in  any  way  the  conduct  of 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  435 

their  pastors  ;  and  they  have  impressed  them  with  a  belief 
that  when  they  leave  the  vestry,  invested  with  the  alb  and 
chasuble,  they  are  free  from  all  guilt  while  performing  mass  or 
any  other  ecclesiastical  ceremony. 

From  this  it  may  be  deduced  that,  as  these  priests  are  of 
such  corrupt  habits,  and  lost  to  all  sense  of  honour  and  virtue, 
they  may  be  very  easily  seduced  from  their  allegiance,  as 
interest  speaks  all  languages,  and  acts  all  parts,  even  that  of 
disinterestedness  itself. 

Notwithstanding  the  generality  of  the  priests  are  men  of 
such  dissolute  habits,  yet  there  are  some  among  them  of  a  very 
different  description,  men  of  virtue  and  piety,  many  of  whom 
are  branches  of  the  first  families  for  birth  and  consequence  in 
the  country ;  but,  being  Creoles,  they  are  incapacitated  for 
holding  any  military  or  civil  employment  of  distinction  in  the 
State,  as,  by  the  laws  of  this  country,  no  Creole  can  hold  any 
thing  above  a  subordinate  situation  in  the  military  and  civil 
departments  ;  but,  in  the  ecclesiastical  and  judicial,  there 
exists  no  law  to  prevent  them  from  attaining  the  rank  of 
Bishop,  and  that  of  a  Regent  in  any  of  the  three  Eoyal 
Audiences  of  Mexico,  Guadalaxara,  and  Guatimala. 

The  nobles  and  others  of  high  rank,  who  are  Creoles  by 
birth,  bear  a  rooted  antipathy  to  those  Spaniards  who  are  sent 
from  Old  Spain,  to  act  as  governors  of  towns  and  chief  com- 
manders of  their  armies.  As  these  Creoles  are  for  the  most 
part  men  of  great  learning  and  knowledge,  they  consider  it  a 
degradation  to  be  governed  by  men,  many  of  whom  are  not  so 
well  informed  as  themselves,  and  who  assume  over  them  a 
degree  of  arrogance  but  ill  suited  to  their  nature  and  disposi- 
tion. 

It  may  be  inferred  from  this,  that  the  natives  would  be  in- 
clined to  throw  off  the  yoke  of  the  Spaniards,  but  they  are  so 
fettered  by  their  religion,  which  has  taught  them  to  believe 
that  the  least  disobedience  to  their  Government  and  supreme 
commanders  would  immediately  be  followed  by  excommunica- 

F  F  2 


436  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

tion  from  the  Pope,  the  bare  mention  of  which  is  to  them 
more  terrible  than  the  idea  of  any  torture  that  could  be  in- 
flicted upon  them.  Besides,  they  have  no  sense  whatever  of 
independence,  but  consider  themselves  bound  to  submit  to 
whatever  is  imposed  upon  them  by  their  rulers.  This,  added 
to  a  stupidity  inherent  in  their  nature,  renders  them  the  most 
subservient  and  time-servino:  people  on  the  face  of  the  globe. 

Much  of  this  stupor  and  extreme  indifference,  which  governs 
all  their  actions,  arises  in  a  great  degree  from  the  terror  they 
are  held  in  by  the  Inquisition,  which  keeps  a  strict  watch  over 
them ;  but,  were  they  released  from  that  abject  slavery  in 
which  they  are  kept  by  this  tribunal,  and  were  suffered  to  have 
a  free  intercourse  with  civilized  nations,  they  would  show  them- 
selves to  be  a  people  not  void  of  those  qualifications  which 
would  render  their  services  acceptable  and  very  useful. 

The  system  which  the  Spaniards  have  adopted  to  extract 
their  revenue  from  this  country  has  also  been  very  offensive 
to  the  nobility  and  the  enlightened  classes  of  the  people ;  for 
instance,  no  Mexican  nobleman  or  gentleman  of  independent 
fortune  is  suffered  to  travel  into  any  foreign  country,  not  even 
to  Old  Spain  itself,  without  the  permission  of  his  Catholic 
Majesty,  in  order  that  no  money  may  be  spent  out  of  his  own 
dominions. 

The  Kinor  holds  also  an  exclusive  ri^jht  in  the  sale  of  to- 
bacco,  colours  for  paint,  gunpowder,  sulphur,  saltpetre,  and 
stamped  paper ;  and  if  an  individual  is  detected  in  the  sale  of 
any  of  these  articles,  he  is  liable  to  suffer  death  for  the  offence, 
if  the  quantity  he  has  sold  is  great,  and,  if  it  is  trivial,  he  will 
be  compelled  to  undergo  ten  years'  slavery  in  chains. 

These  articles,  which  are  manufactured  by  the  King  alone, 
are  kept  for  sale  in  Mexico,  in  warehouses  which  the  Spaniards 
call  estan^os^  or  places  of  monopoly.  The  royal  manufactory 
of  tobacco  is  a  very  extensive  fabric,  wherein  are  employed 
900  men  and  women.  There  is  also  in  the  capital  of  each 
province  one  of  these  estancos  for  tlie  same  purpose,  which  are 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  437 

supplied  from  those  at  Mexico ;  but  in  every  small  town 
throughout  the  different  provinces  are  to  be  found  various 
estanqiiillos^  or  small  shops,  for  the  sale  of  tobacco  and  snuff", 
all  belonging  to  the  King,  and  they  are  supplied  monthly  with 
a  certain  quantity  from  the  royal  manufactory  at  Mexico ;  the 
money  arising  from  the  sale  of  which  they  must  also  return 
monthly  to  the  same  place;  and  the  persons  employed  by  the 
King  to  sell  the  tobacco  in  these  shops  are  paid  only  one 
dollar  for  every  hundred  they  receive  for  the  sale  of  the  to- 
bacco. The  amount  of  the  profits  arising  to  the  King  annually 
from  the  sale  of  tobacco  and  the  other  articles  is  computed  to 
be  not  less  than  five  millions  of  dollars. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  plants  which  this  country  pro- 
duces is  called  maguey^  from  the  root  of  which  is  extracted  a 
liquor  called  pulque^  which  is  used  throughout  this  country  as 
much  as  malt  liquor  is  in  England.  It  intoxicates  those  who 
drink  to  excess ;  it  is  mild  in  its  nature,  though  somewhat 
acid.  There  is  brought  into  the  city  of  Mexico  every  morning 
as  much  of  this  pulque  as  is  worth  ^$^10,000,  and  the  revenue 
thence  arising  to  the  King  is  immense ;  for  instance,  a  noble- 
man, the  Marquess  de  Valle  Ameno,  with  whom  I  was  in 
habits  of  friendship,  sent  from  his  estate  every  morning  as 
much  of  this  beverage  as  was  sold  for  ;^100,  out  of  which  the 
King  received  ^84  for  duty,  of  which  extortion  he  bitterly 
complained. 

When  the  root  of  this  plant  is  not  disturbed  by  extracting 
the  pulque,  but  is  suff'ered  to  grow  to  maturity,  it  becomes  a 
soft  tree,  about  ten  feet  high,  the  substance  of  which  is  manu- 
factured by  the  Indians  into  a  kind  of  hemp,  of  which  they 
make  cordage,  sewing  thread,  &c.  This  is  the  most  predomi- 
nant plant  in  the  country,  and  produces  the  greatest  revenue 
of  any,  except  tobacco.  The  revenue  arising  to  the  King  from 
the  mines  and  the  commerce  with  Old  Spain  I  apprehend  is 
already  known  in  England. 

The  native  inhabitants  of  Mexico  differ  greatly  in  disposi^ 


438  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

tion  and  manner  from  those  of  Peru  and  Chili.  Those  of 
Mexico  are  of  a  mild,  soft,  innocent  disposition,  bordering  on 
extreme  indifference ;  and  the  great  dread  they  are  held  in  by 
those  Spaniards  who  are  their  governors  renders  them  ex- 
ceeding cowardly.  They  bear  a  rooted  hatred  towards  the 
Spaniards,  which  arises  from  the  severity  of  their  treatment ; 
and  the  Spaniards  do  not  fail  to  take  advantage  of  the  mild- 
ness of  their  disposition,  to  exercise  with  greater  severity  that 
tyrannical  authority  which  they  hold  over  them.  Were  they 
freed  from  this  tyranny  and  treated  with  kindness,  they  might 
become  useful  mechanics  and  excellent  soldiers,  possessing,  as 
they  do,  considerable  natural  abilities. 

The  natives  of  Peru  and  Chili  are  of  a  more  bold  and  fierce 
disposition  than  those  of  Mexico,  which  makes  them  far  less 
submissive  to  their  governors  ;  consequently,  they  are  treated 
by  them  with  less  severity,  as  the  nature  of  the  Spaniards  is 
to  use  that  authority  which  they  hold  over  inferiors  in  a 
greater  or  less  degree,  according  as  they  find  their  dispositions. 

Leaving  Old  Vera  Cruz,  the  next  place  on  the  road  to 
Mexico  that  engages  our  attention  is  Paso  de  Varas.  This 
place,  twelve  miles  distant  from  the  former  city,  is  one  of  tlie 
four  points  of  defence  which  the  Viceroy  has  established  in 
this  country :  it  is  a  small  village,  situated  in  the  middle  of  a 
fine  plain,  spacious  enough  for  the  review  of  a  large  army,  and 
the  fittest  position  for  a  European  army,  after  it  has  made 
good  a  landing.  It  is  sixteen  miles  from  the  coast,  but  an 
invading  army  will  easily  reach  this  station  before  that  of  the 
Mexicans  could  be  brought  to  oppose  it ;  as  the  news  of  the 
approach  of  an  enemy ""s  fleet  could  not  reach  the  Viceroy  at 
Mexico  in  less  than  two  days,  and  four  more  would  elapse 
before  he  could  arrive  with  the  army  at  this  point.  The 
Spanish  army  always  lies  at  Xalapa,  which  is  only  forty-eight 
miles  from  the  coast,  and  under  the  command  of  a  Major- 
General,  who  receives  intelligence  of  an  enemy ""s  approach  by 
the  same  messenger  who  passes  through  that  town  on  his  way 


1808.]  LOKD  CASTLEKEAGH.  439 

to  Mexico ;  but,  in  the  absence  of  the  Viceroy,  this  officer  is 
not  authorized  to  take  the  field  with  the  army,  or  to  act  with 
it  in  any  other  way  than  in  its  own  defence.  The  main  body 
of  the  army,  stationed  at  Xalapa,  amounts  to  about  10,000 
men. 

The  four  principal  points  of  defence  established  by  the 
Viceroy  are  Paso  de  Varas  ;  La  Rinconada,  situated  on  a  rising 
ground,  seventeen  miles  from  Paso  ;  Lanceros,  twelve  miles 
further ;  and  the  castle  and  plain  of  Perote,  sixteen  miles 
from  Lanceros.  In  this  castle  are  deposited  45  millions  of 
dollars,  and  all  the  spare  arms  in  the  country  :  it  is  mounted 
with  72  pieces  of  cannon.  These  four  places  are  situated  on 
the  road  between  Old  Vera  Cruz  and  Mexico.  There  is  no 
such  thing  as  a  fixed  battery  or  other  obstruction  on  the  whole 
way  between  those  two  cities. 

The  town  of  Xalapa,  situated  close  to  the  foot  of  Mount 
Perote,  is  computed  to  contain  between  12  and  14,000  inhabit- 
ants. Here  are  barracks  for  cavalry  and  infantry,  capable  of 
accommodating^  11,000  men:  they  were  constructed  durina: 
my  residence  in  the  country.  The  climate  is  between  tempe- 
rate and  frigid ;  and  the  town  is  abundantly  supplied  with 
excellent  water  from  Mount  Perote.  The  wealthy  class  of 
the  inhabitants  derive  their  support  from  agriculture  and 
commerce,  and  the  lower  class  are  employed  chiefly  as  mecha- 
nics and  in  husbandry ;  they  are  the  cleanliest  and  most  civi- 
lized people  in  the  whole  country ;  as,  in  former  times,  the 
fleet  that  annually  arrived  from  Europe  sent  its  merchandize 
to  this  town,  where  a  fair  was  held  for  the  disposal  of  it,  where 
all  the  inhabitants  of  the  adjacent  country  assembled  to  make 
purchases,  and  consequently  had  an  opportunity  of  observing 
and  imitating  the  manners  of  the  Europeans.  Xalapa  has  a 
large  cathedral,  in  which  are  deposited  the  plate  and  gold  of  all 
the  churches  along  the  coast,  several  other  small  churches,  and 
a  convent. 

Seven  miles  beyond  Xalapa,   going  round  the  foot  of  the 


440  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

mountain  to  Perote,  is  situated  the  villasje  of  Burras,  where 
the  climate  in  winter  is  extremely  cold  ;  and  seven  miles  from 
Burras,  at  the  foot  of  the  north-west  side  of  the  mountain,  is 
the  small  town  of  Perote,  in  which  there  is  nothing  worthy  of 
remark  but  the  castle,  a  place  of  no  considerable  strength, 
though  mounted,  as  I  have  said,  with  72  pieces  of  cannon.  It 
is  surrounded  by  a  ditch,  in  which  1  never  saw  any  water, 
crossed  by  a  drawbridge  close  to  the  gate,  which,  when  drawn 
up,  unites  itself  with  the  gate,  and  doubles  its  strength. 

This  fortress  is  famous  for  the  immense  sums  of  money  that 
have  been  deposited  in  it  in  times  of  war,  but  at  present  it  is 
rendered  still  more  so,  as  there  has  been  less  money  exported 
from  the  country  during  this  war  than  at  any  former  period. 
It  contained,  when  I  left  Mexico,  the  sum  of  45  miUions  of 
dollars,  besides  some  silver  and  a  few  gold  bars.  To  give  an 
idea  of  the  strength  of  this  castle,  I  need  only  mention  that 
the  Viceroy  satirically  said  of  it,  that  ^'  he  could  take  it  with 
the  domestics  of  his  own  family  alone.''''  All  the  spare  arms  of 
the  country,  which  amount  to  a  considerable  number,  are  also 
deposited  here,  and  contribute  to  render  the  possession  of  this 
eastle  a  most  important  object  to  a  European  army,  for,  that 
being  taken,  the  whole  country  would  immediately  submit,  as 
there  is  no  other  obstruction  to  prevent  an  invading  force  from 
advancing  to  Puebla  and  Mexico  ;  and  I  can  assert  with  the 
greatest  confidence,  my  lord,  that  an  English  army  of  15,000 
men,  having  a  due  proportion  of  cavalry,  commanded  by  an 
able  general,  whose  humanity  and  good  address  are  not  inferior 
to  his  skill  in  the  field,  would  conquer  this  country  with  the 
greatest  ease. 

I  repeat  this,  my  lord,  as  my  firm  belief;  and,  were  my 
services  required  as  an  aide-de-camp,  I  would  engage,  from  my 
loc^l  knowledge  of  the  country  and  the  nature  of  its  inhabit- 
ants, and  also  possessing  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  lan- 
guage, to  give  the  Commander  such  assistance  as  would  render 
him  competent  to  overcome  every  obstacle  and  difficulty.     I  do 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  441 

not  mean  that  15,000  men  would  be  required  to  conquer  the 
^lexican  army  ;  one  half  of  that  number  would  be  sufficient 
for  the  purpose ;  but  the  respect  or  awe  which  an  army  of 
15,000  men  would  produce  in  the  native  inhabitants  would 
make  them  cling  to  the  English;  and,  having  once  experienced 
their  friendship  and  good  treatment,  they  would  readily  form 
an  attachment  which  would  continue  and  increase,  as  they 
became  mutually  acquainted  with  each  other. 

The  road  from  New  Vera  Cruz  to  Mexico  is  inferior  to  none 
in  the  universe ;  it  is  wide  enousfh  for  six  carriages  to  2:0 
abreast,  and  the  materials  of  which  it  is  made  are  hard  and 
durable  ;  consequently,  the  baggage  and  other  appurtenances  of 
an  army  can  be  conveyed  with  great  facility.  That  part  of 
the  road  between  New  Vera  Cruz  and  Perote  was  constructed 
under  the  orders  of  the  present  Viceroy,  and  was  begun  in  the 
year  1803.  The  road  from  Old  Vera  Cruz  to  La  Ventilla, 
where  it  joins  the  other,  is  very  bad  in  the  rainy  season ;  yet 
it  is  passable  enough  for  carriages. 


General  Miranda  to  Lord  Castlereagh, 

Grafton  Street,  May  16,  1808. 

My  Lord — Give  me  leave  to  trouble  your  lordship  once 
more  upon  a  subject  so  interesting  to  our  countries,  and  so  near 
my  own  heart,  that  I  should  consider  it  a  blameful  neglect  on 
ray  part  if  I  was  to  conceal  from  you,  at  this  critical  moment, 
the  smallest  thought  or  apprehension  that  might  lead  to  the 
preservation  of  South  America,  or  to  the  success  of  the  plans, 
the  execution  of  which  we  have  now  in  hand. 

The  late  eventful  occurrences  in  Spain,  by  which  that  coun- 
try is  not  only  taken  possession  of  by  the  armies  of  France, 
but  the  whole  monarchy  absolutely  delivered  to  the  ruler  of 
Europe,  are  so  materially  interesting,  and  connected  with  the 
execution  of  our  plans  for  the  emancipation  of  South  America, 
that,   if   we  do   not   avail  ourselves   of   this  grand  and  pro- 


442  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

vidential  opportunity,  we  may  have  hereafter  to  lament  it  for 
ever. 

We  have  now,  in  fact,  every  circumstance  in  our  favour,  if, 
with  celerity  and  magnanimity,  we  appear  before  the  South 
American  provinces,  offering  them  assistance  for  emancipation, 
rational  liberty,  and  independence :  but  if,  through  the  activity 
of  our  enemies  and  unforeseen  accidents,  they  arrive  there 
before  us,  with  some  plausible  scheme  and  intrigues  suitable  to 
their  interest  and  private  views,  then  the  best  digested  and 
most  judicious  plans  may  be  defeated,  or  in  a  great  measure 
checked  and  spoiled. 

Nothing  but  delay,  I  conceive,  my  lord,  may  ruin,  at  this 
moment,  our  preconcerted  plans  ;  therefore,  I  should  take  the 
liberty  of  submitting  to  you,  if  the  measure  of  leaving  behind 
us  some  part  of  the  intended  co-operating  force  (to  join  soon 
after)  would  not  be  even  a  preferable  thing,  for  the  sake  of 
anticipating  the  pernicious  views  and  schemes  of  our  enemies, 
than  to  expose  the  whole  of  our  operations  to  be  defeated  by  a 
fatal  delay. 

I  have  no  doubt  that  your  lordship''s  penetration,  as  well  as 
Sir  Arthur  Wellesley's  great  experience  and  judgment,  must 
have  foreseen  these  circumstances  and  difficulties ;  but,  as  I 
said  before,  I  do  present  them  to  your  lordship,  at  this  eventful 
crisis,  feeling  anxious  for  the  safety  of  the  New  World,  as  well 
as  for  the  happiness  of  Great  Britain  and  mankind  in  general. 
I  have  the  honour  to  remain,  &;c., 

Fran,  de  Miranda. 


Lord  Melville  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Dnnira,  June  8,  1808. 
My  dear  Lord — Agreeably  to  your  desire,  I  return  you  the 
papers  which  came  in  your  packet  of  yesterday ;  and,  agree- 
ably to  my  promise  of  yesterday,  shall  send  you  what  occurs 
to  me  on  the  re-perusal  of  your  letter.  I  cannot  undertake  to 
send  you  any  thing  methodical,  and  you  must  be  contented  to 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  443 

receive  the  loose  and  floating  ideas  which  have  passed  through 
my  mind  in  the  course  of  a  restless  night. 

I  wish  Parliament  had  been  up  before  you  had  begun  the 
execution  of  projects  so  deeply  important ;  for  the  prepara- 
tions of  necessity  give  rise  to  speculations,  all  of  which  are 
used  by  factious  men  as  instruments  of  mischief  to  their 
country,  and  as  the  means  of  obstructing  its  operations  being 
attended  with  success. 

As  your  lordship  has  not  distinctly  explained  the  grounds 
or  information  on  which  his  Majesty  has  been  induced  to  send 
the  force  from  Gibraltar  and  Ireland  to  the  coast  of  Spain,  any 
suggestions  I  offer  on  that  subject  must,  of  course,  be  very 
vague  and  inconclusive. 

My  general  impression  is  that,  if  you  proceed  on  any  such 
information  or  communication  with  Spain,  as  induces  us  to 
confide  in  a  co-operation  to  get  into  our  possession  the  fleets  of 
Spain,  Russia,  or  France,  now  in  the  ports  of  Spain,  the  plan 
is  a  meritorious  one,  and  the  success  would  be  attended  not 
only  with  great  eclat,  but  with  very  beneficial  consequences ; 
but  if,  without  any  such  specific  object,  you  have  been  tempted 
by  any  general  speculations  of  a  disaffection  in  the  minds  of 
the  Spaniards,  against  either  their  own  Government  or  the 
Government  of  France  erected  there,  it  is  impossible  for  me 
not  to  entertain  the  most  serious  apprehensions,  if,  with  a  view 
to  any  such  co-operation,  a  considerable  body  of  British  troops 
should  be  landed  and  carried  into  the  interior  of  Spain.  If  it 
turns  upon  a  question  of  numbers,  the  population  of  Spain, 
animated  by  a  proper  spirit,  is  adequate  to  work  its  own  deli- 
verance. If  they  cannot  rouse  themselves  to  a  spirit  suffi- 
ciently vigorous,  and  adequate  to  the  circumstances  of  their 
situation,  I  cannot  conceive  any  substantial  good  or  any  decisive 
effects  that  can  be  accomplished  by  a  body  of  British  troops 
comparatively  small,  when  we  consider  the  magnitude  of  the 
object  to  be  accomplished.  And,  in  addition  to  this,  you  will 
never  forget  the  facility  with  which   any  numbers  of  French 


444  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

troops  may  be  poured  into  the  provinces  of  Spain  ;  and  we  all 
know  enough  of  the  temper  and  animosity  of  Bonaparte  to 
Great  Britain,  not  to  feel  that  there  is  no  sacrifice  he  would 
not  risk  of  his  own  troops,  if  he  saw  a  reasonable  prospect  of 
bringing  any  serious  disaster  upon  a  considerable  body  of 
British  force.  Indeed,  independent  of  the  gratification  of  his 
own  rancour,  he  would  judge  wisely  in  acting  so ;  for,  if  such 
a  disaster  was  to  befal  any  considerable  body  of  British  troops 
engaged  in  such  an  enterprise,  it  would  have  the  worst  effects 
on  the  feelings  of  this  country,  and  bring  complete  discredit 
on  the  councils  of  his  Majesty. 

As  to  the  question  more  immediately  under  consideration,  I 
own  I  am  very  sanguine  in  my  expectations  of  success  in 
effecting  a  separation  of  Spanish  America  from  the  mother 
country,  if  the  measure  is  planned  with  wisdom,  and  the  exe- 
cution is  attempted  with  a  due  attention  to  the  feelings  and 
prejudices  of  the  people  with  whom  we  have  to  deal.  And, 
in  this  view,  it  is  certainly  a  point  of  radical  importance  to 
discharge  from  our  thoughts  and  to  disclaim  every  idea  of 
establishing  in  our  persons  another  European  sovereignty  in 
the  Spanish  Colonies  in  America.  One  of  the  great  topics  we 
must  endeavour  to  enforce  on  their  minds,  is  the  oppression 
they  have  suffered  under  the  yoke  of  Old  Spain ;  and  we 
should  urge  any  such  topics  with  a  very  bad  grace,  if  we  did 
not  convince  them  that  we  had  no  such  plan  in  our  own  con- 
templation, when  we  come  forward  professing  ourselves  as  their 
deliverers  from  the  yoke  under  which  they  had  so  grievously 
groaned.  Above  all,  it  will  require  the  utmost  caution  to  per- 
suade them  that  we  have  no  plans  against  their  religion.  If 
we  are  not  credited  in  this  respect,  we  shall  have  the  whole 
strength  of  the  country  against  us.  The  great  body  of  the 
people  are  bigoted  and  in  the  hands  of  their  clerg}^,  and  any 
thing  like  a  meditated  attack  against  their  religious  prejudices 
would  operate  as  a  watchword  of  union  against  us. 

When  I  was  in  your  office,  I  had  occasion,  in  official  in- 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  445 

structions  to  Governor  Picton,  as  Governor  of  Trinidad,  to 
inculcate  those  sentiments.  The  document  is  probably  in  your 
Office.  The  subject  was  brought  to  my  recollection  last  spring, 
when  I  was  in  London,  by  a  communication  made  to  me  by 
General  Miranda.  A  despatch  of  mine  to  Governor  Picton 
appears  to  have  been  captured,  and,  as  I  learned,  indirectly 
through  him,  he  found  the  terms  of  my  despatch  translated 
into  the  Spanish  language,  and  dispersed  throughout  the 
Spanish  provinces  as  an  incitement  to  revolt  against  the 
Spanish  yoke.  This  is,  at  least,  a  proof  that  the  manner  in 
which  I  instructed  Colonel  Picton  to  address  them  was  con- 
genial to  their  own  feelings  and  prejudices.  I  have  no  other 
copy  of  it ;  and  therefore  you  will  be  so  good  as  return  it  to 
me  ;  but  perhaps  it  may  be  desirable  for  you  to  read  the  com- 
munication made  to  me  by  Miranda,  and  with  that  view  I  send 
it  to  you  under  a  separate  cover. 

The  force  you  have  appropriated  for  the  emancipation  of 
Spanish  America  seems  respectable ;  and  I  should  flatter  my- 
self that,  with  the  aids  we  are  naturally  entitled  to  expect,  it 
may  be  adequate  to  its  object.  If  I  was  necessarily  called 
upon  to  decide  finally  on  the  alternative  you  put,  where  the 
most  beneficial  exertions  could  be  made  on  the  Spanish  posses- 
sions in  America,  I  should  be  obliged  to  decide  in  favour  of  an 
attack  on  the  province  of  Mexico,  or,  to  speak  more  accurately, 
as  preparatory  thereto,  on  Mobile,  Pensacola,  New  Orleans,  or 
such  other  positions  as  would  give  us  the  undoubted  command 
of  the  Mississippi.  By  having  those  positions,  you  would  secure, 
in  the  most  efficient  way,  your  conquest  of  Mexico ;  and,  that 
secured,  it  appears  to  me  that  the  means  of  diffusing  through 
the  whole  of  Spanish  America  a  spirit  of  revolt  are  almost 
certain,  and,  in  doing  so,  we  are,  at  the  same  time,  adminis- 
tering most  substantially  to  the  commercial,  and,  of  course,  to 
the  maritime  interests  of  Great  Britain. 

There  is  another  view,  in  which  securing  "the  positions  I 
have  stated  at  the  mouths  of  the  Mississippi  appears  to  me  to^ 


446  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

be  of  deep  importance,  not  only  for  the  conquest  of  Mexico, 
but  as  connected  with  the  establishment  of  a  permanent  and 
solid  connexion  with  the  United  States  of  North  America.  I 
can  never,  in  my  contemplation  of  this  subject  of  Spanish 
America,  lay  out  of  my  consideration  the  ultimate  state  of 
North  A  merica.  If  he  is  not  already  known  at  your  Office, 
which  I  think  he  probably  is,  let  me  entreat  you  to  desire 
Alexander  Hope  to  bring  about  a  communication  between  you 
and  Mr.  Charles  Williamson,  with  whom  Mr.  Pitt  and  myself 
have  been  in  almost  unremitted  confidential  communication, 
since  our  first  connexion  with  him  began,  at  the  time  of  our 
threatened  war  with  Russia,  on  the  subject  of  Oczakow,  down 
to  the  present  moment.  If  I  have  any  solid  knowledge  of  the 
interests  of  Great  Britain  in  relation  to  the  United  States  of 
America,  and  the  means  of  securing  a  paramount  influence  in 
those  States,  either  jointly  or  separately,  I  am  bound  to  con- 
fess that  I  am  indebted  for  that  knowledge  to  the  information 
and  instruction  I  have  received  from  Mr.  Williamson.  I  have 
long  had  confidential  communication  with  him ;  and,  in  the 
course  of  a  visit  he  paid  me  at  this  place,  during  my  residence 
here  last  winter,  I  had  occasion  to  discuss  this  topic  with  him  in 
every  point  of  view,  and  the  result  of  the  whole  is  a  perfect 
conviction  that  it  will  be  owing  to  our  own  mismanagement 
and  want  of  wisdom,  if  we  do  not  derive  substantial  aid  from 
North  America  for  the  emancipation  of  Spanish  America;  and, 
our  influence  over  Spanish  America  once  firmly  established,  it 
will  serve  as  an  instrument  in  our  hands  to  obtain,  consolidate, 
and  preserve,  a  paramount  authority  and  control  over  the 
councils  and  politics  of  North  America.  Indeed,  so  sanguine 
am  I  on  this  subject,  I  have  not  a  doubt  it  would  lead  to  Great 
Britain  obtaining  and  preserving  the  commercial  market  of  both 
Americas ;  and  it  would  be  the  interest  of  both  to  cling  to  the 
pre-eminence  of  the  British  flag,  as  the  only  effectual  guardian 
of  all  their  substantial  interests  ;  and,  that  being  established 
as  their  general  feeling  and  the  ruling  principle  of  their  system 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  447 

and  conduct,  Grreat  Britain  would  be  rendered  independent  of 
the  casualty  of  every  European  combination  against  her  ;  and 
the  whole  both  of  North  and  South  America,  in  place  of  being 
jealous  of,  or  cavilling  at,  the  maritime  power  and  interests  of 
Great  Britain,  would  feel  that  on  that  power  rested  all  their 
hopes  of  security  against  any  such  revolutionary  barbarity  as 
that  which  now  enthrals  the  whole  of  the  European  quarter  of 
the  globe. 

With  such  impressions  on  my  mind,  animating  and  enlivening 
the  future  prospects  of  my  country,  I  must  urge  you  to  give 
at  least  a  candid  and  patient  hearing  and  consideration  to  all 
that  Mr.  Williamson  shall  lay  before  you.  I  know  that  he 
has  had  much  communication  with  Mr.  Canning,  and  the 
confidential  men  in  his  Office.  I  know  not  whether  the  clear- 
ness of  his  head,  the  accuracy  of  his  information,  and  the 
acuteness  of  his  understanding,  have  made  the  same  impres- 
sion on  them  they  have  on  me,  and,  to  my  knowledge, 
made  on  Mr.  Pitt ;  but  it  is  my  earnest  wish  that  you  should 
not  form  your  opinion  at  second  hand.  Converse  with  him ;  hear 
all  he  has  to  communicate ;  and  then  form  your  own  opinion. 

I  have  said,  if  I  was  obliged  to  decide  on  the  alternative 
you  put,  I  should  give  the  preference  to  the  establishment  of 
our  power  in  Mexico  over  an  expedition  directed  to  an  esta- 
blishment at  Monte  Video;  but  it  will  be  with  much  reluctance 
if  I  am  obliored  to  abandon  this  last.  I  have,  ever  since  I  read 
the  fatal  despatch  of  Whitelocke,  after  his  disaster  at  Buenos 
Ayres,  mourned  over  the  wanton  loss  of  Monte  Video  and  the 
command  of  the  Eiver  Plata ;  and  ever  since  the  fortunate 
emigration  of  the  royal  family  of  Portugal  to  the  Brazils,  aiid 
our  consequent  influence  in  that  part  of  the  world  took  place, 
I  have  flattered  myself  that  the  naval  and  military  force  to  be 
kept  at  the  Brazils  would  almost  necessarily  lead  to  the  re- 
establishment  of  our  power  at  the  mouth  of  the  Plata.  I 
cannot  bring  myself  to  abandon  that  expectation.  I  know  not 
whether  we  have  any,  and  to  what  extent  of  nulitary  force  at 


448  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

the  Janeiro  to  aid  the  Portuguese.  If  we  have  not,  we  cer- 
tainly should ;  and  the  largeness  of  the  destined  force  for  the 
coast  of  Spain,  I  should  think,  would  admit  of  a  detachment 
of  it  to  the  Brazils.  It  is  equally  the  interest  of  the  Portur 
guese,  as  our  interest,  to  prevent  the  River  Plata  falling  into 
the  hands  of  France ;  and  I  should  think  such  an  effort  per- 
fectly within  our  joint  exertion,  under  the  protection  of  a 
British  squadron. 

You  say  nothing  in  your  letter  of  a  naval  force  being 
destined  for  the  purposes  of  Spanish  America,  in  addition  to 
what  may  be  necessary  for  the  protection  of  the  Brazils ;  but 
I  should  certainly  consider  that  a  very  inadequate  provision 
was  made  for  the  purposes  of  Spanish  America,  if  there  was 
not  a  squadron  appropriated  both  for  the  mouths  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi and  the  River  Plata. 

Many  other  topics  crowd  in  upon  me  in  the  contemplation 
of  this  subject,  on  which  I  would  wish  to  enlarge.  Indeed,  the 
discussion  is  endless;  but  I  feel  myself  exhausted,  and  my  head 
oppressed,  so  that  I  am  under  the  necessity  of  stopping. 

I  remain,  &c.,  Melville. 

PS.  Of  course,  if  there  is  any  thing  in  the  idea,  it  must 
have  occurred  to  yourself;  but,  as  it  strikes  me,  I  may  as  well 
mention  it.  I  suppose  that  no  persons  can  be  more  horrified 
at  what  is  now  passing  in  Spain  than  their  clergy.  Will  it 
not  be  possible  to  get  hold  of  some  of  them,  and  send  them 
out  as  emissaries  to  Spanish  America,  to  persuade  the  inhabit- 
ants of  those  provinces  that  we  have  no  plans  against  their 
religion  ?  On  the  same  errand,  would  it  be  impossible  to  avail 
ourselves  of  a  few  well-affected  Roman  Catholic  Clergy  from 
Ireland  ?  M. 

General  Miranda  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Grafton  Street,  August  19,  1808. 
My  Lord — Since  Sir  Arthur   Wellesley''s  departure  from 
this  capital  in  June  last,  I  have  had  no  communication  with 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  449 

your  lordship  upon  the  political  affairs  of  South  America, 
nor,  indeed,  did  I  wish  to  call  your  lordship's  attention,  ab- 
sorbed, as  I  conceived,  in  the  affairs  of  Portugal  and  Spain. 

In  the  mean  time,  however,  I  have  received  various  letters 
and  verbal  communications  relative  to  the  province  of  Oaraccas, 
through  Trinidad  and  the  West  India  islands,  that  I  thought 
sufficiently  important  to  communicate  to  your  lordship ;  but, 
unfortunately,  upon  calling  on  General  Charles  Stewart  ^  for 
this  purpose,  I  found  him  so  much  pressed  and  engaged  at  the 
moment  of  his  departure  for  Spain,  that  I  could  not  fulfil  my 
wishes. 

This  I  the  more  regretted,  as  your  lordship  must  be  aware 
that,  after  the  communications  which,  with  your  lordship's 
and  Sir  Arthur's  approbation,  I  have  made  since  January  last 
to  my  correspondents  in  Trinidad  and  Caraccas,  they  would 
be  extremely  anxious  for  further  advice  from  me,  on  the  sub- 
ject of  which  I  was  desirous  of  consulting  Greneral  Stewart. 
Not  having  been  so  fortunate  as  to  have  an  opportunity  of 
doing  so,  and  feeling  the  necessity  of  writing  before  the  sailing 
of  the  packet,  it  appeared  to  me  the  best  advice  I  could  give 
them,  in  the  present  most  critical  state  of  affairs,  both  with 
respect  to  the  uncertainty  of  events  in  Spain,  and  to  the 
various  sentiments  and  interests  prevailing  in  America,  would 
be  to  open  a  direct  communication  by  authorized  persons  with 
the  British  Government,  in  order  to  concert  with  it  such  mea- 
sures as  circumstances  might  require,  without  listening  to  the 
Juntas  of  Madrid,  Oviedo,  &;c.,  whose  interests  were  opposite ; 
but  the  Cabildos  to  assume  the  Government  of  the  country  them- 
selves, having  present,  among  other  official  papers,  his  Majesty's 
Speech  to  both  Houses  of  Parliament,  and  the  late  Order  in 
Council  relative  to  the  Spanish  nation  ;  which  documents  re- 
garded also  our  American  interests,  and  gave  an  idea  of  the 
views  of  the  British  Government  towards  their  mutual  com- 
mercial interests  with  our  opulent  establishments  in  South 
^  Then  Under-Secretary  of  State. 

VOL.  VIL  G  Q 


450  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

America,  recommending  to  them,  above  all,  to  act  with  unani- 
mity^ wisdom,  &c. 

The  most  material  intelligence  which  my  information  con- 
veys is  that  the  French  detachment  of  troops  which  was  at 
Caraccas  had  returned  to  Guadeloupe,  and  that  there  is  at  pre- 
sent no  French  force  remaining  in  that  province.  2ndly,  that 
the  intercourse  between  the  same  province  and  the  island  of 
Trinidad,  since  the  late  calamity  happened  to  the  town  of  Port 
of  Spain  by  fire,  has  materially  increased,  and  a  friendly  com- 
munication been  so  far  established,  that  a  great  number  of  the 
Spanish  inhabitants,  sufferers  at  Trinidad,  had  been  received 
and  settled  on  the  opposite  part  of  the  Continent,  in  a  place 
called  Guiria,  with  the  consent  and  approbation  of  the  present 
Governor  of  Cumana,  who  had  permitted  every  assistance  to 
be  given  to  the  Island,  and  received  Governor  Hislop's  confi- 
dential agents  in  a  most  friendly  manner.  Srdly,  that,  as  to 
the  dispositions  of  the  inhabitants  of  these  provinces,  on  hear- 
ing the  information  transmitted  by  me  from  this  country, 
they  were  excessively  willing  to  accede  to  it,  and  as  well  in- 
clined to  embrace  the  opportunity  for  emancipation  as  they 
ever  were. 

Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,  at  the  moment  of  quitting  this  for 
Ireland,  (General  Stewart  present)  communicated  to  me  a 
message  from  your  lordship,  purporting  that  the  requests  in 
my  Memorandum  of  the  6th  of  June  were  agreed  to,  so  far  as 
it  related  to  the  re-establishment  of  my  pension,  and  providing 
for  my  Secretary,  Mr.  Molini ;  which  matter  was  to  be  referred 
to  Mr.  Vansittart*'s  statement ;  that  the  other  subjects  would 
be  decided  after  knowing  the  results  from  Spain  ;  and  that  the 
original  papers  that  I  had  transmitted  to  Government  would 
be  returned  to  me  through  General  Stewart,  with  whom  I  was 
to  continue  in  future  my  communications  to  Government,  as  I 
had  previously  done  with  Sir  Arthur. 

General  Stewart,  on  the  point  of  his  departure,  informed  me 
that  your  lordship  had  agreed  to  the  above  pension,  and  the 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  451 

support  of  my  Secretary  as  given  in  by  Mr.  Vansittart's  Me- 
morandum, and  that  I  was  to  apply  to  Mr.  Cooke  for  payment 
of  the  same,  on  which  account  I  beg  your  lordship  will  accept 
my  most  grateful  acknowledgments  and  thanks. 

Mr.  Vansittart  will  have  the  goodness  to  inform  you  of  the 
circumstance  of  two  officers,  Messrs.  Downie  and  K/Oorbach, 
who,  having,  with  the  approbation  of  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley, 
been  induced  to  wait  for  some  time  in  this  town,  with  the  view 
of  being  usefully  employed  with  me,  may  be  entitled  to  receive 
some  assistance  or  support  from  Government,  if  your  lordship 
may  deem  it  proper. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  fcc, 

Fran,  de  Miranda. 


Memorandum. 
Produce  of  the  Mines  of  Spanish  America,  in  1806. 
Mexico,     1,352,348  dollars,  in  gold. 
23,383,672       „       in  silver. 


24,736,020 
N.B.  This  is  less  than  the  usual  produce,  the  average  of 
several  preceding  years  being  about  twenty-seven  millions  of 
dollars.  The  port  of  Vera  Cruz  is  that  from  which  shipments 
to  Old  Spain  are  made,  a  distance  from  the  city  of  Mexico  of 
220  English  miles. 

Peru.     Produce  of  Gold  and  Silver  Mines  of  Peru,  for  ten 
years,  from  80  to  89,  both  included  : 
Silver,  made  into  plate    .         .  602,130  dollars. 

Silver,  made  into  ingots            .     29,126,024       „ 
Gold 4,424,035 


Annual^  produce,  about  .     34,152,189 

N.B.     Lima  is  the  city  where  the  dol^lars  are  coined,  and  it 
is  also  the  principal  shipping  port. 

^  So  in  MS. 

G  G  2 


452  LETTE]{S  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Carthageiia  is  the  shipping  port  of  Santa  Fe,  from  which  it 
is  distant  upwards  of  200  miles ;  but  the  quantity  of  treasure 
collected  or  produced  in  this  district  is  not  great,  perhaps  not 
much  exceeding  a  million  of  dollars  per  annum. 

Rio  de  la  Plata  has  hitherto  been  an  important  debouchure  for 
the  mines  of  Potosi,  the  place  of  deposit  of  the  Royal  Treasury, 
as  well  as  the  residence  of  the  wealthiest  of  the  trading  com- 
panies of  Spain. 


General  Miranda  to  Sir  A  rthur  Wellesley. 

Grafton  Street,  ce  7  Fevrier,  1809. 

Mon  cher  General — J"'ai  re9u  hier  une  lettre  dont  copie  est 
ci-jointe  ainsi  que  la  traduction  ;  et,  comme  c''est  un  sujet  de 
la  plus  haute  importance  pour  ce  pays-ci  ainsi  que  pour  le 
mien,  je  vous  la  transmets  sans  delai,  afin  qu"*etant  commu- 
niquee  aux  Ministres  de  sa  Majeste,  on  puisse  prendre  des 
mesures  convenables  et  a  tems. 

Je  n^ai  pas  besoin  de  vous  faire  observer  que  si,  le  20  Sep- 
tembre,  quand  on  avoit  les  prospects  les  plus  favorables  sur  la 
Revolution  de  PEspagne,  le  probleme  (comme  dit  Tauteur  de 
cette  lettre)  n'^etoit  pas  encore  resolu  en  faveur  des  Patriotes  a 
la  Ha  vane,  quel  sera  le  rdsultat  aujourd'hui  quand  on  appren- 
dra  le  manque  total  du  succ^s,  et  la  soumission  aux  vues  du 
pretendu  nouveau  Roi  de  las  Indias,  Joseph  Bonaparte  I 

La  personne  a  qui  cette  lettre  est  adressee  est  Don  Josef  de 
Toledo,  Lieutenant  de  vaisseau  dans  la  marine  Espagnole,  et 
ayant  servi  comme  Adjutant- General  dans  Tarmee  de  Galice, 
commandee  par  lilake.  II  est  natif  de  la  Havane,  dont  la 
famille  m'a  ete  connue  dans  le  tems  de  mon  sejour  dans  le 
pays.  Son  p^re  commande  actuellement  la  Matricula  ou 
role  d'^equipages  dans  toute  Tile,  ^tant  Creole  lui-meme,  et 
d'une  famille  respectable  dans  le  pays. 

11  m'*a  communique  bien  d''autres  choses,  relativement  k  la 
situation  actuelle  des  colonies  Espagnoles  dans  le  Nouveau 
Monde ;  mais  comme  c'est  un  sujet  sur  lequel  les  Ministres  de 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  453 

sa  Majeste  ne  veulent  pas  tourner  la  vue  dans  ce  moment-ci 
jusqu'a  ce  que  les  affaires  de  TEspagne  ne  soient  entierement 
terminees,  comnie  vous  m'avez  fait  Fhonneur  de  me  dire  Fautre 
jour,  je  m''en  defends  de  vous  en  parler  davantage — attendant 
avec  impatience  cette  remarquable  epoque. 

J'ai  ajoute  sur  la  copie  ci-jointe  la  liste  des  escadres  qui 
etoient  au  Ferrol,  quand  il  quitta  la  Corogne  le  17  du  mois 
passe,  en  compagnie  du  Due  de  Veraguas. 

Etant  toujours  avec  devouement  et  consideration,  votre  tr^s 

humble  et  obeissant  serviteur, 

Fran,  de  Miranda. 


Literal  Translation. 

Havana,  September  20,  1808. 
My  dear  Joe — for  a  long  time  have  I  experienced  with  re- 
gret the  want  of  news  from  you ;  but,  thank  God,  the  political 
events  in  Spain  have  opened  the  door  of  the  seas,  and  conse- 
quently to  me  that  of  communication  with  you. 

I  do  not  doubt,  my  dear  son,  that  you  have  embraced  the 
just  cause,  and  that  you  would  sacrifice  yourself  for  it,  without 
ever  forgetting  those  principles  of  which  you  have  so  often 
given  me  proofs :  and  I  repeat  to  you,  what  I  have  often  told 
you,  that  I  would  rather  lose  you  for  ever  than  have  the  re- 
gret to  learn  that  you  do  not  rank  among  the  honourable  men. 
I  have  said  enough  to  my  beloved  son. 

You  know  that  the  infamous  CFarrel  has  many  relations 
here,  and  is  greatly  allied  by  various  other  causes,  as  well  as 
Casa-Calvo  :  these  keep  and  foment  a  secret  party,  which  may 
be  very  prejudicial  to  us  ;  because  the  problem  of  the  French 
politicians  is  not  yet  resolved.  I  wish  you  would  minutely 
detail  to  me  what  has  passed,  and  give  me  your  opinion,  with 
reflection,  about  the  future,  that  I  may  with  reserve  do  all  that 
is  in  my  power  in  behalf  of  my  beloved  country. 

God  make  you  as  happy  as  is  the  wish  of  your  father, 

Lewis. 


454  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  Rt.  Hon,  N.  Vansittart. 

Downing  Street,  August  2,  1809. 

My  Dear  Sir — As  you  are  much  better  acquainted  with 
Miranda  than  I  am,  I  venture  to  trouble  you  with  the  confi- 
dential perusal  of  the  enclosed  ;  and  perhaps  you  will  take  the 
trouble  to  ascertain  how  far  there  is  any  truth  in  the  represen- 
tation received  from  Admiral  Apodaca.  I  should  very  re- 
luctantly adopt  any  measure  of  unkindness  to  Miranda ;  but, 
connected  as  we  are  with  Spain,  the  honour  of  the  country  and 
of  the  Government  must  not  be  compromised  ;  and  I  think  you 
will  be  enabled  to  obtain  assurances  from  Miranda,  so  distinct 
with  respect  to  his  conduct,  as  to  justify  me  in  continuing  to 
him  the  protection  which  he  now  receives. 

I  beg  you  will  excuse  the  liberty  I  have  taken  of  availing 
myself  of  your  good  ofiices  on  the  present  occasion,  and  that 
you  will  believe  me,  &c.,  Castlereagh. 


The  Rt,  Hon.  N.  Vamittart  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Great  Malvern,  August  7,  1809. 

My  dear  Lord — I  should  have  felt  considerable  uneasiness 
from  your  lordship's  letter  of  the  2nd  instant,  sensible  as  I 
am  of  the  delicate  situation  in  which  Government  is  placed,  if  I 
did  not  feel  confident  that,  in  some  way  or  other,  Apodaca  has 
been  misinformed ;  and  I  can  have  no  objection  to  state  dis- 
tinctly, for  your  lordship's  and  Mr.  Canning's  information 
only,  my  reasons  for  thinking  so. 

First,  I  am  satisfied  that  Miranda  has  heard  nothing  through 
Brazil,  since  he  received  the  letters  which  I  showed  to  you, 
and  to  which  he  did  not  return  any  answer :  but  I  think  he 
mentioned  something  to  me  of  a  duplicate  of  an  old  letter  of 
his,  which  he  supposed  to  have  been  intercepted,  and  of  which 
it  is  possible  Apodaca  may  have  heard. 

Secondly,  because  I  have  strong  reason  to  believe  that,  at 
present,  he  only  wishes  to  be  quiet  and  to  wait  for  events  ;  and 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  455 

this  not  only  from  his  declaration,  but  from  his  conduct  on  a 
very  critical  occasion,  which  lately  happened,  and  which  I 
should  certainly  have  mentioned  to  your  lordship,  if  I  had 
not  found  you  wished,  as  far  as  possible,  to  keep  clear  of  all 
communications  on  the  subject. 

About  six  months  ago,  Miranda  received  a  communication 
from  Caraccas,  his  native  place,  pressing  him,  in  the  strongest 
manner,  to  go  there  immediately,  stating  that  those  who  op- 
posed him,  when  he  appeared  off  the  coast,  in  1 806,  were  now 
among  the  most  eager  for  his  return,  offering  him  any  money 
he  might  want,  and  even  mentioning  that  a  ship  was  ready  for 
his  accommodation.  He  consulted  me  immediately,  and  offered 
to  take  your  directions  as  to  the  answer  he  should  give,  but  I 
thought  it  best  (considering  what  you  had  said  to  me)  to  ad- 
vise him  to  decline  the  offer  entirely  with  civility,  without 
involving  you  in  any  way  in  the  business.  He  accordingly 
answered  that  he  did  not,  at  present,  think  it  advisable  to  go 
out,  and  referred  the  person  who  wrote  to  him  to  the  public 
accounts  and  to  his  correspondence  with  your  lordship,  of 
which  he  sent  a  copy,  for  the  state  of  affairs. 

I  think  this  transaction  very  material,  not  only  to  show  his 
present  disposition,  but  to  prove  how  essential  it  is,  even  to 
Spanish  interests,  that  he  should  remain,  as  at  present,  under 
the  protection  of  this  Government.  If  he  was  to  leave  this 
country,  where  could  he  go  with  personal  safety  but  to  the 
United  States  of  America  ?  And  if  he  had  received  such  a 
proposition  there,  I  cannot  doubt  he  would  have  accepted  it ; 
and  that  the  consequence  would  have  been  an  explosion,  which 
could  not  fail  of  being  very  mischievous,  whatever  the  event  of 
it  might  have  been. 

I  certainly  do  not  attribute  this  disposition  to  be  quiet  to  any 
change  in  his  principles,  but  to  his  conviction  that  what  he 
wishes  must  take  place  speedily,  in  the  natural  course  of 
events ;  ^.^.,  either  that  Spain  will  be  overrun  by  the  French, 
(which  is  his  decided  opinion)  and  that,  in  that  event,  a  sepa- 


456  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES.  [1809. 

ration  of  the  Colonies  under  British  protection  will  take  place 
of  itself;  or  that,  if  Spain  should  be  able  to  maintain  the  con- 
test, she  will  be  obliged  to  adopt  a  more  liberal  policy  towards 
the  Colonies,  and  admit  them  to  a  full  participation  of  liberty 
and  civil  rights. 

Of  this  there  has  very  lately,  for  the  first  time,  been  some 
appearance,  though  Bonaparte  was  wise  enough  to  assume  the 
mask  of  it  at  first,  by  calling  the  pretended  deputies  of  Mexico, 
Peru,  &c.,  in  common  with  those  of  Spain,  to  the  assembly  at 
Bayonne.  But  what  has  particularly  pleased  Miranda  is,  that 
the  Marquess  del  Toro  and  some  other  persons,  whom  he  con- 
siders as  friends,  at  Caraccas,  and  who  had  been  arrested,  and 
were  even  said  to  have  been  executed  by  the  Jamaica  papers, 
have  been  set  at  liberty  by  the  new  Governor  of  Caraccas, 
Emparan. 

I  certainly  shall  not  fail  to  use  all  my  influence  (which  I 
believe  is  considerable)  with  him  to  confirm  this  disposition  to 
be  quiet,  and  I  think  I  can  answer  for  his  doing  nothing  with- 
out consulting  me.  If  you  wish  me  to  make  any  communica- 
tion to  him  as  from  your  lordship,  in  addition  to  my  own  ad- 
vice, I  shall  be  happy  to  do  it. 

I  remain,  my  dear  Lord,  very  sincerely  yours, 

N.  Vansittart. 


END  OF  VOL.  VIL 


F  Sbobcrl,  JuQ.,  B'upvit  Street,  Hityuiurkft. 


BINDING  SZC7.  NOV  9  ^  jgg? 


DA  Londonderry,  Robert  Stewart, 

522  2d  Marquess  of 

L3A3        Memoirs  and  correspondence 

I848  of  Viscount  Castlerea^ 

V.7 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


