

Pitt had been careful not to mention that his government had been in the redemption-buying business since 1790. Pitt's retort that his government had been purchasing only the redemption of slaves fooled no one in Commons that day. This argument, born of Pitt's still creative imagination, was nothing more than a feeble attempt by an embarrassed man to avoid a humiliating situation. Stimulating the wretched trade with orders for thousands of slaves in order to save them from slavery was hardly the way to bring the trade to an end.

Pitt may have been correct when he claimed that his government had never contracted to purchase five thousand slaves from a single contractor. But, here, again, was yet another attempt of Pitt to move the argument away from the central point, which was the evident duplicity of his government (or at least of certain ministers) regarding the slave trade, by quibbling about numbers and the purpose of buying people.

Finally, abolition of the trade became law in March 1807, with a suddenness that surprised even some abolitionists.37 What factors produced this historic occasion? The coalition ministry that came to power in 1806, and shepherded the abolition bill through Parliament contained many who supported abolition. Other reasons included the improved tactics and lobbying efforts of the abolitionists, as well as the political leadership of Grenville. But to these factors must be added another: abolition was no longer a threat to national or imperial security on military grounds. The removal of the danger, therefore, ended the need for the quiet agreement among abolitionists and anti-abolitionists in cabinet. Abolitionists were now free to pursue their cause unencumbered. The elimination of the military argument weakened the opposition program by removing a major plank and may substantially account for the rapid success of abolition in 1806 and 1807. How did this finally come about?

Actually, the revitalization of the abolition effort in 1804, prompted considerable activity in London to find alternative sources of non-European manpower for West Indian defense, and not without success. The Mutiny Act of 1807, which was drafted under Windham's overall direction, stipulated that blacks be enlisted for unlimited service only. The Abolition Act, furthermore, decreed that forfeited slaves and slaves taken as prizes of war could be enlisted into Britain's armed forces. And to these was added an Order in Council of 16 March 1808, which directed that all fit Africans taken from slavers be turned over to military and naval authorities for enlistment into Britain's land and sea services. 38 Although it was no longer sanctioned in Britain, the trade would continue to serve Britain's imperial interests.

Britain's use of the trade to maintain a slave army in the West Indies was an important reason for the long delay associated with Abolition. This policy also helps to explain Pitt's ambivalent attitude towards Abolition since he was forced to encourage a trade he both personally and publicly loathed.