

According to the historian of the British army, Sir John Fortescue, many British activities during the war in the West Indies were cloaked in secrecy, making a complete understanding of Britain's wartime operations extremely difficult. 14 It is certain that London chose to keep certain of its more dubious transactions under wraps and therefore away from public examination-particularly hostile political scrutiny. Nurturing the odious trade with large purchases of African slaves at a time of mounting abolitionist sentiment would have been embarrassing, to say the least. The British government's Army Extraordinaries account provided a place in which politically sensitive financial transactions could be hidden. Army Extraordinaries contained large sums of money allocated to cover extraordinary expenses that could not be foreseen and which were in addition to sums voted by Parliament upon annual estimates. The total amount, for instance, voted by Parliament for the army for 1797, was £10,913,000 of which £4,300,000 was for Army Extraordinaries. 15 The fact that this account lacked a periodic parlia-mentary audit resulted in massive fraud. The system of Army Extraordinaries became so abused that it was eventually abolished in 1836. 16 It is thought that virtually all costs associated with the raising of the West India Regiments were met from funds drawn from this account. This burial ground for dubious financial transactions was not the only place where the accounts of slaves purchased on public account were recorded. Fortunately, the details surrounding these transactions were diligently recorded in official dispatches between army commanders in the West Indies and the ministers, including Henry Dundas and William Windham. Even George III was privy to the scheme. 17 These records clearly show that from 1795 to 1808, the British government bought an estimated 13,400 slaves for its West India Regiments at the considerable cost of about £925,000. The average price paid per slave was approximately £70. 18 This was, apparently, substantially above that being paid for new male slaves by civilian buyers. 19 It must be noted here that the number 13,400 does not include an indefinite-but probably considerable-number of additional slaves bought by the British government to perform other military related functions, particularly those carried out by the quartermaster general's department. It also does not reflect slaves serving in the Royal Navy, nor slaves purchased in Portuguese East Africa as recruits for Britain's Ceylon Regiments. British activities in the Indian Ocean appear to duplicate those in the West Indies. 20 ecorded in one of these dispatches are the names of those commissioned to provide slaves to the army from 1798-1807. This telltale list even includes the names of two British army officers, the governor of Dominica, Andrew Cochrane Johnstone, and the Commissary General of the British army in the West Indies in 1807, one Samuel Chollet. 21 The presence of the latter's name is a clear indication of conflict of interest as it was the responsibility of the commissary general to award contracts to prospective suppliers of slaves.