

Based on Philip Curtin's slave trade calculations, and using 15,000 as the average number of slaves imported into the British Caribbean from 1795 to 1808, total British imports reached about 195,000. 22 The army's purchases for the West India Regiments alone represented about 7 percent of this sum. Recent studies into the volume of Britain's slave trade indicate that Curtin's census figures require upward revision. 23 his would require an increase in total British imports and a corresponding decrease in the proportion of this revised estimate siphoned off to maintain the black regiments. Nonetheless, the British government was itself the largest individual buyer of slaves and, consequently, the major promoter of the wretched trade.

Contributions in Black Studies, Vol. 5 [1981], Art. 2 https://scholarworks.umass.edu/cibs/vol5/iss1/2 1790-1807 Roger N. Buckley University of Hartford

Procuring slaves was accomplished by contracting with merchants to raise a specific number by a given date. One of the major contracts was awarded to James Bontein of Martinique in 1797. Although brief, the conditions of the Bontein contract were explicit and illuminating. Bontein was engaged to provide the army with twenty-five hundred recruits within four months of the date of agreement. The proper title to each slave was to be warranted to the British government. No recruit was to be younger than eighteen or older than thirty. The minimum height of each recruit was five feet and all were to be of "a sound Body, and in all points able to carry arms." Moreover, no recruit would be accepted by the army who was "incumbered with a Family or Follower." All slaverecruits were to be delivered to military depots at either Antigua, St. Kitts, Barbados, Martinique, St. Vincent or Grenada, where they would be inspected by officers and the medical staff and either accepted or rej ected. 24 A maximum of £70 sterling was to be paid in bills drawn by the commissary general upon the Treasury for each approved slave. Bontein was not permitted any contingent charges. However, he was given the assistance of small recruiting parties from those West India Regiments stationed at the various depots, and the allowance of six pence sterling per diem in lieu of rations for each slave recruited from the date purchased or attestation to the time when the slave was approved and received by the army. Failing to fulfill these conditions, Bontein was to forfeit a security of £5,000 sterling to the British government. 25 nstructions to inspectors and medical officers provide us with an insight into some of the problems of purchasing slaves. The inspectors were to be particularly attentive to the authenticity of the title of each slave accepted by the army. To be genuine, each title had to be certified by crown lawyers in those islands where the transactions occurred. Furthermore, pertinent information pertaining to the identification of the slave had to be registered with the office of the island secretary. No slave was to be purchased as a recruit for British military service until these conditions had been met. 26 he age of the slave and the length of time he had lived in the West Indies were additional problems. Sometimes these could be very difficult to determine. The latter was of special importance because a seasoned, fit slave, "a proper Subject for a Flank Company," would cost the princely sum of £70 sterling. On the other hand, the price of a black purchased directly from a slaver would range from only £50 to £56 sterling,27 Inspection teams resigned themselves to the fact that determining the age of a prospective slave-recruit was at best a troublesome 5 Buckley: The British Army's African Recruitment Policy, 1790-1807