

Published by ScholarWorks@UMass Amherst, 1981 task. Inspectors were warned to be "extremely exact" and to seek the advice of knowledgeable persons. Ascertaining the length of time a slave had resided in the West lndies was somewhat easier. The "principal Proof' was whether or not the slave could speak and understand the European language of the island from which he allegedly came. 28 he policy of purchasing slaves as soldiers was an important reason for delaying abolition; it also helps explain Pitt's puzzling behavior. First, however, what conclusions have historians come to on the issue of delay? Three arguments, only partially explanatory, have been adduced:

(1) the unpopular linkage of abolition with lacobinism and the influence of the latter in causing the revolution in Haiti; (2) the threat of a Haitian-style slave insurrection if British slavery were similarly modified; and (3) the necessity to continue the trade in order to harvest Haiti's valuable sugar crop after that colony had been occupied by Britain. 29 he evident connection between abolition and lacobinism did indeed prove temporarily detrimental to efforts to end the trade. At one point, toward the end of 1792, the most vehement champions of abolition were usually radical groups. But from about 1800 on, the revolutionary excitement on the Continent waned and with it the antidemocratic spirit in Britain. As for the lesson imputed to the upheaval in Haiti and other slave societies elsewhere in the Caribbean, these events genuinely frightened the proprietor class. In this climate of fear, many waxed eloquent on the imagined dangers that would befall British colonies in the wake of abolition. However, modification of the slave system in the Danish West Indies in 1803 failed noticeably to unleash the anticipated violence. Moreover, largely because of British military successes in the West Indies from 1796 to 1798, a pronounced tranquility characterized the once-turbulent sugar islands as the century came to an end.

The final argument, that the trade had to continue in order to maintain Haiti's sugar estates, is a plausible explanation of events up to 1798. At the end of that year, faced with increasing expenditures and enormous casualties in a losing cause, Britain abandoned its dream of extended empire and evacuated the stricken island. As a result of the Peace of Amiens of 1802, Britain returned all West Indian possessions taken from France.

The destruction of Haiti did indeed open for the moment, however, the way for a world sugar boom and a concomitant increased demand for slaves which was being satisfied, even in the Spanish islands, by British ships. Moreover, Britain's retention of Trinidad in 1802, with its huge expanses of uncleared land, and planter designs on St. Vincent,

Contributions in Black Studies, Vol. 5 [1981], Art. 2 https://scholarworks.umass.edu/cibs/vol5/iss1/2 which was opened up as a result of the wholesale deportation of dissident groups, certainly titilated British investors. The political consequences of all this, plus the subsequent British reconquest of the rich lands of the Dutch Guianas soon after the rupture of the Amiens Peace in 1803, helped materially to delay the death of the British slave trade.