

Several conditions led to the British army's dependence on African manpower in the West Indies by the end of the eighteenth century. These included the absence of conscription, which severely limited the size of the regular army, global wars which steadily increased the demand for more and more troops, a pestilential climate, particularly for Europeans, and, of course, the presence of a large, captive African population.

The possibility of war with Spain around 1790 prompted the British government to augment the number of black service troops in its Caribbean garrison. Earl Effingham, who arrived in Jamaica early in 1790 as governor, received several "Secret" instructions in July and October, 1790, from Lord Grenville, then Home Secretary in Pitt's first administration. These instructions authorized Effingham to strengthen the defences of Jamaica by, among other things, purchasing as many slaves as necessary on public account. 6 As a consequence ofthe friendly turn of events which resulted from talks with Spain and the unlikelihood of war, Effingham was ordered to stop all military preparations.? It is not known how many slaves had been purchased by Effingham during his short term as governor of Jamaica; he died in November, 1791. A subsequent report on the state of Jamaica's defenses indicated that in March, 1793, eighty-seven black pioneers were attached to units of the British army then serving in Jamaica. 8 To this number, however, must be added an undetermined number of slaves similarly purchased and employed at other British garrisons in the West Indies.

The timing of the British government's decision of 1790 to purchase slaves on public account coincided with the first attack on the slave trade in England. 9 At this time abolition was not a government measure because Pitt's cabinet and his supporters in both houses were divided on the issue. 10 However, as events proved, the British government would be placed in a singularly embarrassing position when it subsequently used the trade to purchase thousands of African slaves as recruits for the West India Regiments. Perhaps this was anticipated by Grenville, which may help to explain, at least in part, why he sent classified instructions to Effingham.

There was renewed demand for slave-soldiers during the 1793-1815 war in the West Indies. The revolutionary tone during the early part of the war between Britain and France, coupled with serious British military setbacks and appalling casualties among European troops, compelled the British government to rely heavily on blacks. This reliance was both dramatic, because of the unprecedented numbers of Africans involved, and sustained. In December, 1795, Jamaica claimed that about 2,000 of its slaves were employed daily as pioneers. I I By September, 1797, the Windward and Leeward Island Command reported it had raised a pioneer corps of 3,509 slaves. 12 All of these men, it is thought, were eventually purchased on public account. However, the largest contingent of purchased Africans were destined for service as regular troops in some eight permanent regiments which were raised in 1795. These units were the so-called West India Regiments. They eventually constituted a standing, professional slave army in the British Caribbean. 13 How many were purchased, by what means, and at what cost?