

Still, more recent scholarship comes closer to the mark. As reasons for the delay of abolition until 1807, it stresses royal hostility, the tardy use of the argument that abolition would advance rather than hinder traditional imperial and national interests, limitations of then-current constitutional conventions, opposition in the House of Lords to reform measures, and the absence of cabinet agreement which resulted in free voting on the issue.

There are still gaps in the knowledge represented by these important arguments, and in developing several of these further, Pitt's policy of purchase sheds some additional light on the controversy.

As I have argued elsewhere, the obstacles to making abolition a government measure were not limited to conventions of the Constitution, nor to the presence of powerful anti-abolitionists in successive cabinets, particularly those headed by Pitt. Looking at the question of cabinet consensus from a different angle, it appears that an agreement had in fact been reached: not an official or public avowal but a privately reached consensus; not one to support abolition, obviously, but concord to oppose it! The chief abolitionists in the cabinet-Pitt, Grenville, and Windham-and the leading opponents of abolition-Portland and Dundas-had reached accord, probably as early as the end of 1795, to use the slave trade to recruit the West India Regiments. This agreement could also have been reached outside the cabinet by the principle parties. According to J. Steven Watson, "Pitt often enough decided policy outside the cabinet with Dundas or his cousin Grenville. In cabinet he would then listen and reveal decisions."3o The decision satisfied the immediate interests of all concerned: for those opposed to abolition, it permitted the trade to continue and flourish; and to both abolitionists and anti-abolitionists with responsibilities for directing the war, it afforded an opportunity to prosecute the war successfully in the West Indies and soon in other theatres of operations. Numerous official correspondence confirm the participation of Portland, Dundas and Windham in all stages of the development and implementation of the policy of purchasing slaves as recruits for the British army. As head of government, Pitt is compromised: it is inconceivable that a decision such as this could have been reached and implemented without his cognizance and approval. The actions and priorities of the abolitionists in cabinet are instructive since they conflicted with those of the cause of abolition and thereby doomed the movement to a protracted birth.

Windham, who had a long and close association with abolition and its leaders, bolted from the movement soon after agreeing to serve under Pitt as secretary of war, a post he held from 1794 to 180 I. As the executive head of military administration at the War Office and answerable to Parliament on matters of military expenditure, Windham assumed much of the responsibility for the inner workings and success of Pitt's recruiting policy. Later, as secretary for war and colonies from 1806 to 1807, one of Windham's chief concerns was to provide the soldiers, white and black, necessary for the war effort. From the start of the war in 1793, the manpower needs of the regular army severely taxed the talents and energies of successive ministers. Given the limitations imposed by these imperatives, how could Windham simultaneously fulfill the duties of his offices and champion the death of the trade that provided the African troops so necessary to the protection of the empire in both the West and East Indies?