

And it is further recommended, that the said States shall persevere in their efforts to obtain such amendments, until the same shall be effected.

First.-Representatives and direct taxes shall be apportioned among the several States which may be included within this union, according to their respective numbers of free persons, including those bound to serve for a term of years, and excluding Indians not taxed, and all other persons.

Second.-No new State shall be admitted into the union by Congress in virtue of the power granted by the Constitution, without the concurrence of two-thirds of both Houses.

Third.-Congress shall not have power to lay any embargo on the ships or vessels of the citizens of the United States, in the ports or harbors thereof, for more than sixty days.

Fourth.-Congress shall not have power, without the concurrence of two-thirds of both Houses, to interdict the commercial intercourse between the United States and any foreign nation or the dependencies thereof.

Forth.-Congress shall not make or declare war, or authorize acts of hostility against any foreign nation, without the concurrence of two-thirds of both Houses, except such acts of hostility be in defense of the territories of the United States when actually invaded.

Sixth.-No person who shall hereafter be naturalized, shall be eligible as a member of the Senate or House of Representatives of the United States, nor capable of holding any civil office under the authority of the United States.

Seventh.-The same person shall not be elected President of the United States a second time; nor shall the President be elected from the same State two terms in succession.

Resolved.-That if the application of these States to the government of the United States, recommended in a foregoing Resolution, should be unsuccessful, and peace should not be concluded and the defense of these States should be neglected, as it has been since the commencement of the war, it will in the opinion of this Convention be expedient for the Legislatures of the several States to appoint Delegates to another Convention, to meet at Boston, in the State of Massachusetts, on the third Thursday of June next with such powers and instructions as the exigency of a crisis so momentous may require.

| Source: Ford, Paul Leicester The Federalist : A commentary on the Constitution of the United States by Alexander Hamilton, James Madison and John Jay edited with notes, illustrative documents and a copious index by Paul Leicester Ford. New York : Henry Holt and Company, 1898. |
| --- |

| Avalon Home | Document Collections | Ancient 4000bce - 399 | Medieval 400 - 1399 | 15th Century 1400 - 1499 | 16th Century 1500 - 1599 | 17th Century 1600 - 1699 | 18th Century 1700 - 1799 | 19th Century 1800 - 1899 | 20th Century 1900 - 1999 | 21st Century 2000 - |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

© 2008 Lillian Goldman Law Library

127 Wall Street, New Haven, CT 06511.
