

See “Note: On Being an ‘Authorised’ Author” at the end of the acknowledgements.

Lord Weidenfeld was the match-maker who suggested that I might like to write this book and for that (and many other kindnesses) I shall always be in his debt. I am indebted too to Anthony Cheetham at Orion for investing in me and offering only encouragement as deadlines passed and the manuscript overshot the agreed length. Ion Trewin has been and is a superb editor; the same goes for Peter James, my copy-editor. I should also like to thank Rachel Leyshon, Francis Gotto and Carl Stott for their contributions.

My agents, successively Gill Coleridge and Georgina Capel, provided all the shrewd advice and tenacious negotiation an author could wish for.

This book could not have been written in five years—indeed, it could not have been written—without a great deal of research assistance. I must make special mention of Mordechai Zucker, whose unique ability to decipher the archaic Hebrew script used by the first and second generations of Rothschilds was a sine qua non. Thanks to the translations which he had been working on for years before I came on the scene, and through his tape-recorded readings of the original Judendeutsch, Mordechai has been the eyes through which I have been able to read the most important of all the documents on which this book is based. Nor would I have got far with the correspondence of the French Rothschilds without the invaluable Abi gail Green, who also hunted down long-lost literary allusions to the Rothschilds. Edward Lipman did great things on financial questions; while Rainer Liedtke provided vital expertise on Jewish history. Harry Seekings and Glen O’Hara slaved over nineteenth-century financial statistics. Andrew Vereker chased Natty Rothschild’s dispersed political correspondence. I should also like to thank Katherine Astill, Elizabeth Emerson, Bernhard Fulda, Tobias Jones and Suzanne Nicholas.

The finished text owes much to the critical comments of other historians on earlier drafts. David Landes acted on the family’s behalf as a kind of editor-cum-Dok torvater. It has been a rare privilege to be so attentively read by one of the acknowledged masters of modern economic history. I must also thank another master in the field, Barry Supple, for finding the time to read the first draft; as well as my old friend Jonathan Steinberg, who generously read the early chapters at a very difficult time. Fritz Backhaus and Helga Krohn of the Jewish Museum in Frankfurt gave me invaluable material which they had gathered for their outstanding exhibition; I warmly thank them and their assistant Rainer Schlott. Others who have read and commented on individual chapters include Robert Evans, Gerry Feldman, John Grigg, Lord Jenkins of Hillhead, Rainer Liedtke, Reinhard Liehr, Wolfgang Mommsen, Susannah Morris, Aubrey Newman, Sir John Plumb, Hartmut Pogge von Strandmann and Andrew Roberts. I am grateful to them all for these good works, as well as to all those who have commented on conference and seminar papers I have given on aspects of Rothschild history. I would also like to thank Amos Elon for scholarly comradeship in Moscow.