

The Principal and Fellows of Jesus College, Oxford, have tolerated my absence or absent-mindedness throughout the five years this book has taken to write, as have the other members of the Oxford Modern History Faculty. I am especially grateful to my colleague Felicity Heal, who has often had to shoulder burdens we are supposed to share, as well as to Dafna Clifford, Don Fowler and Patrick McGuinness. I have also been indirectly helped by the college’s staff; others will, I hope, forgive me if I single out Vivien Bowyer and Robert Haynes, who have regularly acted beyond the call of duty. I should also like to thank Doris Clifton of the Modern Languages Faculty. Nor could I omit the indispensable Amanda Hall.

Finally, I thank Susan, Felix and Freya, for whom this book was written, and to whom it is dedicated.





Note: On Being an “Authorised” Author

It may be as well to state explicitly that those members of the Rothschild family who read parts of the early manuscript were not acting as censors. From the outset, it was formally agreed that I would be entitled to quote freely from any material in the Rothschild Archive in London predating March 1915 (the date of the 1st Lord Rothschild’s death); and, of course, from any other archives and private collections of papers as far as their curators gave me permission to do so. It was also agreed that N. M. Rothschild & Sons would have the right to comment on the manuscript. This arrangement has worked far better in practice than I could ever have hoped. For the avoidance of doubt: I have been able throughout to abide by the Rankean principle of trying to write history as far as possible “as it actually was,” and the comments I have received from members of the family have only helped me in this attempt. Their commitment to historical accuracy has deeply impressed me. If the end-product falls short of Ranke’s ideal, I hope it is only because relevant documents have not been read for lack of time, have not survived or never existed. Errors are, of course, my fault alone.

Niall Ferguson





Pickup from old film





INTRODUCTION

Reality and Myth





I


Banking,” the 3rd Lord Rothschild once remarked, “consists essentially of facilitating the movement of money from Point A, where it is, to Point B, where it is needed.” There is a certain elementary truth in this aperçu, even if it did reflect Victor Rothschild’s personal lack of enthusiasm for finance. But if the history of the firm founded by his great-great-grandfather two centuries ago consisted of nothing more than getting money from A to B, it would make dull reading. It should not.

All banks have histories, though not all have their histories researched and written; only the Rothschilds, however, have a mythology. Ever since the second decade of the nineteenth century, there has been speculation about the origins and extent of the family’s wealth; about the social implications of their meteoric upward mobility; about their political influence, not only in the five countries where there were Rothschild houses but throughout the world; about their Judaism. The resulting mythology has proved almost as long-lived as the firm of N. M. Rothschild & Sons itself. The name “Rothschild” (which translates from the original German as “Redshield”) may be less well known today than it was a hundred years ago, when, as Chekhov remarked, a moribund Russian coffin-maker could use it ironically as a nickname for a poor Jewish musician.1 But most readers will recognise it, if only from its still fairly regular appearances in the press. The bank may not be the financial giant it was in the century after 1815 and the family may be a great deal more dispersed and diffuse, but the name continues to attract attention—some of it prurient. Even those who know nothing about finance and care less are likely to have come across it at least once in their lives. Thanks to an apparently hereditary aptitude for zoology and horticulture, there are no fewer than 153 species or sub-species of insect which bear the name “Rothschild,” as well as fifty-eight birds, eighteen mammals (including the Baringo Giraffe, Giraffa camelopardalis rothschildi) and fourteen plants (including a rare slipper orchid, Paphiopedilum rothschildianum and a flame lily, Gloriosa rothschildiana)—to say nothing of three fish, three spiders and two reptiles. The family’s almost equally recurrent enthusiasm for the pleasures of the table has also bestowed the name on a soufflé (made with glacé fruit, brandy and vanilla) and a savoury (prawns, cognac and Gruyère on toast). There are towns and numerous streets named after members of the family in Israel, Rothschild-owned vineyards at Mouton and Lafite whose wines are drunk the world over, numerous Rothschild-built houses from the Vale of Aylesbury to the Riviera—and there is even a Rothschild Island in the Antarctic. Pieces of music have been dedicated to Rothschilds by Chopin and Rossini, as have books by Balzac and Heine. The family is as famous in the art world for its many collections (some of which can be seen in public galleries) as it is in horse-racing circles for its past Derby winners. In the course of writing this book, I have met few people who had not heard at least one Rothschild anecdote—most commonly the myth of the immense profits Nathan Mayer Rothschild made by speculating on the outcome of the battle of Waterloo; almost as often the story of the purchase of the Suez Canal shares which Disraeli did his best to make famous. And, for those who know no history, books of Jewish humour still contain Rothschild jokes. There have even been two Rothschild films, a play2 and a bizarre, though moderately successful, Broadway musical.