

Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Ringwood,

Victoria, Australia

Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue,

Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4V 3B2

Penguin Books (N.Z.) Ltd, 182-190 Wairau Road,

Auckland 10, New Zealand





Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices:

Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England





First published in the United States of America by Viking Penguin,

a member of Penguin Putnam Inc. 1998

Published in Penguin Books 1999





Copyright © Niall Ferguson, 1998

All rights reserved





This is the first of two volumes of The House of Rothschild.

In Great Britain The House of Rothschild was published as one volume

by Weidenfeld & Nicolson under the title The World’s Banker.





CIP data available.

eISBN : 978-1-101-15730-5





http://us.penguingroup.com





For Susan, Felix and Freya





ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Documents from the Royal Archives at Windsor Castle are quoted with the gracious permission of Her Majesty the Queen. It was Sir Evelyn de Rothschild, chairman of N. M. Rothschild & Sons, who originally suggested that the writing of a history of the firm would be a good way to mark the bicentenary of his great-great-grandfather Nathan Mayer Rothschild’s arrival in England; I owe a special debt to him for opening the Rothschild Archive to me. Amschel Rothschild also took a keen interest in the project before his tragic death in 1996. Lord Rothschild, Edmund de Rothschild, Leopold de Rothschild and Baron David de Rothschild were all kind enough to agree to be interviewed. They and others also took the trouble to read and comment on substantial parts of the text. I am grateful to Miriam Rothschild for her corrections to an early version of the epilogue, and to Baron Guy de Rothschild for his looking over those passages relating to the recent history of the French bank and family. Emma Rothschild read and commented on the first draft in its entirety, a considerable distraction from her own research and writing for which I thank her. Lionel de Rothschild saved me from innumerable slips by reading and meticulously annotating the first draft, a labour for which this acknowledgement seems a very meagre wage. I should also like to thank the Earl and Countess of Rosebery for giving me access to the private papers of the 5th Earl, and for their kind hospitality at Dalmeny.

A number of directors and employees at N. M. Rothschild & Sons have also assisted me. In particular, I should like to thank Tony Chapman, Russell Edey, Grant Manheim, Bernard Myers and David Sullivan, as well as Lorna Lindsay, Hazel Matthews and Oleg Sheiko.

A project such as this depends heavily on the expertise and toil of archivists and librarians. I owe a special debt of gratitude to those at the Rothschild Archive: Victor Gray and Melanie Aspey, and their assistants Tamsin Black and Mandy Bell, who have uncomplainingly put up with my erratic work methods and unpredictable demands. I should also like to thank their predecessors, Simone Mace and Ann Andlaw. Sheila de Bellaigue, Registrar of the Royal Archives at Windsor Castle, was a model of efficiency; as were Henry Gillett and Sarah Millard at the Bank of England and Robin Harcourt-Williams at Hatfield House. I should like to record my gratitude to Dr M. M. Muchamedjanov and his assistants at the Centre for the Preservation of Historical Documentary Collections in Moscow. In addition, I and my research assistants have received invaluable help from the archivists and librarians at the Anglo-Jewish Archives, University of Southampton; the Archives Nationales, Paris; the Bayerisches Hauptstaatsarchiv, Munich; the Birmingham University Library; the Bodleian Library; the British Library; the Cambridge University Library; the Geheime Staatsarchiv Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin-Dahlem; the Hessische Staatsarchiv, Marburg; the House of Lords Record Office; the Institut für Stadtgeschichte, Frankfurt; the Jewish Museum, Frankfurt; the Leo Baeck Institute, New York; the National Library of Scotland; Rhodes House, Oxford; The Times Archive; and the Thüringische Hauptstaatsarchiv, Weimar.