



The readers of Brockhaus’s Encyclopaedia were spared these somewhat hackneyed philosophical reflections. Instead—in the form of a footnote inserted by Gentz’s editor—they were given a specific and hitherto unpublicised episode which was intended to illustrate precisely the relationship between virtue and luck which Gentz was driving at: When the late Elector of Hesse had to flee in 1806 as the French approached, his large private fortune very nearly became Napoleon’s booty. R. rescued a substantial part of it by his courage and cleverness, although not without risk to himself, and conscientiously took care of it.



In the 1836 version, the story was elaborated on. Now, it was said, the Elector had: left the recovery of his private possessions to Rothschild, their value amounting to many million gulden. It was only by sacrificing the whole of his own property and at considerable personal risk that Rothschild contrived to save the property that had been entrusted to him. The well-known fact that all Rothschild’s possessions had been confiscated by the French led the exiled Elector to believe that his own property had been lost too. Indeed he does not even appear to have thought it worth while to make enquiries about it.



But he underestimated the virtuous Mayer Amschel: When matters had settled down again, Rothschild immediately proceeded to resume business with the property he had saved . . . When the Elector returned to his states in 1813, the House of Rothschild not merely offered immediately to return to him the capital sums with which they had been entrusted; they also undertook to pay the customary rate of interest from the day when they had received them. The Elector, positively astonished by such an example of honesty and fair dealing, left the whole of his capital for several more years with the firm, and refused any interest payments in respect of the earlier period, accepting a low rate of interest only as from the time of his return. By recommending the House of Rothschild [to others], especially at the Congress of Vienna, the Elector certainly assisted greatly in extending their connections.



This, then, was “the decisive factor in the enormous . . . development of [Mayer Amschel’s] business.” Few stories in financial history have been more frequently repeated, and the Rothschilds themselves did their share of the propagation. Nathan gave a potted version to the Liberal MP Thomas Fowell Buxton over dinner in 1834, while the version in the 1836 edition of Brockhaus was read by Carl von Rothschild and probably expanded by his sons’ tutor Dr Schlemmer. The story was even the subject of two small paintings by Moritz Daniel Oppenheim which the family commissioned in 1861.

Yet Gentz did not portray the morality tale of the Elector’s treasure as the sole explanation for the Rothschilds’ subsequent success: he also had some illuminating points to make about the Rothschilds’ business methods. “Success in all great transactions,” he argued, “does not depend purely on the choice and exploitation of the favourable moment, but much more on the application of consciously adopted and fundamental maxims.” Besides their “shrewd management and the advantageous circumstances,” it was these “principles” which the Rothschilds had to thank for the greatest part of their success. One of these principles obliged: the five brothers to conduct their combined businesses in an uninterrupted community [of interest] . . . any proposal, no matter where it comes from, is the object of collective discussion; each operation, even if it is of minor importance, is carried out according to an agreed plan and with their combined efforts; and each of them has an equal share in its results.