

Yet it would be wrong to see them as the archetype of the “feudalised” bourgeois family, “aping” the manners of the landed elite. For the Rothschilds brought to the aristocratic milieu patterns of behaviour which were distinctively commercial in origin. Initially, they bought land as an investment which they expected to pay an economic return. They regarded the large houses they built at least partly in functional terms, as private hotels for dispensing corporate hospitality. Nathan’s sons and grandsons even saw the purchase of horses as a form of enjoyably speculative investment and placed bets on horse-races in much the same way that they engaged in stock market “specs.” To put it cynically, mixing with members of the aristocracy was essential if it was they who governed, and almost as much political information came from informal socialising as from formal meetings with ministers.

At the same time, there is a sense in which the Rothschilds more closely resembled royalty than either the aristocracy or the middle classes. This was not just because they consciously imitated the many crowned heads they came to know. Like the extended family which provided so many of Europe’s monarchs, the Rothschilds were extreme in their preference for endogamy. They relished the sense that they were sans pareil—at least within the European Jewish elite. In this sense, phrases like “Kings of the Jews” which contemporaries applied to them contained an important element of truth. That was exactly the way the Rothschilds saw and conducted themselves—as phrases like “our royal family” in their letters show—and the way they were treated by many other less wealthy Jews.

This relationship to Judaism and the Jewish communities of Europe and the Middle East is unquestionably one of the most fascinating themes of the family’s history. For the Rothschilds, as for so many Jewish families who migrated westwards in the nineteenth century, social assimilation or integration in the countries where they settled posed a challenge to their faith, although the relaxation of discriminatory legislation allowed them to acquire not only money but many of the desirable things it could buy. Yet no matter how sumptuous their houses and how well educated their children, they constantly encountered anti-Jewish sentiment, ranging from the aggression of the Frankfurt mob to the subtle disdain of aristocrats and Gentile bankers for “the Jew.” Many other wealthy Jewish families opted to convert to Christianity partly in response to such pressures. But the Rothschilds did not. They remained firmly committed to Judaism, playing an important role in the affairs of the various Jewish communities of which they were members. Moreover, they sought, from their earliest days, to use their financial leverage over individual states to improve the legal and political position of the Jews living there. They did this not only in their home town of Frankfurt, but consistently in almost every state where they did business thereafter as well as in some countries (for example, Rumania and Syria) where they had no economic interests. At least some members of the family saw such altruistic activities as in some sense linked to their own material success: by remaining true to the faith of their ancestors and remembering their “poorer co-religionists” the Rothschilds not only demonstrated their gratitude for their good fortune but ensured that it continued.