

The French Rothschilds also took a direct role in politics. They were close to the comte de Villèle in the early 1820s, shifted their allegiance skilfully to Louis Philippe in 1830, managed to survive the 1848 revolution by cultivating leading republicans, and subtly undermined the rule of Napoleon III, whose foreign adven turism they disliked. They also had a firm friend in the Third Republic in the person of Léon Say, four times French Finance Minister. In Germany and Austria, the close relationship between Salomon and Metternich was of immense importance in the years 1818-48, but it was far from unique. Other “friends” of the Restoration era included Count Apponyi, the Austrian ambassador in Paris, and members of the Esterházy family; as well as (in Prussia) Prince Hardenberg, the State Chancellor, Wilhelm von Humboldt, the educational reformer and diplomat, and Christian Rother, the finance official who rose to become president of the Prussian royal bank. Links with Bismarck proved harder to forge, though by the 1870s Mayer Carl was able to act as a channel of diplomatic communication between “old B.” and the governments in London and Paris. The Emperor William II awarded Alfred de Rothschild a medal for his diplomatic services and regarded his brother Natty as “an old and much respected acquaintance.”

A central aim of this book is to illuminate these relationships. As Fritz Stern said in his pioneering study of the relationship between Bismarck and Gerson Bleichröder, historians used to be shy of acknowledging the role of financial factors in the policies of the great statesmen of the nineteenth century. Strangely, the many historians of a Marxist persuasion who were once so influential did hardly anything to rectify this, preferring to assert rather than to demonstrate that the interests of the ruling class were essentially the same as (or subordinate to) those of “finance capital.” In recent years, historians of British imperialism have done much to refine our understanding of the relationship between the City and the Empire. But the model of “gentlemanly capitalism” advanced by Cain and Hopkins does not quite fit the Rothschild case; and, given the sheer scale of the Rothschilds’ role in nineteenth-century finance, this is an exception which may do more than prove the rule. The Rothschilds after the second generation may have acted like gentlemen when they were in the West End or the country. But in the “counting house” they were unalloyed capitalists, applying rules and precepts of business which had their origins in the Frankfurt Judengasse.





III


The above is a sketch of what might be called the reality of Rothschild history which this book describes in detail. In itself, it is an absorbing story. Yet it becomes doubly so when juxtaposed with the extraordinary mythology which has grown up around the family since they first began to be noticed by contemporaries as “exceptional.”

The origins of the Rothschild myth—as far as surviving published records go—can be traced back to 1813, the year after the death of the founder of the firm. Despite its eulogistic title and tone, it would be wrong to describe S. J. Cohen’s memoir, The Exemplary Life of the Immortal Banker Mr Meyer Amschel Rothschild, as an authorised biography. Nevertheless, it set the tone for what might broadly be described as the sympathetic (if not the official) explanation for the Rothschilds’ financial success, essentially portraying it as a morality tale of virtue rewarded. Not only was Mayer Amschel a pious and observant Jew, Cohen argued, but his life “proved beyond doubt that a Jew, as a Jew, can be religious and at the same time an excellent man and a good citizen.” Like the authors of so many later works of homage, Cohen said very little about Mayer Amschel’s business career. But the strong implication was that his success as a banker was a sign of divine approbation.