

Some thirteen years later a more precise but comparably moralistic explanation was published. The General German Encyclopaedia for the Educated Classes produced by the Leipzig publisher F. A. Brockhaus was a typical example of the secular reference work of the Biedermeier era. It was popular, selling around 80,000 copies; but, though similar in form to the French encyclopaedias which had been associated with the pre-Revolutionary Enlightenment, its content was monitored by the conservative authorities. Indeed, the man who wrote the entry for “Rothschild” first published in the 1827 edition of the encyclopaedia was Friedrich von Gentz, secretary to Metternich; and the positive tone of the piece reflected the Rothschilds’ growing influence over both Austrian public finance and Gentz’s private affairs. This was an article which the family not only approved of but paid for: prior to publication Gentz read it aloud to Leopold von Wertheimstein, one of the Vienna house’s senior clerks, and ten days later received his “actual reward” from Salomon von Rothschild himself.

Though he said little about their origins in the Frankfurt ghetto in the four columns which Brockhaus published—indeed, he did not mention their religion at all—Gentz implied that they had only recently become “the greatest of all business firms.” This success had its roots, he suggested, in Mayer Amschel’s “hard work and parsimony . . . knowledge and proven integrity.” Likewise his five sons were celebrated for “the reasonableness of their demands . . . the punctiliousness with which they carry out their duties . . . the simplicity and clarity of their schemes, and the intelligent way in which they are put into operation.” Apart from their skill as businessmen, Gentz also laid considerable emphasis on “the personal moral character of each of the five brothers” as “a determining factor in the success of their undertakings”: It is not difficult to create a party for oneself when one is powerful enough to draw many people into one’s interest. But to unite the support of all parties and . . . to win the esteem of great and small, requires the possession not merely of material resources, but also of spiritual qualities which are not always found in association with wealth and power. Doing good works on all sides, never refusing help to one in need, always willing to fulfil the requests of anyone who asks for help, without regard to his class, and performing the most important services in the most gracious manner: by these means each of the five branches of the family has achieved a real popularity, and not in a calculated way but out of a natural philanthropy and kindness.



Such reflections had a faintly standardised quality to them, of course: paid hacks had been writing in such glowing terms about their wealthy patrons since ancient times. Privately, Gentz was more ambivalent. His first comment on the family (in response to a suggestion by his friend Adam Müller in 1818 that he write just such an essay) had been decidedly backhanded. They were, he agreed, “a distinct species plantarum with its own characteristic features:” to be precise, they were “common, ignorant Jews, who exercise their craft quite naturalistically [that is, instinctively], with no idea of the more elevated relationships between things.” On the other hand, they were also “gifted with a remarkable instinct which causes them always to choose the right and of two rights the better.” Their enormous wealth was “entirely the result of this instinct, which the public are wont to call luck.” In a section of his “Biographical Notes on the House of Rothschild” which was only published posthumously, Gentz elaborated on this last point—the relationship between ability (“virtue”) and circumstances (“luck”)—in a Machiavellian vein: There is a truth, which, although not quite new, is generally not properly understood. The word luck as commonly used in the history of famous individuals or eminent families, becomes bereft of all meaning when we endeavour to dissociate it entirely from the personal or eminent factors in each case. There are circumstances and events in life in which good or ill luck may be a determining although not an exclusive factor in human destiny. Lasting success, however, and constant failure are always . . . attributable to the personal virtue or the personal failings and shortcomings of those who are blessed by the one or damned by the other. Nevertheless, the most outstanding personal qualities may sometimes require exceptional circumstances and world-shattering events to come to fruition. Thus have the founders of dynasties established their thrones, and thus has the House of Rothschild become great.