



As in the case of the Elector’s treasure, the notion of perfect fraternal harmony was very probably inspired by the brothers themselves. When they submitted a design for a coat of arms in 1817 (following their ennoblement by the Austrian Emperor), the fourth quarter depicted an arm bearing five arrows, the symbol of the unity of the five brothers which the firm of N. M. Rothschild & Sons Ltd continues to use on its notepaper to this day. The motto later adopted by the brothers—“Concordia, integritas, industria”—was intended to depict precisely the virtues listed in Brockhaus’s Encyclopaedia.

Gentz was the first of many writers to write about the Rothschilds in essentially friendly (if not sycophantic) terms. Perhaps the best of the more affectionate representations of the Rothschilds can be found in the novels of Benjamin Disraeli, who came to know the family intimately (and was also, like Gentz, not uninterested in their wealth). In Disraeli’s Coningsby (1844), for example, the resemblance between Sidonia and Lionel de Rothschild is close (though not complete). Sidonia’s father is described as having made money in the Peninsular War: he then “resolved to emigrate to England, with which he had, in the course of years, formed considerable commercial connections. He arrived here after the peace of Paris, with his large capital. He staked all on the Waterloo loan; and the event made him one of the greatest capitalists in Europe.” After the war, he and his brothers lent their money to the European states and he “became lord and master of the money-market of the world.” The younger Sidonia too has all the skills of a banker: he is an accomplished mathematician and “possessed a complete mastery over the principal European languages.” In Tancred (1847), the Rothschild-inspired Jewess Eva asks: “[W]ho is the richest man in Paris?” to which Tancred replies: “The brother, I believe, of the richest man in London.” They are, of course, of her “race and faith.” Admittedly, Disraeli’s Rothschild-based characters often act as mouthpieces for the author’s own somewhat idiosyncratic reflections on the place of Jews in the modern world: in no sense can they be regarded as “realistic” portraits of individual Rothschilds. Nevertheless, there are enough traces of his original models to give the novels a genuine value to the historian.

Other “positive” fictional representations are less substantial. An Austrian novella of the 1850s, for example, portrayed Salomon von Rothschild as a kind of Viennese Santa Claus, benignly siding with a carpenter’s daughter who wants to marry her rich father’s gifted but poor apprentice. A later example of the same genre is Oscar Wilde’s short story “The Model Millionaire, a note of admiration” (1887), which describes how an impoverished man-about-town is helped to marry the girl he loves by the generosity of “Baron Hausberg.” Such fairy stories, in which Rothschild-inspired characters are cast as benign dispensers of largesse, have echoes in some of the twentieth-century popular works about the family, particularly the books by Balla, Roth, Morton, Cowles and Wilson. The consciously (and sometimes cloy ingly) positive tenor of such works can be inferred even from their titles: The Romance of the Rothschilds, The Magnificent Rothschilds, A Family Portrait, A Family of Fortune, A Story of Wealth and Power. The 1969 musical about Mayer Amschel and his sons represents the reductio ad absurdum of this sycophantic tendency. Here the family’s early history is transformed into a sentimental yarn of good Jewish boys overcoming the deprivation and degradation of a South German version of Hell’s Kitchen: in a word, kitsch.