

Yet such positive representations account for a relatively small part of the Rothschild myth. Indeed, it is not too much to say that for every writer who has been willing to attribute at least part of the Rothschilds’ financial success to their virtues, there have been two or three who have taken the opposite view.

At first, in the 1820s and 1830s, it was not as easy to attack the Rothschilds in print as it later became, especially in Germany; for one of the other favours Friedrich Gentz did for his “friends” was to send instructions to newspapers like the Allgemeine Zeitung that the Rothschilds should not be criticised. Even in 1843 the radical republican Friedrich Steinmann still found it impossible to find a publisher for his detailed and highly critical history, The House of Rothschild, Its History and Transactions ; it did not appear for another fifteen years. The most that could safely be indulged in were mild digs of the sort published in 1826 by the German economist and journalist Friedrich List, whose brief report of a theft from the Paris house gratuitously described James de Rothschild as “the mighty lord and master of all the coined and uncoined silver and gold in the Old World, before whose money-box Kings and Emperors humbly bow, [the] King of Kings.” Even in relatively liberal England, the earliest criticisms of the Rothschilds were made in the form of allegorical cartoons like Cruikshank’s The Jew and the Doctor, or under the protection of parliamentary privilege, like Thomas Duncombe’s contemporaneous allusion in 1828 to “a new, and formidable power, till these days unknown in Europe; master of unbounded wealth, [who] boasts that he is the arbiter of peace and war, and that the credit of nations depends upon his nod.”

It was not untypical, therefore, that the earliest critique of the Rothschilds published in France took the form of fiction. In The House of Nucingen (1837-8), Honoré de Balzac portrayed a roguish German-born banker who had made his fortune from a series of bogus bankruptcies, forcing his creditors to accept depreciated paper in repayment. The resemblances between the overbearing, ruthless and coarse Nucingen and James de Rothschild were too numerous to be coincidental; and in his Splendours and Sorrows of Courtesans (1838-47), Balzac drew a famous conclusion which applied not only to Nucingen but also, by implication, to James: “All rapidly accumulated wealth is either the result of luck or discovery, or the result of a legalised theft.”

It may also have been Balzac who originated or at least disseminated what rapidly became one of the favourite stories in the anti-Rothschild canon; for in The House of Nucingen he describes Nucingen’s second greatest business coup as a massive speculation on the outcome of the battle of Waterloo. This story was repeated nine years later in Georges Dairnvaell’s scurrilous pamphlet, The Edifying and Curious History of Rothschild I, King of the Jews (1846), which claimed that, by obtaining the first news of Napoleon’s defeat at Waterloo, Nathan had been able to make a huge sum of money by speculating on the stock exchange. In later versions of the story, Nathan was said to have witnessed the battle himself, risking a Channel storm to reach London ahead of the official news of Wellington’s victory and thereby pocketing between £20 and £135 million. Other accounts have him bribing the French General Grouchy to ensure Wellington’s victory; and then deliberately misreporting the outcome in London in order to precipitate panic-selling.