



Elsewhere, Heine analysed the ambivalent nature of the Rothschilds’ power in more detail. He acknowledged that in the short term it served to shore up the reactionary regimes because “revolutions are generally triggered off by deficiency of money” and “the Rothschild system . . . prevent[ed] such deficiencies.” However, he insisted that the Rothschild “system” was also potentially revolutionary in itself: No one does more to further the revolution than the Rothschilds themselves . . . and, though it may sound even more strange, these Rothschilds, the bankers of kings, these princely pursestring-holders, whose existence might be placed in the gravest danger by a collapse of the European state system, nevertheless carry in their minds a consciousness of their revolutionary mission.



“I see in Rothschild,” he went on, “one of the greatest revolutionaries who have founded modern democracy”: Rothschild . . . destroyed the predominance of land, by raising the system of state bonds to supreme power, thereby mobilising property and income and at the same time endowing money with the previous privileges of the land. He thereby created a new aristocracy, it is true, but this, resting as it does on the most unreliable of elements, on money, can never play as enduringly regressive a role as the former aristocracy, which was rooted in the land, in the earth itself.



Not only had the Rothschilds replaced the old aristocracy; they also represented a new materialist religion. “[M]oney is the god of our time,” declared Heine in March 1841, “and Rothschild is his prophet.”

Nothing seemed to illustrate better the revolutionary significance of the Rothschilds than their role as railway developers. When the Rothschild-financed lines to Orléans and Rouen were opened in 1843, Heine wrote breathlessly of a social “tremor” with unforeseeable implications. By this time, however, a new note of scepticism can be detected in his allusions to the growing power of the “ruling aristocracy of money” and the apparent convergence of their interests with those of the old landed aristocracy. In the course of the 1840s a growing number of journalists began to express a more pronounced hostility than Heine ever dared—indebted as he was (and hoped to remain) to the Rothschilds. In particular, James’s securing of the rail concession to link Paris and Belgium incensed more radical critics of the July Monarchy. Thus Alphonse Toussenel’s The Jews, Kings of the Epoch: A History of Financial Feudalism (1846) was primarily directed against the financial terms under which the concession had been granted.

At one level, Toussenel was a kind of socialist who believed that the French rail network should be owned and managed by the state. However, his critique of the Rothschilds as capitalists was inseparably linked to an argument about their Jewishness. France had been “sold to the Jews” and the railways were directly or indirectly controlled by “Baron Rothschild, the King of Finance, a Jew ennobled by a very Christian King.” It was this aspect of Toussenel’s book which inspired the most imitation. Like Toussenel, the anonymous author of Judgement Passed against Rothschild and Georges Dairnvaell equated Judaism and capitalism: James was “the Jew Rothschild, king of the world, because today the whole world is Jewish.” The name Rothschild “stands for a whole race—it is a symbol of a power which extends its arms over the entirety of Europe.” At the same time, in “exploiting all that is exploitable,” the Rothschilds were merely “the model of all the bourgeois and mercantile virtues.” The connections between tracts like these and what later developed into Marxism are well known. In his notorious 1844 essay “On the Jewish Question,” Karl Marx himself spelt out his view of “the real Jew,” by which he meant the capitalist, irrespective of his religious background. When, in the wake of the 1848-9 revolutions, the Rothschilds seemed to emerge intact along with the majority of the regimes temporarily overthrown, the moral was obvious to Marx: “[E]very tyrant is backed by a Jew, as is every Pope by a Jesuit.”