

Of course, it is possible for modern writers to retell the Waterloo legend as an illustration of Nathan’s business acumen—indeed, that is what most people today seem to infer from the anecdote. According to a later American banker, Bernard Baruch, it even inspired him to make his first million. However, the idea of a huge speculative profit made on the basis of advance news of a military outcome was a shocking one to many contemporaries: indeed, it epitomised the kind of “immoral” and “unhealthy” economic activity which both conservatives and radicals disliked when they contemplated the stock exchange. In refusing Gladstone’s request to make Lionel de Rothschild a peer, Queen Victoria explicitly questioned whether “one who owes his great wealth to contracts with Foreign Govts. for loans, or to successful speculations on the Stock Exchange can fairly claim a British peerage” as this seemed to her “not the less a species of gambling, because it is on a gigantic scale—and far removed from that legitimate trading which she delights to honour . . .”

Another contemporary interpretation of the Waterloo story was as an illustration of Rothschild political neutrality: by implication, if Napoleon had won, Nathan would have been a bear rather than a bull of British bonds. Some writers, however, chose to see his speculation as evidence of positive support for the coalition against Napoleon. To French critics especially, the Waterloo story symbolised the “unpatriotic” (sometimes German, sometimes British) sympathies of the family. As Dairnvaell put it, “The Rothschilds have only ever gained from our disasters; when France has won, the Rothschilds have lost.” That the Rothschilds gave their financial support to the opponents of Napoleon could equally well be taken as a sign of their political conservatism; as could the fact that they floated loans for Austria, Prussia and Bourbon France after 1815. Indeed, for radical opponents of the legitimist regimes restored at the Vienna Congress, the Rothschilds were notoriously the “chief ally of the Holy Alliance.” To the German writer Ludwig Börne, they were “the nation’s worst enemies. They have done more than any to undermine the foundations of freedom, and it is unquestionable that most of the peoples of Europe would by this time be in full possession of liberty if such men as Rothschild . . . did not lend the autocrats the support of their capital.”

Nevertheless, it was not always easy to sustain the notion that the Rothschilds were politically biased towards conservative regimes. As early as 1823, in the twelfth canto of Don Juan, Byron had asked “Who hold the balance of the world? Who reign O’er Congress, whether royalist or liberal?” and answered: “Jew Rothschild, and his fellow Christian Baring.” The crucial point is that Byron saw “Rothschild” as influential over both royalist and liberal regimes, his power stretching as far afield as the republics of Latin America. Even before the 1830 revolutions, the idea was gaining currency that the Rothschilds were more than merely bankrolling the legitimist regimes; consciously or unconsciously, they were acquiring a power of their own which rivalled and perhaps might even replace that of the monarchs and emperors. The events of 1830, when Charles X was toppled from the French throne but James de Rothschild survived unscathed, seemed to confirm this notion of a new financial royalty. “Would it not be a great blessing for the world,” asked Börne sarcastically in 1832, “if all the kings were dismissed and the Rothschild family put on their thrones?” William Makepeace Thackeray joked that “N. M. Rothschild, Esq. . . . play[ed] with new kings as young Misses with dolls.” Heinrich Heine described Nathan sitting as if on a throne and speaking “like a king, with courtiers all around him.” The same point underlies Heine’s vision of a children’s fancy-dress ball given by Salomon: The children wore lovely fancy dress, and they played at making loans. They were dressed up like kings, with crowns on their heads, but there was one of the bigger lads who was dressed exactly like old Nathan Rothschild. He played his part very well, kept both hands in his trouser-pockets, rattled his money and shook with bad temper when one of the little kings wanted to borrow off him . . .