

Nowhere is the continuing vitality of the Rothschild myth on the lunatic fringe more apparent than in the writings of David Icke, the erstwhile environmentalist turned “New Age” evangelist. According to Icke, the Rothschilds are members of the “Global Elite or Brotherhood”—also referred to as the “All-Seeing Eye Cult” and the “Prison Warders”—which secretly rules the world. Ever since the time of Mayer Amschel, they have “manipulated governments and worked through the Brotherhood network to create wars and revolutions.” They are the hidden power which “controls” other well-known banks such as Warburgs, Schroders and Lazards, as well as being “behind” American financiers such as J. P. Morgan, the Rockefellers, Kuhn, Loeb & Co. (an “obvious Rothschild front”), the Speyers and the Lehmans—not to mention the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve system. Through this network of global power, they have been responsible for, among other things: the murder of Abraham Lincoln; the Boer War; the creation of Israel (a gambit to control the oil of the Middle East); the Russian revolution (“a coup on Russia by the United States financial arm of the Global Elite largely controlled by the Rothschilds”); the financing of Hitler; and even the floating of the dollar by President Nixon. Today, Icke alleges, they and their associates in the Conservative party and the press are plotting to monopolise the world’s energy supplies—hence their interest in electricity, coal and gas privatisation.

A cursory search of the Internet reveals a plethora of equally bizarre conspiracy theories. A “Study of Corporate and Banking Influence” by Don Allen purports to show the “linear connection” between the Rothschilds, the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve. The “A-albionic Research Weekly” by James Daugherty claims to have identified “The ‘World Money Cartel’ or ‘Empire of the City (of London)’ operated for the ‘Crown’ by the ‘legendary’ Merchant Bankers of the Bank of England, including the Warburgs, Rothschilds [and] Barings.” “Scriptures for America” gives a more elaborate version of Icke’s claims about the economic rationale behind Rothschild support for Zionism, “the single purpose” of which is supposedly “to secure permanent and secure access to [the] vast natural resources in the Far East.” In a similar vein, Sherman H. Skolnick’s “Conspiracy Nation” repeats the claim that the Rothschilds “arranged the murder of President Lincoln,” as his “post-war policies would have wrecked [their] commodity speculations.” Skolnick also repeats the allegation that “the Rothschilds . . . financed the rise of Hitler as a bulwark against the Soviet Union,” adding by way of “explanation” that “the Rothschilds are interwoven with the Catholic Church and, jointly with the traditional mafia and the American CIA, interlocked with the Vatican Bank, which was pro-Nazi.”

Such surreal libels are not confined to the Internet. The television preacher and Republican politician Pat Robertson’s book The New World Order (published in 1991) states that the Rothschilds were “polluted by the occultism of . . . Illuminated Freemasonry” and that “Paul Warburg, architect of the Federal Reserve System, was a Rothschild agent.” From a completely different political milieu, Khalid Muhammad—a former assistant to Louis Farrakhan, the leader of the radical African-American organisation Nation of Islam—has repeated the suggestion that “the Rothschilds . . . financed Hitler” and “aided” his anti-Semitic policies; as well—needless to say—as “gaining control of” the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve system. It might be thought that a serious banking history should scrupulously avoid reference to this kind of nonsense. Yet it is impossible to appreciate the need for a scholarly history of the subject if one blithely pretends such myths do not exist.