

If a Zionist could use such language in the 1890s, it is perhaps not surprising that the radical anti-Semites who flourished in the defeated states of Central Europe after the First World War did so too, albeit with a very different rationale. Indeed, perhaps the most interesting thing about early National Socialist or völkisch propaganda directed against the Rothschilds is its very lack of originality. A good example is Dietrich Eckart’s address “To All Working People” of 1919: The House of Rothschild owns forty billion! . . . [They] only need to administer their wealth, to see that it is nicely placed, they do not need to work, at least not what we understand by work. But who provides them and their like with such an enormous amount of money? . . . Who does this? You do it, nobody but you! That’s right, it is your money, hard-earned through care and sorrow, which is drawn as if magnetically into the coffers of these insatiable people.



This was little different from the kind of thing radicals had been saying in France as well as in Germany since the 1840s. Another early National Socialist who cited the Rothschilds as examples of the “Jewish problem” he pledged to “solve” was Adolf Hitler. In an article in the Nazi Völkische Beobachter in May 1921, for example, he named them as one of a group of Jewish “capitalists” who controlled the socialist press. On at least two occasions in 1922 he gave speeches in which he referred to “the significant difference between the achievements of a man like Alfred Krupp, who has bequeathed an immense national achievement through his indefatigable work as an innovator, and the rapacity of a Rothschild, who financed wars and revolutions and brought the peoples into interest-servitude through loans.” Alfred Rosenberg made a similar point in his book The Myth of the Twentieth Century.

Hitler’s use of the past tense was not accidental, for by the 1920s there was no longer a Rothschild bank in Frankfurt, and even the three remaining Rothschild houses in London, Paris and Vienna had ceased to play a major role in the German economy. Yet that did not stop the Nazis from repeatedly using the Rothschilds as a subject for their anti-Semitic propaganda once they came to power: the old myths were recycled and embroidered to illustrate the various racial characteristics which Hitler so detested. For example, Eberhard Müller’s play Rothschild Wins at Waterloo (1936) portrayed Nathan on the field of battle, intoning lines like: “My money is everywhere, and my money is friendly. It is the friendliest power in the world, fat, round as a bullet and smiling”; “My Fatherland is the London Stock Exchange”; and “The wealth of England is in my hands.” Similar themes were taken up in May 1938 when Julius Streicher’s anti-Jewish exhibition was sent to Vienna with a room devoted exclusively to the House of Rothschild. A later version in Frankfurt put on display forged “facsimiles of letters” by Mayer Amschel to “an English banker” which appeared to explain “how he planned to send his five sons all over Europe for the purpose of dominating all Gentile commerce and finance.”