

Such polemics against the social and political power wielded by the Rothschilds were probably most numerous in France, but they had their counterparts elsewhere. In Germany, for example, the Rothschilds were attacked in books like The Frankfurt Jews and the Mulcting of the People’s Well-being published by “Germanicus” in 1880, Max Bauer’s crudely racialist pamphlet Bismarck and Rothschild (1891), or Friedrich von Scherb’s 1893 History of the House of Rothschild. Such works found an echo in the rhetoric of the anti-Semitic “People’s” and “Christian Social” parties which enjoyed moderate electoral success in parts of Germany and Austria; Social Democrats also sometimes talked in this way. Indeed, so all-pervasive did the idea of Rothschild power become that the academically respected (though since discredited) Werner Sombart could assert in his book The Jews and Economic Life (1911): “[T]he modern stock exchange is Rothschildish (and thus Jewish).”

English examples can also be found. There, as on the continent, “anti-Rothschildism” was as likely to come from the left as from the right. A good illustration is John Reeves’s book The Rothschilds: The Financial Rulers of Nations (1887), which returns a typical verdict: “The Rothschilds belong to no one nationality, they are cosmopolitan . . . they belonged to no party, they were ready to grow rich at the expense of friend and foe alike.”

Reeves’s argument that the Rothschilds wielded international as well as internal political power was nothing new. As early as the 1830s, an American magazine could marvel: “Not a cabinet moves without their advice. They stretch their hand, with equal ease, from Petersburg to Vienna, from Vienna to Paris, from Paris to London, from London to Washington.” They were, according to the English diarist Thomas Raikes, “the metallic sovereigns of Europe.” Alexandre Weill’s essay “Rothschild and the Finances of Europe” (1841) went even further (in Reeves’s translation): There is but one power in Europe and that is Rothschild. His satellites are a dozen other banking firms; his soldiers, his squires, all respectable men of business and merchants; and his sword is speculation. Rothschild is a consequence that was bound to appear; and, if it had not been a Rothschild, it would have been someone else. He is, however, by no means an accidental consequence, but a primary consequence, called into existence by the principles which have guided the European states since 1815. Rothschild had need of the states to become a Rothschild, while the states on their side required Rothschild. Now, however, he no longer needs the State, but the State still has want of him.



An anonymous German cartoonist made essentially the same point (though more vividly) in 1845 when he portrayed a grotesquely caricatured Jew—manifestly a composite Rothschild—as “Die Generalpumpe,” a monstrous engine pumping money around the world, with tentacles extending to control monarchs and ministers as far away as Spain and Egypt. A similar image appeared in Wilhelm Marr’s Mephistopheles in 1850, portraying “Rothschild” surrounded by the kings of Europe, all holding out their hands for money, and again in 1870, when Lionel was depicted in the same pose by the Period. Twenty-four years later, the American populist “Coin” Harvey envisioned “Rothschilds” as a vast, black octopus stretching its tentacles around the world. The French cartoonist Léandre likewise portrayed Alphonse de Rothschild as a giant vampire, grasping the world in his claws.