

By the 1850s, then, Heine’s notion that the Rothschilds were in some sense the allies of revolutionary change seemed to have been comprehensively discredited and replaced by a critique of the Rothschilds not only as defenders of the political status quo, but also as archetypal capitalists and therefore economic exploiters. It tended to be writers on the revolutionary left in the 1840s who were most keen to equate this with their Judaism—though it was never really explained why Jews should have such different attitudes towards economic activity from Gentiles. (For a coherent—if largely fanciful and self-referential—explanation of Rothschild business success as a function of their religion and their race, we need to turn back to Disraeli’s Coningsby and Tancred.)

Further distinctions were possible. In the France of the Second Empire, some contemporaries differentiated between the Rothschilds and other Jews—between the conservative haute banque, personified by the Rothschilds, and the “new” bank, embodied by the Crédit Mobilier which the Saint-Simonian Pereire brothers had established. Thus the Crédit Mobilier was portrayed by many writers as a primarily political challenge to the dominance of the Rothschilds over French public finance—Napoleon III’s bid to “free himself” from Rothschild tutelage. Unlike most of the overtly anti-Semitic critiques of the Rothschilds, this has proved a more respectable line of argument: the Crédit Mobilier is still sometimes portrayed as a revolutionary new kind of bank, pursuing industrialisation as a developmental strategy in contradistinction to the “old” and implicitly parasitical private banks led by the Rothschilds. But contemporaries—notably the financier Jules Isaac Mirès—sometimes attributed this difference in style to the different cultural backgrounds of the two families (the Pereires were Sephardic Jews, originally from Spain, the Rothschilds Ashkenazim). Others conceived of the difference in more traditional political terms: Rothschild represented “the aristocracy of money” and “financial feudalism” while his rivals stood for “financial democracy” and an economic “1789.” In those terms, the decline and fall of the Crédit Mobilier in the 1860s seemed to be more than just a financial event: it was a harbinger of the collapse of the Second Empire itself. Even in modern historiography, James’s famous epigram, “L’Empire, c’est la baisse,” is often cited as the death-knell for the Bonapartist regime and a reassertion of the haute banque’s political supremacy in France.

The advent of a republic in 1870 did nothing to dam the stream of French anti-Rothschild literature, however. All that happened was that the attacks now came from the right rather than the left. To those snobbish salon conservatives, the Goncourt brothers, the Rothschilds seemed to be the “Pariah kings of the world . . . coveting everything and controlling everything.” Under the veil of republicanism, absolutism had been restored; but it was a corrupt and alien absolutism quite unlike the monarchical and imperial versions which had gone before. The catalyst for a fresh explosion of publications hostile to the Rothschilds was the collapse of the Union Générale bank in 1882, which its founder bitterly blamed on “Jewish finance” and its ally “governmental freemasonry.” In his novel L’Argent, Emile Zola portrayed the affair as a triumph for the Rothschildian figure of Gundermann, “the banker king, the master of the bourse and of the world . . . the man who knew [all] secrets, who made the markets rise and fall at his pleasure as God makes the thunder . . . the king of gold.” But Zola at least acknowledged that there had been a conscious attempt by anti-Jewish Catholics to overthrow Gundermann. It took the twisted mind of Edouard Drumont to argue—in his Jewish France (1886)—that the Union Générale had itself been established by the Jews to rob Catholics of their savings. “The God Rothschild,” Drumont concluded, was the real “master” of France. Another purveyor of similar libels was Auguste Chirac, whose Kings of the Republic (1883) and The Speculation of 1870 to 1884 (1887) denounced the subjugation of the Republic to “a king named Rothschild, with a courtesan or maid called Jewish finance.”