

The culmination of the Nazis’ anti-Rothschild propaganda was Erich Waschnek’s film Die Rothschilds, which was screened for the first time in July 1940 and then re-released after further editing a year later with the sub-title Aktien auf Waterloo (“Shares in Waterloo”). This was one of a trio of films designed to prepare the German population for harsher measures against the Jews: the others were Jud-Süss and the notorious “documentary” Der ewige Jude (“The Eternal Jew”). It is true that the Waterloo legend presented problems for the Propaganda Ministry at a time of uncertainty about the correct “line” to take towards Britain. While some British characters (Wellington and the “Finance Minister” Herries) are portrayed as corrupt and morally degenerate, others—in particular the banker “Turner” and his Irish wife—are cast sympathetically as victims of the Rothschilds’ machinations. But the portrayal of the Rothschilds themselves is unambiguous enough, as the plot summary drafted by the Allies after the war shows: In 1806 the “Landgraf ” of Hesse escaping Napoleon has to entrust his fortune of £6,000,000 to somebody for safekeeping. He deposits the money with the Jewish banker, Meyer Amschel Rothschild in Frankfurt. The abusive use of this money becomes the foundation for the power of the Rothschilds. Amschel Rothschild sends the money to his son Nathan who is not respected by his business rivals. But Nathan ruthlessly outwits all of them. He gets money to Wellington in Spain with the help of his brother in Paris—Nathan is the first to receive news that Napoleon has escaped from Elba and the only one to gamble all he possesses on the reinstatement of Louis of Orleans [sic]. He is a joke in Society—nobody takes him seriously but his Jewish hirelings and the British Ministry of Finance. “Lord” Wellington is again sent to fight Napoleon. He has very little time to prepare for the war—the ladies keep him busy! But he has time enough (just as Fouché does in Paris) to confer with Rothschild who implies that Wellington will be well rewarded if Rothschild is the first to know the outcome of the battle. The moment Rothschild hears that Napoleon is beaten he spreads news that the English cause is lost. A panic follows—everybody sells Government Bonds—Rothschild buys them. The poor lose their money. The few honourable rich Englishmen (one of them is pictured as extremely decent due to the fact that he is married to an Irish woman!) lose all they own. The star of David lies over England—over the part of the world that Nazi Germany fights.



All the themes of Nazi anti-Semitism are here. The Jews have no allegiance to the countries where they live and merely wish to profit from the sufferings of others: “You can only make a lot of money with a lot of blood!” Mayer Amschel (Erich Ponto) tells Nathan (Karl Kuhlmann). Under their direction, “International Jewry” engages in “gigantic speculations” while “soldiers bleed to death on the battlefields.” The Jews are physically different and repellent: Mayer Amschel sports a kaftan and ringlets, while his oleaginous son lusts grotesquely after the wife of his Aryan rival—a typical Goebbels touch. Despite the Propaganda Minister’s apparent dissatisfaction with the film, it appears to have been relatively popular: the secret police reported excitement when it was first released in Berlin and surrounding districts and it also played to large audiences in occupied France. When a British prisoner-of-war was leafing through a German newspaper in January 1945, he was so amazed to find a version of the story on the front page that he translated it and took it home when the war was over.