

Yet other commentators—on both Left and Right—often took the opposite line: that the Rothschilds positively fomented wars. In 1891 the Labour Leader denounced the Rothschilds as a blood-sucking crew [which] has been the cause of untold mischief and misery in Europe during the present century, and has piled up its prodigious wealth chiefly through fomenting wars between States which ought never to have quarrelled. Wherever there is trouble in Europe, wherever rumours of war circulate and men’s minds are distraught with fear of change and calamity, you may be sure that a hook-nosed Rothschild is at his games somewhere near the region of the disturbance.



The case was put in a more sophisticated form by the left-leaning Liberal J. A. Hobson, author of the classic Imperialism: A Study (1902). Like many radical writers of the period, Hobson regarded the Boer War as having been engineered “by a small group of international financiers, chiefly German in origin and Jewish in race.” The Rothschilds, in his view, were central to this group: “Does anyone seriously suppose,” he asked in Imperialism, “that a great war could be undertaken by any European State, or any great State loan subscribed, if the house of Rothschild and its connexions set their face against it?” Scherb had made much the same point from a German nationalist perspective in his History: “The House of Rothschild has arisen from the quarrels between states, has become great and mighty from wars [and] the misfortune of states and peoples has been its fortune.”

War or peace? There was, however, another possibility: that the Rothschilds saw their financial power as a means to advance the interests of their fellow Jews. To poorer Jews throughout Europe, Nathan Rothschild’s extraordinary rise to riches had an almost mystical significance—hence the legend of the “Hebrew talisman,” the magical source of his good luck, which became associated with him in Jewish lore. This extraordinary story—a version of which was published by an anonymous author in London just four years after Nathan Rothschild’s death—imagined that the source of Nathan’s financial success was his possession of a magical talisman. His wealth was in fact intended for a higher purpose: “to avenge the wrongs of Israel” by securing “the re-establishment of Judah’s kingdom—the rebuilding of thy towers, Oh! Jerusalem!” and “the restoration of Judea to our ancient race.”

The notion that the Rothschilds had a design to reclaim the Holy Land for the Jewish people was frequently canvassed in more serious terms than these. As early as 1830 an American journal suggested that “the pecuniary distress of the sultan” might lead him to sell Jerusalem to the Rothschilds. The French socialist Charles Fourier raised the same possibility in his book The False Industry in 1836. Disraeli too spoke in 1851 of the Jews being “restor[ed] . . . to their own land” with the help of Rothschild money. And the same idea can be found in popular stories from the Russian Pale of Settlement like “The Czar in Rothschild’s Castle.”