





IV


Part of the purpose of this book, then, is to supplant Rothschild mythology with historical reality, in so far as that can be “reconstructed” from surviving documentary evidence. It might be wondered why this has not been done before; why only a tiny fraction of the books which purport to be about the Rothschilds are in fact based on serious archival scholarship. Part of the answer, of course, lies in the enduring appeal of a rich and successful family to hack writers, who are always able to turn a penny by rehashing the myths and anecdotes already in print. Another reason is that, until recently, it was far from easy to gain access to the relevant documentary material. Tragically, the vast archive of the Frankfurt house—which also included all that had been kept of the Naples house’s papers—was largely destroyed in 1912, with the exception of a very few early documents which were sent to Paris.4 Part of the archive of the Vienna house was confiscated by the Nazis in 1938 and passed into Soviet hands at the end of the war along with various papers belonging to members of the French family which were seized during the German occupation. This material lay buried in the Moscow “trophy” archive of the KGB throughout the Cold War and became available to outside researchers at the Centre for the Preservation of Historical Documents only in 1990.5 When Count Corti wrote his two-volume study of the “Rise” and “Reign” of the Rothschilds in 1927-8, he had to rely mainly on the Austrian state archives and the published correspondence, memoirs and diaries of nineteenth-century politicians. The archive of the London house was not generally open to scholars before 1978, though members of the family and “insiders” like Lucien Wolf made use of documents there to produce a number of important monographs.

On the other hand, the archive of the French house—the basis of Bertrand Gille’s monumental two-volume study published in the 1960s—was deposited in the Archives Nationales following the nationalisation of Banque Rothschild in 1981. Considering the wealth of material which has been available in both Paris and London since the family began to relax its restrictions on access, it is remarkable how little serious research has been done. A mainly social and political history of the English family and a handful of articles and monographs on quite specialised subjects is a relatively low yield for such important—indeed, in many ways unique—documentary collections. Even the volume of essays produced to coincide with the successful 1994-5 exhibition at the Frankfurt Jewish Museum entitled The Rothschilds: A European Family contains relatively few contributions based on new archival research. Pauline Prevost-Marcilhacy’s volume on Rothschild architecture is the only book to date which has made use of all the major Rothschild document collections in London, Paris and Moscow.

There is, however, a further explanation for this relative lack of scholarship, and that is the intractability of so much of the material. There is a vast amount of it. “We Rothschilds are inveterate scribblers,” wrote Charlotte de Rothschild to her children in 1874, “and cannot live without letter writing and letter receiving.” It was only too true. The most important letters in the London archive are the so-called “private letters” (the XI/109 series) between the partners in the bank, which cover the years from 1812 to 1898. Altogether, these fill 135 boxes. Of these letters, I have referred to around 5,000 in the text. (To give an idea of the relative importance of this series, the final database of letters which I and my researchers wholly or partially transcribed from all archives contains around 13,000 entries.) The frequency of this private correspondence—which was private in the sense that, with a few exceptions, only the partners and the scribes they occasionally used saw it—varied enormously, depending on the volume of business, political news, the number of partners in the various offices and the time of year. Sometimes the partners in Paris might send out only two or three letters in a quiet week; but at peaks of activity, three partners might write one or sometimes two letters a day. To give a single example, in March 1848, the London partners received at least sixty important private letters from their partners on the continent. These letters were often quite lengthy, especially in the early years of the partnership, when Amschel and Salomon routinely sent their brothers five or six sides, mingling political news, financial information, business enquiries and answers with family gossip and personal grumblings. These were, it might be said, the telephone calls of the nineteenth-century, in that they contain the kind of information businessmen today rarely commit to paper. They were also, it should be stressed, untypical by nineteenth century standards. Firstly, because their partners were not so geographically dispersed, few if any of the Rothschilds’ rivals corresponded in this way on a regular basis. It is unlikely that a comparable series of letters exists in any other banking archive. Secondly, because the Rothschilds were exceptionally well connected, the political intelligence their letters contain was usually of a very high quality. James did not exaggerate when he spoke in the 1840s of being able to see King Louis Philippe “daily”: at times of political crisis, he could do just that. His letters to London—the series which I have used most fully—constitute one of the most remarkable sources for nineteenth-century financial and diplomatic history.