

There are only two causes for regret. There is a substantial and unexplained gap in the XI/109 series for the period 1854 to 1860, and after 1879 it trails off (though the letters from Paris in the series XI/101 continue up until 1914). More seriously, nearly all the copies of the outgoing letters from the London partners (in so far as these were made at all) were destroyed at the orders of successive senior partners. All that survive are eight tantalising boxes covering the period 1906-14. We therefore have precious few letters by Nathan compared with the thousands from his brothers which have survived; only a frustratingly small number from his eldest son Lionel; and next to nothing from his grandsons for the period before 1906. It should also be said that relatively few non-business letters by the partners were preserved; indeed, the first Lord Rothschild insisted that all his private correspondence be burnt after his death (though I have been able to find a number of letters in the archives of politicians to whom he wrote). If at times the history of N. M. Rothschild & Sons seems to have been written from the point of view of their continental relatives, that is an unavoidable consequence of this imbalance in the sources. We are fortunate that Nathan’s sons (especially Nat) spent a good deal of time on the continent and that their letters “home” to their parents and brothers have been preserved; but these are no substitute for the letters written from London. By comparison, I have been unable to do more than take occasional samples from the even more voluminous general and private correspondence from the various Rothschild agents—particularly those in the major agencies in Madrid, Brussels, St Petersburg, New York, Mexico and San Francisco. There is an equally huge amount of mostly routine business letters from less important firms who merely acted as “correspondents” or did occasional business with the Rothschilds: again, I have had time only to dip into these letters, which came from as far afield as Calcutta, Shanghai, Melbourne and Valparaiso.

A further difficulty—which explains why the XI/109 files have never before been fully utilised by historians—is that, up until the late 1860s, all of the second generation and a number of key figures in the third generation of partners (as well as a few of the firm’s agents) corresponded with one another primarily in Judendeutsch: German written in Hebrew characters. This was partly because it was the family’s first language. But it was also partly to ensure that prying eyes would not be able to read the firm’s private correspondence. The difficulty which even Hebrew readers find in deciphering the relatively archaic script used by the brothers has deterred previous scholars, who have been content to rely on the highly selective English extracts translated somewhat freely by a group of refugees from Germany employed as researchers in the 1950s (the so-called “T” files), or on the letters written by Nathan’s children in easily legible English. However, the heroic work of Mordechai Zucker in translating or reading aloud the original letters on to tape has removed this obstacle for me, making available for the first time a “virgin” historical source of the very first importance.