





I

Father and Sons





ONE

“Our Blessed Father”: Origins


Yes, my dear fellow, it all amounts to this: in order to do something you must be something. We think Dante great, but he had a civilisation of centuries behind him; the House of Rothschild is rich but it has required more than one generation to attain such wealth. Such things all lie deeper than one thinks.

—GOETHE, OCTOBER 1828





A traveller arriving in eighteenth-century Frankfurt, as he passed across the main Sachsenhäuser Bridge leading to the Fahrtor Gate, could hardly miss the Judensau —the Jews’ Sow (see illustration 1.i). An obscene graffito on the wall, it depicted a group of Jews abasing themselves before—or rather beneath and behind—a fierce sow. While one of them suckled at her teats, another (in rabbinical garb) held up her tail for the third (also a rabbi) to drink her excrement. The “Jews’ devil” watched approvingly. If the traveller looked up, he could also see a second and still more repellent image: that of a dead baby, its outstretched body punctured by countless small knife wounds and beneath it nine daggers. “On Maundy Thursday in the year 1475,” read a caption, “the little child Simeon, aged 2, was killed by the Jews”—an allusion to the case of Simon of Trent, who had allegedly been a victim of “ritual murder,” the fictional practice whereby Jews murdered Gentile children in order to put their blood in unleavened bread.

Such a graphic expression of anti-Jewish sentiment was by no means unique: the image of Jews worshipping a pig can be found in numerous woodcut and printed versions dating as far back as the fourteenth century, while the myth of ritual murder gained currency in Germany in the fifteenth. What made the Frankfurt pictures remarkable—at least in the eyes of the city’s most celebrated son, Johann Wolfgang Goethe—was that they were “not the product of private hostility, but erected as a public monument.” The Judensau and the murdered child were officially sanctioned symbols of a long-standing tradition of hostility to an enemy within the free imperial town.1

The first records of a Jewish community in Frankfurt date back to the middle of the twelfth century, when it numbered between one and two hundred. Its history was one of periodic persecution by the Gentile populace. In 1241, more than three quarters of the Frankfurt Jews were massacred in the so-called “Battle of the Jews” (Judenschlacht). The community re-established itself over the subsequent decades, but just over a century later, in 1349, there was a second pogrom. In both cases, popular millenarianism played a part: in the first “battle,” fears that the Jews were in league with the Mongol horde; in the second, fears instigated by members of a fla gellant order that the Jews would attract the plague to the town.



1.i: Anonymous early-eighteenth-century print of Simon of Trent and the Judensau.

There were, however, worldly reasons why both the Holy Roman Emperor—who declared the Jews “servi nostri et servi camerae nostri” in 1236—and the municipal authorities were inclined to encourage Jewish settlement. The Jews were a source of tax revenue and credit (given their exemption from the laws prohibiting usury) who could be offered “protection” and restricted privileges in return for hard cash. But protection and restriction went hand in hand. In 1458, at the order of the Emperor Frederick III, the Jews were confined to a ghetto (from the Italian borghetto or suburb): a single, narrow street on the north-eastern edge of the town at both ends of which gates were erected. To the 110 Jews living in the town, this capitivity in what became known as the Judengasse (Jews’ Lane) suggested a “New Egypt.” On the other hand, the persistent risk of popular violence could give the ghetto the character of a sanctuary. Allegations of ritual murder in 1504 and an attempt to declare the Jews heretics five years later provided a reminder of the vulnerability of the community’s position, as did the conversion of the majority of the town’s population to Lutheranism in 1537, given the avowed hostility of Luther towards the Jews. The Judengasse provided sanctuary of sorts in a perilous world; and between 1542 and 1610 its population grew from around 400 to 1,380 (an increase which was paralleled by Huguenot migration to Frankfurt from the Netherlands). The economic and social tensions which coincided with—or were caused by—these influxes culminated in yet another outbreak of popular violence against the Jewish community: the “Fettmilch riots,” named after their shopkeeper leader Vincenz Fettmilch. However, wholesale looting of the Judengasse was this time not accompanied by mass murder (the Jews were expelled from the town) and, after a brief period of popular rule, imperial troops quashed the insurrection. Fettmilch and the other leaders of the revolt were hanged and the Jews marched back into the ghetto, their status as protégés of the Emperor reaffirmed.