

Why did Nathan go to England? In the absence of hard evidence, most historians have followed Nathan’s own account of his emigration—which he related to the MP Thomas Fowell Buxton in 1834—in which he portrayed the decision to leave as his own: “There was not,” he said, “room enough for all of us in that city. I dealt in English goods. One great trader came there who had the market to himself: he was quite the great man, and did us a favour if he sold us goods. Somehow I offended him, and he refused to show me his patterns. This was on a Tuesday; I said to my father, “I will go to England.” I could speak nothing but German. On the Thursday I started . . .”



There is no reason to think that this version of events was wholly fictitious. Nathan was a fiercely ambitious and competitive man, as quick to take offence as to give it in his business dealings, and it is not difficult to imagine him responding impetuously to such a contretemps. However, in a number of respects his retrospective account was misleading. Perhaps he could not resist romanticising his own rags-to-riches story; perhaps he was indulging in irony for the benefit of his after-dinner audience (the latter would have been more in character). In any event, it seems highly unlikely that his father would, or indeed could, have entrusted him with as large a sum of money as he suggested to Buxton—£20,000, or roughly double the net assets shown in the 1797 balance sheet—on the strength of a youthful impulse. However much “start-up” capital Nathan took with him, the idea that he was doing much more than following his father’s orders seems unlikely.

For political reasons, it soon became imperative to conceal the fact that Nathan was acting as the agent of a Frankfurt firm, and this has led some historians to assert that, once he arrived in England, he effectively operated independently from his father and brothers. But the evidence in the firm’s archives for this period is unequivocal: initially, Nathan took his orders from Frankfurt—indeed, his elder brother Salomon was sent over to assist him in 1801—and it was only gradually that he began to trade on his own account. A number of Nathan’s earliest letters from London and Manchester are signed “pp. Meyer Amschel Rothschild.” Correspondence between father and son was evidently regular (though very little of it has survived), and Nathan wrote frequently on his father’s behalf to the London firms of Salomon Salomons and Harman & Co., which handled the firm’s insurance and banking business in London. It was not untypical for letters of this early period to begin with phrases like “My father wishes me to write to you” or “Agreeable to the direction I have just received from my father.” On one occasion when a firm let him down, Nathan warned them that if there were more “complaints of this nature . . . [I] am certain my father will order me to turn myself to somebody that will attend more punctually.” On another, he informed Salomons: “I received letters from home this morn[in]g advis[in]g me of my father being very discontented w[ith] your packing, writing that I must not send any more goods to London as you have neglected the shipping.” And for most of this period the chests of cloth which Nathan was sending to the continent in increasing quantities all bore the insignia “MAR” for Mayer Amschel Rothschild. Nathan was not sparing his father anxiety when he concealed a brief illness from him in the summer of 1802. Rather, he did not want his father to think he had been unable—for whatever reason—to attend to business. In a letter to a recalcitrant French customer not long after this illness, Nathan left for posterity a revealing insight into his father’s character, and his own view of it: “Do you think that my Father will sell . . . Goods upon his own bills . . . without Profit? You are quite mistaken, my father’s Chimney will not smoke without Profit.” Just ten days later he received a stern letter from his father accusing him of not keeping “regular” accounts.