

The frenetic, hustling atmosphere of these formative years is vividly captured in the letter books of Nathan’s which have survived. In a market crowded with numerous small businesses, subject to rapid fluctuations in prices and interest rates and almost completely unregulated, it took a combination of burning aggression and cool calculation to survive and thrive. Nathan Rothschild possessed both in abundance. He was prepared, in his earliest days, to be ingratiating, on one occasion sending Salomon Salomons a cask of wine in the hope of getting better insurance rates.11 But soon the brash, even bullying tone which seems to have come most naturally to him began to predominate. As early as December 1800 he could write confidently to one Scottish manufacturer with whom he had placed an order: “[P]rovided you will exert your best endeavours to please me and expeditiously, [you] may rest assured that it is in my power to furnish you regularly with considerable commissions.” Two weeks later he underlined the message: “I expect any day commis[sion]s from the Continent. I certainly shall give you the preference but wish to have the commis[sion]s you have . . . executed first before I can give you any more. You request to have 3 weeks more to execute it but the quicker you are in serving me, and the lower you do it, the more com[missions] you may depend on.” When no response was forthcoming, Nathan was indignant: “I am astonished that I have not heard from you before this. When I was in Glasgow you promised me faithfully to execute my order instantly and now it is a long while ago that I never even heard from you. If you could execute orders in a short time you might depend upon large commission for it is of no use to give commission if they are not executed by the promised time.” Another Scottish firm which delayed dispatching goods he had ordered was reproached even more forcefully: I suppose you keep them in possession as a security untill I had sent you your very large Bill ! which I think is very ungenteel conduct . . . I suppose you think I shall never come to Glasgow or Paisley any more but I give you my honor I will come again in 2 mo[nths] and I believe I shall be able to procure plenty of goods for my method of payment.



A year later, he did not hesitate to accuse an awkward French buyer of “chicanery.”

At times, Nathan felt himself almost at war with his business rivals. He was on one occasion “surprized beyond measure to be informed of the most scandalous and unfounded reports that have been so industriously circulated in Frankfort by my enemies.” There were, he told his father, “many people in this country that would be very glad to support their own credit and character by destroying mine—But I thank God that I am so firmly established, that they cannot effect their purpose, by their wicked and weak attempts.” No doubt his rivals did seek to get the better of him. However, it is hard to avoid concluding that at times he let his combative temper run away with him. “You are a great rascal,” the Hamburg banker Behrens told him in the course of a minor spat: I . . . cannot but express my astonishment at the tune [sic], as well as the contents [of your letter]; to be sure you would like to make me believe you as virtuous as Cato and as rigid in being as good as your word as Regulus; however whether your wishes in this respect will ever succeed with me remains a question which I have neither the leisure nor the humour to investigate . . . You are often crazy, that’s what I think. Do you fancy that you might frighten me because of your money? I have as much as you have and I am not even living in England.