

The negotiations leading up to the various Danish loans are of particular interest because they give us an insight into the way Mayer Amschel squeezed out his business rivals. At first, in 1800 and 1801, he was content merely to take a share of loans which were organised by the likes of Rüppell & Harnier and Bethmanns. Before long, he was being treated by them as an equal partner. Finally, from around 1804, he was able to establish what amounted to a monopoly of Danish business, partly thanks to the “douceurs” and discounts he gave the obsessively penny-pinching William, partly thanks to the good relationship he established with the Hamburg banker J. D. Lawätz, who played a mediating role between Kassel and Copenhagen. Altogether, Mayer Amschel sold William Danish bonds worth a total of at least 4.5 million gulden (roughly £450,000) in this period; placed three loans to the Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt totalling 1.3 million gulden, of which around half was taken by William; and one loan to Baden of 1.4 million gulden. These are impressive figures and, understandably, Mayer Amschel’s success aroused considerable envy and resentment among his competitors. In 1806 Rüppell & Harnier complained bitterly (but vainly) about aspersions being cast on their honour by “Jewish commercial rivals” who seemed to believe that “the name Rothschild” enjoyed more credit in Hesse-Kassel than that of the Danish government itself.

Nor was such ill-feeling confined to Gentile firms. In 1802 the Kassel Jewish community lodged a complaint against Mayer Amschel, on the ground that he was to all intents and purposes residing in the town (where most of the business described above was done) without having the status—and tax liabilities—of a “protected Jew.” Having been obliged to pay 180 gulden to buy exemption from the relevant dues, Mayer Amschel then decided to secure protected status for his eldest son Amschel. With wonderful insincerity, he argued in his application that the presence of a Rothschild in Kassel would “not impair the activities of the local merchants in any way and those who conduct business in bills will rather profit from this, as such transactions always benefit from a large competition.” Opposition from the local Jewish community and hesitation on the part of Mayer Amschel as to whether the residence permit should be in his or his son’s name meant that it was not actually issued until June 1806.2

Yet, despite the title of senior court agent (Oberhofagent) bestowed on him in 1803, it is important to stress that at this juncture it was not Mayer Amschel so much as William who was the real banker; Rothschild was in many ways more of a stockbroker, catering to his client’s growing preference for bearer bonds as opposed to personal loans.3 Typically, Mayer Amschel’s commission when he bought bonds for William was no more than around 1.75 or 2 per cent, so that his total profits from this business probably did not exceed 300,000 gulden. Moreover, on at least two occasions, it was Mayer Amschel himself who borrowed from William. At the same time, it is important to remember that, although William was Mayer Amschel’s most important client in this period, he was by no means his only client. The objective, in this era of multiple states, was to establish links with as many princely courts as possible—something which the loans business he did for Hesse-Kassel made easy. By 1803 he had been appointed court agent to the Order of St John (on the strength of a decidedly ill-starred loan), the Prince of Thurn und Taxis (hereditary postmaster of the Holy Roman Empire), the Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt and Karl Friedrich Ludwig Moritz zu Isenburg, Count of Büdingen. The most prestigious of these appointments came in 1800, when Mayer Amschel secured the title of imperial court agent from the Austrian Emperor, in return not only for his earlier services as a supplier of war matériel, but also for his work in collecting the interest on the Emperor’s considerable borrowings from Hesse-Kassel. His only failure came in 1802, when the court of Bavaria ignored his application for the title of agent.