

The finances of Hesse-Kassel consequently resembled less those of a small state than those of a large bank. While the Exchequer (Kammerkasse) collected regular revenues from the royal estates and indirect taxes which were then disbursed on regular civil expenditures, the War Chest (Kriegskasse) received revenue not only from the state’s property taxes but also from the hiring out of mercenaries and the interest on the Landgrave’s investments, which it managed. William’s total assets in 1806—adding together the assets of each financial department—stood at more than 46 million gulden (more than £4 million). More than half of this (28.8 million) was held in the form of loans to other German princes, notably the Duke of Mecklenburg-Strelitz and the Prince of Lippe-Detmold, while a further 4.6 million was invested in English annuities. The fact that his net income after all expenditures was around 900,000 gulden speaks for itself: the contemporary view that he was one of the richest of European “capitalists” was not far wrong. From the point of view of an aspirant banker like Mayer Amschel, William therefore exerted a magnetic attraction. Not only was there money to be made from buying and reselling his English bills; there was also money to be made from placing his immense and constantly growing capital in secure investments. The only problem from Mayer Amschel’s point of view was that other people were already making that money.

The truth was that, despite his efforts to gain a foothold at William’s court while he was still residing in Hanau, Mayer Amschel was still to all intents and purposes a nobody when the new Landgrave moved north to Kassel on his father’s death in 1785. We know from the fact that he requested a special Sunday pass to leave the Judengasse in 1783 and from later correspondence that Mayer Amschel had already begun to involve himself in the English bills business. But it was not until 1789 that he was able to squeeze himself into the main market for these bills at Kassel by offering to pay more than the established local firms. Even then he was granted only the most meagre credit facility—£800, compared with the figure of £25,000 given to the leading Kassel broker Feidel David—and when he requested a higher credit limit the following year he got just £2,000, compared with the £10,000 he had asked for.1 At this point, however, Mayer Amschel struck up one of those peculiarly instrumental friendships based on mutual advantage which were to become a hallmark of his sons’ (and grandsons’) modus operandi. Karl Friedrich Buderus had begun his career in William’s service as the tutor of his bastards by Dorothea Ritter. In 1783 he had moved into the financial administration at Hanau and in 1792, at the age of thirty-three, he moved to Kassel to work for the all-important War Chest, rising swiftly through the civil service ranks.

The first sign of tacit co-operation between Buderus and Rothschild came in 1794 when the former explicitly recommended that Mayer Amschel be allowed to join five established firms in bidding for a sale of £150,000 of English bills. Evidently, his recommendation was ignored, but Buderus tried again in 1796 and this time succeeded. The two Gentile banking partnerships of Rüppell & Harnier and Preye & Jordis had offered 1 million gulden of Frankfurt city bonds to the War Chest, of which the Chest had bought 900,000. Buderus then tipped off Mayer Amschel that he should offer to sell the remaining 100,000 gulden to the Chest at a more generous price (97.5 per cent of face value) than the other banks were offering (98 per cent). This was hardly profitable as the bonds were quoted at par (that is, 100) on the Frankfurt bourse, but the slightly larger discount he was offering secured Mayer Amschel the foothold he had so long sought. In 1798 most of the £37,000 of English bills sold were bought either by him, by Rüppell or by Jordis for cash. In the following years, Mayer Amschel steadily increased his share of William’s investment business as well. Altogether, between 1801 and 1806, he was involved in at least eleven major loans, of which the most important were to Denmark, Hesse-Darmstadt, Baden and the Order of St John. He also became involved in purchases of real estate on William’s behalf, while continuing to supply him with his beloved medals.