



His partner Rindskopf once made the mistake of criticising Nathan in the early stages of their collaboration. A subsequent letter from Rindskopf suggests that Nathan had not taken this well: “My speaking my mind openly to you proceeded from a real friendship I bear towards you and if any unguarded expression made its appearance it ought to be placed to the disappointment of the moment and by no means the fault of the Heart but on my part everything is buried in oblivion and I hope and wish you will on your part do the same and consider myself now writing to my old friend Mr Rothschild.” When a London merchant accused him of doing business with “none but swindling houses,” Nathan was incensed: I can assure you Sir that there is not a House with whom I have transactions but both for respectability and solidity are equal to your own; the richest and greatest Houses in London, Hamburg and other places on the Continent are not swindlers, and it is those houses with whom I do business . . . I can prove to anyone that I never made a bad debt or lost a single penny thro’ any of my friends being insolvent which I presume would not have been the case had my business been done principally by Swindlers . . . No one abhors chicanery and complaints more than I do.



True, it was always extremely important, in the volatile world of the early-nineteenth-century textile business, to preserve one’s reputation as an honourable businessman, for on that depended one’s creditworthiness in the eyes of others. All the same, one sympathises with another correspondent, who evidently found Nathan’s extreme belligerence hard to take: The great misfortune is, that as soon as you are answered on one point the vivacity of your imagination makes you suggest another and a person in business who has something better to do than eternally refute futile obsessions of every sort must be naturally averse to follow you through the labyrinth of misconceptions or erroneous statements in which the fertility of your mind hurries you so continually to so little purpose to yourself and to the dissatisfaction of others.



The question remains how financially successful this aggressive young man actually was. Circumstantial evidence suggests that Nathan did indeed do well. By 1804, when he was granted letters of denization, he had a house in Downing Street, Ardwick, a prosperous area of the town, as well as his warehouse in Brown Street. Four years later he owned a “large and commodious” warehouse adjoining a “spacious, modern and well built” town house at 25 Mosley Street, “the most elegant street in Manchester.” Such figures as it is possible to construct for the turnover of Nathan’s business between 1800 and 1811 (when he closed down his Manchester office) confirm the impression of rapid economic ascent (see illustration 1.ii). Indeed, if we assume that he achieved profits of, to err on the conservative side, 5 per cent on his gross sales of around £800,000 over the whole period, then his subsequent claim to Buxton that he made £40,000 as a textile merchant looks about right. On the other hand, his progress was far from being as smooth as he later claimed. As illustration 1.ii indicates, a good period beginning in early 1804 and continuing until the autumn of 1805 was succeeded by nearly two years of low turnover. This repeated itself when rapid growth in the volume of Nathan’s business in 1808 and 1809 was choked off sharply in 1810.