



He had travelled a long way since leaving behind the cramped confines of the Judengasse—and the discrimination symbolised by the Judensau—just twelve years before. But Nathan Rothschild could not have acquired his new City address at a more propitious moment.





TWO

The Elector’s Treasure


The Old Man . . . made our fortune.

—CARL ROTHSCHILD





Nathan Rothschild’s success in the heartland of the early Industrial Revolution was of undeniable importance to his father’s business back in Frankfurt. In this sense, the Rothschilds were authentic children of the industrial age. Yet it was Mayer Amschel’s parallel success in the old-fashioned role of “court Jew” which contemporaries came to believe counted for more in the family’s economic rise. Indeed, even Mayer Amschel’s own sons themselves tended to regard his relationship with William IX, Hereditary Prince, Landgrave and after 1803 Elector (Kurfürst) of Hesse-Kassel, as the real foundation of their fortune. Since it first began to gain public currency in 1826, the myth of the Elector’s treasure has been related so often and with so much embroidery that it has never seriously been questioned. Yet a close scrutiny of the surviving records suggests that the Elector’s significance has been exaggerated—or at least misunderstood.

William of Hesse-Kassel was almost exactly the same age as Mayer Amschel, and shared with him an interest not only in old coins but in money of every sort. In every other respect, however, the two men were as different as could be, not least in their religious backgrounds. William’s father, Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel between 1760 and 1785, had caused consternation to his Protestant relatives—not only his own father, but his father-in-law George II of England as well—by converting to Catholicism as a young man. As a result, the young William was effectively removed from his care. During the Seven Years’ War, he and his brother Karl were sent to Denmark, where they came under the influence of another Protestant monarch (also linked by marriage to George II), Frederick V of Denmark, whose daughter William married in 1763. Until his father’s death, William ruled independently the small Grafschaft of Hanau-Münzenberg, which lay immediately to the north and west of Frankfurt. Yet, for all the political significance of religion in his life, it cannot be said that William observed the Commandments with anything approaching the punctiliousness of his lowly Jewish contemporary. He had at least twelve illegitimate children by at least three mistresses, including four by a Hessian noblewoman, Caroline von Schlotheim, and no fewer than seven by a Swiss woman, Rosalie Dorothea Ritter. Far from seeking to conceal the fruits of his adultery, William gave them all suitably grand titles and names—von Hessenstein, von Heimrodt and von Haynau.

His besetting sin, however, was avarice—a sin he was singularly well placed to commit. For, unlike the great majority of kingdoms and principalities in eighteenth-century Europe, Hesse-Kassel was rich, to the extent of between 30 and 40 million gulden at William’s accession. Nor was its ruler prevented from disposing of this wealth as he pleased by any of the political restrictions which had developed in other parts of Western Europe: the assets of the state were effectively indistinguishable from the personal wealth of the Prince. This great accumulation of capital had been achieved primarily by selling the services of the Hessian army to the highest bidder—usually Britain—a system which reached its zenith during the American War of Independence. Even before succeeding his father, William was already engaged in this trade, selling a regiment of around 2,000 men from Hanau to fight for George III against the rebellious colonists. The terms were lucrative: William received 76 gulden (around £7) per man, plus an additional charge of 25 gulden for each man wounded, and 76 for each man killed. This money was paid not in the form of cash, but in (non-interest-bearing) bills of exchange which were initially paid to William’s account at the London bank of Van Notten & Son. When he wanted to convert these into cash before they fell due, he sold them to brokers in Germany. Although he did spend considerable sums—for example, on building himself a new palace, Wilhelmshöhe—his object in realising such bills was more usually to invest his earnings so that they yielded the highest possible interest. And, as the majority of his fellow princes in Germany were frequently in want of money, he had no difficulty in doing so by lending to them.