

Such abrupt ups and downs should not surprise us. Business of the sort Nathan was engaged in was susceptible to sharp seasonal and cyclical fluctuations at the best of times; Nathan had to deal with the added disruption of intermittent war, with all the restrictions on trade between England and the continent which characterised the Napoleonic period. Even before war resumed between England and France in 1803, he had been warned of possible embargoes on cross-Channel trade.12 The climate for business was already deteriorating in 1805, so that the formal imposition of a blockade—by the Berlin decree banning British imports to the territories under French control (November 1806)—merely set the seal on a disastrous collapse. As one correspondent lamented as early as November 1805: “The present time is the most critical and the most unhappy for the Continent . . . no trade whatsoever, the market overstocked with goods [and] no debts coming in.” At least three firms with which Nathan had dealings, including M. M. David in Hamburg, collapsed in the first months of 1806, well before the imposition of the blockade in June. Thereafter, the choice for firms like Nathan’s was between inactivity and sanctions-busting, with all the risks that entailed. In May 1806 the Admiralty took possession of five ships at Hull and seized contraband worth around £20,000 which had been purchased in Manchester by three Jewish merchants. Another, who had merely come to settle accounts with Nathan, was arrested at Stockport. The French meanwhile did the same, arresting Nathan’s new Hamburg agent Parish, who was forced to sell goods of his at a heavy loss to avoid their confiscation. The surviving letter copy books reveal that this was an especially difficult period for Nathan, as his bills became progressively harder and harder for Rindskopf to discount. As early as April 1806 Parish complained to Mayer Amschel that his son had exceeded his credit limit by drawing on them for £2,000. And by the end of August he appears to have owed Rindskopf over £28,000, on which he was paying interest at 4.2 per cent per annum. Matters were improved by the Treaty of Tilsit between Napoleon and the Tsar, reports of which reached Nathan from his brother Amschel in July 1807; but the restrictions on cross-Channel trade remained in force.

1.ii The turnover of Nathan Rothschlid’s textile exporting business, 1801-1811(f).



Under these circumstances, Nathan therefore had little option but to carry on his export business illegally—he became, in a word, a smuggler. In October 1807 he was sending a consignment of coffee to Sweden via Amsterdam, using an American-registered ship and fake Dutch documents. Other favoured routes for contraband were through Heligoland and the Baltic ports. Of course, such shipments could not legally be insured, so that the risks involved were very substantial. But so, presumably, were the potential rewards. By 1808 Nathan had earned a reputation as a man who had, thanks to his superior “management, judgement, foresight and connections,” regularly “succeeded in getting goods to the Continent”—though “not a word was passed about . . . how the goods had been sent.” The recovery his business enjoyed in 1808 and 1809 was short-lived, however. In September 1809 a large shipment to Riga was seized and could be released only by means of “bribery—and a heavy tax indeed it was.” Another cargo suffered the same fate at Königsberg.