



According to this not untypical version of the story from an English newspaper in 1836, when Mayer Amschel finally returned the money to William, he replied: “I will neither receive the interest which your honesty offers nor yet take money out of your hands. The interest is not sufficient to replace what you lost to save mine; and further my money shall be at your service for 20 years to come and at no more than two per cent interest.”

As discussed in the introduction, this story first gained currency in 1827, when it appeared in F. A. Brockhaus’s General German Encyclopaedia for the Educated Classes. Though there is good reason to think that it was initially inspired by the Rothschilds themselves, it was subsequently so widely disseminated as to take on a life—and a variety of significances—of its own. Initially, it was intended to illustrate the family’s exceptional probity as deposit-holders: willing to risk everything rather than fail to protect and pay interest on a client’s money. That was certainly the message of Moritz Daniel Oppenheim’s two paintings on the subject commissioned by the family in 1861. By the later nineteenth century, however, it was beginning to acquire an alternative reading: the Elector’s treasure was “blood money” because it had been earned by the sale of mercenaries, while Mayer Amschel made the most of it rather than merely preserving it. The positive and negative versions of the myth are vividly juxtaposed in the American and German films The House of Rothschild (1934) and Die Rothschilds (1940).

As has long been realised, the story is fiction—though, like so much of the Rothschild myth, it contains a very tiny grain of truth. In fact, William’s movable property was widely dispersed in the period after the French occupation and only a few relatively unimportant items came into Mayer Amschel’s possession. Some of the most important valuables—mainly bonds (without their coupons, which were stored separately)—were successfully smuggled out of Kassel by Buderus, who made the hazardous trip through the French lines to Itzehoe in early November. The bulk, however, was stored in caches at William’s country houses. According to a meticulous list drawn up by the Elector himself, twenty four chests—containing not only securities and coupons but also accounts, silverware and clothes—were hidden under the stairs of the north wing of the Wilhelmshöhe, while another twenty-four, including important War Chest papers, were concealed in another part of the palace. In the cellar of the nearby Löwenburg were hidden a further twenty-four chests, including securities belonging to the Elector’s mistress, official papers, porcelain and clothes. Finally, at his hunting lodge at Sababurg, there were forty-seven chests, most of them filled with silverware. Most of this would in fact have been lost to the French—who quickly managed to obtain an inventory of the Elector’s silver—had it not proved possible to strike a deal with Lagrange. In return for a bribe of 260,000 francs (modest under the circumstances) he agreed to allow forty-two of the chests to be spirited away; the rest were confiscated. Accordingly, on the night of November 8, one of the Elector’s officers led a convoy of carts with the freed chests to Hof Stölzingen, where they were divided up. War Councillor Lennep took some of the most important documents (including papers relating to the Elector’s London investments) back to Kassel; ten chests were deposited with the Münden firm of Thorbecke, of which two were sent on to Schleswig and the rest to Eisenach; and nineteen were smuggled into Frankfurt and left in the hands of the bankers Preye & Jordis.