

The importance of such titles should not be exaggerated, of course. In 1803, for example, Hesse-Darmstadt customs officials simply refused to recognise Mayer Amschel’s privileged status as a court agent. In any case, the whole system of petty principalities and overlapping jurisdictions which had made such titles matter in the eighteenth century was on the brink of an unprecedented and revolutionary upheaval—an upheaval which was to transform the Rothschilds’ relationship with their princely patrons. Up until 1806 they had depended on the Elector and his ilk for their business and the privileges they could confer. Thereafter, William found that, little by little, it was he who began to depend on Mayer Amschel and his sons.

The Origins of a Myth

As we have seen, there had already been one major collision between Hesse-Kassel and the forces of Revolutionary France in the 1790s, culminating in the bombardment of Frankfurt which destroyed the Judengasse in 1796. That had led to a strengthening of the traditional links between Kassel and London: not for the first time, William put troops in the field against France in return for English money. True, he had subsequently accepted the terms of the Peace of Lunéville (1801), which transferred the left bank of the Rhine to France. But when war broke out again between England and France in 1803 a showdown became almost inevitable. William was too committed to England to follow the lead of those sixteen German states which seceded from the defunct Holy Roman Empire to form the Francophile Confederation of the Rhine in the summer of 1806. He was also too intent on driving a hard bargain with the various powers bidding for his support to realise the vulnerability of his own position. Napoleon offered Hanoverian territory. On the other hand, the Elector (as William now was) had lent money to Austria and to Prussia, who had joined the coalition against France in 1805. When the Prussian army was defeated at Jena and Auerstadt in the autumn of 1806, he was hopelessly exposed. Neither the hasty demobilisation of his troops, nor his belated request to join the Rhine Confederation, nor even the plaintive signs he hastily ordered to be put up at his borders—“Electorat de Hesse: Pays Neutre”—could deflect the wrath of Bonaparte, in whose eyes he was now merely “a field marshal in the service of Prussia.” “My object,” Napoleon declared bluntly, “is to remove the House of Hesse-Kassel from rulership and to strike it out of the list of powers.” William had little option but to flee, heading initially for his brother’s estate at Gottorp in Holstein (then Danish territory).4 On November 2 General Lagrange occupied his residence at Kassel as Governor-General; two days later he issued a proclamation formally confiscating all his assets and threatening anyone who sought to conceal these with trial by a military tribunal.

According to legend, it was at this critical moment that William turned to his faithful court agent Rothschild, hastily leaving in his care the entirety of his movable wealth: The French army was actually entering Frankfurt at the moment when Rothschild succeeded in burying the prince’s treasures in a corner of his little garden. His own property, which in goods and money was worth about 40,000 thalers, he did not hide, well knowing that, if he did so, a strict search would be made and that not only his own but the prince’s hoard would be discovered and plundered. The Republicans who, like the Philistines of old, fell upon Rothschild, left him not one thaler’s value of his own money or property. In truth, he was, like all the other Jews and citizens, reduced to utter poverty but the prince’s treasure was safe . . .