

It was not only in terms of capital that Mayer Amschel remained primus inter pares: he alone had the right to withdraw his capital from the firm during the period of the agreement; he alone had the right to hire and fire employees of the firm; and his unmarried sons could marry only with his permission. The agreement made the grounds for this explicit. It was Mayer Amschel who had, “through the industry which he had evinced from his youth onwards, his commercial abilities and the indefatigable activity which he had maintained into his old age, laid the basis for the prosperity of the firm, and thereby established the worldly fortune of his children.”

In other respects, however, the agreement would act as a model for future agreements between the brothers and their descendants for most of the nineteenth century. Profits were divided in proportion to capital shares, no partner was to engage in business independently of the others and the agreement was to run for a fixed period of years (in this case, ten). The most remarkable clause in the agreement stated what would happen were one of the partners to die. Each solemnly renounced the rights of his wife, children or their guardians to contest in any way the amount of money agreed by the surviving partners to be the deceased’s share of the capital. Specifically, his widow and heirs were to be denied any access to the firm’s books and correspondence. This was the first formal statement of that distinctive and enduring rule which effectively excluded Rothschild women—born Rothschilds as well as those who married into the family—from the core of the business: the hallowed ledgers and letters.

The death of a partner was, of course, no longer a remote possibility. Not only was Mayer Amschel now an old man—he was sixty-six or sixty-seven when the 1810 agreement was signed—he was also a sick man. He had been seriously ill two years before, possibly with a rectal abscess arising from chronic haemorrhoids, and, although an operation was successfully performed, his health never fully recovered. It was a common complaint in the Judengasse, whether because of the sedentary lives its inhabitants perforce led, or because of a genetic defect which intermarriage—also imposed by the Stättigkeit—had spread through the street’s 500 families. On September 16, 1812, he was taken ill; he died just three days later. But even as he lay on his deathbed, Mayer Amschel hastily revised his will, as if wishing to reinforce the message conveyed to his sons in the 1810 agreement. The new will pre-empted the agreement’s provisions by withdrawing just 190,000 gulden from the firm as his notional share of the capital—obviously a substantial understatement. And it repeated emphatically the rule excluding the female line from the business: I hereby decree and therefore wish that my daughters and sons-in-law and their heirs have no share in the capital of the firm “Mayer Amschel Rothschild & Sons” and even less that they are able or are permitted to make a claim against it for whatever reason. Rather, the said firm shall exclusively belong to and be owned by my sons. None of my daughters and their heirs therefore has any right or claim on the said firm and I would never be able to forgive a child of mine who, against this my paternal will, allowed themselves to disturb my sons in the peaceful possession of their business.