



Mayer Amschel prevailed and Carl stayed; it may have been a sop to Nathan that James was sent to join him for a spell three years later.

As this letter also shows, Mayer Amschel’s in-laws, the Schnappers, were now involved in the business; so too were the Sichels, into which family Isabella had married, and the Beyfus brothers, Seligmann and Mayer, who married Babette and Julie respectively in 1808 and 1811. He was also well aware of Nathan’s work in partnership with Rindskopf and his own father-in-law Levi Barent Cohen. But from the outset, Mayer Amschel kept his in-laws at one remove from the management of the firm: the reference to the Schnappers as “outsiders” is revealing. In the same letter to Nathan, he asked a characteristic question: “Dear Nathan, do our letters come directly into your hands alone, so that one can write what one wants, or do you read our letters to your whole family [meaning Nathan’s in-laws, the Cohens]? Let me know.” Even at this early stage, Mayer Amschel had formulated a rule which was to be followed strictly for more than a century: his male descendants were, as far as the running of the firm was concerned, the inner circle. In practice, this meant a distinction between family or private correspondence—almost always written in Hebrew characters—and business correspondence, usually written in German, French or English by clerks. Mayer Amschel more than once had to reprimand Nathan for forgetting this distinction: “I repeat for the last time that your Hebrew written letters may be good enough for family purposes, but for account and business matters you have to write in German, French, or English; I cannot give to my clerks in the office your muddled Jewish letters mixed with family news, if they are to keep good books—accordingly, a good deal of confusion arises.” For the historian, of course, it is precisely these letters—repetitive and unstructured though they often were—which have by far the greater value.

The transition of the family business into “Mayer Amschel Rothschild & Sons” happened in September 1810, when he and three of his sons—Amschel, Salomon and Carl—issued a printed circular announcing that they would henceforth act as partners (wirkliche Theilhaber) in a new firm (Gesellschaft). When members of the family had been interrogated by Savagner the year before, Mayer Amschel was still calling himself the sole proprietor (Inhaber) of the firm, while his sons were merely his “assistants” (Gehülfen). However, he may have been lying in order to protect them in case Savagner decided to prosecute the firm. Earlier in the year it had been Amschel, Salomon and Carl who had negotiated the purchase of a vacant lot in the Judengasse (as reconstruction work at last began) in order to build a proper office for the firm. And when a formal legal partnership contract was drawn up in September 1810, its preamble explicitly stated that “a trading company already existed” in which Mayer Amschel, Amschel and Salomon were the “associates.” The principal function of the 1810 agreement was to make Carl a partner, giving him a 30,000 gulden share of the total capital of 800,000 compared with Mayer Amschel’s 370,000, Amschel’s 185,000 and Salomon’s 185,000; and to guarantee that James would become a partner (also with a share worth 30,000 gulden) when he attained his majority.