

On the other hand, the price of that security was a high level of insecurity on the continent. For the risks the Rothschilds ran in serving William were real. The French authorities were in earnest about tracking down the Elector’s wealth and they were prepared to use all the means at their disposal to do so. Under the Berlin Convention of 1808, for example, Napoleon extended a tempting offer to the Elector’s numerous debtors, inviting them to settle with the French authorities instead of the Elector in return for reductions in their debts. More alarmingly, the departure of General Lagrange put paid to the deal which had been struck with him. Mayer Amschel’s offices were searched by the French police, as were those of Preye & Jordis. It was probably at this time that the contents of the four chests in Mayer Amschel’s possession were concealed in the secret cellar described above. In August 1808 Salomon was interrogated by a French police official, as was a representative of another bank suspected of acting for William, and the following month Buderus and Lennep were briefly arrested. The same happened in the summer of the following year, in the wake of a minor anti-French revolt. The Special Commissioner of Police in Westphalia—a man named Savagner—had Buderus and Lennep arrested again and then, acting on information supplied by one of the Rothschilds’ business rivals, proceeded with a senior Frankfurt police officer to Mayer Amschel’s office. There followed a bizarre interrogation in which the French attempted to get Mayer Amschel to admit to having supplied money on William’s behalf to the instigators of the recent revolt.

Savagner was undeniably well informed. He knew about Mayer Amschel’s visits to Hamburg and Itzehoe in 1807—where he had “spent hours with [the Elector] in his office, walking in his garden and conversing with him.” He also knew about his dealings with Buderus. But Mayer Amschel was apologetic: “Because of a painful illness from which he had suffered for years, he had developed a short memory.” Yes, he had been in Hamburg, but only on account of some goods which had erroneously been impounded as contraband. Yes, he knew Buderus and Lennep, but he had “never trusted them, as neither of them had ever sincerely been his friends, merely appearing to be in the world’s eyes.” Yes, he had been the Elector’s court agent and had in the past made loans on his behalf to Denmark—or was it Emden? Far from relaying money to Buderus, he had received 20,000 gulden from him, from which he had made various payments, though to whom he could not recollect. The next day, Savagner tried again with Salomon, the fifteen-year-old Jacob, Salomon’s wife, Amschel’s wife and even Mayer Amschel’s wife Gutle. Each stonewalled in turn. Gutle in particular was the embodiment of feminine innocence: “She knew about nothing at all, she was at home throughout the year and had nothing whatever to do with business. She had never seen [Buderus], she only concerned herself with her housework.” In the end, Savagner seems to have admitted defeat and, like most Napoleonic officials the Rothschilds encountered, settled for a small “loan.” Matters only eased in 1810 when Frankfurt was transformed into a grand duchy under the direct jurisdiction of Baron Karl Theodor Anton von Dalberg, erstwhile Archbishop of Mainz and, since 1806, Prince-Primate of the Rhenish Confederation.