

Mayer Amschel had already begun to ingratiate himself with Dalberg some three years before by offering the inevitable loan. He now proceeded to facilitate a payment of 440,000 gulden to secure the emancipation of the Frankfurt Jews by discounting bonds worth a total of 290,000 gulden and to advance Dalberg 80,000 gulden to finance his journey to Paris for the baptism of Napoleon’s son. Indeed, Mayer Amschel was soon formally acting as Dalberg’s “court banker,” assisting him in the speculative purchases of land he undertook with the money paid by the Frankfurt Jews. It was a sign of the esteem in which Dalberg came to hold Mayer Amschel that he appointed him to the electoral college of the new département of Hanau, along with such eminent Gentiles as Simon Moritz von Bethmann. Whether he was aware how far Mayer Amschel continued simultaneously to serve the man whose most fervent wish was to oust him and his French patrons from Hesse-Kassel is not known. There is a startling symmetry in the fact that, only a few years previously, Mayer Amschel had been arranging payments of some 620,000 gulden from the Elector to Austria, to pay for troops and horses in the 1809 campaign against France. Shortly after Mayer Amschel’s death, his son Amschel was advancing 255,000 gulden to Dalberg, partly in order to purchase horses for the French army!

It is possible, of course, that Mayer Amschel—like Buderus, who also accepted an official appointment by Dalberg—no longer expected William to be restored to his estates. But if so, he never wrote him off completely. He simply backed both sides. Such a strategy has obvious attractions, and it was to become a frequent Rothschild gambit in the decades ahead. However, the double agent always runs the risk of forfeiting the trust of both sides and ending up the loser, whichever wins. For this reason, it is not surprising that during the years of the Elector’s exile Mayer Amschel developed a penchant for secrecy—another of his most enduring bequests to later generations. At first, he had been blasé. He and his son Carl made numerous trips to the vicinity of Itzehoe in the first months of the Elector’s exile—indeed, they established a permanent office for the purpose in Hamburg—and corresponded regularly and openly with one of William’s most senior officials, Knatz. As we have seen, this did not go unnoticed by the French police, and Mayer Amschel quickly came to appreciate that “these days one has to set to work carefully.” By the middle of 1808 correspondence between the Rothschilds and the Elector’s officials, much of which was relayed via Buderus and Lawätz, was being written in a crude code. Buderus was referred to as “Baron von Waldschmidt,” Knatz as “Johann Weber,” Mayer Amschel as “Peter Arnoldi” or “Arnold” and William himself, variously, as “Herr von Goldstein,” “Johannes Adler” or “the Principal.” The Elector’s English investments were known as “stock fish” (a pun on the German for cod, Stockfisch). For additional security—“for the more care that you take, the better it is”—letters were sent not to Mayer Amschel but to Juda Sichel, whose son Bernhard had married Isabella Rothschild in 1802. When Carl and Amschel travelled to see the Elector in Prague, following his flight south from Denmark, correspondence was hidden in specially fitted secret compartments. Sometimes the Rothschilds even took the precaution of transliterating incriminating letters into Hebrew characters. And it seems highly probable that two sets of books were kept in this period, one complete, the other specially doctored for the consumption of the authorities. Such precautions were justified; in addition to the searches and interrogations described above, the French police succeeded in intercepting at least one letter in 1811.