



In his will too he bequeathed 100 gulden to “three praiseworthy, charitable Christian foundations.” Even his charitable work within the Jewish community became increasingly secular in its orientation. In 1804 he played a leading role in establishing a new school for poorer Jewish children—the Philanthropin—the curriculum of which had a thoroughly secular flavour. This seems to have reflected the influence of his book-keeper Geisenheimer and of the tutor he employed for his own children, Michael Hess, a follower of Moses Mendelssohn who later became the school’s headmaster. It may also have been inspired by his younger sons, at least one of whom (Salomon) was a member of the same masonic lodge as Geisenheimer.11 The important point is that Mayer Amschel continued to favour a communal basis for education at a time when an increasing number of Jewish families were sending their children to Gentile schools outside the ghetto. Ludwig Börne was one of those who rebelled against the relatively conservative atmosphere of the Frankfurt ghetto, ultimately converting to Christianity rather than endure discrimination. But, as Heine later recalled, he could not help admiring the unaffected piety of the Rothschild household. Passing the old family home in the Judengasse in 1827, he noticed nostalgically that Mayer Amschel’s widow Gutle had decorated its windows with white curtains and candles in celebration of the great feast of joy (Chanukkah): How gaily the candles sparkle—those candles which she has lit with her own hands in order to celebrate the day of victory on which Judas Mac cabeus and his brothers liberated their fatherland as heroically as did in our own day King Frederick William, the Emperor Alexander and the Emperor Francis II! When the good lady looks at these little lights, her eyes fill with tears, and she remembers with melancholy joy her younger days when Mayer Amschel Rothschild, of blessed memory, still celebrated the Feast of Lights with her, and when her sons were still little boys who placed candles on the floor and leapt over them with childlike pleasure, as is the custom in Israel.



It was Mayer Amschel’s work to win full civil and political rights for the Frankfurt Jews, however, which best expressed his loyalty towards Judaism.We know that his political activism predated the French Revolution because he had been one of the seven signatories of the protest to the Senate of 1787 (quoted in chapter 1) about increased restrictions on travel outside the ghetto on Sundays and holy days. However, it was only with the advent of a French-backed regime that the possibility arose of more substantial improvements in the lot of the Jews. Things would have moved faster if Frankfurt had been under the direct jurisdiction of Napoleon’s brother Jérôme who, as King of Westphalia, favoured a policy of complete emancipation. By contrast, Dalberg was cautious, partly because he could not risk alienating the local Gentile establishment, partly because he himself feared that a liberated Jewish community might “balance Christian injustice, as soon as they breathed some air, with Jewish impudence.” The new Stättigkeit which he issued in 1808 seemed, if anything, a step backwards, as it reasserted the ban on Jews living outside the (still dilapidated) Judengasse, reimposed the poll tax and confirmed the traditional restrictions on numbers of families and marriages.