

At the start of his time in exile, William already had a very substantial English portfolio, primarily annuities with a nominal value of £635,400 paying interest of £20,426 a year. In addition, he was owed a considerable sum—around £200,000—by the Prince of Wales and his brothers (though they were characteristically in arrears with their interest payments). As an ally of the crown, he also received subsidies totalling £100,150 between 1807 and 1810.6 The critical question was what should be done with the interest payments and subsidies as they were paid to William’s current account with Van Notten. As early as 1807—in other words, some time before his move from Manchester to London—Nathan approached William’s envoy in London, Lorentz, with suggestions as to how the money might be invested, but he was rebuffed at the Elector’s express instruction.7 It was not until two years later, once again at the prompting of Buderus, that Mayer Amschel was instructed to purchase 3 per cent consols (redeemable state annuities, or what would now be called gilt-edged securities) with a face value of £150,000 at 73.5 (that is, at 73.5 per cent of their face value or price at redemption). It was to be the first of no fewer than nine such purchases up until the end of 1813, totalling £664,850. This was the money to which Nathan later alluded in his conversation with Buxton. His brother Carl was also alluding to it when he observed in 1814 that “the Old Man”—mean ing William—had “made our fortune. If Nathan had not had the Elector’s £300,000 [sic] in hand he would have got nowhere.”

How could such purchases of consols on someone else’s behalf have been so vital to the Rothschilds? The answer lies in the way these investments were carried out. At first sight, there was not a great deal to be made from this business, as Mayer Amschel charged only one-eighth of a per cent brokerage on each purchase. On closer inspection, however, much more stood to be made. William did not actually put up all the cash at once for each purchase; it was the Rothschilds who effectively bought the consols, albeit on his behalf, and with money they had largely borrowed. If they had wished, they could have paid only a fraction of the market price, postponing full payment until a future settlement date. But this would have involved a double speculation: on the price of the consols and on the gulden-sterling exchange rate. Mayer Amschel preferred not to do this. He was content to derive advantage from the difference between the price and the exchange rate agreed with William, and the actual price and exchange rate paid by his son in London. For the first three purchases, the difference in price was of the order of 2 per cent, reflecting the fact that, at this low ebb in Britain’s campaign against Napoleon, consols were falling. It is probable (though impossible to prove) that Mayer Amschel was also deriving some benefit from differences in the exchange rate.

The Elector probably suspected what was going on: when consols reached a low of 62.5 in the summer of 1811, he called a halt to new purchases and ceased remitting money to cover previous purchases until May of the following year. But this probably suited the Rothschilds well. For the consols remained registered in Nathan’s name until they were fully paid for by William. That meant, for example, that even as late as March 1813 consols with a face value of £121,000 were notionally Nathan’s. Of course, they had largely been bought with borrowed money, and, from the moment the Elector’s remittances arrived until the stocks were formally transferred to him or his agents, the Rothschilds also had to pay interest. On the other hand, a certain latitude was possible, given the difficulty of getting certificates of ownership from London to the Elector in Prague.8 Whatever profits Nathan was able to make on the market price and the exchange rate, purchases of more than £600,000 worth of consols and the actual possession of over £100,000 signalled the advent of a new financial force in the City of London. In this sense, as Carl later noted, it gave Nathan a kind of “security”—the impression of capital resource in excess of what the family actually had. Amschel spelt out the significance of this in a letter to his brothers in 1818: “The good Nathan would have been unable to draw during the war bills to the amount of £132,000 and to handle all the businesses if . . . we had not obtained for him in Prague the big deal of the Elector’s stocks, which he handled . . . [U]p to then Nathan did not even know what stocks looked like.” In effect, the war had allowed the Rothschilds to make a part of William’s financial strength their own.