

It was at this point that Mayer Amschel was able to use his financial leverage over Dalberg to force the pace of change—the first time a Rothschild acted in such a way for what he explicitly called “our nation,” and not the last. Dalberg, as we have seen, was biddable: if a sufficiently large capital sum could be paid to compensate his duchy for the loss of tax revenue which Jewish emancipation would entail, he was prepared to give his consent. After preliminary discussions conducted via Dalberg’s Jewish police commissioner Itzstein, the sum of 440,000 gulden was agreed on—twenty times the sum paid each year by the Jews for their “protection”—of which Mayer Amschel raised 290,000 on behalf of the community by discounting bonds. In December 1811, after further negotiations with the Frankfurt Senate, Mayer Amschel was able to inform his son, with understated satisfaction: “You are now a citizen.” Two weeks later the decree on the “civil-legal equality of the Jewish community” came into force.

To be a citizen of his native state, but to remain unequivocally a member of “our nation,” meaning the traditional Jewish religious community: this was Mayer Amschel’s aim. For the critical distinction between the Rothschilds and many other successful Jewish families of this period was that, while they fervently desired social, civil and political equality with their Gentile counterparts, they refused to abandon Judaism as their religion in order to achieve it. Their own ambition was therefore from the outset inseparable from the political campaign for Jewish emancipation not only in Frankfurt, but throughout Europe.

In this, as in so much else, Mayer Amschel’s influence on his descendants was profound and enduring. Four days after their father’s death, his sons sent out a circular to their most valued clients to reassure them that there would be no change in the conduct of the family business: “His memory will never fade among us, his surviving partners . . . Our blessed father remains unforgettable to us.” Such pious sentiments are not always translated into practice once the first pain of bereavement has passed; but the sons of Mayer Amschel meant what they said. Time and again in the years after his death, they harked back to their father’s words—to his business aphorisms, to his views on Jewish emancipation and, above all, to his paternal commandments to them, his male descendants. In many ways, these numerous allusions to Mayer Amschel—unremarked by previous historians—reveal more about his character than any other source.

A typical example is Amschel’s request for better stock market information from Nathan in October 1814: “Father used to say: ‘A banker has to calculate, there is no merit in making transactions in the dark.’ ” He made a similar point in 1817: their father had told them “that Jewish fortunes as a rule don’t keep longer than two generations for two reasons. One because the housekeeping and other expenses are not being considered, second because of Jewish stupidity.” While these echoed Mayer Amschel’s criticism of Nathan’s somewhat casual approach to accounting, other maxims related more to the firm’s relations with governments. One point was obvious enough, given the benefits Mayer Amschel had derived from his relationship with William of Hesse-Kassel: “I [learned?] from our blessed father,” Salomon told Nathan in 1818, “who always said, ‘The evil eye of the court brings fewer advantages [than the title of consul or court banker].’ ” But, as Amschel remembered, it was not enough just to acquire minor titles like “court agent”: “Nowadays everybody calls himself ‘Excellency.’ I remember, however, what our father used to say, ‘With money you become an Excellency.’ ” The key was to establish some kind of financial leverage. As Amschel put it, “It is better to deal with a government in difficulties than with one that has luck on its side. We heard this from our father.”