



If his daughters did do so, they would forfeit all but their minimal statutory claims as heirs under the Napoleonic code. The distinction between sons and daughters could scarcely have been more strongly expressed.10

That Mayer Amschel’s testament was so strictly adhered to, not just by his immediate heirs but by his descendants for generations to come, confirms the impression given by those letters to his sons which have survived. Within his immediate family circle, he was a commanding and perhaps also intimidating figure. Interestingly, this is not how he was remembered by the rest of the world. To Gentiles who had dealings with him, he had tended to conform to the intelligent but deferential stereotype of the court Jew. It should be stressed that modern portrayals of Mayer Amschel—especially the screen performances by George Arliss and Erich Ponto—probably exaggerated the “Jewishness” of his appearance and manner, the former sporting a long beard and fez-like hat, the latter ringlets and a skullcap. On the other hand, the most commonly reproduced nineteenth-century lithograph—of a rather square-jawed clean-shaven man in a neat wig—was the product of an artist’s imagination. One contemporary who met him in her youth remembered “a rather big man, who wore a round unpowdered wig and a small goatee beard.” Another remembered him wearing the kind of hat and clothes which would have been worn by a Gentile merchant of the same generation, albeit slightly threadbare.

This tallies with Mayer Amschel’s somewhat ambiguous reputation within the Judengasse as relatively orthodox in matters of religion, but progressively more and more liberal in matters of education and politics. Mayer Amschel was not one of those maskilim who were inspired by the Jewish Enlightenment, nor did his attitudes anticipate the later Reform movement to modernise Judaism as a religion; but nor was he a staunch conservative. Cohen’s unauthorised memoir (published shortly after his death) portrayed him as the personification of a kind of middle way between the new and the old—“proof that the dogmas of the Jewish religion, even according to the teachings of the Talmud, contain nothing which conflicts with the laws of morality.” Rothschild had been “a zealous believer in the Talmud and chose it alone as the guiding principle of all his actions”; indeed, according to Cohen, his attitude towards religious conservatism had been “a little exaggerated.” He and his brother Moses (who administered the community’s poor-relief fund for some years) were active members of the Jewish community. But Mayer Amschel was also a “good citizen”—a significant phrase, as we shall see.

This is evident in Mayer Amschel’s attitude towards charity. As noted above, he and his brothers were conscientious in paying their tenth to the poor of the community. Ludwig Börne remembered the crowd of beggars who used to lie in wait for Mayer Amschel as he walked through the street, and the patience with which he distributed alms. Yet he was less conventional in not confining his charity to the Jewish community. Cohen recalled an occasion when a street-urchin had shouted “Jew!” at him. Mayer Amschel calmly reached into his purse and gave the needy youth some money with the request that he might often repeat what he had said. No one could have been happier to oblige. He took what he was offered and cried at the top of his voice: “Jew! Jew!” Several other youths came up and mockingly joined in. Rothschild listened with evident pleasure, pronouncing the Hebrew blessing: “Praise be to Him, who gave the laws to His people of Israel!”