



The irony, however, is that Buderus’s assurances were themselves far from disinterested. For, unbeknown to the Elector, he had entered into an agreement with Mayer Amschel which effectively made him a sleeping partner in the Rothschild firm. In return for investing 20,000 gulden—the sum which Mayer Amschel admitted to having received when questioned by Savagner—Buderus promised “to advise that firm in all business matters to the best of his ability and to advance its interests as far as he may find practicable.” In the light of this—to say nothing of the deals struck by Mayer Amschel with the French authorities and with Dalberg—the Elector’s mistrust begins to look rather less like paranoia. As William came to realise, the Rothschilds’ skill at forging new business relationships was liberating them from their early dependence on him. When, in May 1812, he requested that one of Mayer Amschel’s sons move to Prague to act as a kind of court agent in exile, he was politely but firmly rebuffed.

It is therefore something of an exaggeration to say, as Carl did, that “the old man” had made their fortune. In 1797 Mayer Amschel’s capital had been 108,504 gulden (around £10,000). Ten years later the balance sheet showed a total capital of 514,500 gulden (around £50,000).9 It seems unlikely that the business he did with William in this period accounted for as big a share of this increase as the import-export business between Frankfurt and Manchester. By 1810, to be sure, the firm’s capital had risen to 800,000 gulden (around £80,000) and a substantial part of this increase probably was due to the income generated by managing William’s portfolio. But the real significance of the Elector’s treasure, as both Carl and Amschel implicitly acknowledged, was that it helped Nathan to make the transition from Manchester merchant to London banker. Once this was achieved, the Rothschilds needed “the Old Man” less.





Mayer Amschel’s Legacy

A letter Buderus wrote to William at around this time provides a neat summary of the firm’s radius of activity in the last months of its founder’s life: Their father is old and ailing. His eldest son Amschel Mayer, and his second son Salomon, who is delicate, are indispensable to him in his extensive operations. The third [sic] son, Carl, is almost continually engaged in travelling in the service of your Electoral Highness, while the fourth [sic] son, Nathan, is very usefully established in London and the youngest, James, spends his time between London and Paris.



By this stage, power in the firm had effectively passed from Mayer Amschel to his five sons. Only a few years before, however, the old man had still been playing the role of Herr im Haus. As we have seen, even the mercurial Nathan, far away in England, was still having to do as he was told as late as 1805. His brothers were treated even more like employees: Amschel writes that Kalman [Carl] would like to come to you, but what is the point of that? . . . I still need to have Kalman with me in Frankfurt for the moment and he would be much less use with you . . . He is keen to go to London. But I don’t think it sensible from the point of view of our house, as Salomon has hard work to do cashing in and paying out bills. He has the obligations to deal with too . . . [If Kalman goes] then all my commodity business will have to be done through Seligmann and Abraham Schnapper, and Mayer Schnapper his son, because although Jakob [James] is already in the office he has only just had his bar mitz vah. So it really is necessary for Kalman to stay with us. He really wants to go to London [and] if you really need him then I will write him off. But it is stupid not to leave Kalman here for a few more years until Jakob has grown up. Don’t write to Kalman that I said this to you . . . Furthermore, my dear son Nathan, when you are writing to my son Kalman, I advise you to praise him a lot. With God’s help he is a very clever man for his age, though he is rather too bold . . . He really wants to come to you but I really don’t want this dear boy, may he live to be a hundred years old, crossing the sea for just a three-week trip and we cannot do without him for long[er] because as I told you Amschel has business in Kassel. Much as I would like my son Kalman to travel to London for three weeks it would end up being six months, and it is simply not possible to teach conceited outsiders how to run my indigo business.