

This would not have been worth writing if it had been commonplace behaviour. It clearly was not. Even as late as 1841, nearly thirty years after Mayer Amschel’s death, his eldest son could feel moved to remind all the other partners—including those who had never even met their grandfather—of the same, all-important nexus between unity and success: Unity was what our blessed father, with his last words, enjoined me to uphold as [our] first and holiest of duties—our father, who united in himself boundless integrity, the deepest of insights, the wisdom of experience and the pious habits of a sage. It is my conviction, and I am sure it is yours too, that, along with God’s blessing, we owe not only our wealth but also our honourable position in society primarily to the [spirit of] unity and co-operation [that binds together] all our partners, bank houses and establishments. I therefore request most urgently that you, beloved brothers and nephews, will always take care to implant in your heirs the same consciousness of concord and togetherness, so that the same [spirit of] unity and co-operation continues to exist for as long as is at all possible. To do so will be of benefit both to you and to your descendants. It will prevent our business interests from being split up, and will stop others benefitting from our great efforts, our knowledge and the experience [we have] laboriously accumulated over many years. So I ask you, for the sake of ensuring unity, whenever there should be any differences of opinion which might lead to ill feeling, not to make an immediate decision, but to let a few days pass first to allow tempers to cool, in order to avoid any overhasty steps being taken. May the unity, integrity, sympathy and mutual trust of the community of all Rothschild houses be always preserved and forever affirmed.



In the years between 1812 and 1841, there were, as we shall see, many times when Amschel and his brothers came close to just the kind of breakdown in fraternal unity which their father had warned them against. That they always avoided it—that, even thirty years after his death, they still remembered his dying commandment—is a striking testament to the patriarchal power of Mayer Amschel Rothschild.





II

Brothers





THREE

“The Commanding General” (1813-1815)


My brother in London is the commanding general, I am his field marshal . . .

—SALOMON ROTHSCHILD





It is an established rule with us that no disapprobation shall be expressed by either of us at the conduct of the other, since as partners we act always for the joint interest and consequently neither of us has the right to blame the other when he has acted for the best.

—SALOMON ROTHSCHILD





Napoleon’s celebrated aphorism—“An army marches on its stomach”—left open the question of how that stomach was to be filled. So did the Duke of Wellington’s equivalent: “To gain your objects you must feed.” All the armies which fought in Europe between 1793 and 1815 resorted at times to the age-old practice of requisitioning provisions from civilian populations. To varying degrees, they also relied on their own lines of supply from secure territory. But taking supplies at gunpoint has the disadvantage of making an army unpopular and food scarce, while extended supply lines are a source of vulnerability. In protracted campaigns like Wellington’s in the Iberian peninsula, more sophisticated methods of procurement were necessary. Above all, it was essential to be able to purchase supplies and to pay troops. The truth of Cicero’s maxim was never more apparent than in the years between 1808 and 1815: nervos belli, pecuniam infinitam, or, as Henry Dundas had put it to William Pitt at the outset of the wars with Revolutionary France: “All modern Wars are a Contention of Purse.”