

This was a bad miscalculation; on the contrary, the Rothschilds’ ability to relay specie across the Channel was about to become a decisive source of strength to Britain. On January 11, 1814, Nathan was officially charged with the task of financing Wellington’s advance through France. In Vansittart’s words, Herries was to “employ that gentleman [Nathan] in the most secret and confidential manner to collect in Germany, France and Holland the largest quantity of French gold and silver coins, not exceeding in value £600,000, which he may be able to procure within two months from the present time.” These were then to be delivered to British vessels at the Dutch port of Helvoetsluys, whence they would be relayed to Wellington via St Jean de Luz, near Biarritz. It was to be “distinctly understood by Mr Rothschild . . . that he is to take upon himself all risks and losses, which may occur, prior to the delivery on board His Majesty’s ship.” If successful, he would be entitled to a commission of 2 per cent on the sum delivered. But, at all costs, secrecy must be maintained. This was a breakthrough, in that it was the Rothschilds’ first official commission from the British government and it brought Nathan into direct contact not only with Herries—by March, he was “almost continually” in Herries’s office—but with Vansittart and the Prime Minister himself, Lord Liverpool.

Admittedly, the operation proved to be rather more difficult than Nathan had anticipated. Meyer Davidson, whom Nathan sent to Amsterdam, complained repeatedly about the short supply of suitable coins in the wake of the French occupation, and quickly concluded that new napoléons d’or (the imperial successor to the old louis d’or coin) would have to be struck if Nathan was to fulfil his contract. By the end of February Davidson had been able to accumulate no more than £150,000, “Yet this is like a drop of water in the ocean. Why? Because it is . . . an English government commission and the English government could make use of all the cash that exists on the continent and even this would not satisfy them.” Davidson began to fear that the transaction could not be carried out, and there was talk of reducing the target figure from £600,000 to half that amount.

Despite these difficulties, however, Herries was impressed. As early as February 22 Wellington was writing to thank Bathurst for “the supplies of money which are very ample.” By April Nathan and James were able to convert over £20,000 into guilders for immediate use by the British forces, and the Rothschilds continued to furnish the advancing army with money until the end of the year, when the government resumed normal methods of payment. As Herries told Sir George Burgman, the British paymaster in Amsterdam, “Rothschild of this place has executed the various services entrusted to him in this line admirably well, and though a Jew, we place a good deal of confidence in him.” One reason for Herries’s satisfaction was that the Rothschilds delivered substantial amounts of the cash to Helvoetsluys in advance of being paid by the government, leading some historians to assume that Nathan was using Prince William’s London stocks as collateral for large-scale borrowings in London and Paris. This is possible, but it cannot have been the brothers’ sole source of credit, given the size of the sums involved. As Neal has put it, Nathan was “financ[ing] the war against France with the resources of the continent”—merchants’ bills on London which the Rothschilds were buying up and converting into bullion, which they then sent to Wellington’s army on Herrries’s account. By the middle of May Nathan was owed as much as £1,167,000 by the government—a sum large enough to terrify his brother Salomon, and evidently more than even Nathan could sustain. As Herries told Drummond, his representative in France, he was not surprised at the extreme solicitude of the brother in London to obtain money from you. They are now serving us to a very considerable extent by their credit and if we fail to supply [them] with funds to meet these engagements the weight is greater than any individual however rich could be expected to support. The brother here is doing the business remarkably well and seems capable of supplying one with money to any extent.