

In accordance with his venerable wishes, and following the prompt ings of our own hearts, we therefore wish today, through this renewed agreement, to reinforce our mutual dependence and hope, in this new league of brotherly love, to guarantee the success of the future activities of our House. May our children and descendants in the future be guided by the same aim, so that with the constant maintenance of unity the House of Rothschild may blossom and grow into full ripeness . . . ; and may they remain as mindful as we of the hallowed precept of our noble ancestor and present to posterity the godly image of united love and work.





The same theme of paternally ordained brotherly unity was developed still further in an annexe to the agreement, which solemnly hoped that “in the future [as in the past] the blessing of our blessed father and grandfather upon our House and our family” would be fulfilled. He had promised them “the protection of the Almighty; the success of our undertakings; the prosperity of our family and the continuing honour and respect of our reputation and name,” but only if they “always preserved concord, love and faith” with one another.

Of course, it is easy to detect in all this the influence of the Old Testament; and no doubt many another Jewish (or Calvinist) patriarch before and after Mayer Amschel tried to instil similar values into his sons. Nor was the ideal of familial unity peculiarly biblical: Plutarch relates the parable of Scilurus, who showed his sons that a bundle of arrows could not be broken, but that the individual arrows could. The impressive thing about the Rothschilds, however, is that the sons heeded their father so zealously. This was a point Gentz stressed in his article for the 1827 Brockhaus Encyclopaedia. The first of the Rothschilds’ guiding principles, he suggested: obliges the five brothers to conduct their combined businesses in an uninterrupted community [of interest]. That was the rule which their dying father bequeathed them. Since his death, any proposal, no matter where it comes from, is the object of collective discussion; each operation, even if it is of minor importance, is carried out according to an agreed plan and with their combined efforts; and each of them has an equal share in its results.



In the very first paragraph of his essay, Gentz had in fact already alluded to Mayer Amschel’s last commandment to his sons to maintain “unbreakable unity.” “Never has a father’s last testament been carried out more conscientiously and more profitably,” he observed. “It is a peculiar characteristic of this family, that all its members consult the shade of their father at every important stage of their lives, and when assessing every business deal; remind themselves—often verbatim—of his wise teaching . . . and never mention his name without deep reverence.” In the 1836 edition it was even stated that the brothers “revere their father with such piety that that they refer back to him in the course of all important business undertakings and indeed Nathan usually decides all doubtful cases on the basis of a rule which he attributes to his father.”