



It was not only the British army which received money from the Rothschilds on Herries’s account in 1814. Of rather more importance—because potentially more lucrative—were the payments which had to be made by the British government to finance the military efforts of its less solvent allies on the continent. Such payments had previously been handled by banks such as Barings and Reid, Irving, but now Nathan, having won Herries’s confidence, was well placed to take them over. The only difficulty lay in persuading the recipient countries to place similar confidence in his brothers on the other side of the Channel. This was achieved most easily with Russia, rather less easily with Prussia and only to a limited extent with Austria. Smaller Allied states—including Mecklenburg and, predictably, Hesse-Kassel—also received money through the Rothschilds, as did the returning French monarch, Louis XVIII. The total amounts involved were huge. Altogether between 1811 and 1815 Britain paid around £42 million to her allies. The Rothschilds became involved late in the day, but swiftly established a dominant position. In June 1814 Herries listed the payments they had so far made to Prussia, Austria, the French King and the British army. Including money that had not yet been disbursed, the total was 12.6 million francs, and more was to come. Small wonder Lord Liverpool referred to “Mr Rothschild” as “a very useful friend.” “I do not know,” he told Castlereagh, “what we should have done without him last year [1814].”

It proved relatively easy to secure a substantial share of the Russian business. The agreement reached between Britain, Russia and Prussia at Reichenbach in June 1813 had promised a total payment of £1,333,333 to Russia and £666,666 to Prussia, partly in the form of interest-bearing treasury bills. However, the cash-strapped British government repeatedly deferred payment and it was not until the end of May 1814 that an agreement was reached which provided for fifteen monthly instalments of a million Prussian thaler each (in the form of interest-bearing drafts), two-thirds to Russia, one-third to Prussia. Gervais, the Russian diplomat charged with converting the subsidy into cash, initially turned to Hope & Co., seeking an advance on the first seven months’ payments and offering a discount of 2 per cent. But the Hope director Labouchère hesitated and the Rothschilds—represented ably by Salomon and James—snapped up the business. They offered not only to convert instalments worth 4 million thaler into louis d’or and ducats, but to deliver most of the money to Hamburg, Dresden and Warsaw, where it was urgently needed to pay Russian troops.

The Rothschilds’ terms were evidently attractive enough, especially in the initial absence of competition. As James said, Gervais “needed cash, and soon,” and no other firm would risk delivering so much cash to remote Warsaw. It was also advantageous from a British viewpoint to let the Rothschilds handle the transaction, as they undertook to reduce the interest Britain had to pay and to secure a more favourable exchange rate from pounds to thalers than had originally been agreed. Indeed, James exuberantly claimed that “a better deal had never been made for [a] government.” “You can confidently tell Lord Liverpool,” he told Nathan with youthful bravado, “that this transaction is a masterpiece.”