



And, of course, the story has been embroidered by myth-makers, attributing patriotic motives to Nathan and even imagining James crossing the French lines in woman’s clothing. The reality was very different. At some point before March 1811 the Rothschilds became involved in smuggling gold bullion from England to France. This was technically a breach of the Continental System, but it was tolerated by Napoleon and later actually licensed. The youngest Rothschild brother took care of the business on the other side of the Channel, at Gravelines or Dunkirk, exchanging the imported guineas for bills on London, the prices of which were naturally very low in France at that time and which could then be redeemed at a profit in London. A typical series of six shipments from Nathan to James in April 1812 amounted to some £27,300 in guineas, in return for which James sent Nathan bills from Paris bankers like Hottinguer, Davillier, Faber and Morell with a face value of £65,798. The other Rothschild brothers contributed by relaying suitable bills to James from Hamburg and Frankfurt.

As with the earlier covert operations on behalf of the Elector of Hesse-Kassel, an unsophisticated code was devised which more or less sufficed to allay French suspicions. Nathan became “Langbein,” London became “Jerusalem,” and the transfers of bullion across the Channel were codenamed “Rabbi Moses” or “Rabbi Mosche.” Incriminating consignments were referred to, variously, as “beer,” “fish” or “children.” Other key figures (no longer identifiable) were known as “the fat man” and “the cursed one.” In addition, to ensure that cross-Channel communications were as secure and swift as possible, agents at Dover were authorised to charter boats for Rothschild business. It was one such vessel which smuggled James himself across the Channel when he visited Nathan in 1813. “Playing hide and seek” with the authorities was becoming second nature to the brothers. Indeed, even their sons were already being taught to attach importance to secrecy: at the age of just eleven Salomon’s son Anselm refused to let his teacher correct a letter he was writing to his father. “My dear mother,” the boy explained, “how can I possibly divulge the secrets which I share with my father to Mr Sachs?”

It was probably the scale of Nathan’s purchases of bullion in London which first brought him to Herries’s attention. It may also be that some of the bills which were finding their way back to London through the Rothschilds were Wellington’s, having been sold on by his Spanish, Portuguese and Maltese bankers to Paris houses. And it is just possible that James was already using the bullion sent to him by Nathan to buy bills on Spanish and Portuguese houses which were then sent across the Pyrenees to Wellington. Although evidence for this assertion is scant, it is not implausible. After all, money had been sent in 1806 and 1807 from Spain’s American colonies to France by an even more circuitous route starting in Vera Cruz, heading north to New York and then crossing the Atlantic, via London, to Paris. Indeed, on one occasion Mexican piasters worth over 14 million francs were shipped across the Channel to the French Treasury by a British warship! Generally speaking, the profits to be made from such transactions were regarded as outweighing the benefits the enemy derived from the money itself. In addition, there was a degree of theoretical confusion as to the economic significance of such transfers of bullion, which helps to explain why the French authorities tolerated James’s activities in Paris and Bordeaux (about which they were quite well informed). Although some French police officials had their suspicions, Napoleon followed the advice of his Minister of the Public Treasury, François Nicholas Mollien, who argued that any outflow of bullion from Britain was a sign of economic weakness and therefore advantageous to France.