

As early as May 1809 Wellington was complaining to the government in London that he did not have enough of it. In March 1811 he wrote to the Prime Minister, Lord Liverpool, threatening that he would have to halt the campaign altogether because of the lack of cash. A year and a half later, on the eve of the invasion of France itself, the problem was once again acute. The outgoings of his military chest were running at around £100,000 a month, including not only payments to his own troops, but also subsidies to Portugal and Spain (now forcibly won over to the British side). But, as he explained to Earl Bathurst, he was only just able to pay for the subsidies to his allies. In the absence of cash, he was reduced to paying officers in depreciated paper money, while the lower ranks (who refused to accept payment in paper) were not being paid at all. “Unless this army should be assisted with a very large sum of money at a very early period,” he warned the government, the distress felt by all the troops will be most severe . . . and it will be quite impossible for me to do anything . . . [The Spanish troops] are in so miserable a state, that it is really hardly fair to expect that they will refrain from plundering a beautiful country, into which they enter as conquerors; particularly, adverting to the miseries which their own country has suffered from its invaders. I cannot, therefore, venture to bring them back into France, unless I can feed and pay them . . . Without pay and food, they must plunder; and if they plunder, they will ruin us all.



The nadir was reached in February 1813, when Wellington reported that he could “scarcely stir out of my house on account of the public creditors waiting to demand payment of what is due to them.” As it was Wellington’s financial difficulties which provided Nathan Rothschild with the decisive business opportunity of his career, it is worth saying a few words about the cause of them.

Of all the states of the ancien régime, Britain had the most efficient financial system. The key institutions had evolved in the century after the Glorious Revolution: a relatively cheap and centralised system of revenue collection; a fairly transparent budget-making process in parliament; a more or less stable system of public borrowing, the funded national debt; and an equally stable monetary system revolving around the Bank of England and the convertibility of paper notes into gold. It was this which enabled Britain to wage six major wars in the course of the eighteenth century without succumbing to the kind of political crisis which precipitated the overthrow of the more financially backward French state. But the cost of war rose rapidly after 1789 (partly because the Revolutionary regime was able to field armies of unprecedented size): it has been estimated that the annual cost was five times higher in real terms during the Napoleonic Wars than it had been a century before. Public expenditure in Britain rose sharply between 1793 and 1815, from something like £18 million a year to around £100 million (around 16 per cent of estimated national income). The total cost of war with France in that period was around £830 million, of which some £59 million took the form of subsidies to Britain’s less solvent allies. A host of new taxes had to be created, of which the income tax was the most important, but these only paid for about a quarter of the war’s costs. As a result, the national debt soared from £240 million in 1793 to £900 million in 1815, close to 200 per cent of national income. Moreover, in 1797 the Bank of England felt obliged to suspend gold convertibility, ushering in a period of currency depreciation. The combination of wartime shortages and the growth of paper-money circulation led to inflation: prices roughly doubled in the twenty years before 1815. Wellington’s campaign was therefore being fought at a time of unparalleled fiscal “overstretch.”