

Nor was it only the elder brothers who reminisced in this fashion. In March 1817 James remembered a tip which he would often put into practice in his relations with rival firms: “Father used to say, ‘If you can’t make yourself loved, make yourself feared.’ ” As late as 1840 Carl could still be heard recalling how “his Father had often taught him, when he had occasion to apply to an inferior or a man who had little power to assist him in carrying an object he had in view, he spoke with the person as if the whole depended entirely on him, though perhaps he knew he had but the smallest possible influence in the business.” Of all these pieces of business advice, the one most frequently cited was probably Salomon’s favourite, on the importance of cultivating politicians. He cited this in a letter to Nathan in October 1815: “You know, dear Nathan, what father used to say about sticking to a man in government.” It came up again a few days later: “But you remember father’s principle that you have to be ready to try everything to get in with such a great government figure.” And Mayer Amschel had left them in no doubt as to how such politicians could best be wooed: “Our late father taught us that if a high-placed person enters into a [financial] partnership with a Jew, he belongs to the Jew” (“gehört er dem Juden”).

The brothers’ consciousness of their Jewishness and of their responsibilities to the rest of the Jewish community also owed much to their father’s influence. Intriguingly, both Salomon and Carl seem to have regarded carrying on their father’s work for Jewish emancipation in an almost instrumental way. As Carl put it in May 1817, “It is the best thing on earth to be of service to the Jews. Our father did so and we see how well we are paid back.” Salomon made the same connection between good works and good fortune a few months later when he wrote to Nathan reminding him to put pressure on the British government on behalf of European Jewry: “If we want our children to be one day really happy, we have to do all that is in our power to bring to a good end all the work which . . . father of blessed memory . . . began in the interest of our people.” And he repeated the point early the next year: If everything depends, as it does, on God, if we want, as we do, to be fortunate, then, dear Nathan, [the interests of the entire Jewish people] must be as important to you as the most important business deal once was. How can we show more respect for our blessed father, than by supporting that work which he laboured at for years[?]



But of all their father’s advice, his last commandment—to maintain fraternal unity—had the greatest and most enduring impact. Salomon once attributed “all our luck to the benediction which our father gave us an hour before he passed away.” Amschel remembered that benediction too: “I remember what our father, peace be with him, told me on his deathbed: ‘Amschel, keep your brothers together and you will become the richest people in Germany.’ This has almost come true.” That advice was often invoked when the brothers quarrelled—as they frequently did in the turbulent years immediately after Mayer Amschel’s death. “Our blessed father ordered us to live in peace,” Salomon reminded Nathan, following an especially bitter attack by the latter on Carl. He had to say it again just a week later: “My good brother, dear Nathan, our blessed father ordered us to live in peace, otherwise we shall lose our courage. Let us have peace.” More than twenty years later the same principle was elaborately enshrined in a new partnership agreement, drawn up following the death of Nathan himself: We wish to offer a proof of our reverence for the holiest memory of our father, whose virtuous conduct in all of life’s relations is a noble example to us all. Through pious acceptance of the higher wishes of God, through faith in God’s help, through conscientious honesty and indefatigable industry, this noble and philanthropic man laid the foundation of our good fortune, and when, almost forty years ago, he took his sons into partnership with him in his business, he told them that acting in unison would be a sure means of achieving success in their work, and always recommended fraternal concord to them as a source of divine blessing.