

The second factor in Nathan’s favour was the appointment of John Charles Herries as Commissary-in-Chief in October 1811. Herries was to be Nathan’s Buderus, his first “friend” in a high place. Himself the son of a minor merchant banker, Herries had risen through the political ranks rapidly since becoming a junior clerk at the Treasury in 1798. Three years later he was appointed private secretary to Nicholas Vansittart, the Secretary to the Treasury, and served Spencer Perceval in the same capacity when he was Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1807-9. It was not only his family background in finance, however, which enabled Herries to identify Nathan Rothschild as the solution to his problem as Commissary. For Herries, unusually, was something of a Germanophile. Not only had he studied in Leipzig; he had even translated Friedrich Gentz’s anti-French tract On the State of Europe before and after the French Revolution. It also seems possible that it was a friendship dating back to his Leipzig days which alerted him to the potential usefulness of the Rothschilds. According to one account, Herries had, as a student, been involved romantically with a woman who was now the wife of an ennobled Leipzig tobacco merchant named Baron Limburger—to the extent that he had an illegitimate child by her. The Limburgers later claimed that it was on their recommendation that Herries had involved Nathan in the financing of Wellington’s campaign; and it seems reasonable to infer something of the sort from the fact that they subsequently felt able to claim between £30,000 and £40,000 as a 1 per cent commission on the money made by Nathan on government business. On the other hand, it was not until February 1814—after Nathan’s first commission from the government—that Limburger wrote to Herries, praising the Rothschilds’ “zeal and prudence,” but at the same time offering his own services as “an upright and prudent individual” to superintend their operations; and Herries was initially cool in his response. On reflection, he did decide to employ Limburger in the way suggested, but he was careful to emphasise that his confidence in Nathan predated Limburger’s involvement. Similarly, it was not until June of the same year that the Rothschilds began to regard Limburger as having influence with Herries.

It is possible that Limburger was merely one of those unscrupulous and opportunistic conmen who abounded in Napoleonic Europe, and that he was subtly blackmailing Herries on account of his bastard child. As Carl commented sceptically in early 1815, Limburger’s wife was “a great lover of money,” and Amschel suspected Limburger himself of merely “playing the great man.” In the end, the Limburgers had to be paid off with £15,000 in a manner which was more appropriate to blackmailers than partners. Nevertheless, as Carl had to admit, Limburger “had done us a favour,” if only by acting as an aristocratic go-between in the brothers’ dealings with continental governments.

The third and most important reason Nathan became involved in British war finance was that, unlike his rivals, he had a solution to the problem of how to get money to Wellington. As so often, Nathan subsequently made what he had done sound easy: When I was settled in London, the East India Company had £800,000 worth of gold to sell. I went to the sale, and bought it all. I knew the Duke of Wellington must have it. I had bought a great many of his bills at a discount. The Government sent for me and said they must have it. When they got it, they did not know how to get it to Portugal. I undertook all that and I sent it to France; and that was the best business I ever did.