

This does not fully explain the Duke’s difficulties, however, which were partly logistical. Even if the Exchequer in London had been overflowing, it would still have been difficult to get money to Wellington in a form that Spanish merchants would accept. Up until 1813 there were two ways in which this could be done. Either bullion (in the form of gold guineas)1 could be shipped to Portugal or Spain, and exchanged there for local coins; or the Duke could borrow from local bankers by selling them bills on London. Given the risks which attended large-scale shipments of gold, it was the latter method to which Wellington more often had recourse. The problem was that by 1812 the Iberian market for bills on London was saturated, and Wellington found that he could sell new bills only at a prohibitively steep discount: “The patriotic gentlemen at Lisbon,” he complained to Bathurst, “will give us no money, or very little, for the draughts on the Treasury.” It was into this breach that Nathan Rothschild stepped.





War and Peace

Historians have never adequately explained how an obscure Jewish merchant banker—who only a few years before had been a smuggler, and a few years before that a minor textiles exporter—was able to become the principal conduit of money from the British government to the continental battlefields on which the fate of Europe was decided in 1814 and 1815. Of all the steps in the ascent of the house of Rothschild, this was surely the greatest; yet it is also the least understood.

Three distinct elements were required to turn Nathan into (as his brothers later said, only half in jest) the “commanding general”—the Napoleon of finance. The first was the absence of competition. This was a matter of sheer good luck, for before 1810 the City of London was not short of able bankers. Harman & Co. (whom we have already encountered among the Rothschilds’ earliest correspondents in London), Reid, Irving & Co., Smith, Payne & Smith and above all Baring Brothers—all might have been expected to assist the government in its financial difficulties. Indeed, the Barings had already been involved in relaying British funds in the form of loans to Portugal. Nor was Nathan the only Jewish merchant seeking to challenge the established banks: Abraham and Benjamin Goldsmid had been doing so since the 1790s, while a succession of German bankers arrived in London in the years after 1802 (notably Schröder, Brandt and Huth) intending to emulate their achievements. As the new Commissary-in-Chief who had been entrusted with the task of providing Wellington with funds observed in November 1813, “Many houses have already offered their services to me.” Indeed, his first instinct was that Barings were “on every score the most proper channel for our money transactions.” Yet it soon became apparent that neither Barings nor any other established firm was in a position to act. In the case of Barings, this was partly because leadership of the firm had only recently passed from Francis Baring (who died in 1810) to his son Alexander. The main reason, however, was that the City as a whole was reeling from two major shocks. The first was the crisis of 1810, partly occasioned by the report of the Bullion Committee, recommending (against the advice of the Bank of England) an early resumption of gold payments. The prospect of a period of tight money—which this implied—led to a slump in the price of government stocks and left the Barings and the Goldsmids holding substantial amounts of the most recent government loan. Barings lost around £43,000. Abraham Goldsmid committed suicide, leading (as William Cobbett remarked with distaste) to “alarm and dismay” in the City and an intensification of the panic. Probably of equal importance was the simultaneous collapse of the Amsterdam market occasioned by Napoleon’s annexation of the Netherlands. This left Barings’ continental partner Hope & Co., which had for some time played a dominant role in Russian finances, a mere “empty shell.”