

It was a masterpiece in more ways than one. As their father had taught them, the brothers were always careful to make their terms attractive not only to governments, but also to the individual officials with whom they were negotiating. Thus, to ensure that Gervais acquired a personal interest in doing business with Rothschilds—to make him a reliable “friend” or “helper” of the house—he and other Russian officials were discreetly plied with money in the form of commissions and interest-free loans. This was, as the brothers themselves privately acknowledged, no more or less than bribery. Under the terms of a separate agreement with Russia, a 1 per cent commission went straight into Gervais’s pocket. “Our friend baksheesh” (“der Freund Schmiergeld”) had, as James and Carl said, played a vital role not only in clinching the deal, but in paving the way for future deals. For, as Davidson archly put it, “Now the Russian knows Salomon and Salomon knows the Russian.” Characteristically, the brothers had widely differing views as to how much Gervais should receive. Salomon knew—or thought he knew—Gervais’s price. On reflection, he felt James had given the Russian “too much of the profits” and “obviously [did] not understand how bribes are given”: the gift of a watch and some English stocks would have sufficed. But James dimissed this as “really stupid,” assuring his brothers that he would be able to secure an even bigger commission on the next Russian transfer: “The money given to Gervais makes all the difference and I happen to know the man.” Carl appears to have sided with James in this argument, but could not resist pointing out that bribing Gervais had originally been his idea.

Such payments to politicians and civil servants should not, of course, be judged by the standards of late-twentieth-century Britain, where holders of public office are forbidden to accept bribes, and Members of Parliament are obliged to declare their private business interests, consultancy fees and even gifts. As we shall see, bribery was common practice in most of Europe for most of the nineteenth century, and the Rothschilds frequently obliged the more venal politicians and civil servants they encountered with cash payments. To be sure, as contemporaries often remarked, “corruption” varied in its character and degree from place to place as well as over time. Even in 1814—long before the spread of Gladstonian notions of public probity—British officials were understood to be more scrupulous than Russian; or, rather, they were known to be more subject to parliamentary and press scrutiny. For this reason, the payments to Gervais were carefully concealed from Herries, and there was no question of Herries himself receiving similar sums. But more subtle ways could be found of taking his private interests into consideration. In July 1814 Amschel sent Nathan a letter from Madame Limburger relating to her illegitimate child—a letter he advised his brother to show to the child’s father, Herries. “It would be good [if you could],” he wrote, “because he may give you the Prussian and Russian business, as he would very much like the child to make some more money. And if the child gets a quarter of the profit, then we would have our profit, too.”