



According to Salomon, Nathan had also purchased around £450,000 of Omnium funds at 107; if he had followed his brother’s advice and sold at 120, his profit would have been around £58,000. But this evidently did not strike him as a significant sum; he fretted at having bought too few in the first place, and held on for higher prices in the new year. Indeed, it may not have been until quite late in 1816 that Nathan made perhaps his most successful speculation in stocks to date: the purchase of £650,000 at an average price of 62, much of which he sold in November 1817 at 82.75, yielding a profit of £130,000. However, this was not his to keep, as the original investment had been made with government funds at Herries’s suggestion.

A second and more important way of recouping some of the losses caused by Waterloo lay in prolonging for as long as possible the subsidy payments to Britain’s allies. In this, the Rothschilds had invaluable accomplices in the Allied powers themselves, who naturally wished to pocket as much as they could before peace was signed and the subsidies ceased. In October the Prussian representative Jordan privately admitted that the continental powers were spinning out the negotiations to secure an extra month’s subsidy; a gift of £1,100 in British stocks ensured that the Rothschilds handled the payment. Another amenable official was, as before, the Russian Gervais, who received a generous cut (2 per cent) of the subsidy business he sent the Rothschilds’ way. “The main thing,” reported James from Paris, “is that Gervais, thank God, had been made Commissar in Chief for everything. Yesterday he said to me: ‘Rothschild, we must make money!’ ” The previously wary Austrian government too (thanks partly to lobbying by Limburger) now entrusted some of its subsidy business to the Rothschilds. As Carl observed, it was “not easy to do business with the Austrians . . . but once you have their confidence you can depend upon it.” On the other hand, the increase of competition on the continent reduced the commissions which could be charged, and it was harder to make money on the side from arbitrage. Some governments—for example, that of Saxe-Weimar—were eager to avoid “falling completely and utterly into the hands of Mr Rothschild, who is, after all, a Jew.” The brothers repeatedly alluded to the meagreness of the profits (often as little as 1 per cent) they were making in this period, and it seems questionable whether the various petty German states which Amschel provided with subsidy payments—including Frankfurt as well as Saxe-Coburg and Coburg-Saarfeld—were worth the “heartbreak” of which he complained. Salomon and Amschel were philosophical: “You can’t make millions every day,” wrote the former as negotiations with Prussia dragged on. “Nothing in this world can be forced to happen. Do what you can; you can do no more.” The whole world could not “belong to Rothschild.” “Things here are not the way they are in England, where transactions worth millions happen every week. For a German 100,000 gulden is a big deal.” It is doubtful whether such fatalism impressed their brother in London.