

Moreover, the success of arbitrage and forward exchange operations hinged on rapid communication. As far as possible, the brothers sought to keep one another abreast of news which might affect the exchange markets: the impending payment of a new subsidy, the likelihood of further military action, the imminence of the peace treaty being signed. And, as we have seen, they were already able to transmit such information through their own couriers considerably faster than was possible through official channels or the regular post. Yet the time-lags could still be substantial and Nathan was constantly being urged to speed up the system. When sterling surged by 6 per cent in Amsterdam, James wrote impatiently for guidance: Now, dear Nathan, if you think the subsidies are going to stop, then you can be sure that the exchange rate will rise again, as there will be fewer bills. But if you think that there will be further transfers, then the exchange [rate] will fall again . . . One simply no longer knows what to do about the exchange rate. It is terrible that you, dear brother Nathan, don’t bother to write me your opinion, because now it is vital to know what is going on over there.



So anxious was Amschel to have up-to-date news from London that he asked Nathan to send his letters by more than one route—via Paris and Amsterdam as well as Dunkirk—and to use colour-coded envelopes so that his contact at the post office could tell at a glance whether the exchange rate was rising (blue) or falling (red).

And even with the benefit of swift communications, it was still possible to be caught out. In July 1814 Nathan unexpectedly remitted—“like a madman”—more than £100,000 to his brothers in Frankfurt. This caused the pound to drop at once in Frankfurt; and when the slide persisted into August and spread to Amsterdam, a “depressed” Carl began to fear that Nathan had lost control of the market. Salomon nervously warned Nathan not to “bring the pound below a certain level”: “If you are not careful you will not remain the master of the Stock Exchange.” Even as matters stood, confidence in sterling on the continent had been badly damaged. These anxieties were merely compounded by Amschel’s continuing confidence (which may have been due to the fact that, just as he had feared, bad news had not reached him soon enough). It was time, Carl felt, to stop speculating in sterling: But if you were to write about this to Amschel [in Berlin] he would do exactly the contrary and would buy sterling immediately without thinking things over first. No one on earth can imagine what I have to go through. Immediately after his arrival in Leipzig he proceeded to purchase £10,000 at 136. His opinion is that the pound will rise to 140 but if it were to reach 140 he still would not be able to decide whether he could sell or not. He would maintain the fact that it would rise to 150 and so forth . . . If therefore you write to him, have a fixed . . . amount in your mind and tell him half of it, as he will no doubt buy more in any case.