

The Russian subsidy deal was indeed a Meistergeschäft—for the British government, for Gervais, and above all for the Rothschilds themselves. Taking into account their 2 per cent commission from Britain, an additional 2 per cent to cover costs and a further 4 per cent from the Russian government, their gross profit on the first tranche of 4 million thaler was of the order of 8 per cent. Later payments (of 3.7 million francs and 5.3 million thaler) yielded comparable returns. Other governments were equally willing to pay substantial commissions in order to convert their subsidies into ready cash. The government of Mecklenburg “needed money like bread,” James reported from Schwerin, and was willing to forgo up to 30 per cent of its 1.5 million thaler subsidy entitlement—and pay a 5 per cent commission—if the Rothschilds could arrange “immediate payment.” “They would do anything we want them [to do],” wrote James gleefully, “in order to obtain money quickly.” The returning French King, Louis XVIII, was also furnished with money by Rothschilds in the form of bills on Paris. There were equally easy pickings in Hesse-Kassel, where, following the departure of Dalberg and prior to the return of the Elector, a skeleton administration struggled to pay the costs imposed by Allied armies in transit. With the Russian Second Army Corps requisitioning already scarce grain and not a penny left in the War Chest, William’s officials turned in desperation to the Rothschilds for a 250,000 gulden loan. Initially intended to be for only six months, part of this loan had to be prolonged because of the virtual impossibility of raising adequate taxation from the “plundered” and “exhausted” populace.

By contrast, the Prussian subsidy business proved at once harder to secure and less lucrative. In part, this was because Prussian negotiators were less biddable than Gervais. The brothers made overtures to the Finance Minister Prince Bülow and to Prince Hardenberg’s adviser Christian Rother, but elicited only a lukewarm response, despite the positive impression made by Herries’s recommendation. James managed to secure three instalments totalling a million thaler, but the Prussians dismissed the 2 per cent commission he asked as too high. “There’s money to be made from Russia,” James suspected, “but none from Prussia.” Six months on, he saw no reason to revise that initial judgement: “There is generally no pleasure in doing business with the Prussians,” he grumbled as yet another bid was rejected. In the end, the brothers had to do without a commission altogether, and although the 3 per cent profit finally realised on this deal was better than had initially been expected, they had to console themselves with the thought that they had at least secured a foothold in Berlin, which might prove more profitable in the future. “At any rate,” James reflected, “we have now, thank God, managed to push our way into the business, and it will be of considerable use in bringing us into contact with the Prussian court.”