

Although Nathan told his brothers to carry on delivering specie to Wellington’s military chest, the business had ceased to be viable. Towards the end of July an “alarmed” Carl temporarily halted payments to the military chest. Two months later James found himself so strapped for cash that he had to do the same. Amschel, by contrast, was “swimming” in money in Frankfurt, but money which no one needed. As Carl admitted, “Now we don’t need money for the army, as the army has enough.” By the end of the year James was reduced to offering Drummond deposit facilities in Paris in an attempt to get some of the specie back—a suggestion which was curtly rejected. Even bigger difficulties arose in Amsterdam, where Carl found himself unable to sell the British treasury bills at the relatively modest discount agreed between Nathan and Herries. Indeed, the sudden advent of peace had made the Amsterdam market so liquid that such long-dated bills could scarcely be sold at all, precipitating another round of ill-tempered recrimination between the brothers.6 The French collapse also had a disruptive impact on the subsidy business. In Berlin, James’s negotiations with the Prussian government were thrown into confusion as the news of Waterloo caused a surge in the sterling exchange rate. Other German states quickly began demanding more generous exchange rates for their subsidy payments. To compound the brothers’ misery came news of a family tragedy: the death of their sister Julie at the age of thirty-five. “I feel my spirits very depressed indeed,” Nathan confessed to Carl just two weeks after Waterloo, “and [am] by no means able to attend to business as I could wish. The melancholy communication of the death of my sister has entirely unhinged my mind and have done but very little business today on that account.” Far from being hugely profitable, the aftermath of Wellington’s victory was a period of acute crisis for the Rothschilds.

In London, a frantic Nathan sought to make good the damage; and it is in this context that the firm’s purchases of British stocks have to be seen. On July 20, the evening edition of the London Courier reported that Nathan had made “great purchases of stock.” A week later Roworth heard that Nathan had “done well by the early information which you had of the Victory gained at Waterloo” and asked to participate in any further purchases of government stock “if in your opinion you think any good can be done.” This would seem to confirm the view that Nathan did indeed buy consols on the strength of his prior knowledge of the battle’s outcome. However, the gains made in this way cannot have been very great. As Victor Rothschild conclusively demonstrated, the recovery of consols from their nadir of 53 in fact predated Waterloo by over a week, and even if Nathan had made the maximum possible purchase of £20,000 on June 20, when consols stood at 56.5 and sold a week later when they stood at 60.5, his profits would barely have exceeded £7,000. Much the same can be said of Omnium (another form of government bond), which rose eight points on the news of victory. In fact, the brothers’ correspondence suggests that such purchases were not made on a large scale until some time later, in the period before the Paris peace treaty was finally signed. An unusually anxious letter from Nathan suggests that even these were nerve-racking speculations, dependent as they were on the assumption that this time the French would not seek to resist the peace terms: Everything is going well, so help me God, better [even] than you would imagine. I am quite pleased. I went to see Herries, he made me feel . . . well. He swears that everything is going well. I bought stock at 61⅛ and 61½ and Herries swears . . . that everything is going well, with God’s help . . . We are all in better spirits. I hope it will have the same effect on you.