

But he miscalculated in two vital respects: in assuming that it would take another lengthy war to defeat Napoleon, and in assuming that the financial paralysis which had prevailed on the continent a year before would quickly return, leaving the field empty of competition. In fact, barely three months elapsed between the return from Elba and the defeat at Waterloo, and for the first two of these there was minimal military action. As a consequence, the Rothschilds’ rivals in Amsterdam, Hamburg and Frankfurt were able to compete in the money markets in a way they had not in 1814. The first signs of trouble came in Hamburg, where—to Nathan’s dismay—James found himself unable to hold up the exchange rate in his purchases of bullion. Then from Amsterdam it was reported that Wellington had more bullion than he knew what to do with, so that on May 5 Nathan “received orders from Government this day to desist in my operations owing to your having sent off so much specie.” Furiously, he laid the blame on James: I certainly feel at a loss to understand the reason you cannot follow the instructions I have so repeatedly given you . . . I am certain you cannot be aware of the injury you are doing me . . . by your inattention I have lost at least ⅞ of the business I expected . . . What do you suppose will be the result for they are not my orders but Government’s as I before mentioned and I am continually blamed. I beg of you to do nothing whatever for the present in purchasing coins or bills to draw on London a single bill, and if you do I shall not countenance your operations in any way whatever, and will not accept the bills, but let them be returned protested to you. I hope I shall not have occasion to repeat this.



Yet it was hardly James’s fault. It was simply—as Davidson pointed out—that he was being undercut by continental bankers like Heckscher who discerned the absurdity of the Rothschilds’ shipping gold from Hamburg and Amsterdam to London only to ship it back to the continent: When I left London, Mr R, the Commissary in Chief in fact everyone was anxious that as much bullion might be obtained as possibly might be done. To execute this order there was no alternative but to draw on London. Things have since taken a different turn, and the long expected war remains hitherto only in preparation, and no actual war having commenced, has the effect that bullion can be collected fom all quarters. Moreover the Houses which at the time when Bony recaptured France had no desire to be connected in that line of business, appear more anxious to receive a share thereof.



James—despatched back to Paris in disgrace—and Salomon, now joined in Amsterdam by Carl, struggled to reverse the slide of sterling, but the damage had been done.

It was at this juncture that the military situation came to its epoch-ending climax at Waterloo. No doubt it was gratifying to receive the news of Napoleon’s defeat first, thanks to the speed with which Rothschild couriers were able to relay a newspaper version of the fifth and conclusive extraordinary bulletin—issued in Brussels at midnight on June 18—via Dunkirk and Deal to reach New Court on the night the 19th. This was just twenty-four hours after Wellington’s victorious meeting with Blücher on the battlefield and nearly forty-eight hours before Major Henry Percy delivered Wellington’s official dispatch to the Cabinet as its members dined at Lord Harrowby’s house (at 11 p.m. on the 21st). Indeed, so premature did Nathan’s information appear that it was not believed when he relayed it to the government on the 20th; nor was a second Rothschild courier from Ghent.5 But no matter how early it reached him, the news of Waterloo was anything but good from Nathan’s point of view. He had expected nothing as decisive so soon; indeed, just five days before the battle, he had arranged a new million pound loan for the British government in Amsterdam, and was in the middle of organising a subsidy payment to Baden even as his courier neared London. Now Waterloo threatened to bring his financial operations on behalf of the anti-French coalition to a premature and highly inconvenient end. For the brothers were encumbered not only with substantial amounts of depreciating bullion, but also with over a million pounds’ worth of treasury bills to be sold in Amsterdam, to say nothing of a succession of half-finished subsidy contracts which would cease the moment a peace treaty was signed. As reports reached New Court confirming that the end of the war was imminent, Nathan was faced not with the immense profits of legend but with heavy and growing losses. John Roworth, his agent with the British army, described a gruelling journey on foot from Mons to Genappe, walking by day “in the midst of a cloud of dust under a burning and scorching sun” and sleeping at night “under the cannon’s mouth on the ground.” But when he finally caught up with Wellington’s Commissary-General Dunmore, he was handed back unwanted Prussian coins worth £230,000.