

To begin with, Napoleon’s return was, as Nathan put it, nothing but “unpleasant news” for the Rothschilds. Early March had seen the brothers buying Austrian stocks in the expectation of a bull market in both Vienna and London. When the news of the escape from Elba reached Nathan on March 10, this prospect evaporated. There was, he informed Salomon, “stagnation on ’Change . . . in the bill way, and I am prevented from making you a large remittance.” The effect on Paris was even worse: “It is practically not possible to continue business at present,” reported James. True, Nathan was quick to reorientate his operations. On the assumption that the British government would soon once again need cash on the continent, he began buying up bullion in London, which he then sold to Herries for shipment to Wellington. Immense sums were involved: in the first week of April alone, Nathan bought “100,000 guineas gold, £50,000 foreign and upwards of 100,000 Spanish dollars and . . . nearly £200,000 good bills.” To maximise the amount he could offer Herries, Nathan also sent Salomon to Amsterdam and James to Hamburg with orders “to purchase plenty of gold for the armies” and send it to London. The first shipment to the continent—three ingots worth around £3,000—was despatched on April 4; around £28,000 followed on May 1, and by June 13 more than £250,000 had been sent. On April 22 Nathan sold Herries gold worth around £80,000; by October 20 he had provided gold coins worth a total of £2,136,916—enough to fill 884 boxes and 55 casks. In addition, he offered his services again to relay a new tranche of subsidies to Britain’s allies, which at their peak reached the unprecedented level of a million pounds a month. This time, not only Russia and Prussia but the previously aloof Austrians found they had little option but to accept payment from the Rothschilds—as did a gaggle of other states, including Saxony, Baden, Württemberg, Bavaria, Saxe-Weimar, Hesse, Denmark and Sardinia. Altogether, Herries’s account with Nathan in 1815 amounted to £9,789,778.4

Assuming that the commissions charged for these transfers were, as in 1814, somewhere between 2 and 6 per cent, that figure might seem to imply profits in the region of £390,000. However, this overlooks the role of exchange rate fluctuations which, as in 1814, were the key to the profitability of the transfer payments. The immediate impact of Nathan’s bullion purchases in London was to weaken sterling, pushing up the price of gold by as much as 23 per cent. This represented a major gamble, as it remained uncertain throughout March whether Britain would in fact go to war against Bonaparte once more. (Had it been postponed, Nathan might have found himself with a large stock of unwanted and depreciating bullion.) When the decision for war was finally confirmed, Nathan sought once again to strengthen sterling’s exchange rate with the continental currencies—he was duly credited with pushing the pound up from 17.50 francs to the pound to 22. The Rothschilds’ “commanding general” was now quite confident of his ability to control the exchanges: “You need be under no uneasiness from anywhere,” he told James. “Our resources here are like lions, equal if not superior to all and every demand.” He was equally sanguine in a letter to Carl: “I am not limited to a trifling difference in the exchange . . . which will give me great command over the market.” Nathan was also convinced that his latest agreement with Herries was effectively risk-free, as it provided for immediate reimbursement of every amount sent to the continent (where previously he had advanced the government considerable sums).