

The key lay in controlling the sterling exchange rate, and this was in many ways the brothers’ principal concern in this period. As early as June 1811, when they were first engaged in smuggling bullion across the Channel, Amschel accused James of “forcing the rate of exchange in Jerusalem [London] too high” (meaning, in fact, that the pound was falling against the franc); and James’s letters to Nathan the following year frequently refer to his efforts to keep the franc from rising. “It is impossible,” he assured Nathan, “to do more than I do to keep [the exchange] so low as possible.” These early experiences explain the success with which the Rothschilds avoided substantial depreciation when transferring larger sums for Herries. To Herries’s surprise and satisfaction, Nathan was able to disburse as much as “£700,000 in the purchase of bills on Holland and Frankfurt, without its having produced the smallest effect or excited any sensation on the market . . . The exchange is better now than when the operation commmenced . . . I am convinced that £100,000 negotiated by a foreign minister or an officer of the commissariat would have produced ten times the effect of Rothschild’s operations.” The fall of Paris to the Allied armies naturally strengthened the pound, but the continued payment of subsidies soon threatened to weaken it again. For this reason, the Rothschilds intervened to push it up further. By now the markets were tending to follow the Rothschild lead. As Carl noted: “When we buy, everybody buys.” This reflected the widespread belief that the Rothschilds were acting “on behalf of the English government and that this is being done in order to force the rate of the pound sterling up [and] . . . that we succeeded very well in doing so.”

In reality, of course, the Rothschilds had reasons of their own for holding up the pound. With movements of sterling more or less predictable, it was possible to engage in profitable arbitrage on the back of the big subsidy transfers. In May 1814, for example, Salomon drew Nathan’s attention to the substantial gap between the Paris and London gold quotations. A month later it was Nathan’s turn to urge James to buy undervalued pounds in Frankfurt. The subsidy payments to Gervais generated a succession of profits from exchange rate differences. For example, Amschel went to Berlin in July to take advantage of the premium on ducats over louis d’or. The ducats which were delivered to Gervais in August and September had been bought by James at a lower price in Amsterdam, yielding an extra profit of some 4 per cent.

Such transactions probably accounted for the lion’s share of the profits the Rothschilds made in this decisive period. Amschel was only half joking when, during the post-war surge in sterling, he wrote urging Salomon: “Do your stuff, make the Frankfurt house richer by a million francs, the Paris house richer by a million louis d’or and the London house richer by a million pounds, and you’ll be awarded the order of the Grande Armee!” Yet it must be stressed that this was a strategy fraught with risk. It was exceedingly difficult to accumulate the cash necessary to carry out the subsidy transfers to Russia and Prussia on time. The Frankfurt house found its sources of credit all but exhausted on more than one occasion, and Carl and Amschel frequently complained that Nathan was biting off more than they could chew. Raising sums of the order of 600,000 gulden was, as Carl complained, “no joke.” At the same time, the governments concerned in the subsidy transfers naturally resented the fact that the Rothschilds were making these large profits on the side. Even Herries and Gervais on occasion complained about what was going on, while the Prussian government managed to pass at least some of the costs occasioned by the unexpected fall of the pound in August back on to the Rothschilds. The exchange rate was also a stumbling block in the negotiations with Austria.