



When Amschel realised his mistake, he found it “astonishing”—the more so as he was held responsible for the fall of sterling in Berlin! “Could I have been more careful?” he retorted, stung by his brothers’ criticisms. “You really want to be able to go out in the rain without getting wet.” Salomon’s gloomy conclusion was that Nathan had overreached himself: “No man on earth can at any time fix the rate of the pound except a government which would be ready to risk half a million pounds during one year in order to carry out a monetary plan . . . I do not think there is any point in buying sterling for the purpose of keeping the rate of the pound from falling, because there is too much of this currency already in the world.” James even suggested a change of strategy: running up sterling debts on the assumption of continuing depreciation. It was only gradually—and with Nathan “operating . . . as much as lies in my power” to push the rate back up—that the brothers recovered their confidence in the pound. By November James found that it was once again enough for him “to put in an appearance” at the Hamburg stock exchange for the pound to rise, and the same was true when he visited Berlin early in the New Year.3 By February he could confidently report to Nathan: “It depends solely on me whether the pound rises or falls in Paris.”

There was another (and not dissimilar) way of profiting indirectly from the subsidy business: by speculating on fluctuations in bond prices. Like exchange rates, bond prices were highly sensitive to large international transfers, as well as to related political developments. For example: the price of Russian bonds had plummeted from 65 per cent of their face value to just 25 between February and October 1812, for the reason that the French invasion had led to the suspension of interest payments on the government debt. News of the retreat from Moscow led to a rally: on November 30 they were quoted at 35 in Amsterdam and by March 1813 they had risen to 50, only to fall back to 41 in June on news of Napoleon’s victories in Saxony. As the prospect of an Allied victory neared, so Russian bonds rallied, with the payment of subsidies from Britain strongly implying an imminent resumption of interest payments. It therefore made sense for anyone who anticipated the defeat of France to buy the bonds of states allied to Britain while they were still in the doldrums. The Rothschilds attempted to do so, albeit rather late in the day. By the time Nathan sent his brother-in-law Moses Montefiore to Paris with instructions to make some speculative purchases, Russian bonds were already close to par. Nevertheless, James was convinced that they would go higher, having received information (from Gervais) that interest payments would soon be resumed. Amschel also made purchases of modest amounts of bonds from neighbouring German states that August. And in March 1815 Rothschild purchases based on similar calculations pushed up the price of Austrian bonds. However, it seems that much less money was made from these transactions than from arbitrage and foreign exchange speculation, which were on a much larger scale. Indeed, the last bond purchases very probably led to considerable losses—for reasons which will become clear.