

It proved harder still to “establish contact” with the Austrian court. Under the Treaty of Treplitz of 1813, the Austrians were to be paid a million pounds as a subsidy, and the Treaty of Chaumont of January 1814 increased the total by two-thirds, to be paid in monthly instalments of £138,888. After the French defeat, the total due was scaled down to £555,555. Again the Rothschilds put in a bid to handle part of the transfer, backed up as usual by Herries. The terms were deliberately generous: not only did the Rothschilds offer to waive any commission, but they offered to convert sterling into gulden at the rate of 8.48 to the pound. But Barbier, the Vice-President of the Austrian Treasury, and his superior, the Finance Minister Count Ugarte, rejected the offer in the belief that Viennese banks should be employed. A second bid to transfer monies to Austria from Belgium (to defray the costs of occupation) also fell through because the Austrians sought to attach unacceptable conditions to the Rothschild offer.2

All the diverse inter-governmental payments the Rothschilds succeeded in making in 1814 had one thing in common: in each case, there were at least two ways (and sometimes three) to make a profit. The first and most obvious took the form of commissions, which ranged, as we have seen, from as much as 8 per cent to as little as zero. The second—potentially more lucrative but also riskier—lay in exploiting the often rapid and large exchange rate movements which occurred in this period. This was how the otherwise unattractive Prussian transfer was made to yield a profit; and it seems to have been attempted on most of the other transfers too. Essentially, the brothers were able to take advantage of the variations in exchange rates from place to place, which reflected the absence—especially pronounced in wartime—of an integrated European foreign exchange market, and the effects of political uncertainty—also at a peak in 1814-15. On a given day, a draft or bill denominated in sterling might be worth quite different amounts in terms of gulden in London, Amsterdam and Frankfurt. Arbitrage transactions sought to exploit those differences by buying a currency cheap in one market and selling it dear in another. In the same way, the exchange rate of the thaler or the ducat could vary dramatically within a short space of time. Classic forward exchange speculation meant timing payments so that a particular currency could be bought when its exchange rate was weakest and sold when it was strongest.

The Rothschild brothers were singularly well placed to carry out such transactions. Not only did they have permanent bases in Frankfurt and London and semi-permanent offices in Amsterdam and Paris; individual brothers also continued to undertake business trips as far afield as Berlin and Prague. Moreover, thanks to their relationship with Herries, they had a large advantage over their competitors. For one of the main causes of volatility on the foreign exchanges was the very transfers of money from Britain to the continent which the Rothschilds themselves were being asked to undertake. Long before 1814, British observers had realised that large purchases of foreign currency with sterling bills tended to cause the pound to depreciate. The bigger the deficit on the British balance of payments—in effect, the more such unrequited subsidy payments had to be made—the more the pound’s exchange rate slid. It was precisely Nathan’s commitment to Herries to undertake the transfers with the minimum exchange rate depreciation which secured him the subsidy business in the first place; and the brothers never ceased to draw Herries’s attention to their success in this regard. (This was what James was driving at when he described the first major Russian transfer as a “masterpiece” from the British point of view.) At the same time, however, the Rothschilds were able to derive substantial benefits for themselves by exploiting the effects of their transactions on the various currency markets.