

In reality, however, brotherly love was far from easy to maintain in the chaotic circumstances of 1814 and 1815. As their resources were stretched by a succession of huge and risky undertakings, personal relations between the Rothschild brothers frequently deteriorated—on occasion, to the point of complete rupture. The main reason for this was undoubtedly Nathan’s increasingly imperious treatment of his supposed partners in the business. Technically, according to the 1815 agreement, the brothers were equals: profits were divided equally, and Nathan gave each of them a promissory note worth £50,000 to compensate for his much larger share of the capital. But as Salomon and others commented at the time, the combination of Nathan’s aggressive temper and the increasingly Anglocentric nature of the firm’s operations effectively reduced the other brothers to the status of mere agents. Nathan was, as Salomon half joked, “the commanding general,” the others were his “marshals,” while the sums of “capital resources” they had to dispose of were “soldiers” who had to be “kept in readiness.” The implied comparison with Napoleon himself—against whom, after all, their financial operations were ultimately directed—was a revealing one, and Nathan’s brothers were not alone in making it. As Swinton Holland said to his partner Alexander Baring in 1824: “I must candidly confess that I have not the nerve for his operations. They are generally well planned, with great cleverness and adroitness in execution—but he is in money and funds what Bonaparte was in war, and if any sudden shake comes, he will fall to the ground like the other.” To Ludwig Börne, Nathan and his brothers were all “Finanzbonaparten,” and the parallel was still being drawn by writers in the 1870s. But it was really Nathan who became the Bonaparte of the banking world, and he shared with the French Emperor his superhuman appetite for risks and his intolerance of inept subordinates.

As early as 1811—even before their father’s death—Nathan’s brothers had begun to complain about the occasionally bullying tone of his letters. But it was not until the middle of 1814 that he really began to emerge as the dominant, not to say domineering, partner. The key issue was his desire to dictate his brothers’ movements. In June 1814 he ordered Salomon to go to Amsterdam to assist James and took the opportunity to let fly at their brothers in Frankfurt: “I tell you, Amschel and Carl make me damned upset. You have no idea how idiotically they write and they draw on me like madmen . . . By God, they write me such idiocies that today I feel very cross. Amschel writes to James as if he could do the business by himself.” This evidently touched a raw nerve, and Davidson’s appeal to Nathan to desist from “disparaging correspondence” came too late. A distraught Carl took to his bed, warning that “if he carried on in this way,” Nathan would “soon have a partner in the other world,” so ill did his letters make him feel. Salomon also complained of “severe pains in my back and legs,” but his tone was angrier: I cannot for one moment believe that even if I were the learned Nathan Rothschild I would regard the other four brothers as stupid schoolboys, and myself as the only wise one . . . I do not wish to be upset any more and made more ill than I already am. To put it quite bluntly, we are neither drunk nor stupid. We have something you in London obviously do not have—we keep our books in order . . . If my tears were black I would write a lot more easily than with ink . . . The English mail day is a regular terror for me. Every night I dream of these letters . . . One just doesn’t write that way to one’s family, one’s brothers, one’s partners.