

The summer of 1815 was therefore anything but a time of unalloyed success for the Rothschilds. The agreement drawn up in March of that year would seem to suggest that the brothers’ collective assets had grown substantially since the last balance sheet of 1810. But no less than two-thirds of the total capital in 1815 was credited to Nathan, and he had not been party to the 1810 agreement. Taking into account only the shares of his four brothers, there may in fact have been a contraction in the continental side’s capital. Moreover, this agreement predated the crisis of the Hundred Days and should therefore be regarded as evidence of earlier success (primarily, it seems reasonable to conclude, the highly lucrative business done for Herries in 1814). By the summer of 1816, it is true, the brothers estimated that their combined capital amounted to between £900,000 and £1 million, implying a doubling of their capital between March 1815 and July 1816. Given that the figure agreed between them in June 1818 was £1,772,000 (a three-quarters increase over two years), this was a remarkable rate of growth. But there is good reason to doubt whether the period immediately after Waterloo was when the bulk of this increase occurred.

The trouble is that it is almost impossible to say precisely how the Rothschilds performed financially in this period because they had no idea themselves. So tumultuous were the events precipitated by Napoleon’s return from Elba, and so enormous the turnover of their various transfer operations during 1814 and 1815, that their already rudimentary accounting procedures collapsed altogether.

The problem first surfaced in June 1814, as Carl scrambled to raise the cash needed for an especially large subsidy instalment. The only way he had been able do this, he complained, was by “swindling” (issuing accommodation bills, or bills unrelated to “real” purchases of commodities). When James complained about this, Carl pointed out that it was not his responsibility to “keep the books.” At this stage, it was Salomon who was regarded as the accountant of the family—the one who could always cheer their father up by making him “on paper . . . rich in a minute.” But even he was soon unable to keep track of the immense commitments Nathan was making on his brothers’ behalf. By August 1814 he and Amschel had to confess that they were “completely confused and do not know where the money is.” “Together we are all rich and if all the five of us are taken into consideration we are worth quite a lot,” wrote Salomon anxiously to Nathan. “But where is the money?” Nathan’s (perhaps rather acid) response was that “a book [should] be kept where [Carl] should enter business rules.”

The problem recurred in September 1815, when the brothers on the continent experienced a severe cash-flow crisis. “But dear Nathan,” wrote Salomon, “you must have a frightful amount of money over there because here I am in debt [and] Amschel hasn’t much left over. It must all be over there and [yet] you write that you are so much in debt. Where is our [cash] reserve?” Calculating that he owed as much as £120,000 in Paris alone, he repeated the question a few days later: You must have all our money over there with you. We here are stinking poor. We haven’t a penny to spare. Amschel has less than a million left and therefore the whole lot must be with you, including what we owe . . . Work out where the family money is, my good Nathan. I don’t know . . . Where is our money? Well, it’s just absurd. God willing it will turn up when we do the spring cleaning!