

The shade of Bonaparte’s noble daring? -

Jew Rothschild, and his fellow Christian Baring.1



Those lines have been quoted by historians before. It is worth, however, reading the verse which follows too, for it nicely illustrates the ambivalent feelings with which contemporaries regarded the spectacular financial boom of the early 1820s. To Byron, Rothschild and Baring were, along with the “truly liberal Laffitte,” “the true Lords of Europe,” whose every loan Is not a merely speculative hit,

But seats a nation or upsets a throne.

Republics also get involved a bit;

Columbia’s stock hath holders not unknown

On ’Change; and even thy silver soil, Peru,

Must get itself discounted by a Jew.



Byron went on to discuss—with remarkable insight—that ascetic materialism which, as we have seen, was such a distinctive early Rothschild trait. Indeed, it seems not unreasonable to suggest that the poet’s reflections on “gaunt Wealth’s austerities” may have been inspired by Nathan himself: He is your only poet;—passion, pure

And sparkling on from heap to heap, displays

Possess’d, the ore, of which mere hopes allure

Nations athwart the deep: the golden rays

Flash up in ingots from the mine obscure;

On him the diamond pours its brilliant blaze,

While the mild emerald’s beam shades down the dyes

Of other stones, to soothe the miser’s eyes.

The lands on either side are his: the ship

From Ceylon, Inde, or far Cathay, unloads

For him the fragrant produce of each trip;

Beneath his cars of Ceres groan the roads,

And the vine blushes like Aurora’s lip;

His very cellars might be kings’ abodes;

While he, despising every sensual call,

Commands—the intellectual lord of all.

Perhaps he hath great projects in his mind,

To build a college, or to found a race,

A hospital, a church,—and leave behind

Some dome surmounted by his meagre face:

Perhaps he fain would liberate mankind

Even with the very ore which makes them base:

Perhaps he would be wealthiest of his nation,

Or revel in the joys of calculation.





The allusion to “his nation” may indicate that there was more of Rothschild than of Baring in this inspired evocation of financial might.

That Byron could suggest—even satirically—that Nathan Rothschild held, along with Alexander Baring, “the balance of the world” requires some explanation. The name of Baring was, of course, well established. Like the Rothschilds the family hailed from Germany (Francis Baring had emigrated from Bremen in 1717); and, like Nathan, Francis’s son John had made his fortune in the textiles business, as a wool manufacturer, before his sons established the merchant bank of Baring Brothers in 1770. However, as Lutherans the Barings had easily been absorbed into the social elite of Exeter and later London. John’s younger son Francis had been an MP since 1784, a member of the board of the East India Company since 1779 and a baronet since 1793. Alexander, his son and successor at the bank, also became an MP in 1806. By contrast, only a few years before Don Juan, the Rothschilds’ role in the financing of the war against Napoleon was still largely a secret, known only to political and financial insiders. Even the Paris banker Jacques Laffitte was better known as Governor of the Banque de France between 1814 and 1820 and one of Napoleon’s financial backers in the Hundred Days. What happened in the years after the upheaval of Waterloo to catapult Nathan to such celebrity—and notoriety—that he could be said to “reign” over royalists and liberals, “rouse” Spanish patriots and “keep the world, both old and new, in pain / Or pleasure?”