



Herries was already receiving disquieting reports from Drummond in Paris about a “simulated transaction” which James assured him had been necessary to avoid disturbing the exchange rate. “This I dare say is very true,” commented Drummond nervously, “but on the other hand in matters of account that are to come before the auditors nothing is more to be avoided than fiction to which a suspicion is always likely to be attached . . . Would it not be a proper general injunction to all accountants to banish all fiction?” What Drummond did not know was the extent of the fiction. When his colleague Dunmore paid a visit on James in March 1816, the latter confessed: “My heart was beating terribly as I was scared that he might give me the order to send his money to the army.” James had in fact no more than 700,000 francs, far less than the sum Dunmore could legitimately have demanded.

In the end, none of the brothers was equal to the task of untangling the accounts. It was left to Benjamin Davidson to try to reconstruct the extraordinary transactions of the previous year—and then to try to conceal the numerous irregularities which had occurred. The difficulties he confronted were daunting. For a start, none of the brothers had yet adopted the system of double-entry book-keeping. As Amschel put it, the Berlin banker Mendelssohn “know[s] how he stands with each of [his joint accounts] while in the House of Rothschild we have to rely on what the book keepers say. Gasser tells me: ‘We have made nice profits on the Prussian transactions’ and I have to believe him.” This in itself is remarkable: after all, the double-entry system had first been described by the Venetian Luca Pacioli in 1494 and was widely known in most European countries by the end of the sixteenth century. The fact that the Rothschilds were so slow to adopt it suggests that the capitalism of the Frankfurt Judengasse was technically quite backward (though it also, of course, suggests that business geniuses can do without accountants—for a time). Secondly, there were substantial gaps in the records, reflecting the habits of concealment which had developed in Frankfurt and elsewhere during the period of French occupation. Thirdly, there was the problem of the large profits which had been made on exchange rate fluctuations without Herries’s consent. Finally, and most embar rassingly, there were the “fictional” accommodation bills which had been issued, which totalled more than £2 million. As Davidson put it drily, “One should have thought earlier . . . that one day Herries [would] have to look at these accounts.”

Fortunately, Davidson was able to arrive at figures which showed the government rather than the Rothschilds as the principal beneficiary of the subsidy and other payments; and in the end Salomon’s verdict seems to have been accepted by Liverpool and his colleagues that “not even a hundred banking houses would have been able to carry out a business transaction of this size within nine months and to show a profit for the government.” Herries was discharged honourably with a pension when the office of commissary was wound up in October 1816 and a Commons motion to prevent his appointment as auditor of the Civil List was defeated. Nevertheless, Salomon was still fretting about the accounts as late as January 1818: We are not yet in the clear with the government . . . As long as the government leaves the accounts with Herries in suspension, we are not yet in the clear. [Are we] rich men or are we at ease? As far as I can see, the serving boy is more at ease with the little he has than we are with the great deal we have. Why? Because he doesn’t have a bungled account with a government hanging round his neck . . .