



In the same way, the other brothers were kept abreast of Carl’s attempts to find a wife in Hamburg because it was a matter of intense interest to all of them which family Carl married into. In the end, there were authentic bonds of brotherly love, forged in the Judengasse, which no other ties could rival. “Did anyone promise us more when we all slept in one little attic room?” asked Salomon when Nathan was grumbling at having sold some consols too soon. Such memories were never wholly forgotten, no matter how far apart the brothers lived and how many harsh words they exchanged by post.

The extent—and limits—of fraternal unity were most apparent as the brothers debated whether or not to modify the 1815 partnership agreement. The legacy of the great transactions of 1814 and 1815 was a tangle of financial interdependence which could not easily be undone. The question now was whether James should be allowed to establish a new house in Paris under the explicitly collective name of “de Rothschild Frères.” Although James was against merging the accounts of the various establishments, Amschel had his anxieties, fearing that James might embroil him in risky business. He and Carl were only brought round when James agreed that the capital of the partnership should not be made public—an important decision in favour of secrecy which was to set an enduring precedent. The result was a compromise which it took almost two years to hammer out. The 1818 agreement accordingly defined the brothers’ partnership as “three joint mercantile establishments [conducted] under their the said five partners’ mutual responsibility” but at the same time “form[ing] but one general joint concern.” It was a nice distinction which quite accurately encapsulated the way the brothers reconciled their individual differences with a deep and enduring sense of common fraternal purpose.





FOUR

A“ Court Always Leads to Something” (1816-1825)


You are certainly right that there is much to be earned from a government which has no money. But you have to take risks.

—JAMES ROTHSCHILD TO NATHAN ROTHSCHILD.





N. M. Rothschild . . . has the money, the strength and the power.

—NATHAN ROTHSCHILD TO CHRISTIAN ROTHER.





In 1823 the twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth cantos of Byron’s Don Juan were published in London, at a time when their author was embroiled—fatally, as it proved—in the Greek struggle for independence. Byron’s aristocratic profligacy with money was by now as notorious as his libertinism. Nevertheless, these late verses indicate a keen awareness of the power of money—and specifically of the new kind of financial power personified by Nathan Rothschild. “Who hold the balance of the world?” asked Byron in the twelfth canto, “Who reign O’er Congress, whether royalist or liberal?

Who rouse the shirtless patriots of Spain?

(That make old Europe’s journals squeak and gibber all.)

Who keep the world, both old and new, in pain

Or pleasure? Who make politics run glibber all?