

But Nathan gloried in his ascetic materialism: I am writing to you giving my opinion, as it is my damned duty to write to you . . . I am reading through your letters not just once but maybe a hundred times. You can well imagine that yourself. After dinner I usually have nothing to do. I do not read books, I do not play cards, I do not go to the theatre, my only pleasure is my business and in this way I read Amschel’s, Salomon’s, James’s and Carl’s letters . . . As far as Carl’s letter [about buying a bigger house] is concerned . . . all this is a lot of nonsense because as long as we have good business and are rich everybody will flatter us and those who have no interest in obtaining money through us begrudge us for it all. Our Salomon is too good and agreeable to anything and anybody and if a parasite whispers something into his ear he thinks that all human beings are noble minded[;] the truth is that all they are after is their own interest.7



Privately, even Gentz had to acknowledge that in reality Nathan was primus inter pares. It was he who had the “remarkable instinct which causes them always to choose the right, and of two rights the better”: Baring’s most profound reasoning inspires me, now that I have seen everything at close quarters, with less confidence than the sound judgement of one of the more intelligent Rothschilds—for among the five brothers there is one whose intelligence is wanting and another whose intelligence is weak—and if Baring and Hope ever fail, I can state with confidence that it will be because they have thought themselves cleverer than Rothschild and have not followed his advice.



The use of the singular “Rothschild” is important. There was only one true Finanz bonaparte.

It was probably Amschel and Carl whom Gentz had in mind when he spoke of “one whose intelligence is wanting and another whose intelligence is weak.” This was unfair: a more accurate characterisation would be that they were more risk-averse than their brothers. Amschel was the most cautious of the five and constantly yearned to lead “a quiet life.” “Me, I don’t want to eat the world,” he wrote in a typically homespun letter. His ideal was “to work in tranquillity,” without the anxieties which Nathan’s Napoleonic approach necessarily generated. Carl, the fourth brother, was nervous and insecure, and shared Amschel’s limited ambition. “I am fed up with business,” he confided to his eldest brother in a characteristic letter. “I wish God would give me but little, enough to live, garments for myself and bread to eat. I do not wish to float above the skies.” This feeling doubtless intensified at the time of the Amsterdam treasury bills fiasco, which brought a torrent of recrimination down upon him. After this, as Salomon wrote, Carl was genuinely “afraid” of Nathan, though he was still capable of muttering criticisms behind “the boss’s” back. As we have seen, Salomon himself had the intellect and self-confidence to question Nathan’s strategy; but he was too “quiet and thoughtful” and “took things too much to heart”—according to senior Rothschild employees like Davidson and Braun—to withstand his brother’s belligerence. He preferred, where possible, to side with Nathan against the others.