



When Nathan wrote back suggesting that it was Amschel who was the “big rich man,” there was something close to panic.

The problem was that Amschel had a string of subsidy payments to make in Berlin and elsewhere, and virtually no cash in hand, while Carl’s funds were almost entirely tied up in the British treasury bills in Amsterdam. In Paris too the position was alarmingly tight. “This eternal indebtedness is not very pleasant,” complained James. “The payments we have to make are big, far too big,” echoed Salomon. “Dear Nathan, you write that you have one million or two million over there. Well you really must have, because our brother Amschel is bust. We are bust. Carl is bust. So one of us must have the money.” In fact, the continental Rothschilds averted “bankruptcy” at this time only by means of short-term borrowing and by making further use of accommodation bills. Not surprisingly, they blamed Nathan for their predicament. Echoing their father’s earlier criticisms, Salomon bitterly accused his brother of mismanagement: “We are relying on miracles and luck, and I say to you once again that you don’t write clearly enough. In the name of God, such important transactions have to be carried out precisely. Unfortunately, there is absolutely no order in the way you deal with these.” Too much of their accounting was being done “in the head” instead of on paper. Was it any wonder the Austrian government feared that the Rothschilds might “go bankrupt?”

Nathan tried to reassure his brothers that their position was secure. But Amschel continued to yearn for some tangible proof of the family’s wealth. “You state that I need not enquire as to where the money actually is,” he complained to Nathan. “In this respect I am like little Anselm [Salomon’s son, then aged thirteen] who always inquires as to where the money is. ‘People say my father possesses five millions,’ he says. He would like to see it all in one single heap.” Were they millionaires, he demanded to know, or bankrupts? The uncertainty was making him ill: “I have to tell you that since Sukkoth [October 1815] I have not been well and I cannot bear it any longer. If you wish to keep your brother in good health then you must try to reduce his money worries. I have sacrificed my health. I have to take it easy . . . I have lost my spirit of speculation.” They were, he complained, “living like drunkards”: “We don’t know whether we owe money to the English Government or not.”

To compound the problem, this period of chaos came just as Herries was facing allegations of “maladministration” in the Commons and was therefore pressing Nathan for detailed account statements. His principal parliamentary critic, Alexander Baring, had an axe to grind, needless to say. On the other hand, there was some justification for his claim. In their dealings with at least one government (the Russian) the Rothschilds had secured additional commissions and paid bribes about which Herries had not been informed. In addition, they had made the most of exchange rate differences during the early phase of subsidy payments. The need to cook books which were already in a state of some confusion no doubt explains the months of prevarication in the face of repeated requests for accounts from the “very particular” Herries. Even if it meant keeping the clerks in Paris working until midnight, it was vital, as Salomon said, to avoid damaging the Rothschilds’ reputation in London, “as England is our bread basket.” So fearful was Nathan of a scandal that in early 1816 he wrote to Amschel advising him not to purchase a new house in Frankfurt: I asked Herries and he gave me a rather incomplete answer saying that I should not go in for luxuries because the papers would immediately commence writing against me and officials here would start questioning . . . It would be best to take mine and Herries’s advice, do not buy a house, wait until my accounts are straight.