

The brothers undoubtedly sought to join in the bull run in the French bond market after 1816. James held rentes worth 3 million francs (nominal) at the beginning of March 1817, and by the end of the month he had acquired a further 7 million, all bought on the assumption of a sustained rise. Soon he was inundated with orders to purchase rentes for Nathan and his London relatives too, though he himself still felt “in the dark” as to how long the rise could be sustained. It also seems quite likely, as Ouvrard later claimed, that James took advantage of the system of part-payment to maximise his speculative purchases. But there is no evidence of a concerted policy of selling at any time in 1818. When James did take profits, he took care that his sales should not be noticed, precisely to avoid weakening the market as a whole; and when rentes did weaken in the summer of 1817, the brothers actually made purchases to support the market. Indeed, it is from this period that we can date that keen preoccupation with the health of the rente, and any news which might affect it, which was to be a feature of his correspondence for the next fifty years. A year later, in July 1818, he saw no reason to question Laffitte and Delessert’s assumption that rentes would reach par by the end of the year.

None of this should surprise us. The Rothschilds would have been taking a grave risk if they had sought to subvert the final “liquidation” of the French indemnity. In February 1818 Salomon explicitly argued against an attack on Baring: it would be counter-productive if people were able to say, “The Rothschilds organised a diversion, the loan fell through, the troops can’t be withdrawn.” In any case, Baring was an MP and had already asked enough awkward questions about Herries’s activities as Commissary-in-Chief. There were good reasons not to antagonise him. The best explanation for the downturn in the price of rentes during the Aix conference in fact lies in the policy of the Banque de France, which had fuelled the surge in rente prices after May by lending over-generously to the Paris banks. When a run on its reserves alerted the Banque to its mistake, it over-compensated by tightening its discounting terms. It was this contraction on the money market which temporarily halted the speculation in rentes and depressed prices. Once the Banque had been persuaded to relax its policy again, rentes recovered rapidly, though it was not until 1821 (with prices at 87) that sufficient confidence had been recovered to float the final reparations loan. Moreover, if the Rothschilds had hoped to benefit from Baring’s retreat from the French market, they were disappointed: the 1821 loan went to the Paris bankers Hottinguer, Delessert and Baguenault.

In reality, it was British consols, not French rentes, which the Rothschilds sold, and they did so at the end of 1817, not in late 1818—making a profit in the process which more than compensated for any losses they may have suffered in the summer of 1815. As we have seen, at the end of that year Nathan had, at Herries’s recommendation, made substantial purchases of 3 per cent consols at prices of 61.1 and 61.5 as well as £450,000 of Omnium stocks at 107. Throughout 1816 he ignored his nervous brothers’ repeated advice to take profits, so that by the end of that year he held altogether £1.2 million (nominal) worth of consols. This must have been very nearly equivalent to the entire capital of the firm. Family opinion on this strategy was divided: cautious as ever, Amschel regarded it as “stupid . . . to invest one’s whole fortune in one single security” and continued to urge that Nathan sell, especially as he and Carl found themselves increasingly strapped for cash in Frankfurt. James was more enthusiastic—as he said, this single investment had already earned them “as much as a loan”—but he questioned Nathan’s assessment that consols would reach 80, and by April 1817 he too was urging a halt. Those closer to New Court, however, joined in Nathan’s “spec” with their own private savings. Caroline, Salomon’s wife, had evidently caught the bug while staying with her brother-in-law: by August 1816, she was actually having dreams about consol prices reaching 86!—a revealing insight into the indirect participation of the Rothschild women in the family business in this period. In May of 1817, when the upward trend was momentarily checked, Nathan finally gave in to his brothers’ pleas by selling around £600,000, but he evidently did so with the greatest reluctance and moved quickly to reinvest even more before the rise resumed the following month. By July, with consols leaping to above 82 and a total holding of £1.6 million (nominal), Salomon had to acknowledge that his brother had pulled off another business “masterwork.”