



4.i: The average price of 3 per cent consols, 1780-1830.



As he put it to an incredulous James: “Nathan’s relation with these gentlemen [of the Treasury] is such as between brothers . . . Our New Court gives me the impression of being like a Freemasons’ lodge. He who enters becomes a Stock-mason.” The significance of this remark will be returned to below.

In fact, the operation Vansittart mentioned to Nathan ran into trouble because of mounting political opposition to the Chancellor’s financial policy. Indeed, Nathan’s sale of consols at the end of 1817 may have been one of the abuses which Vansittart’s critics had in mind when they accused him of being “at the Mercy of the Money Market” and fuelling “the inordinate spirit of gambling.” Vansittart’s task was in many ways a hopeless one. As noted in the previous chapter, the British public debt had grown to immense proportions—£900 million, or roughly 200 per cent of national income—as a consequence of the wars against France. But in 1815 the House of Commons defied the government by refusing to renew the wartime income tax (and the malt tax), causing an immediate loss of over £14 million in revenue. Faced with annual debt service charges of over £30 million, to say nothing of the continuing costs of the army and navy, the government had little option but to increase indirect taxes—of which the duty on imported corn or “Corn Law” was to become the most controversial—and to carry on borrowing.

Vansittart’s strategy in 1818, which aimed at concealing the extent of the deficits he was running in order to boost consol prices, was to borrow short term by issuing exchequer bills, in order to continue making payments to Pitt’s sinking fund. This hand-to-mouth system undoubtedly suited those, like Nathan, who bought and sold both bills and consols. But it was criticised, given the inflationary consequences of issuing exchequer bills to redeem consols, by those political economists who regarded the continuing depreciation of paper money and the exchange rate in terms of gold as the principal post-war problem. Led within the government by William Huskisson and supported (after initial doubts) by Robert Peel, the proponents of the resumption of gold or “cash” payments by the Bank of England gradually gained the upper hand over Vansittart and the directors of the Bank itself. With the setting up of the “Secret Committee on the Expediency of the Bank Resuming Cash Payments” under Peel’s chairmanship in 1819, the “bullionists” had effectively won.8 Dismayed, Nathan sought to dissuade Liverpool from going back on to gold, even pursuing ministers into the country to make his case. But the Prime Minister’s mind had been made up, as he indicated to Vansittart in October 1819: Nothing can be more foolish than Rothschild’s following you, and intending to follow me, into the country. If his proceeding is known it can of course only augment the general alarm, and increase all the evils he is desirous of preventing . . . The point . . . upon which I feel most anxiety is the idea suggested by Rothschild, of a continuance of the Bank restriction. I am satisfied that no measure could be more fatal, and that the very notion of its being a matter for consideration would do harm . . . As to continuing the restriction from the dread of their diminishing their [the Bank of England’s] circulation too much, this would be a ground for perpetual restriction, and is the idea of all others that it was most necessary to combat last year. Let us therefore determine to stand upon our present system, and let no one entertain a doubt that this is our determination.