

The Rothschilds’ failure to secure the 1817 and 1818 reparations loans was therefore a costly defeat. The implication was clear: if they had stolen a march on other bankers in early 1814, now they had to face a determined effort by the Barings and Bethmanns to reclaim their earlier predominance in European public finance, as well as new competition from less established figures like Gontard and the Bavarian financier Adolph d’Eichthal.5 As Carl had put it in 1814, “The main thing is that people are hostile towards us because we have the business.” “We have enemies aplenty,” James lamented a year later, “though it is more a matter of envy than enmity. Every five minutes someone else is going to the [Prussian] minister and asks: ‘Why does Rothschild get given everything?’ ” It had been easier before, commented Carl, when the risks were greater, because there had been less competition. Indeed, James even acknowledged that, in seeking to exclude them from the reparations payments, the Viennese bankers were only “doing what the Rothschilds had done” over the subsidies. Baring seemed to pose the biggest threat at this stage. Not only did he and his associates “want to subject all of France according to their will so that they can do what they like”; they also posed a threat to Nathan’s position in London. As Amschel said, Nathan seemed to be “rather upset if somebody else does any business transactions with London. He feels that he more or less owns London.” It cannot have pleased him to hear it said “that [because of Baring] you don’t play any longer the first [role] on the Stock Exchange and that you are unable to fix the quotation” of stocks. However, the growth of competition was just as marked in smaller financial markets like Kassel, where the end of the war and the return of the Elector led to frenetic efforts to end the Rothschilds’ near-monopoly over his finances, built up during his years in exile, and to win a share of the Rothschilds’ “mountains of gold.”6 As James put it in early 1818, “The whole world is jealous.”

The Rothschilds did not suffer competitors gladly. Indeed, they had a wide range of abusive terms for them, such as Schurken (scoundrels), Bösewichte (rogues) and Spitzbuben (rascals). Even before Waterloo, there had been much talk of “putting spokes in wheels” of rival “scoundrels” and “sharpshooters,” and dealing them “blows where it hurts.” The question in 1818 was how best to “hurt” Baring and Labouchère. Tradition has it that the brothers did so by means of a huge intervention in the market for rentes. First, they invested heavily in the new rentes being created under the Baring scheme. Then, just as the great powers met at Aix-la-Chapelle to negotiate the final reparations payments, they allegedly turned from bulls into bears, dumping rentes on the market with devastating consequences for prices. In this way, they decisively weakened Baring’s position, forcing him to call off the final loan which he had been on the point of making on behalf of France. There is no doubt that we need an explanation for the remarkable speed with which the Rothschilds outstripped their more established rivals. And it is true that Baring was acutely embarrassed by the sharp drop in rentes to a nadir of 60, and was saved only by the fact that so many of the ministers present at Aix—including Nesselrode, the Austrian Chancellor Prince Metternich and his Prussian counterpart Prince Hardenberg—had themselves taken shares, and therefore had a common interest in cancelling the final loan.7 However, no archival evidence has come to light to support the notion that the Rothschilds were directly responsible for the crisis.