



Whatever the truth of these allegations, Baring was in a strong enough position to exclude James again when the negotiations began for a final loan to pay off the remainder of the indemnity. Although rentes with a face value of 290 million francs were issued directly to the public in May 1818, the government appears to have taken fright at the frantic speculation these attracted (the issue was oversubscribed almost ten times, pushing prices up to a peak of 80 compared with an issue price of 66.5), and a second issue of 480 million francs (nominal) in the same month was entrusted to Baring. When James—along with the other Paris banks Baguenault, Delessert, Greffulhe, Hottinguer and Laffitte—was offered a mere 10 million francs, to be shared with David Parish, he was disgusted, fulminating at the “abominable” way he had been treated. He and the others had to content themselves with shares of a 31 million franc loan to the city of Paris. As the Duke of Wellington reported to Lord Liverpool, “The fact is that Baring, having the French finances in his hands, and French loans being in fashion in England, has to a certain degree the command of the money market of the world. He feels his power, and it is not a very easy task to succeed in counteracting him.” If there was ever a moment when Barings deserved to be called “the sixth great power” (a probably apocryphal phrase attributed to Richelieu), then this was it.

There were admittedly arguments for limiting the brothers’ direct involvement in a large-scale loan to France. After the trauma of the Hundred Days, Nathan had good reason to doubt the stability of the restored Bourbon regime. Salomon might reassure him that, according to best sources in Paris, there would be “no more revolution in France,” but he added the important rider: “at least not in the foreseeable future, and if there is something, it is certainly not be feared in the next three months.” After all, as he admitted, there was “no way of insuring against the hot heads of the French,” and a future default could not be ruled out. Such comments suggest that he had no more confidence than Nathan in French funds. This pessimism was reinforced by “talk of war” which James heard in Paris in May 1816. A few months later he was even more alarmed by news that the British government might favour replacing Louis XVIII with the duc d’Orléans, which James warned would lead to civil war. Widespread social unrest in 1817 caused by a bad harvest and high food prices reinforced such anxieties.

On the other hand, the financial position of the restored Bourbon regime was less shaky than it appeared, and this helps explain the rapid rise in the price of rentes during 1817 and the first half of 1818 which made the loan so profitable for its contractors. Because of the great assignat inflation of the 1790s, France—unlike Britain—had more or less wiped out the accumulated debts of the eighteenth century. Its total public debt in 1815 stood at just 1.2 billion francs, roughly 10 per cent of national income—so much less than the equivalent figure for Britain that it amounted to a clean slate. It was therefore easy, once Baring had started the ball rolling, for France to issue further loans without in any way depressing the price of rentes. As the price of rentes rose, Baring was getting, as James ruefully observed, “money for nothing.” France’s resources were in reality “formidable” and the political situation stable: “If the Allies withdraw, France will remain quiet. Be assured that there is no party left here which could put up resistance to the Government, at least not soon.”