

It was at this point that Nathan began to sell, realising profits of more than £250,000. Interestingly, this was five months ahead of the market’s final peak at 84.25 in December 1817 (see illustration 4.i) and this may explain why he delayed slightly before relaying the advice to sell to others. Even his brothers-in-law and his oldest client in the market, the Elector of Hesse-Kassel, were not tipped off until after Nathan had sold. As it became apparent that the market had indeed peaked—by 1820 prices were back below 70—Moses Montefiore hailed his brother-in-law’s coup: I am very happy to learn you make as good a Bear as you formerly did a Bull, you must have had some difficulty with my brother Abraham, indeed it is quite a new character for both . . . You have beaten your antagonists so frequently that I am surprised there are any so hardy to be found in the Stock Exchange to oppose you in any considerable operation.



There is no simple explanation for the Rothschilds’ triumph over their rivals in the 1820s: but this great coup undoubtedly played an important part.

What had made Nathan decide to dispose of his consols at the end of 1817? Part of the reason may have been a premature alarm sounded by his brothers in Paris about the possibility of war over Spain: not for the last time, the brothers interpreted any threat of armed conflict between the great powers as an argument for selling government bonds. But of greater importance was the invaluable inside information he was receiving about changes in British fiscal and monetary policy. This was the fruit of Nathan’s growing proximity to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Nicholas Vansittart, as well as his brothers’ first direct contacts with the Duke of Wellington—“old Stiff-back”—in Paris. As the Rothschilds hastened to point out, it was not only they but the British government too which had benefited from the rise in consols. The surplus funds in the military chest which had been left over after Napoleon’s defeat had also been used to purchase £650,000 (nominal) of consols at 62 in 1816. Now that consols stood at over 82, the Treasury stood to make a profit of around £130,000. This good turn was clearly felt to deserve another: Nathan was tipped off about a funding operation—involving the issue of £27 million in new 3.5 or 3.25 per cent government stocks—which was bound to depress the market for 3 per cents. As Salomon’s letters at this time show, it was this inside information more than anything else which determined Nathan’s move: Vansittart is a very fine man, insofar as he gave you a hint of a forthcoming funding operation. He well knows that you were the only one who drove up the stocks, who lifted England’s credit, and that you are the great holder of stocks . . . Now it is time to work out a plan. We agree with you that in the case of a funding carried out . . . stocks will fall to 80 or even a little less . . . I assure you that the whole of New Court as soon as they get wind of it are going to be “bears” of millions.