

Historians have long claimed that the Prussian government’s decision to raise a loan in London was intended to avoid the need for political concessions—such as the summoning of an assembly of the estates (Stände) or the creation of an independent judiciary—which the recourse to domestic sources of finance might have necessitated. However, the Rothschild correspondence tells a different story. From the outset of the negotiations, Nathan argued that any loan would have to be secured by a mortgage on Prussian royal domains guaranteed by the Stände of the domains concerned. When Hardenberg demurred, Nathan spelt out his reasons for wishing such a guarantee in a remarkable memorandum: [T]o induce British Capitalists to invest their money in a loan to a foreign government upon reasonable terms, it will be of the first importance that the plan of such a loan should as much as possible be assimilated to the established system of borrowing for the public service in England, and above all things that some security, beyond the mere good faith of the government . . . should be held out to the lenders . . . Without some security of this description any attempt to raise a considerable sum in England for a foreign Power would be hopeless[;] the late investments by British subjects in the French Funds have proceeded upon the general belief that in consequence of the representative system now established in that Country, the sanction of the Chamber to the national debt incurred by the Government affords a guarantee to the Public Creditor which could not be found in a Contract with any Sovereign uncontrolled in the exercise of the executive powers.



In other words, a constitutional monarchy was seen in London as a better credit-risk than a neo-absolutist regime. Was this a subtle form of political pressure—a kind of financial liberalism, lending its weight at a critical time to the efforts of the Prussian reformers who had been pressing Frederick William III to accept some kind of system of representation? Or was Nathan merely justifying the differential between his terms and those obtained by France from Baring? James’s positive allusion to the (notional) ability of French deputies to go to the Treasury and “examine the books” suggests that the Rothschilds really did see some kind of constitutional control over public finances as desirable, if only as a way of reassuring British investors. Admittedly, Nathan was prepared to settle for much less than parliamentary control in the Prussian case: clause 5 of the final contract merely stated that “for the security of the creditors” there would be a special mortgage on the royal domains “which are wholly disposable according to the House[hold] Law of November 6, 1809, passed by H. M. the King of Prussia and the princes of the royal house with the assent of the provincial estates.” The allusion to the estates could hardly have been more oblique. On the other hand, the astonishing tone of some of Nathan’s letters to Rother—especially when Rother attempted to modify the terms after the contract had been signed—reveal his lack of respect for the Prussian regime: Dearest friend, I have now done my duty by God, your King and the Finance Minister von Rother, my money has all gone to you in Berlin . . . now it is your turn and duty to do yours, to keep your word and not to come up with new things, and everything must remain as it was agreed between men like us, and that is what I expected, as you can see from my deliveries of money. The cabal there can do nothing against N. M. Rothschild, he has the money, the strength and the power, the cabal has only impotence and the King of Prussia, my Prince Hardenberg and Minister Rother should be well pleased and thank Rothschild, who is sending you so much money [and] raising Prussia’s credit.