



Given the ultimate triumph of the gold standard in the nineteenth century, it is easy to dismiss Nathan’s position as special pleading. Yet Nathan’s opposition to cash payments was far from unjustifiable, and it was an error on the part of the bullionists and radicals to assume that he was motivated solely by self-interest. Nathan never opposed the resumption of cash payments as a matter of theoretical principle: he and his fellow bankers made a practical argument that the short-run effects of a deflationary policy would be economically destabilising, and that this might tend to run counter to the government’s goal of fiscal and monetary stabilisation. The Treasury official George Harrison was right to worry in October 1818 about the consequences of tightening monetary policy at a time when the budget remained unbalanced. As he said to Vansittart, Its effect upon our concerns and upon the Stocks may be very considerable—for such a proceeding would drive . . . our Agent [meaning Nathan] in all probability to become a Seller of his stock . . . and would inevitably affect the Funds more or less . . . We could not with justice or propriety be pressing him to extend his accommodations to us, when the Bank refused to accommodate him by Discounts—as he would then be driven to become a Seller to a larger extent to enable him to meet our Wants.



In fact, as we have seen, Nathan had already done most of his selling. But his brokers and their clients felt the effects of the government’s deflationary policies when he issued a new loan of £12 million for the government in the summer of 1819. The decision to stick to 3 per cents more or less precluded a rapid rise in the new stock at a time when consol prices were already in the doldrums not far above the issue price of 69. It was this link between monetary tightening and the continuance of government borrowing which he had sought to point out to Liverpool, who preferred to believe Baring that there would soon be “a reaction” (that is, a recovery) in consol prices. Similarly, in his evidence to the Committee of Cash Payments in 1820, Nathan did not deny for a moment that the depreciation of sterling and outflow of specie into foreign bonds was due in part to the suspension of gold payments. The key point was that the combination of tight money and a mountainous government debt was a perilous one for the economy as a whole: Have the goodness to state to the Committee in detail, what you conceive would be the consequence of an obligation imposed upon the Bank to resume cash payments at the expiration of a year from the present time?—I do not think it can be done without very great distress to this country; it would do a great deal of mischief; we may not actually know ourselves what mischief it may cause.

Have the goodness to explain the nature of the mischief, and in what way it would be produced?—Money will be so very scarce, every article in this country will fall to such an enormous extent, that many persons will be ruined.