





This was no exaggeration. Events would amply demonstrate that in embarking on monetary stabilisation before resolving the post-war fiscal crisis, the government was sailing into uncharted and potentially dangerous waters. As Nathan’s brother-in-law Abraham Montefiore shrewdly observed in 1821, defending the record of “the poor inoffensive Old Lady, Mr. V[ansittart]”: “The only really effective plan would be a good property tax properly and judiciously levied to reach only the opulent and those that can afford to spare part of their income, but unfortunately it so happens that these very persons are the law-makers themselves and their patriotism does not go so far as to reach their pockets.” The attempt to balance the budget with virtually no direct taxation at a time of monetary deflation would prove a recipe for instability.





“The Chief Ally of the Holy Alliance”

There was one obvious response to the difficulties experienced by the Rothschilds in London and Paris between 1815 and 1819: to seek new business elsewhere. The alternative was to assist with the financial stabilisation of the other great powers: Austria, Prussia and Russia, now grouped together, at the Tsar’s suggestion, as a “Holy Alliance,” as well as the various smaller states in Italy and Germany in their respective spheres of influence. Like France and Britain, the Central and East European states emerged from the war with dire financial problems which could be addressed only with the assistance of foreign capital. As Disraeli later put it in his novel Coningsby: “[A]fter the exhaustion of a war of twenty-five years, Europe must require capital to carry on peace . . . France wanted some; Austria more; Prussia a little; Russia a few millions.” Moreover, the policy of the Holy Alliance was bound to create additional financial needs from which the Rothschilds could also profit. For the principal aim of the Alliance was to avert a recurrence of the revolutionary “epidemic” which had caused such upheaval in Europe between 1789 and 1815—if necessary by military intervention. That implied further expenditure.

The first major post-war loan which the brothers succeeded in making was to Prussia, which had ended the Napoleonic period with a debt burden of around 188 million thaler (£32 million) and continued to run large deficits in 1815, 1816 and 1817. Although the Frankfurt-based Rothschilds had arranged a small Prussian loan of 5 million gulden (£450,000) in early 1817 (much of which they placed with the Elector of Hesse-Kassel), the size of the floating debt reached 20 million thaler by the autumn, and the government began to contemplate raising a loan in London. The idea for such a loan in fact originated with the representative of the Prussian Seehandlung bank in London, a merchant named Barandon, who came close to scuppering the entire project when he rashly published details of Nathan’s proposed terms in January 1818. As these were singularly tough—the issue price was to have been 60, implying an interest rate of 8.33 per cent—they provoked an outcry in Berlin, where the local bankers hastened to put together a better offer. Berating Nathan for having involved Barandon, whose reputation in Paris was that of a bankrupt small-time commodities dealer, Salomon hastened from Paris to Koblenz for fraught talks with the Prussian State Chancellor Hardenberg, and then proceeded to Berlin, where he and Carl managed to undo at least some of the damage. With the connivance of the Prussian minister in London, the great educational and political reformer Wilhelm von Humboldt, Barandon was quietly sidelined—though it was not until after five days of continuous bargaining with the finance official Rother (now Director in the new Prussian Treasury) that an agreement was finally secured in London at the end of March.9