





The Economic Consequences of the Peace

The answer must be sought in what might be called (to adapt a phrase used in similar circumstances a century later) the economic consequences of the peace—the Second Peace of Paris, imposed on France after Waterloo. The First Treaty of Paris had imposed no reparations on the restored Bourbon regime, but the mood of the victorious powers after Waterloo was less clement. Quite apart from any desire to punish the French collectively for the actions of those who had rallied to Napoleon in the Hundred Days, there was a practical need to pay for the troops occupying northern France, who at one stage numbered more than a million. Even before the peace was signed in November, a charge or “contribution” of some 50 million francs was levied to pay for their upkeep. The final terms of the treaty set a total for reparations of 700 million francs to be paid over five years beginning in March 1816, during which time an occupying force of 150,000 men would remain on French soil. The costs of this occupation were also to be met by the French Treasury.2

The Rothschilds evidently hoped that the financial provisions of the peace—which implied a new and potentially lucrative series of international transfers, this time from Paris rather than London—would provide them with plentiful opportunities to recoup the losses of the Hundred Days. At first, there were grounds for optimism, at least as far as relations with the recipient states were concerned. Gervais as usual promised to hand Rothschilds the better part of Russia’s share, and Herries was likewise expected to secure a large tranche of the British. However, it quickly became apparent that any business arising from the French “contributions” would have to be shared with other bankers, who now rushed to challenge the Rothschild monopoly on international transfer payments. Only by entering into loose partnerships—with Mendelssohn in Berlin, Bethmann and Gontard in Frankfurt, Arnstein & Eskeles in Vienna and Parish & Co. in Hamburg—were Salomon and James able to participate in the initial payments to Prussia and Austria. Even the British and Russian contributions could not be taken for granted.

Partly, the problem was one of declining influence. Dunmore, Herries’s representative in Paris, was less “friendly” than Herries himself, while the Russian minister Count Nesselrode had reasons for favouring Gontard. It was a serious setback when first Gervais and then Herries left office. To make matters worse, some of the other officials they found themselves dealing with—the Russian Merian and the Prussian Rother—declined to accept bribes. But the real problem was that peace had brought competition. As James complained, contemplating profits of 1.5 per cent and less, there was “not much joy to be had from the contributions business, because there are too many people here.” Salomon was especially irked by the Austrian representatives, who “run from one house to the next for the sake of an extra sou.” Ultimately, he and James became almost fatalistic: “There are no big, brilliant deals to be made here. But now that we’re here, we’re happy to take all that we can to prevent it going to anyone else.” The only consoling thought—frequently repeated—was that contacts with courts, no matter how unprofitable, might lead to business in the future. The brothers never turned up their noses at small-scale transactions and gladly advanced the contributions due to the smaller German states and the minor compensation payments which Russia had to make for damage to private property by Russian troops.