

Far more disappointing, however, was James’s failure to win a share of the business generated on the other side of the reparations equation. That France would be able to pay reparations and the costs of occupation only by means of a large loan had become obvious by late 1816. Despite efforts to cut spending and raise taxes, there was no realistic way of achieving an annual surplus in excess of 170 million francs, not least because of the unhelpful attitude of the ultra-royalist “Incredible Chamber” which—like most nineteenth-century assemblies elected by income or property tax payers—showed little enthusiasm for raising direct taxes. Indeed, the 1816-17 budget showed a deficit of over 300 million francs, which was financed only with the greatest difficulty by short-term borrowing. Moreover, the Paris capital market by itself was far too weak to absorb unassisted the new issues of rentes which were inevitably going to be needed. With the price of 5 per cent rentes down as low as 50, the government had little option but to look abroad.

In the immediate aftermath of Napoleon’s defeat, the Rothschilds’ prospects of influence at the French court had been good. Not only had they been responsible for relaying a British loan to the returning French King, but Dalberg, the former Prince-Primate of Napoleon’s Rhenish Confederation and Grand Duke of Frankfurt, had emerged as a member of the French provisional government—one of a number of opportunists (the most famous being Talleyrand) who managed to survive yet another change of regime by a well-timed defection.3 However, the resignation of Talleyrand and the formation of a new government under the duc de Richelieu appear to have weakened the Rothschild position. James made every effort to cultivate Richelieu’s secretary, who evidently provided valuable inside information on French intentions. But, when the question of a loan was raised in the autumn and winter of 1816, the Finance Minister Corvetto elected to give the business to Baring and Pierre-César Labouchère of Hope & Co.,4 who had successfully been wooed by Gabriel-Julien Ouvrard, another survivor of the imperial era. An agreement was reached in early 1817 whereby, in return for a 2.5 per cent commission, Baring provided the French government with an initial 297 million francs in return for 5 per cent rentes. Because the bonds were issued over a period of several months in three tranches at prices of 52.5, 55.5 and 61.5, this meant that the French government had increased its national debt by around 534 million francs for the sake of less than 300 million francs in cash—or to put it another way, it was paying interest at an effective rate of around 9 per cent, nearly double the nominal rate on its rentes. Contrary to later mythology, the Rothschilds found themselves more or less excluded from this immense operation, “to prevent,” so Baring claimed, “a selling race at the exchanges with resulting depreciation.”

This was a bitter blow to James, who had expended considerable energy on his own plans for a loan, and who believed up until the eleventh hour that, at the very least, he would be able to participate in some kind of consortium. “Depressed” and angry, he railed at Baring’s duplicity, claiming that his rival had bribed the French government to exaggerate its inability to pay and thereby secure a six-month breathing-space. His anger was redoubled when a last-ditch effort (in partnership with Laffitte and Parish) to join the Baring group for the third issue of rentes in July 1817 came to nothing. Salomon, returning to Paris from London, could not help but admire the way his brother had been outmanoeuvred: He is quite a crook this Baring. Today he is going to dine with us, together with Laffitte . . . We must certainly watch our step as far as he is concerned. Baring’s lot are and were as well versed in the way of using influence as we are. There is not a single man of importance amongst the authorities here who would not work with Baring hand in glove . . . The Russian ambassador Pozzo di Borgo is on the side of France and of Baring whose orbit he is in . . . Baring and the French Minister of Finances are sharing the profit. The Minister is reputed to be one of the most corrupt of all.