

Although the terms of the loan were heavily criticised in Berlin (not least by the bankers there), Humboldt and Rother were impressed. Nathan, Humboldt reported to Hardenberg, was not only “the most enterprising businessman here”; he was also “dependable . . . fair, very upright and understanding” in his dealings with governments. Rother went further: “The Rothschild in this country . . . has an incredible influence upon all financial affairs here in London. It is widely stated, and is, indeed, close to the truth, that he entirely regulates the rate of exchange in the City. His power as a banker is enormous.” His reputation in Berlin firmly established, Nathan was able to secure a second loan (to the Seehandlung) in 1822 for £3.5 million.

In one respect, Rothschild activity in Germany was far from innovative. Hesse-Kassel was one of those states which had emerged intact from the Napoleonic period, and Amschel was careful to continue cultivating the special relationship his father had developed with the Elector. Now that he had been restored to his lands, however, William needed the Rothschilds less, and the family’s old rivals in Kassel hastened to reassert their influence at court. The Rothschilds continued to manage some of the Prince’s financial affairs, collecting his reparations from France, selling his English stocks (as we have seen) at a healthy profit, trying to sort out his tangled Danish investments and involving him in their post-war loans to Prussia. Amschel even indulged his old coin-collecting enthusiasm. But there was no doubt that the days of mutual dependence were over, especially when Buderus had ceased to be the dominant force in the Kassel bureaucracy. Although the brothers lent considerable sums to William’s spendthrift son, their hopes that these highly unprofitable transactions would bring more lucrative business after he succeeded his father were disappointed when this finally happened in 1821. Apart from two large loans in 1821 and in 1823 for a total of 4.3 million gulden (£390,000), business in Kassel dried up.

On the other hand, Hesse-Kassel was only one of thirty-nine German states which had emerged from the Napoleonic upheaval and were now grouped together as members of the loose German Confederation. And because the Confederation’s Diet met in Frankfurt—in a rented hall in the Thurn und Taxis palace—it was easy for Amschel and Carl to establish contact with senior diplomatic representatives of all the member states. This led to a stream of relatively small-scale loans to minor German states and princes—including the neighbouring Grand Duchy of Hesse-Darmstadt, as well as Schaumburg, Homburg, Saxe-Weimar, Anhalt-Coethen and Nassau-Usingen—throughout the 1820s. Though the individual loans only rarely exceeded 500,000 gulden (£45,000), taken together they represented a substantial amount of business. Between 1817 and 1829 total loans of this sort by the Frankfurt house amounted to more than 24.7 million gulden (£2.2 million). While some were little more than personal loans to petty princes, others took more sophisticated forms, like the Hesse-Darmstadt lottery loan of 1825, one of many premium-bond-style loans issued in this period. On occasion, the Rothschilds also acted as bankers to the Confederation itself. Twenty million francs—paid by France under the terms of the Peace of Paris for the construction of fortifications in Germany—were deposited with the Rothschilds in 1820, pending a decision by the Confederation to proceed with building them. Given the slowness with which such decisions were reached in Frankfurt, this turned out to be a long-term deposit; but it was never certain how much notice would be needed for its withdrawal, nor indeed who had the right to request it. The difficulties this created for the Rothschilds may explain why they never did much to attract similar deposits.