

Real power in Germany, however, lay not in Frankfurt, but in Vienna, the capital of the Confederation’s dominant member: and it was the Austrian court more than any other which the Rothschilds sought to cultivate in the 1820s. As we have seen, the Austrians had been reluctant to leave the payment of their British subsidies to the Rothschilds in the later stages of the war against France, preferring to deal with Viennese houses like Arnstein & Eskeles,11 Fries & Co. and Geymüller & Co.; they had driven hard bargains over the French reparations payments too. Only in partnership with the Frankfurt banker Gontard were the brothers able to handle the minor payments Austria had to receive in the wake of the peace from Russia and Naples. But Vienna needed cash just as badly as the other continental states if it was to consolidate its large floating debt and stabilise its heavily depreciated currency. Although its first major post-war loan of 50 million gulden was concluded—to Rothschild chagrin—with the Anglo-Hanseatic Parish brothers in partnership with Baring, Bethmann and Geymüller, it was obvious, with annual expenditure running above 100 million Austrian gulden, that more would soon be needed. The breakthrough came in 1820, when Salomon jointly organised two lottery loans worth 45 million Austrian gulden (c. £4.8 million) in partnership with David Parish—a transaction so profitable that, despite the hostile comment it aroused, Salomon resolved to remain in Vienna on a more or less permanent basis.

The final coup which completed the Rothschilds’ emergence as “bankers to the Holy Alliance” came in 1822, with the loan to Russia. Here, as in Prussia and Austria, the war had generated acute fiscal and monetary problems: public spending had roughly quadrupled between 1803 and 1815 as had the circulation of paper roubles, leading to the inevitable inflation and currency depreciation. And despite having allowed the Rothschilds to handle so much of her wartime subsidy payments and subsequent reparations contributions, Russia too turned first to others for assistance with stabilisation: it was Baring and Reid, Irving who handled the 1820 loan, for example. This, however, was no great disappointment, as the Russians at this stage were still refusing to follow the Prussian example of issuing a loan denominated in sterling and with interest payable in London. Two years later the Russians, like the Austrians before them, had come round. In the summer of 1822 a loan of £6.6 million was issued by Nathan in 5 per cent bonds priced at 77, which he had no difficulty in selling at prices of 80 and more to his network of London brokers, led by his brother-in-law Moses Montefiore.

Thus by the end of 1822 the Rothschilds could justifiably be regarded as bankers to the Holy Alliance—“la haute Trésorerie de la Sainte Alliance.” Indeed, when the itinerant German Prince Pückler-Muskau first described Nathan in a letter to his wife, he introduced him as “the chief ally of the Holy Alliance.” There is unquestionably a sense in which it was the Rothschilds who gave the alliance substance. When the Austrian Emperor remarked to his envoy in Frankfurt that Amschel was “richer than I am,” he was not being wholly facetious. The Times correspondent reported from St Petersburg that the mere appearance of James Rothschild at the bourse was expected to boost Russian bond prices. Without the financial support which Nathan in particular could provide, it would have been harder to make the Austrian strategy of “policing” Europe effective in the 1820s. Political critics of this strategy recognised this. Nathan was caricatured as the “Hollow Alliance’s” insurance broker, helping to prevent political fire in Europe. In 1821 he even received a death threat because of “his connexion with foreign powers, and particularly the assistance rendered to Austria, on account of the designs of that government against the liberties of Europe.”