

In France, when Villèle proposed to convert 2,800 million francs of 5 per cent rentes into 3 per cents issued at 75, the bondholders’ reaction took a different form. The arguments for conversion were the same as in England: more than a third of the French budget was being consumed by the costs of servicing the state’s debt and, with 5 per cents rising from 93 to a peak of 106, the time for such an operation seemed right.19 But the proposal became mixed up with the vexed question of compensation for losses suffered by royalist émigrés during the Revolution and was narrowly rejected in the Upper House following spurious claims by Chateaubriand and others (notably financiers like Casimir Périer who had been excluded from the deal) that it was an Anglo-Austrian racket to defraud the humble French rentier. A second, heavily modified scheme—which offered to convert 5 per cents on a voluntary basis in return for tax breaks—was pushed through in 1825, but only 30 million francs’ worth of bonds were exchanged, leaving James with a substantial sum on his hands at a time when the market price was falling. Ouvrard later claimed that the Rothschilds had doubly insured themselves against the possible failure of the first conversion scheme by not only insisting on an official safety net of 100 million in treasury bills (to be issued if the banks were left with large quantities of rentes on their hands), but also surreptitiously selling both 5 per cents and 3 per cents. Suspicions that the Rothschilds were cutting their losses by selling rentes—which were justified in 182520—brought to an end the brief period of harmonious relations with Villèle which had begun in 1823. In the wake of the conversion fiasco, the French premier made a concerted effort to direct government business back to James’s rivals in Paris, organising Laffitte and the Receivers-General into a syndicate to undertake a loan to Haiti and to issue 1,000 million francs of 3 per cent rentes for the benefit of the dispossessed émigrés.

Yet the reality was that the Rothschilds had enjoyed a lucky escape. As Nathan’s well informed Times obituarist remembered: [H]ad it [the Villèle conversion] been carried, the convulsion in the money markets of Europe which shortly followed it would probably have proved fatal to him with such a burden on his shoulders, notwithstanding all his vast resources. Indeed, it was a common remark of his own at the time, that neither he nor the houses engaged in the undertaking with him could have stood the shock.21



It was indeed fortunate that Villèle’s scheme foundered when it did. For 1825 was to be the year in which the great speculative bubble burst on the London stock exchange. And not only would it have been awkward for Nathan to have been left holding millions of 3 per cent rentes at such a time; the conversion might also have made it more difficult for his brother James to assist him in containing the English banking crisis of that year.

The 1825 crisis had in many ways been prophesied by Nathan and the other opponents of the decision to resume gold convertibility six years before. Between 1818 and 1823 the Bank of England’s note circulation fell by around a third, a dramatic contraction. In 1824 a temporary influx of gold generated a big expansion in the note issue, but this was followed by an equally sharp contraction in 1825. At the same time, though fiscal policy was gradually being brought under control following Vansittart’s resignation in December 1822, the enthusiasm of Huskisson at the Board of Trade for cuts in import duties made balancing the budget harder than it might have been. The medium-term aim of these first steps towards free trade was to increase the volume of commercial activity, in conformity with the principles of the political economists; but the short-term effect was to reduce revenues. Even with sharp cuts in expenditure, the government still found itself having to resort to both short- and long-term borrowing. Moreover, as Nathan complained, Huskisson’s policy was also giving rise to a trade deficit: as he told Herries in April 1825, “The consequence of admitting foreign goods (which had not been met by any corresponding liberality on the other side of the water) was, that all the gold was going out of the country. He had himself sent two millions within the last few weeks; the funds fell rapidly, and no advantage is gained by any human being.” It was this outflow of gold which lay behind the sharp monetary contraction of 1825. Under these circumstances, the high prices which had been reached on the London stock exchange during the 1822-4 bubble could not be sustained. In April 1825 the market began to slide. The heaviest falls were experienced by British industrial securities and Latin American bonds: the Brazilian bonds which Nathan had issued at 85 were down to 81.25 by July and just 56 by March of the following year.22 But the bonds of the formerly Spanish republics fared even worse: Mexican, Colombian and Peruvian all fell below 20. Even the best paper—British 3 per cent consols—was affected, falling below 75 compared with a peak of more than 97 the previous year. Such a severe asset-price deflation was bound to bring a banking crisis in its wake.