



Moreover, Nathan’s insistence on some kind of political guarantee had important political implications. There is an obvious link from Nathan’s negotiations with Rother to the subsequent Clause 2 of the “Decree for the Future Management of the State Debt” of January 17, 1819, which imposed a ceiling on the state debt, earmarked revenues from the royal domains to service it and declared: “If the state should in future for its maintenance or for the advancement of the common good require to issue a new loan, this can only be done in consultation with, and with the guarantee of, the future imperial estates assembly.” Drafted by Rother himself, this meant that any future loan by the Prussian state would automatically lead to the summoning of the estates; in other words, it conceded the link between public borrowing and constitutional reform. Only by raising loans indirectly through the notionally independent Seehandlung could the Prussian state henceforth borrow money without summoning the estates. This explains why, of all the German states, Prussia borrowed the least in the 1820s and 1830s and why, when the policy of retrenchment broke down in the 1840s, the consequences were revolutionary.

Whatever its significance for Prussian politics, the 1818 Prussian loan was without question a watershed in the history of the European capital market, as contemporaries came to recognise. For Nathan’s demand for some kind of political security was, in financial terms, probably the least important of the conditions he attached to the loan. Firstly, the loan was to be not in thaler, but in sterling, with the interest payable (half-yearly) not in Berlin but in London. Secondly, there was to be a British-style sinking fund to ensure the amortisation of the loan (though Rother managed to get rid of Nathan’s initial stipulation that it take the form of £150,000 of British consols). This deliberate Anglicisation of a foreign loan was a new departure for the international capital market. The Baring French loans had paid interest in francs in Paris, with attendant inconvenience and exchange rate risks for British investors. Now it was much easier to invest in foreign funds; and the fact that throughout the century all foreign government bonds paid higher yields than British consols meant that people did. The Times did not exaggerate when it later described Nathan as “the first introducer of foreign loans into Britain”: for, though such securities did at all times circulate here, the payment of dividends abroad, which was the universal practice before his time, made them too inconvenient an investment for the great majority of persons of property to deal with. He not only formed arrangements for the payment of dividends on his foreign loan in London, but made them still more attractive by fixing the rate in sterling money, and doing away with all the effects of fluctuation in exchanges.



Moreover, the loan was issued not just in London but also in Frankfurt, Berlin, Hamburg, Amsterdam and Vienna. In other words, it represented a major step towards the creation of a completely international bond market. In his book On The Traffic in State Bonds (1825), the German legal expert Johann Heinrich Bender identified this as one of the Rothschilds’ principal contributions to modern economic development: “Any owner of government bonds . . . can collect the interest at his convenience in several different places without any effort.” Henceforth, an investor could receive the interest on Austrian metalliques, Neapolitan rentes or any other Rothshild-issued bonds from any of the Rothschild houses. In stipulating these conditions, Nathan not only succeeded in making the Prussian loan attractive to British and continental investors; he also established a model for such international bond issues which would swiftly become standard.10