

The difference between Naples and Spain was that after the restoration of the Spanish Bourbon (which had been achieved by the end of 1824), the Rothschilds declined—after contemplating a joint operation with Baring and Reid, Irving—to lend to his neo-absolutist regime without guarantees which the French government was unwilling to give.17 There were three reasons for this: the regime’s refusal to recognise and redeem the bonds issued by the Cortes, its refusal to repay France the costs of the invasion and, finally, the bankers’ suspicion that any money lent to Ferdinand might be used in a last and probably vain attempt to recapture his former colonies in South America, which had been fighting successfully for their independence since 1808. After all, had not the 1820 revolution begun with a mutiny by soldiers about to be sent across the Atlantic? And were not Ferdinand’s advisers convinced that recovering the American colonies would solve all his financial problems? It was the South American dimension which particularly concerned the British government. While London had been prepared to put up with the French expedition into Spain, despite its implicit negation of Wellington’s victory in the Peninsular War, the notion that this might be the prelude to some kind of reconquest of Latin America, with whose fledgling republics Britain was rapidly forging close economic ties, was wholly unpalatable. As the Austrian ambassador in Paris reported to Metternich: “Although the House of Rothschild may pretend that their sympathies are purely monarchist, the recognition of the engagements entered into by the Cortes Government, and the independence of the Spanish colonies, would provide a far wider field for his [Nathan’s] financial enterprises and afford political security, the value of which they do not fail to appreciate.” In short, the Rothschild role in Spain had been ambivalent: initially showing signs of interest in the Cortes government, then financing the French invasion, but declining to bankroll the restored regime. James, Salomon and Nathan all came under conflicting pressures from the governments in Paris, Vienna and London; but the final outcome was a united and carefully calculated policy of non-commitment, which was continued throughout the decade. As James put it succinctly in 1826, “Spain’s bankruptcy is uppermost in my mind.”

The Rothschilds kept a safe distance from the numerous bond issues by the former Spanish colonies which were generating such speculative enthusiasm in London at the time of the French intervention. The years 1822-4 were the time of the great South American “bubble,” as investors rushed to lend to new republics like Chile, Colombia, Buenos Aires and Guatemala. Even as unlikely a figure as Gregor MacGregor, a Scottish adventurer and former general in the Venezuelan army, was able to raise £200,000 by styling himself the “Caique of Poyais” and persuading investors that the malarial swamp in Honduras which he claimed to rule was ripe for development. With a bravado it is impossible not to admire, MacGregor even wrote to Nathan outlining a project for an independent Hebrew colony in his “kingdom” on an island called Ruatan. From all this the Rothschilds remained aloof, with one exception: Brazil. There were two reasons for this preference. Firstly, Brazil remained closely linked to Portugal and therefore enjoyed close commercial ties with Britain; secondly, it retained a monarchical form of government even after gaining independence in 1825. (Indeed, the fact that the Brazilian Emperor was married to an Austrian princess inclined some contemporaries to regard Brazil as a kind of American representative of the Holy Alliance, though this exaggerated Austrian influence.)18 Nathan’s first step in this direction came in 1823, with a loan of £1.5 million to Portugal, secured on Brazilian revenues. This once again demonstrated his willingness to lend to a constitutional regime, as the Portuguese King had accepted a Spanish-style constitution drafted by the Lisbon Cortes on his return from Brazil in 1822. The water for Brazilian bonds proper was tested in 1824 by a City group led by Thomas Wilson, which sold over a million pounds’ worth of 5 per cent bonds at an issue price of 75. When these rose to 87, Nathan took over, issuing a further £2 million in 1825 at a price of 85. As Heinrich Heine later joked, Nathan was now “the great Rothschild, the great Nathan Rothschild, Nathan the Wise, with whom the Emperor of Brazil has pawned his diamond crown.” Though it fell into disuse during the middle decades of the century, the relationship with Brazil was to prove one of the firm’s most enduring.