

On the Italian peninsula, matters were relatively straightforward: the Rothschilds supported Metternich’s policy of divide and rule by lending to the various monarchical regimes which had his backing. As early as December 1820 Metternich wrote to Salomon from Troppau alluding suggestively to a transaction involving 25 or 30 million francs “with respect to the future fate of the Kingdom of Naples.” The banker’s initial response was positive. “Even our financiers, led by Parish and Rothschild,” so the Austrian Finance Minister Stadion assured Metternich at Laibach in January 1821, “are only anxious to see our troops across the Po at the earliest possible moment, and marching on Naples.” Nevertheless, Salomon was unenthusiastic when Metternich and Nesselrode invited him to Laibach to discuss possible loans, the purpose of which was evidently to pay for intervention. “My presence there,” he explained to Nesselrode, “might give rise to numerous and probably highly inaccurate newspaper reports. Persons with base motives might unearth the fact that a loan to the most gracious monarchs was being discussed; rumour would be piled upon rumour, and this would not be at all agreeable in the highest quarters.” Firstly, the prospect of a new Austrian loan would depress the Vienna market, already shaken by the Italian crisis. Secondly, the Rothschilds had no desire to make their role in financing the Holy Alliance so public. Instead, Salomon insisted to Stadion that any loan should be raised by Ferdinand I only after his restoration to power, the proceeds to be used to reimburse the Austrian government for the costs of intervention. In the meantime, he offered Stadion short-term advances to finance General Frimont’s advance south. As in the Napoleonic Wars, the Rothschilds used their extensive banking network to make cash available at reasonable rates to an army on the march. And, as before, one of the brothers—this time Carl (“un petit frère Rothschild,” as he seemed to Stadion)—had to be sent to the scene of the action to ensure that all ran smoothly. In March 1821 Carl set off from Vienna to join Metternich and the exiled Neapolitan king at Laibach.

To Metternich, the Neapolitan campaign was nothing less than a counter-revolutionary crusade: “We have embarked,” he told Stadion, on a great undertaking, one that contains the possibilities of greater results than any of our time. It is great, for upon its success or failure the whole future depends; not merely the future of the Austrian monarchy, but that of the whole of Europe . . . It was impossible for us to take any other action, for it is a matter of life or death . . . everything now depends upon success. If not, the result will be the same as if we had ventured nothing; the revolution will engulf first Italy and then the world. I will spare no effort until I am killed myself.



But financial reality gave the lie to such rhetoric. There were recurrent shortages of supplies at the front, while in Vienna Stadion despairingly foresaw a return to the fiscal and monetary morass of the Napoleonic period. Indeed, Salomon had to intervene to prevent a slump in the price of “metalliques” (Austrian silver-denominated bonds). The crisis deepened when reports reached Laibach of further revolutionary outbreaks in Piedmont. The impact of this news in Vienna appalled the hapless Stadion: If the enemy were at the gates there could not be more unreasoning panic. The whole of the population of Vienna is rushing to the Bourse to get rid of our public securities . . . Our credit (which has only just been established) is on the eve of vanishing completely. I shall be forced to suspend the conversion of paper money into cash . . . destroying in one day the labours of the preceding five years . . . This is the first step to our destruction. It is impossible that a loan should be considered, either at home or abroad, at a time when our securities are becoming worthless.