

Vienna’s dependence on the Rothschilds was further increased in 1823, when the British government, in an attempt to exert pressure on Vienna to end its occupation of Naples, raised the question of outstanding loans—now notionally totalling £23.5 million including interest—which had been given to Austria in the early stages of the war against France. Once again Austria turned to the Rothschilds, pressing Salomon to use his brother’s influence in London to get the debt scaled down—the first of many occasions when the Rothschilds would act as an unofficial channel for Metternich’s diplomatic communications. When this had finally been achieved, the Rothschilds offered to organise yet another loan, in partnership with Baring and Reid, Irving, to pay the agreed sum of £2.5 million. Thirty million gulden of new metalliques were taken by the banks at an underwriting price of 82.33, and were soon trading at 93, yielding a substantial profit to the banks. Another 15 million gulden loan followed in 1826. Ultimately, the Austrian policy of intervention in Italy had yielded multiple profits for the Rothschilds.

By contrast, the outbreak of revolution in Spain raised more serious dilemmas. For two years after 1820, the gout-ridden despot Ferdinand VII endured the Cortes constitution, and in that period the liberal government raised a number of loans (which were needed to compensate for the shortfall in revenues caused by the revolution). Although the Rothschilds—as Salomon hastened to reassure Metternich—were not at first involved in these, they were preparing to take a hand when, in July 1822, Ferdinand and his Ultra-royalist supporters unexpectedly attempted to overthrow the Cortes, calling for foreign intervention when their coup failed. At this point James became involved in an attempt by the Spanish financier Bertran de Lys to forestall an invasion by reconstituting the government on less “exalted” (that is, radical) lines.15 It was too late, however; in April 1823, a French expedition analogous to the Austrian invasion of Naples was launched under the leadership of Louis XVIII’s surviving nephew, the duc d’Angoulême, and with the enthusiastic support of revanchist diplomats like the vicomte de Chateaubriand.

Ever the pragmatist—and anxious not to be out-flanked by that seasoned military paymaster Ouvrard—James now offered his services to the French Prime Minister, the comte de Villèle: just as his brother had supplied the Austrian army in Italy with cash, so he now made himself “useful” to d’Angoulême, even raising the ransom money needed to buy Ferdinand VII’s release.16 And just as military intervention had necessitated a new loan in Vienna, so too in Paris the government was obliged to fund its military adventure by borrowing: in 1823 James was at last able to overcome the suspicion of the Restoration regime and secure a major French loan. Worth 462 million francs (nominal) or £18.5 million, it was the biggest single issue of rentes by a French government between 1815 and 1848 and had been preceded by a smaller issue of 120 million in 6 per cent treasury bills, also handled by James. Given the importance of such issues throughout James’s long career in Paris, it is worth noting how he pulled off this deal. Rather as his father had initially squeezed out his rivals in Kassel, James won his first rentes issue by outbidding Lafitte and three other Paris bankers, offering a price (89.55) which was actually above the current market rate. This was more than enough to beat the rival group’s offer of 87.75, but it did not leave James out of pocket: the success of the operation quickly pushed rentes up above 90 and by the end of 1823 they had reached 100.