

The government, however, may have hesitated to approach Nathan because of his well-known antipathy towards Huskisson, whose policies, as we have seen, he held responsible for the crisis. On December 17 - the turning point of the crisis—the wife of Charles Arbuthnot, the Joint Secretary of the Treasury, recorded in her diary “the detestation in which Mr Huskisson is held in the City” as well as their “utmost contempt” for the Chancellor, Robinson. The feeling was evidently mutual. According to her informant, Nathan’s old friend Herries (now Financial Secretary to the Treasury), Mr Huskisson has done all he can also to ruin Rothschild by spreading reports that their house was in danger, & he made Mr Canning write to Paris to enquire into the affairs of [Rothschild’s] brother. Ld. Granville sent his private secretary to pump Rothschild. R found out what he was at & instantly shewed him his accounts & proved to him that he was worth 2½ millions.



Evidently, this led to a change of heart on both sides, which no doubt owed something to Herries’s mediation and Huskisson’s absence: “Rothschild has made the most gigantic efforts to assist the Bank and he told Mr Herries that, if he had been applied to sooner, he wd. have prevented all the difficulty. As it is, if they can hold out till Monday or Tuesday, he will have enormous sums over in sovereigns from Paris, & the pressure will be entirely relieved.”

Nathan had done two things that evening: firstly, he had advised the government to intervene in the money market itself by purchasing exchequer bills to inject liquidity into the market; secondly, and more important, he had delivered gold to the Bank, beginning with £300,000 of sovereigns, and continuing with larger sums in the succeeding weeks until confidence had finally been restored. In fact, the reserve touched its lowest level (just over a million pounds) on December 24; however, Nathan was still delivering gold a year later, pledging a million pounds in the course of March 1826 and a total of £10 million by September. His principal source was James in Paris (as he later reminded Nathan, “I emptied my coffers for your gold”). But, as Nathan recalled, “there was a good deal [of gold] supplied from the whole world; I imported it, and it was imported almost from every country; we got it from Russia, from Turkey, from Austria, from almost every quarter in the world.” The Bank’s ledgers describe the influx of myriad kinds of gold coin from France, Italy, Holland and Germany.

The crisis of 1825 had come close to being another 1797 (the year when the Bank had last suspended cash payments), a monetary crisis with the potential to destabilise the British economy as a whole. As it was, 73 out of 770 country banks failed and, as Huskisson himself admitted, the country came within forty-eight hours of “putting stop to all dealings between man and man except by barter.” Looking back in 1839, Wellington had no doubt who had averted disaster: “Had it not been for the most extraordinary exertions—above all on the part of old Rothschild—the Bank must have stopped payment.” Of course, Nathan would not have made such immense deliveries of gold without asking for a generous commission in return. The operation has to be seen as part of his campaign to establish himself as the dominant force in the London bullion market. On the other hand, there is no reason why he should have bailed out the Bank and the government free of charge, when the crisis was so manifestly the product of policies he had advised against. The rescue of the Bank was a remarkable achievement which owed everything to the international nature of the Rothschilds’ operations. In effect, the brothers were establishing that system of international monetary co-operation which would later be performed routinely by central banks, and on which the gold standard came to depend. Increasingly, their position in the international bullion market was becoming as dominant as their position in the international bond market.