

The brothers encountered similar kinds of hostility in Paris as well. “It’s always a case of ‘The Jew has done too well, has done this, has done that,’ ” Salomon reported to Nathan in October 1815. These were the complaints of business rivals, who battled to elbow the Rothschilds aside in the scramble for post-war pickings in the French capital. Ten years later, by contrast, James found himself the target of a primarily political critique. The liberal Fournier-Verneuil’s Paris, published in 1826, contains the first of many French claims that the government—in this case Villèle’s—was the corrupt puppet of “the aristocracy of finance, the most unfeeling and ignoble of all aristocracies” at whose head stood none other than “M. le baron R.” Fournier quoted Chateaubriand (an unlikely ally for a liberal): “How hard it would be if Providence had shaken the world, thrust the heir of so many kings under the [guillotine’s] blade, led our armies from Cadiz to Moscow [and] chained Bonaparte on a rock, simply in order that MM. Villèle, Rodchild [sic] and company can make money with the debris of our glory and our liberties.” Even this struck Fournier as understating the problem, however: The Jew R. and his co-religionists . . . see in the kingdom of the heavens no more than . . . money devoted to usury . . . It is a singular race of men; I am not intolerant, but Napoleon, in calling together the grand Sanhedrin [Jewish assembly] did not create a [new] Frenchman. They . . . are still Jews, and nothing but Jews. I do not hold it against them that they retain their faith; but I reproach them for profiting from all quarrels, for charging them up; they are everywhere. They were in Poland on the corpses of our brothers; they are [currently] supplying Ibraham [Pasha], and they are dancing at this very moment on the tomb of Achilles.



The references to the Ottoman oppression of the Greeks make the author’s liberal sentiments obvious. Equally evident, however, is an anti-Jewish rhetoric which would only later come to be located on the political right. Fournier’s was in many ways an embryonic version of that elaborate conspiracy theory which was to evolve and expand for years to come in France, and which almost invariably ascribed a central and malign political influence to the Rothschilds.

In London too—where anti-Jewish feeling is often assumed to have been less prevalent—the 1820s saw a spate of more or less hostile public allusions to Rothschild power. Indeed, the volume of such allusions was probably greater in London than anywhere else—a reflection partly of Nathan’s relatively greater importance, but also of the freedom of the press. Again, hostility often had its roots in business rivalry. If the rivals were both Jews—as when Mocatta & Goldsmid denounced “the overwhelming attempt of Mr Rothschild to benefit himself at the expense of any person or establishment”—this could be acrimonious without having a religious dimension. But when Alexander Baring referred to his principal rival, it was often (disdainfully) as “the Jew.” According to Laffitte, it was explicitly on religious grounds that Baring sought to exclude the Rothschilds from the French reparations loan in 1817. Although James tended to think this was merely a pretext, he acknowledged that a measure of prejudice was at work: In Frankfurt one got used to [it] so one is not astonished [there], but here the case is the contrary and if something of this kind happens here, one is more amazed . . . Yesterday Laffitte asked me to come and see him. Baring came to see him and gave clear explanations that he could not possibly make [the loan] with us. True, he himself was not of the same opinion [but] his associés and the English . . . are prejudiced against the Jews. If he were to take us in partnership, the operation would be spoiled. He is unable to do such a business with a Jew . . . It all originates in Labouchère’s pride and in Sillem’s envy; as these two are Hope [& Co.], they think that their honour would suffer if they had to get in line with a Frankfurt Jew and that we would become great by that fact . . . Baring told him: “These gentlemen are working like Jews. How could we co-operate? Their principles are different. They are working on twenty transactions at the same time . . . with the only aim to do business. It is like stock-jobbing. Take for example the Prussian business. They cut off Prussia’s credit . . . then this printing [of circulars] before anything is known.” . . . He added that we are right in what we did because we succeeded and made money. However, he does not want—so he said—to do business in this manner. Now we try—so he said—to bring down the English stocks after having sold ours, in order to buy them back.