

There is an old anecdote which describes Nathan threatening to exhaust the Bank of England’s reserve by bringing an immense number of small denomination notes to its counter and demanding gold. This is another Rothschild myth which is diametrically opposed to the truth. In fact, Nathan’s relations with the Bank of England were close and mutually beneficial. Beginning in the summer of 1823, when he borrowed 3 million silver dollars to finance his first loan to Portugal, he set out to establish a direct line of communication with the Governor with the intention of circumventing the Bank’s established bullion brokers Mocatta & Goldsmid. It worked, though his parallel challenge to Mocatta & Goldsmid’s position as the East India Company’s sole bullion brokers and his later efforts to deal directly with the Mint were thwarted. Thereafter, Nathan’s dealings with the Bank were regular, as he later told the 1832 Committee on the Bank Charter (with characteristic oversimplification): “You bring in your bank notes, they give you the gold.” Much of the time, Nathan was a buyer or borrower of gold and silver. In December 1825, however, it was the other way round: the Rothschilds gave the Bank their gold, supplying the “Old Lady” of Threadneedle Street with enough specie from the continent to avert a suspension of cash payments. James had in fact been sending substantial quantities of gold across the Channel since the beginning of 1825, if not earlier. In the first week of January alone, he had sent gold worth nearly £500,000, which he expected to “impress your Bank” (meaning the Bank of England). By the middle of the month, he was talking about “our old established practice” of “buy[ing] some gold whenever we can find any.”

It was at the end of the year, however, that his assistance mattered most. As a succession of banks stopped their payments—six failed in London alone—the Governor of the Bank informed the government that a suspension of cash payments might be the only way to avert a general financial collapse, as he would be unable to meet the demand for gold likely when exchequer bills fell due. Liverpool and his colleagues were determined not to sanction this, suspecting the Governor of exaggerating the shortage of bullion to undo the work of the 1819 Committee. On the other hand, the Bank’s reserve of coined gold which could be used immediately was running out fast, and the Cabinet was sufficiently alarmed at the prospect of an unauthorised suspension by the Bank that “orders had been given to the regiment of Guards to remain in the City in case of disturbance.” Some City insiders—notably Henry Thornton, who was battling to rescue Williams & Co.—had already realised that “the Jew King of the City, Rothschild” had a stock of gold in reserve, and according to one account, “by dint of a little persuasion and exhortation [by Alexander Baring] the Jew was induced to bring out his gold, first charging 2½ per cent commission, then saying he did it out of public spirit, and lastly begging that they would never tell it or he would be besieged night and day.”