

In Frankfurt, for example, the Rothschilds’ emergence as a financial great power threatened to eclipse the Bethmanns, hitherto the town’s pre-eminent bankers. Simon Moritz, the dominant partner in this period, viewed his own relative decline with remarkable and indeed admirable equanimity; of all their many rivals, he yielded with the best grace. As early as September 1815 he actively sought to work in partnership with Salomon and James, observing in a letter from Paris to his own house in Frankfurt, “The more contact I have with the two Rothschilds here, the more confidence they give me.” Although he did not pretend to like Nathan’s “audacity and vanity,” he insisted that he was “far from wanting to criticise or envy” the Rothschilds, and described Salomon as “a very estimable man of character, to whom I am sincerely well disposed.” He even referred to Nathan as “our fellow countryman.” “The five Rothschild brothers are a remarkable phenomenon of our time,” he wrote in February 1822. “What they lack in genius they make up for with relentless activity, an enviable unity and mutual consideration.” However, such remarks were partly informed by Bethmann’s awareness that the best place to be in the 1820s was on the Rothschilds’ coat-tails. His mood changed markedly when he found himself left out of the 1821 Neapolitan loan, in which he believed Carl had promised him a share. “I do not think it fair,” he wrote angrily, “that I should commit myself to you for a period of months, while you find it suits you to retain the option whether you will keep your offer open or withdraw it.”

Such complaints about the Rothschilds’ ruthless methods were nothing new: it had been the perennial complaint of the Gentile business community in Frankfurt that the Jews’ business methods were “unfair.” Early German caricatures of the Rothschilds emphasise this point: in I. Nussgeig’s Musterreiter, Carl is portrayed as “Blauschild,” a travelling pedlar heading south to Italy with his bedraggled pony bearing all kinds of wares, including muskets and swords.2 A later caricature contrasts the elegant figure of Bethmann, riding his coach-and-four in fashionable apparel, with a scruffy and grotesquely ugly Amschel, standing atop a large cash box which a two-headed eagle struggles vainly to pull forward.3

As in the past, such business rivalry also had a political dimension. The fact that the Rothschilds were now “richer than Bethmann” was widely seen as evidence of the need to restore the traditional legal restrictions on the Jewish minority. In Amschel’s words, it “irked the Gentiles that a Jew should set the tone.” Hostility was growing daily, he reported in September 1815: “They begrudge us Jews the eyes in our heads . . . [and want] to drink our blood.” Matters were not helped by the fact that other Jews were inclined to boast about the Rothschilds’ wealth as a matter of communal pride, something which Amschel and Carl felt only fuelled Gentile resentment. This resentment generated a spate of anti-Jewish pamphlets and plays in the post-war years—the best-known was Unser Verkehr, about a cowardly Jewish soldier—and finally boiled over in the so-called “Hep” riots of August 1819, when a noisy crowd rampaged through the Judengasse, chanting the traditional anti-Jewish slogan “Hep-Hep! Jude verreck!” and vandalising houses. A good deal of this hostility was specifically targeted at the Rothschild family. In 1817 noisy crowds had gathered outside Amschel’s newly acquired garden, itself a symbol of Jewish social mobility, to mock his even more recent ennoblement, “chanting ‘Baron Amschel’ and all sorts of stupidities.” Caricatures were pinned to his door and the Rothschilds’ office windows were among those broken during the “Hep” riots.4 At around the same time, Amschel received death threats.