



It was the Rothschilds’ (very successful) methods, in other words, which Baring found objectionable; but he instinctively thought of these as “Jewish” in character. Such attitudes were widespread. Devotion in Dukes Place, one of the earliest English caricatures thought to be of Nathan, shows him at the front of a Jewish congregation in the Great Synagogue “returning thanks for a loan.” (see illustration 5.i).

As elsewhere, however, there was also a political dimension to anti-Rothschildism. The Rothschilds, as we have seen, often worried in the post-war years about the extent of Baring’s political influence in London and Paris, seeing this as the key to his dominance of the post-war reparations business. To less influential businessmen, however, it was the Rothschilds who seemed to have the political power. As early as 1818 an anonymous member of the stock exchange wrote to Lord Liverpool, attacking Nathan for his opposition to the resumption of cash payments: Let me inform you, the Capitalists of Money Market . . . have set their faces against your Plan because it serves not their purpose or puts Money in their Pockets. The Jew interest alias Mr Rothschild are . . . straining every nerve to defeat your objects . . . If a Man asks Mr Roth-schild, what is his opinion of the Funds, he answers they must be better and at the very same time he acts contrary[;] [that] in so great a country as this, Your Lordship and Colleagues should be the Sport [&] the caprice of a Jew Party . . . is truly lamentable.



5.1: Devotion in Dukes Place—or Contractors returning thanks for a Loan (1818).





A cartoon of 1824 made a similar allusion to Nathan’s role in the debate about resumption, portraying Nathan rising above the stock exchange in a balloon. Although the balloon is held aloft by a bull and a bear and carries the inscription “Everything must rise,” it is held down by ballast labelled “Cash Bags.” Here too there is a religious allusion. Indeed, the most striking feature of this cartoon is the ambiguous way it portrays Nathan’s relationship to a group of poorer Jews. Nathan holds two flags, bearing the mottoes “Those who give to the poor lend to the Lord” and “Charity covers a multitude of sins”; but he says: “I am going to receive my Dividends,” and a figure on the left, emerging from Capel Court with a copy of The Times, exclaims: “We stop the press to announce that one of the greatest capitalists in the City has gone on a secret Financial Expedition.” The six poor Jews on the right—labelled “The Old Stock reduced”—are left to direct their lamentations to King, the guard of the Royal Mail coach, who is carrying a Way-bill bearing eight Jewish names, each of which has been allotted a shilling.

If these critics portrayed Nathan as an interloper within the City, it was nevertheless also plausible to portray him as the personification of the City as a whole: as the leader of the “Change-Alley People,” of “Muckworm,” the gang of financiers and stockjobbers whom the Tory radical William Cobbett blamed for the post-war policy of deflation. A graphic example of this sort of critique is another 1824 cartoon, A New Court Fire Screen, which portrays the Rothschild-founded Alliance Assurance Company as a racket for defrauding country gentlemen. At the same time, this print also attacks Nathan’s connections with the Holy Alliance. The company’s building has an inscription which reads “Hollow Alliance Fire and Life Preserving Office” and is surmounted by five royal busts marked “Russia,” “Prussia,” “Naples,” “France” and “Austria.” At the very top of the print is a longer inscription which alludes to the Rothschilds’ counter-revolutionary role: Persons insured in this Office will be supplied gratis with a Box of veritable German Paste which if applied according to the directions of Prince H [or M?] & Co. will prevent fire. NB Should any Person obtain fraudulently a Box of the above miraculous Paste without being insured in this Office it will have the contrary effect and consume the House on the first appearance of the New Moon.