



Although the emphasis here is on the Rothschilds’ foreignness—Nathan and Moses Montefiore are pictured speaking French to one another, and there is a German porter with a thick accent—there is no mistaking the Jewishness of the three brokers in the foreground, congratulating one another on their profits.

It was, however, a complex crisis at the highest level of British politics which did most to bring Nathan into the British public eye. In the wake of Lord Liverpool’s illness in February 1827, a ministry had been formed by Canning which united Liberal Tories, notably Huskisson, with Whigs like Lansdowne, but excluded Ultra-Tories led by the Duke of Wellington, who shared Nathan’s distaste for Huskisson’s liberal economic policies. When Canning unexpectedly died in August of the same year, the King commissioned the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Robinson (now Lord Goderich), to form a new Cabinet. But the King’s insistence that Herries be appointed Chancellor (as well as his refusal to have the Whig Lord Holland as Foreign Secretary) meant that Goderich’s term in office was exceedingly brief. At the Whig leader George Tierney’s instigation, Goderich and Huskisson appointed Lord Althorp as chairman of a finance committee without consulting Herries, prompting the latter to threaten resignation unless Althorp’s appointment was rescinded, and Huskisson to threaten resignation if it was. In the event, Goderich himself resigned in January 1828 and the King turned to Wellington to form a government—though the conflict between Huskisson and Herries was resolved only when Wellington agreed to replace him as Chancellor with Goulborn, demoting Herries to the office of Master of the Mint.

The significance of the whole tangled affair lay in the identification of Herries with the King and his increasingly influential physician and private secretary Sir William Knighton; with the opposition within the Tory party to Catholic emancipation; and, perhaps decisively, with the financial interests—principally those of New Court—which were hostile to Huskisson. As early as August 1827 the Ultra-Tory Morning Chronicle was suggesting that Herries’s close connections with Nathan disqualified him from serving as Chancellor. In the debate which followed Herries’s demotion in February 1828, this charge was repeated by the Whig MP for Hertford, Thomas Duncombe, who called for the “mystery . . . about the late change” to be “cleared up, by the rising of the curtain which concealed persons of great consequence, incorporeal as well as corporeal”: There is . . . deny it who can, a secret influence behind the throne, whose form is never seen, whose name is never breathed, who has access to all the secrets of State, and who manages all the sudden springs of ministerial arrangement . . . Closely connected with this invisible, this incorporeal person, stands a more solid and substantial form, a new, and formidable power, till these days unknown in Europe; master of unbounded wealth, he boasts that he is the arbiter of peace and war, and that the credit of nations depends upon his nod; his correspondents are innumerable; his couriers outrun those of sovereign princes, and absolute sovereigns; ministers of state are in his pay. Paramount in the cabinets of continental Europe, he aspires to the domination of our own; even the great Don Miguel himself [see below], of whom we have lately heard and seen so much, was obliged to have recourse to this individual, before he could take possession of the throne. Sir, that such secret influences do exist is a matter of notoriety; they are known to have been but too busy in the underplot of the recent [ministerial] revolution. I believe their object to be as impure as the means by which their power has been acquired, and denounce them and their agents as unknown to the British consitution, and derogatory to the honour of the Crown.