



Amschel too was struck by the public propensity to exaggerate: “People think that we are ten times as rich as we really are.” “Wherever we go now,” Carl found, “people think it is a political trip.” The arrival of James at the St Petersburg stock exchange, or of a ship chartered by Nathan in port, was enough to bring business to a standstill. James had only to buy a certain security in Paris for “everybody” to buy it. Unlike Carl, the youngest brother relished this new-found fame. As he told Nathan, “It is indeed nice to possess so much prestige.” “They all say: ‘Il n’a jamais existé à Paris une maison aussi fameuse que la nôtre.’ . . . We are now regarded as the first . . . I sent last week [bills for] three millions to the Banque de France. There was a lot of rubbish among them—yet not a single one was returned.”1 Salomon and Nathan too could make light of publicity. “We are not going to cry about the fact that you have been caricatured,” he told Nathan. “As you say, so are kings and emperors . . . May God grant that this is the worst thing that ever happens to us . . . May my Anselm and your Lionel also be caricatured, please God, as soon as they become well known in this world. I wish this for our darling children . . . [Idle] dreams!” Nathan’s attitude was typically robust: “Gagesh [nobody] is not being written about.” Press interest—including unsubstantiated claims that they were in financial difficulties—was merely the price of success.





Public Relations

As the brothers’ comments suggest, little of this publicity was good publicity. From the very earliest years of their fame, the Rothschilds were subjected to markedly more vilification than glorification in the public sphere. Of course, most monarchs, politicians and other public figures in the early nineteenth century occasionally found themselves held up to ridicule in newspapers, pamphlets and other media, especially in those parts of Europe where censorship was lax. But the Rothschilds often seemed to attract a specially intense form of criticism. One reason for this was their religion. To those who regretted the steps taken towards religious equality in the Revolutionary period, the fact that the most economically successful family of the Restoration era was Jewish was an inexhaustible source of irritation. However, other factors undoubtedly played a part, and it would be a mistake to equate anti-Semitism with anti-Rothschildism. A good deal of the hostility which the brothers encountered after 1815 can be attributed to plain economic rivalry. The other Frankfurt bankers, for example, would have been envious of the meteoric rise of the Rothschilds even if they had not been Jews. Moreover, some of the Rothschilds’ most determined opponents were other Jews—as in Kassel. Additionally, anti-Rothschildism had a political dimension: their identification with conservative regimes and the policy of the Holy Alliance made them targets for liberal criticism. The bad publicity of the Restoration era was therefore often a synthesis of economic envy and religious antipathy, with an admixture of political radicalism.