

Such demonstrations—which prompted Amschel to contemplate leaving Frankfurt altogether—do much to explain the Rothschilds’ ambivalence about popular political participation. When Metternich expressed his disapproval of the riots (a disapproval which, of course, extended to all “outbreaks of the vulgar masses”) he did much to reinforce the Rothschilds’ sense that conservatism might offer them more personal security than the more radical forms of liberalism. This was especially true in Germany, where traditionally the Habsburg Emperor had given the Jews “protection” from the local populace and where the proto-liberal associations of the Restoration era espoused a nationalism which was occasionally anti-Jewish in its rhetoric. At the same time, the closer the Rothschilds drew to the established order, the easier it was for its critics to identify them with it. When marriage between Jews and Gentiles was legalised in Frankfurt—one of a number of minor concessions wrung from the Frankfurt Senate in the 1820s—the eighty-year-old Goethe was moved to comment: This scandalous law will undermine all family sense of morality, intimately associated with religion as it is. When this is passed, how can a Jewess be prevented from becoming Principal Lady of the Bed Chamber? Who knows whether or not bribery has played a role in all this; who knows whether or not the the all-powerful Rothschilds are behind it?



If so august and enlightened a figure could express such a view, it is no wonder the Rothschilds were content to see popular participation in German political life kept to a minimum.

Anti-Rothschildism was not confined to Frankfurt. Wherever the Rothschilds secured a large proportion of government business, local rivals often reacted with religiously-tinged attacks. In Vienna, for example, the 1820 lottery loan which Salomon arranged in tandem with David Parish was widely criticised as “a shameful Jewish ramp” because of the substantial profits the bankers stood to make. Sometimes, it should be stressed, such attacks had no religious dimension. Six years later it was Parish himself who directed one of the most vitriolic blasts against the Rothschilds of the entire period. Parish had gradually been surpassed by his erstwhile partner: by 1823 he was the junior partner (if not the messenger boy) in Nathan’s loan to Portugal, and his eclipse was completed by the 1825-6 crisis, which claimed Parish’s Viennese bank Fries & Co. as one of its victims. On the eve of drowning himself in the Danube, Parish wrote four letters—to his brother John, to the banker Geymüller, to Metternich and to Salomon himself—all blaming his downfall on the Rothschilds and pledging to discredit them publicly. Metternich, said Parish, had “sacrificed me to the cupidity of a family who, for all their riches, are heartless men who only care about their cash box.” He had been “deceived” by Salomon “in the most shameful way and rewarded for very considerable service with the blackest ingratitude.” The strong implication was that the Rothschilds had secured Metternich’s “protection” and left Parish out in the cold by underhand means. Parish’s letters show that it was perfectly possible to be anti-Rothschild without being anti-Jewish. Yet few German journalists could resist alluding to the family’s religion when reporting such stories. A good example is Friedrich List’s newspaper report of a minor case of embezzlement by a clerk at the Paris house in 1826, which referred quite gratuitously to “Rothschild, the pride of Israel, the mighty lender and master of all the coined and uncoined silver and gold in the Old World, before whose money box Kings and Emperors humbly bow . . .”