



Duncombe “trusted that the duke of Wellington and the right hon. Secretary for the Home Department [Peel], would not allow the finances of this great country to be controlled any longer by a Jew, or the distribution of the patronage of the Crown to be operated on by the prescriptions of a physician [a laugh].”

Responding for the government, Peel shrugged the attack off, denying knowledge of “the mysterious, incorporeal, and incomprehensible, being of which he had spoken” and denying “that the other more substantial personage had interfered, in the way stated by the hon. gentleman, with the financial affairs of the country.” But Duncombe’s speech was widely followed up. On February 25 a letter appeared in The Times signed “Algernon,” which declared indignantly: “We cannot suffer the destinies of a mighty Empire to be wielded by the unclean hands of a Jew and a man-midwife.” Writing under the pseudonym “Malcolm Macgregor, jun.,” the young Thomas Babington Macaulay contributed some satirical verses about the “mysterious two, / Lords of our fate, the Doctor and the Jew.”5 A number of satirical cartoons were also published on the subject, at least two of which were inspired by Thomas Dibdin’s 1800 play The Jew and the Doctor. In the first to appear (see illustration 5.ii), Nathan is pictured as a pot-bellied angel, descending from the clouds with bags of gold towards the “Ex-Clerk, Ex-Commissary, Ex-Auditor, Ex-Secretary, Ex-Chancellor” Herries. “Si help me Cot!” he declares in what is supposed to be a thick German-Jewish accent, “de Sinking Job will go to de Bottom of de melting pot if you don’t stick out Herry! You bote know dat I and only I am de Incorporial—never mind. I gave de Don Miggel and all de oder Dons de monish! plesh my hearts!” A second cartoon by Robert Cruikshank (see illustration 5.iii) shows Nathan—bearded, in a broad-brimmed hat and with a sack marked “Old Rags” over his shoulder—approaching Wellington with the words: “By Cot dat Doctor is von tam Jew—he want my perquist—you know fat I do for you—you give me de monish for dat fiddle—blesh moine heats!!!—.”



5.ii: George or Robert Cruikshank, The JEW and the DOCTOR, or SECRET INFLUENCE BEHIND THE CURTAIN!! (Vide Times Feby. 19th 1828).



5.iii: Robert Cruikshank, NEW SCENE FOR THE OLD FARCE OF THE JEW AND THE DOCTOR (March 1828).

Duncombe was something of a maverick figure who moved to the left in the 1830s and 1840s, emerging as a keen supporter of Chartism, as well as of Italian and Hungarian nationalism. But it is suggestive that, though he never completed it, he also attempted to write a book entitled The Jews of England, Their History and Wrongs. It seems reasonable to infer that he, like Fournier in France, was one of those liberals of the 1820s who saw no contradiction in attacking conservative ministers and Jewish financiers, even in terms which by modern standards seem quite anti-Semitic. The cartoonists’ motives were not dissimilar. The original play The Jew and the Doctor is about a generous Jew who brings up a Christian child and endows her with £5,000. The cartoons invert the story by portraying Nathan in the act of trying to bribe Wellington. The recurrent theme is of a tottering government, inextricably tied not only to a corrupt court but also to a corrupting banker. In Cruikshank’s cartoon, Wellington sits on a coffin marked “Hic Iacit the Constitution,” with two bottles behind him marked “Physic for Church” and “Physic for State.”