

Byron was therefore not far wide of the mark when he suggested in Don Juan that Baring and Rothschild reigned over both royalists and liberals, and that their loans could “seat a nation or upset a throne.” He erred only in regarding the two bankers as financial equals. In 1815 they had been. By 1825 they were not. As early as August 1820 the Bremen delegate to the German Confederation’s Diet in Frankfurt had a conversation with his Austrian counterpart Count Buol which acutely identified the unrivalled extent of the Rothschilds’ political influence in Europe: This house has, through its enormous financial transactions and its banking and credit connections, actually achieved the position of a real Power; it has to such an extent acquired control of the general money market that it is in a position either to hinder or to promote, as it feels inclined, the movements and operations of potentates, and even of the greatest European Powers. Austria needs the Rothschilds’ help for her present demonstration against Naples, and Prussia would long ago have been finished with her constitution if the House of Rothschild had not made it possible for her to postpone the evil day.



The Frankfurt banker Simon Moritz von Bethmann echoed this judgement in a letter written at around the same time: N. M. Rothschild, who is equipped with a vulgar talent, audacity and vanity, constitutes the centrifugal point around which the stock exchange revolves. He alone determines the exchange, buying and selling £100,000 each day . . . I can well understand why the Rothschilds are such useful instruments for the [Austrian] government.



Both men had their reasons for disliking this phenomenon, as we shall see; but they did not exaggerate it.





FIVE

“Hue and Cry” (1826-1829)


Seyd Umschlungen Millionen.

—CAPTION TO A GERMAN CARICATURE OF NATHAN ROTHSCHILD





It is not wholly surprising, in view of the decisive role they played in so many post war financial transactions, that the Rothschilds first became famous in the 1820s. Even as early as 1816 Carl was conscious that he and his brothers were becoming “very famous” in their home town. As he told James, “these days a lot is written about us in consequence of the freedom of the Press.” He encountered similar publicity when he visited Berlin later the same year. Carl evidently felt uneasy about such celebrity, not least because of the inaccuracy of much that was written. “We are every day in the news,” he complained to Amschel. “Last week you were mentioned in the papers in connection with the poor . . . Today you are mentioned in connection with grain, and that you are going to become [the Elector of Hesse-Kassel’s] Minister at the Diet of the Confederation.” It was the same in Hamburg: Whenever any one of us arrives gossip and marvellous stories are spread by people. Lawätz told me that at some party in town the story was told that the King of Prussia wrote to us asking to arrange a bond issue of three millions. We are supposed to have replied that this was not necessary, because we were able to advance this sum from our own money.