

Another cartoon of 1828 (see illustration 5.iv) entitled An Untoward Event, or a Tory Triumph shows Wellington being carried by Londonderry and two others. (Wellington carries the “Treasury Money Box,” a “Treatise on the Corn Laws,” the “Army Estimates,” a sword marked “Waterloo” and a bone marked “Commander in Chief ship,” on the end of an elaborate fork—an allusion to the post he relinquished while serving as Prime Minister.) One of the bearers says to Nathan: “Ah My good R-child, lend a hand, for he’s quite a dead weight.” But Nathan replies: “No, no, we’ll not put our shoulders to it. He’s no Daniel,” and a bearded Jew whispers: “No, No, take care of de Monish.” Old Corruption and New Corruption are portrayed as two sides of the same political coin. Yet, in each cartoon, stress is laid on Nathan’s Jewishness: sometimes his foreign accent is exaggerated, sometimes his appearance is altered to make him conform to the stereotype of the unassimilated immigrant, sometimes he is seen in the company of such a stereotype.



5.iv: “Shortshanks” [Seymour], AN UNTOWARD EVENT, OR A TORY TRIUMPH (February 1828).

The only qualification which needs to be made is that the cartoonists of the period can scarcely be accused of singling out Jews as targets for their satire. The Irishman and the Scotsman in A Tory Triumph are scarcely more sympathetically portrayed than the Jews. The Irishman has simian features and leans on a spade, muttering “Devil burn peat if he [Wellington] puts a finger to it, ’tis no good to poor Erin”; while the hook-nosed Scot in his kilt exclaims: “Na na Mon wanna he spend the siller on red jackets lang spurs and sic like.” Nevertheless, they conspicuously stand next to the “plain Englishman” John Bull. Nathan and the poor Jew stand on the other side of the road.





From Canning to Wellington

Was there any truth in these various allegations of hidden Rothschild influence? The answer is that there was, though the reality was more complex than the Rothschilds’ critics could know. As we have already seen, Nathan Rothschild had good reason to feel loyalty towards Herries, whose patronage had given him his single most important business opportunity, and hostility towards Huskisson, whose monetary and commercial policies he had consistently opposed. However, there was an additional political dimension which explains Nathan’s (at first sight puzzling) lack of sympathy with Herries. When he heard the news of his old associate’s defeat, he did no more than shrug, telling Carl: “Our friend Herries is annoyed because he has been given a poor job. He is annoyed, but I cannot help him. He must be patient, and perhaps he will get another job.” In fact, what interested and pleased Nathan far more was the fact that the Duke of Wellington had emerged from the crisis as Prime Minister.

The cartoonists who depicted Nathan as trying to bribe Wellington or refusing to support his government were only slightly wide of the mark. Not only had the Rothschilds been cultivating the Duke assiduously since his victories over France (which they had, of course, largely financed); more importantly, his conception of British foreign policy accorded far better with Rothschild interests than that of his mercurial predecessor Canning.