

Predictably, this somewhat confused policy was grist to the satirists’ mill. We have already seen the various references to “Don Miggel’s monish” in the cartoons of 1828. Brazil’s financial difficulties were also ridiculed in The Hue and Cry, a cartoon published in the wake of Pedro’s default on the earlier 1823 loan (see illustration 5.v). Here Nathan is pictured advising Dom Pedro not to pay the British bondholders—represented by John Bull prostrate on the ground. “If you pay them you’ll want more monies,” says Nathan to Pedro, “and that is not convenient just now.” The devil whispers in Nathan’s ear: “Tell him to call it political expediency—you know how easily John Bull is humbugg’d.”

The Rothschilds were equally in accord with Wellington when, against Nathan’s expectations, Russia renewed hostilities against Turkey in 1828. A Russian request for a loan was politely turned down, much to Metternich’s delight, and the broth-ers continued to hope for Russian military reverses throughout the campaign. When, to their chagrin, the Russians won and imposed a modest indemnity on the Turks under the terms of the Treaty of Adrianople (September 1829), the Rothschilds hastened to offer their services to facilitate the payment. Their sole anxiety throughout this, the first of many Eastern crises they would have to weather, was that Wellington might feel obliged to intervene against Russia. As over Portugal, the Rothschild view was now overtly pacifist, as Nathan emphasised to Salomon: There are some here who want us [meaning Britain] to quarrel . . . with [the Russian ambassador] Lieven . . . and want us to send angry Notes . . . I must tell you Wellington and Peel would like to quarrel with Russia, but in the end we should have to go to war. I am not for demonstrations, and we must see to maintaining peace. What’s the good of quarrelling? The Russians have gone too far, and the world will be angry with us and will say: Why didn’t you do it twelve months ago? If England now says, Yes, we are angry and want to go to war, Austria and France will say, We will remain out—they will leave us in the lurch, and we shall be involved alone. I went to Wellington and congratulated him on peace. He said: “Peace is not yet. It is not yet ratified.” . . . There is dissatisfaction with the Russian Peace in every respect. [But ] the Cabinet has now decided for the present to remain quite calm and not to write a word to Russia, to keep quiet and to let come what may.





5.v: “Sharpshooter,” The HUE and CRY; or JOHN BULL between two Knaves, Stools, and the Heads of Police called to rescue him from Pickpockets. Dedicated to the holders of Foreign Bonds in General (1829).

James neatly summed up the rationality of this pacifism: “If England were earnestly to attack [over] the [Turkish] issue then I assure you that we will suffer a fall of at least 5 per cent over here. If on the other hand the reports from there turn out to be better, then we could get a small improvement.” The connection between international peace and bond market stability was to become a first principle of Rothschild policy in the decade to come.