

Nor was George IV the only member of the British royal family to whom Nathan lent money in the 1820s. In 1824, for example, he lent £10,000 to the Duke of York on the security of some jewels, as well as giving him 100 complimentary shares in the Alliance Assurance Company.7 The Rothschilds also looked ahead to the next generation. In 1816 the only child of the Prince Regent, Princess Charlotte, was betrothed to a minor German prince, Leopold of Saxe-Coburg, the youngest son of Duke Francis Frederick. The brothers at once recognised Leopold’s potential importance (his new father-in-law was, after all, in his fifties and notoriously sybaritic). When he passed through Frankfurt on his way to England for the wedding, Carl made his move: “We went to see him. He is a good man. We gave him a bill for £700 on you against gold as well as a letter of credit . . . He intends to buy jewellery. Please offer him your services.” Nathan needed no further prompting. By April he was being entrusted with delivery of Leopold’s private correspondence to Germany, and by August a loan of 10,000 gulden was being discussed.

Only the effort Nathan put into cultivating Leopold can explain the brothers’ extraordinary reaction in May the following year to the news that Princess Charlotte had died, apparently extinguishing Leopold’s hopes of power in Britain. “We are unable to write you fully today,” wrote Salomon to Nathan, because of the heartbreak caused by that disaster, the death of Princess Charlotte. We lost our heads. I still cannot make myself believe that the noble woman died. We received the bad news on Saturday afternoon at five o’clock. We were negotiating with Baring for another million of rentes and we arranged with him that we are going to give him a final answer on Sunday . . . But when he came on Sunday for the answer, our consternation was so great that we told him that we could do nothing for the time being, we are far too confused for it. Unfortunately, we are losing terribly much, my dear Nathan. It is terrible, my heart breaks when I speak about it . . . I can’t write anything about business. We did not do any. We should . . . draw the moral of it: money, honours are worth nothing, we are all only dust; man should give up his pride . . . he should not make himself believe anything; we are mud and dust. It pains me very badly, this unfortunate event.



“Believe me,” Salomon added two days later, “I was so horrified [at the news], that since then I have had no appetite. It is as if my stomach has shrunk and I have never-ending pains in the joints.” Nathan, he assumed, would also be “thrown off his feet” and “made ill” by the news. Yet the brothers were always quick to come to terms with adversity. “Nobody is immortal,” reflected Salomon, “and we have to get over this . . . Unfortunately, our sorrow and sadness cannot bring her back.”

Another bank might have been tempted to end Leopold’s privileged status now that he was a mere widower. Salomon urged Nathan to do the reverse: “According to the English papers the Prince of Coburg will stay in England and is going to remain an important person there. We should show even more friendship towards a man who fell on hard times than before. I ask you to show him more feeling than hitherto.” This accounts for the subsequent efforts of Nathan to arrange life insurance not only for Leopold but for his father, and for the fact that Carl happily put Leopold up at his Naples villa in 1826.