





Strings of Influence

It was not only a shared view of foreign policy which united the Rothschilds with politicians like Wellington or Metternich, however. Where the conspiracy theorists of the 1820s came closest to the mark was when they suggested that private financial interests also played a part.

We have already seen that it was common practice for European politicians of the period to accept favours—ranging from investment tips to outright bribes—from bankers. At the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle, it was the fact that Baring had sold stakes in his impending French reparations loan to most of the ministers present that made them so eager to postpone the loan when the market unexpectedly crashed. The Rothschilds were adept at playing the same game. Indeed, Amschel was “convinced that we as Jews could not get by without bribing and that the Gentiles have the advantage.” In 1818, for example, the Frankfurt house distributed shares of the Rothschilds’ new Prussian loan not only to other Frankfurt bankers like Bethmann and Gontard, but also to their old sleeping partner Buderus, the Austrian representative at the Bundestag, Count Buol, and a number of other members of the diplomatic corps. In Paris, the political figures who were offered Prussian bonds included Talleyrand.

Another way of securing political influence by financial means was by lending money to such individuals. The most eminent of all French recipients of Rothschild loans in this period was Louis XVIII himself, whom Nathan had advanced £200,000 on behalf of the British government to meet the costs of his return to France in 1814. This did not much endear Nathan to the Bourbon family, however, for he insisted on repayment with interest three years later. By contrast, the loans made in the 1820s to the duc d’Orléans (the future Louis Philippe) were a more long-term investment which paid ample dividends in the subsequent decade. Prussian recipients of loans included the son-in-law of Prince Hardenberg. More routine banking facilities like current accounts were offered to other Prussian officials—notably the ambassador in London, Wilhelm von Humboldt, and the key official during the 1818 loan negotiations, Rother. Because these usually led to the granting of generous overdrafts, however, such accounts often performed the same role as loans. No sooner had Caroline von Humboldt been introduced to Salomon than he asked her point blank “whether he could be of any use to me in the matter of money, and said that his purse was at my disposal.”

Finally, when a more subtle approach seemed appropriate, the Rothschilds gave presents to those they wished to cultivate. As Carl put it, “One must have something when going to see the great and good, either gossip or something to show them.” The roots of the family’s later penchant for collecting art and natural curiosities can be found here; for the brothers prided themselves on their ability to find exotic gifts for jaded palates. They had an advantage in Nathan’s access to the London market, by far the best in the world because of the growing superiority of British trade and manufacturing. In 1816, for example, Nathan sent Amschel two tortoises, one of which he suggested be given to the Elector of Hesse-Kassel. (When they arrived dead, Amschel had them stuffed and presented them to William anyway.) Other luxury goods requested by his brothers for prospective clients included jewelled caskets for the Elector, a horse suitable for a lady and “a carving knife and fork with ivory handles” for “someone who helped us.”