



Just two months later, James was already boasting of his influence with the Duke, whom he had “already given various things.”

Wellington, however, was not the most senior British political figure to whom the Rothschilds “gave things.” It is extraordinary to find that the family’s interest in the financial affairs of King George IV predated his accession to the throne by as much as fifteen years. The earliest document referring to “bills of exchange from Prince George to the nominal amount of 150,000 Frankfurt gulden” is in Mayer Amschel’s hand and is dated 1805. Two years later they figure in one of his earliest surviving balance sheets, entered with a discounted value of just over 127,784 gulden—though even this figure he regarded as questionable. For, even as the heir to the throne and Prince Regent, George was regarded as a singularly unreliable debtor. How did Mayer Amschel, then the father of an obscure Manchester textile merchant, come to acquire a bill on the Prince Regent? The likeliest answer is that he bought it from the Elector of Hesse-Kassel, who had made a number of loans to the sons of George III in the 1790s. Ten years later, with Nathan firmly established as a banker in London, the sons of Mayer Amschel turned to these other royal debts with the intention of making Nathan—in Amschel’s somewhat old-fashioned phrase—“court banker” in England. All told, the Prince Regent owed £109,000, the Duke of York £55,000 and the Duke of Clarence £20,000, making a total of £184,000. Only the Prince Regent had ever paid interest on his loan. After protracted negotiations with the Elector’s advisers—and despite the objections of Buderus—the Rothschilds succeeded in buying these debts in return for the equivalent of their face value in consols. Superficially, this was far more than they were worth. In reality, it was an inspired investment—another of Nathan’s “master-strokes.” As Salomon commented: “This makes me a very powerful man.” “There is luck attached to everything English,” he enthused. “Everything touching them turns out happily. So it is with the court of our Elector. The two courts fit together.”

The value of these old royal debts was that, by making Nathan one of the Prince Regent’s creditors, they brought him into direct contact with the officials charged with managing the future King’s troubled financial affairs. And not only his financial affairs: by the end of 1817 Nathan was asking Salomon and James to gather information which might be of assistance to the so-called “Milan commission,” set up to gather evidence against “the great man’s wife”—Princess Caroline of Brunswick—whom he was determined to divorce. In 1822, just after George had finally ascended the throne, a loan of £50,000 was arranged with Nathan, secured on the revenues of his Hanoverian possessions. A year later a further £125,000 was requested. It was at around this time that he came into contact with Sir William Knighton, though the key figure in the loan negotiations was George Harrison, who assured the King of Nathan’s “great loyalty and honesty towards your Majesty . . . in everything relating to this transaction.” As we have seen, Harrison himself borrowed several thousand pounds from Nathan not long after this.