

It was in October of that year that Metternich—accompanied by his mistress, Princess Dorothy de Lieven—first publicly accepted an offer of Rothschild hospitality, “taking soup” with Amschel in Frankfurt on his way back to Vienna from Hanover.8 This was interpreted by some observers as a calculated gesture of support for the Frankfurt Jewish community at a time when conflict over the civil rights question was at its height. Less than a year later, Metternich received his thanks: a loan of 900,000 gulden, agreed just six days before the brothers received the title of “baron” from the Emperor. This loan sealed the “friendship” between Metternich and the Rothschilds. At Verona in 1823, Salomon furnished Metternich with cash to meet his (considerable) personal expenses. In Paris two years later, James played host to Metternich, throwing a lavish dinner for “the representatives of the Holy Alliance” which greatly impressed the Constitutionnel newspaper. It commented ironically: Thus does the the power of gold reconcile all the ranks and all the religions. One of the more curious spectacles our time—rich as it is in contrasts—is that of the representatives of the Holy Alliance established in the name of Jesus Christ attending a banquet given by a Jew on the day that the law of sacrilege is being debated in the chambers.9



A year later James was present at another equally grand soirée. It was in this period that Metternich began to make use of the Rothschilds’ courier service for important correspondence. From this point onwards, he and Salomon shared political news on a regular basis, Metternich informing Salomon of Austrian intentions while Salomon provided him with news he received from his brothers in London, Paris, Frankfurt and Naples. By the end of the 1820s the Rothschilds had begun to provide Metternich—or “Uncle,” as they often called him—with an unofficial diplomatic channel, through which he could relay his political views indirectly and discreetly to other governments.

All of this puts the bitter accusations of David Parish on the eve of his suicide in a new light. The Rothschilds, Parish complained to Metternich, had “understood better than I how to draw you into their [sphere of] interest” and how to secure “your special protection.” It was, he insisted in his letter to Salomon, “the new alliance” between Metternich and the Rothschilds which had ruined him. “Under the protection of Prince Metternich, you succeeded in securing exclusive control over numerous transactions in which I had a moral and legal claim to a substantial share.” If Salomon had given him his rightful cut of the profits from the Austrian and Neapolitan loans, he might have been able to rescue Fries & Co. “But you found it easier and more advantageous to come to an agreement with the Prince over the old rentes operation and in this way to put him wholly on your side.”

Although Parish’s allegations cannot be taken at face value, there was real substance to his claim that an alliance had developed between Metternich and Salomon Rothschild. This can be demonstrated with reference to the contents of the silver box, recently rediscovered in Moscow, in which Salomon kept Metternich’s accounts and private financial correspondence. These long-lost bank statements show that between 1825 and 1826 Metternich was in a position to repay much of the loan of 1822. However, no sooner had the loan been paid off—ahead of schedule—than a new loan for 1,040,000 gulden (c. £110,000) was arranged, roughly half of which Metternich used to purchase a new estate at Plass, and the rest he took as cash. The balance sheet of the Vienna house shows that Salomon retained some 35,000 gulden of the bearer bonds issued by Metternich for the purchase of Plass, on top of which the Prince owed an additional 15,000 gulden. His total private debt to the Rothschilds grew in the succeeding two years to nearly 70,000 gulden. In addition, the Frankfurt house advanced over 117,000 gulden to Metternich’s son Viktor. When Metternich married again in 1831, Salomon was on hand to help resolve the financial difficulties of his third wife, Countess Melanie Zichy-Ferraris.