

The first British official to benefit materially from his relationship with Rothschilds was, as we have seen, Herries. Though the full extent of his personal stake in the firm’s wartime operations is impossible to ascertain, he was a regular participant in post-war loans like the 1817 loan to the city of Paris. Herries—“your own Buderus over there”—was, as Salomon put it, one of the “important people whose favours are essential.” Another was Lord Stewart, Castlereagh’s brother, the British representative in Paris in the post-war years. He first asked Salomon and James to “speculate for him in rentes” in October 1817, and thereafter became “very friendly with us. Between ourselves he likes to gamble,” reported Salomon, “and I let him share in our business . . . to the amount of 50,000 francs rentes.” This was the case which reminded Salomon of his father’s precept that “if a high-placed person enters into a [financial] partnership with a Jew, he belongs to the Jew.” When Stewart came to them asking for assistance with his English affairs, Salomon urged Nathan to oblige him: “We must routinely accede to this minister’s wishes, as he is everything here, and is helping us to get the loans, the liquidation [of French reparations] and everything, and is the English minister.” Twenty years later James gave the Prime Minister Lord Melbourne’s brother Frederick investment tips during his time as ambassador in Vienna. “Well, Lamb is of the opinion that there will not be any war,” he wrote in a typical letter. “I told him that if he sees that rentes are rising over there then I will buy 24,000 francs of rentes for him in order to resell them at a profit, for he currently has some £30,000 to his credit in London.” British officials who directly borrowed from the Rothschilds included George Harrison and Charles Arbuthnot at the Treasury: the former owed Rothschilds over £3,000 in 1825; the latter borrowed four times as much.

It should be stressed that such relationships were not in themselves illegal—the Rothschilds had every right to extend banking services to politicians and civil servants. However, the brothers privately referred to “bribery” as a feature of their relations with Arbuthnot and with numerous foreign officials, notably the Russian Gervais. And, as the case of Herries illustrates, allegations of corruption in the press could be highly damaging to the career of the politician concerned. Indeed, the brothers had been anticipating a political row of the sort which blew up in 1828 for more than a decade, ever since they first began to worry that their wartime accounts with Herries might not bear close parliamentary scrutiny.

In this context, it is not entirely surprising to find that the Duke of Wellington also banked for a time with Rothschilds. Indeed, it was Stewart who formally introduced the Duke to Salomon and James. The importance of this relationship was probably small in financial terms: the surviving 1825 balance sheet suggests that Wellington did not make much use of his overdraft facility. But in Salomon’s eyes the prestige of being “Wellington’s bankers” was what mattered: It is a great honour . . . You may say, “What does honour matter? Honour is not money.” As an honest man I tell you that now I prefer honour to money. One cannot do more [with money] than to eat [from the proceeds] and we have enough to eat. [But] food does not taste good without honour. Wellington stands here higher in public esteem than the king himself.