

The second reason for Rothschild anxiety about Canning was his anti-Turkish (and therefore pro-Russian) policy over Greece. By 1826 the risings by Greek communities in Moldavia, the Peloponnese and Missolonghi against Ottoman rule had been largely crushed by the Egyptian Prince Ibrahim Pasha (the son of Mehemet Ali). From the point of view of Metternich, this was an entirely satisfactory outcome: another revolutionary threat to the status quo had been thwarted. However, Greek sympathisers in Britain and France, excited by reports of Byron’s death at Missolonghi and of Turkish cruelty, clamoured for some kind of intervention. More seriously, traditional Russian ambitions in the region appeared to revive with the accession of Nicholas I as Tsar. In the hope of averting unilateral Russian intervention on behalf of the Greeks, Canning sent a reluctant Wellington to St Petersburg in April 1826 to agree a joint Anglo-Russian policy. The deal struck effectively gave Russia a free hand in Moldavia, while committing the two powers to impose some settlement on the Turks—forcibly, if need be—which would grant the Greeks limited self-government; a policy which Villèle endorsed in July 1827. The upshot was that in the autumn of 1827 a joint naval expedition was sent to the Eastern Mediterranean and inflicted a decisive defeat on the Ottoman forces at Navarino.

As Villèle himself put it, however, “Cannon fire is bad for money”; and, like Canning’s threat of war over Portugal, his commitment to joint military action against Turkey perturbed the Rothschilds. There were two reasons for this: firstly, they were inclined to share Metternich’s pro-Turkish attitude, even if plans for a loan to Constantinople had come to nothing in 1825; secondly, their relations with St Petersburg had taken a distinct turn for the worse since the appointment as Finance Minister of Count Kankrin, who made no secret of the fact that he regarded the Rothschilds’ 1822 loan to Russia as “useless.”

All this helps to explain why Nathan was so delighted by the emergence of Wellington as Prime Minister in 1828; for it was well known that the Duke disapproved of Canning’s policy abroad, sharing the King’s view that he had played into the Tsar’s hands by turning against Britain’s “ancient ally,” the Sultan. “Consols have gone up because of our [new] Ministers,” Nathan reported gleefully to Carl. “Praise be to God that we have good news, as Russia will wait [before taking further military action], through Wellington everybody is for peace which does not surprise me, for our King in his speeches is nothing but schalom aleichem [peace be with you].” When Mrs Arbuthnot asked Nathan at around the same time “what they thought of the Duke in the City, [h]e said they had unbounded confidence in him.” In the two and a half years of Wellington’s premiership which followed, that unbounded confidence was translated into concrete financial support for a foreign policy markedly different from Canning’s. Not only did Nathan purchase substantial sums of exchequer bills in 1828 (£1 million) and 1829 (£3 million); he also provided Dom Miguel with £50,000, “under the guarantee of the British Government,” to enable him to take possession of his office as Regent in Portugal. At the same time, he floated a £769,000 loan to Miguel’s brother Pedro, the Emperor of Brazil, in an effort to stabilise Brazilian finances, still reeling from the 1825 Latin American debt crisis.6