

George Canning no more believed in “regenerating” Europe than his predecessor Castlereagh. What distinguished the two was Canning’s determination to pursue British interests, with minimal regard for the other great powers. As he put it, famously: “For Europe I shall be desirous now and then to read England.” He pointedly declined to take into account “the wishes of any other Government, or the interests of any other people, except in so far as those wishes, those feelings and those interests may, or might, concur with the just interests of England.” This explains Britain’s refusal to sanction the French intervention in Spain, to which Canning had responded with a strong pledge to uphold Portuguese neutrality and recognition of the Latin American republics’ independence from Spain. That did not much bother the Rothschilds, who comfortably played both ends against the middle over Spain. However, in his last years—particularly in his brief period as Prime Minister (April-August 1827)—Canning took bolder steps which did much to alarm the Rothschilds.

There was already a degree of tension in their relationship even before Liverpool’s death. As James said in November 1826, “It would be a mortal sin to be dependent . . . on a Canning.” The feeling was mutual: the following month, when Canning received details of an important speech in Paris from the Rothschilds twelve hours before the official report of the speech from the British embassy, he wrote angrily to his ambassador: You must make full allowance too for the day which I passed on Saturday. “Good God! what! nothing direct from Paris! Perhaps it is a mere stock-jobbing report.” “Perhaps it is a trick of M. Rothschild’s.” . . . Such were the propos of the morning . . . I hope you will contrive to establish some communication with the F.O. at Paris, that will prevent Rothschild from getting official papers, (news you cannot help), before you.



That this less than friendly figure was to be Prime Minister deeply alarmed the Rothschilds. James immediately anticipated “a very serious crisis on our hands in Spain and in Portugal” and “a complete standstill in business activity” in Paris. For in December 1826, “to defend and preserve the independence of an Ally,” Canning had sent troops to Portugal in support of the young Portuguese Queen Maria, whose claim to the throne was being challenged by her uncle Dom Miguel. Because Miguel had the backing of the reactionary Bourbon regime in Spain, which in turn was supported by France, this raised the possibility of a confrontation between Britain and France. For the first time, the Rothschilds appreciated what a large stake they had in peace between the great powers. For nothing could do more to weaken the price of consols, rentes and every other security they and their clients held than a war. Although Villèle had reassured James in November “that I should not be silly because England and France would never go to war on account of such miserable people like the Spanish and Portuguese,” James had been worried enough about Canning’s attitude “to remain on the sidelines” (that is, to make no major purchases or sales) until the crisis blew over. The appointment of Canning as premier revived these fears of Anglo-French conflict over Portugal. The brothers took the view that Canning was backing the wrong side in what might prove to be a bloody civil war. At an early stage they seem to have made a decision in favour of Dom Miguel, though it is not clear why.