

The strategy of extending credit and other financial facilities to influential but profligate figures like Metternich and Esterházy was a highly effective way of ensuring political goodwill and “friendship.” Of all the private financial relationships of this era, none illustrates this better than that between Salomon and Metternich’s secretary, Friedrich von Gentz. Gentz was an intelligent, conservative and thoroughly venal man of letters—a kind of Central European Edmund Burke gone wrong—who had acquired the habit of selling the influence he had in Vienna for cash long before he came into contact with the Rothschilds. Indeed, for a time it was David Parish whom he regarded as “the matador, the pearl of the merchant class of all Christendom”—a view which was not unrelated to the 100,000 gulden stake Parish had given him in the 1818 Austrian loan. It did not take the Rothschilds long to purchase Gentz’s fickle allegiance. After an initial encounter in Frankfurt, he, Carl and Salomon met at Aix in 1818. On October 27 Gentz recorded in his diary that Salomon had handed him 800 ducats, supposedly the proceeds of a successful speculation in British stocks. A few days later there were more “pleasant financial dealing with the brothers.” Gentz was soon paying regular visits to his new friends, whose apparently instinctive ability to make money deeply impressed him. He had regular business dealings with Salomon thereafter: a minor transaction in late 1820, a small loan at Laibach in 1821, a share in the Neapolitan loan of the same year which earned him 5,000 gulden within a year. His diaries in this period make repeated references to “very agreeable communications” from Salomon; “important financial arrangements” with him; “a proof of real friendship” over breakfast; “matters which, although not so elevated [as diplomacy], were far more pleasant”; and “highly welcome financial transactions with the excellent Rothschild.” The pattern continued throughout the decade. In 1829 Salomon lent Gentz 2,000 gulden “with the most amiable readiness,” bringing his total debts to Salomon and other bankers to over 30,000 gulden. To Gentz, such loans were to be regarded as “donations pure and simple.” Indeed, according to one account, Salomon finally dispensed with the fiction that the money would ever be repaid by paying Gentz an annual retainer, though this did not prevent Gentz from pleading for yet another loan of 4,500 gulden from Salomon, and gratefully settling for 500 gulden to tide him over.

Gentz performed a number of valuable services in return for his money: supplying news and facilitating access to Metternich, for example. In addition, he was responsible for the Rothschilds’ first real foray into public relations. At a time when the brothers were the objects of an increasing volume of negative comment in the press, an experienced and politically influential journalist like Gentz was a useful ally. In 1821 he wrote twice to the editor of the Allgemeine Zeitung to express his “grave dissatisfaction” about recent articles by the paper’s Frankfurt correspondent which had been critical of the Rothschilds. “The constant attacks upon the House of Rothschild,” he argued, “invariably, and sometimes in the most outrageous manner, reflect upon the Austrian government by necessary implication, since, as everybody knows, it is transacting important financial matters with that House, which is not only unimpeachable, but is honourable and thoroughly respectable.” Facing the threat of a ban throughout Austrian territory, the editor of the newspaper was obliged to “promise not to accept . . . anything in future relating to the value of Austrian public securities, or anything whatever relating to the House of Rothschild (at least affecting its relations with Austria).” When Salomon heard that he had been awarded a Russian decoration in 1822, he immediately asked Gentz to arrange for a newspaper article on the subject. Four years later, at Salomon’s request, Gentz himself put pen to paper, writing the first “official” account of the family’s history—or , as he described it, an attempt “briefly and I hope not infelicitously to explain the phenomenon of the greatness of this House.” After Gentz had read it to one of Salomon’s senior clerks and received his “actual pay” from Salomon, it was published in the Brockhaus Encyclopaedia. These were the first Rothschild attempts to exert some influence on a generally hostile press, and far from the last. In 1831, with Gentz’s influence waning, Salomon made overtures to the satirist Saphir in the hope of winning his services as a pro-Austrian—and implicitly also pro-Rothschild—publicist.