

In a sense therefore the French journalist Alexandre Weill was not exaggerating when, looking back in 1844, he declared: The house of Rotschild [sic] is merely a necessary consequence of the principle of state which has governed Europe since 1815; if it had not been a Rotschild, it would simply have been someone else . . . it is this system . . . dominant throughout Europe, which has created, produced and elevated the house of Rotschild . . . Rotschild reigns and governs on the bourse and in all the cabinets . . .



This was too deterministic a view, of course. There had been moments in the 1820s when the “principles” governing the European states had come close to calling the Rothschilds back out of existence, and it is hard to imagine any other contemporary financier easily taking their place. But Weill was closer to the mark than Richelieu: if there was a sixth great power in the 1820s, it was no longer Barings, but Rothschilds. Small wonder there was such a hue and cry about them.





SIX

Amschel’s Garden


Oh what joy to be in the open air

and draw breath easily!

Here alone, here alone there’s life.

. . . Speak softly! Restrain yourselves!

There are ears and eyes upon us.

—FIDELIO, ACT 1, FINALE





The Jew, who may have no rights in the smallest German states, decides the fate of Europe.

—BRUNO BAUER





Nothing symbolised the Rothschilds’ escape from the gloomy confines of the Frankfurt ghetto better than their acquisition of real estate outside it. In 1815 virtually all the family’s wealth was held in the form of paper—bonds and other securities—and precious metal. Such “immovable property” as they possessed was all in Frankfurt; everywhere else, the brothers still lived in rented accommodation. Inside the old Judengasse, there was of course the old Stammhaus “zum grünen Schild” where the brothers had grown up. It was a matter of public curiosity that their mother Gutle continued to live there until the end of her life; her sons, however, felt no such attachment. By 1817 Carl had had enough of his old room on the third floor of his mother’s house: “Of course, you will say that in the ghetto we slept on the fourth floor. Yes, but one is getting old. Also [it is galling] that one should make much money and live a dog’s life while others who have not a tenth of our fortune live like princes.” By this time the first steps out of the Judengasse had already been taken. Although the plot they had acquired in 1809-10 for their new offices was technically in the Judengasse, the sandstone neo-classical building they built there had its entrance in the Fahrgasse, the main thoroughfare off which the Judengasse ran. (In the absence of its old gates, the Judengasse itself was now increasingly referred to as the Bornheimer Strasse.) Salomon had already been given permission to move his residence to a house in the Schäfergasse in 1807; but the real escape came when Amschel bought a house in the suburbs on the road to Bockenheim in 1811 (10 Bockenheimer Landstrasse). For the first time, he found himself living in fresh air.