

The religious differences between—and within—branches of the family grew more acute in the next generation. In London, Nathan’s elder children continued to worship more or less as their parents had done. Although not deeply spiritual, they were fundamentally conservative in their habits of worship. Indeed, they found their uncle’s family in Paris rather too lax. Lionel pointedly refused to work when he was in Paris for Passover in 1829, though James continued to write letters as usual. Nat too, despite sharing his uncle’s aversion to kosher food,2 found it surprising that during Passover “although we go to shul and eat matzot, in Paris it is impossible to shut up shop.” The ascendancy of the Reform movement in Frankfurt (which essentially sought to remodel the rabbinate and Jewish forms of worship along Protestant lines) perturbed them too, accustomed as they were to Amschel’s old-fashioned ways. “They have a new Rabbi here who preaches uncommonly well,” reported Anthony ambivalently in 1844. “He preached on Friday for the first time, I did not like anything that he said—but perhaps it was the fault of the Reformers here. They go a good deal further than they do in England. I should like to hear a man who could preach as well in England . . . I was very disquieted with the whole service.”

The influence of Reform on Carl’s daughter Charlotte was strong, judging by the way she later critically compared Jewish practices in England with those of some Christian denominations. Yet when her brother Wilhelm Carl went to the other extreme, outdoing even Amschel in his Orthodoxy, the English Rothschilds were even more disconcerted. His aunt Hannah reported to Lionel on his condition rather as if “his enthusiasm in observing all the stricter duties of the Jewish religion” were a sign of possible mental imbalance: I have seen him twice, he came to his Brother one Evening and remained an hour, and as much as propriety allowed I remarked his manner &c. which is very rational and not in any way different from others of his age and situation, tranquil and civil, plain in his dress[,] not conspicuous either for much attention to it . . . There is nothing in my opinion to fear, that this religious devotion will be followed by fanaticism. I saw him again at Baron A. de Rothschild[’s] . . . he accompanied us to look at the same things and took as much interest in all as any of us . . . [H]e said, I am determined to be firm and will always be so. Should he be fortunate to find proper and sensible Instructors, no ill can be anticipated from his present good principles.3



When Amschel withdrew a substantial donation (150,000 gulden) intended to finance the building of a new synagogue because “they [the Jewish community’s board] have chosen a new [deputy] Rabbi for the synagogue who is not an Orthodox one,” Anthony could only shake his head: “You have no idea what a parcel of Donkeys . . . the Jews are here.”

To most members of the family, the conflicts between Reformers and Orthodox Jews—which had only a muted echo in England—were an unwelcome nuisance. Internecine theological and liturgical controversies held little interest for them; and any weakening of Jewish unity struck them as self-defeating in a hostile world. Thus Mayer Amschel’s sons and grandsons followed his example in accepting lay offices within their communities, but rarely intervened in religious disputes, save to appeal for harmony. Nathan was Parnass (warden) of the Great Synagogue in Duke Place, and was almost certainly behind a scheme for “an organisation of Jewish charity” to combine the efforts of the three major Ashkenazi synagogues of the metropolis (the Great, the Hambro’ and the New)—a move foreshadowing the later emergence of the United Synagogue. For the Rothschilds, religious activism was primarily about giving practical, material assistance to a stable Jewish community—not defining the community, much less the nature of its faith, which they tended to regard as an immutable given.