

Such a defiant repudiation of conversion could well have come from a real Rothschild. “I am a Jew in the depths in my heart,” wrote Carl in 1814, commenting on the extent to which Jewish families in Hamburg were converting to Christianity. When he encountered the same thing in Berlin two years later, he was scornful: “I could marry the richest and most beautiful girl in Berlin; but I am not going to marry her for all the world because, here in Berlin, if [one is] not converted [then] one has a converted brother or sister-in-law . . . We have made our fortune as Jews and we want nothing to do with such people . . . I prefer not to mix with the meshumed [converted] families.” The brothers regarded the Bavarian banker Adolph d’Eichthal with considerable suspicion precisely because he was a convert (a mere “goy” would have been less objectionable). As James put it, “It is a bad thing when one has to deal with an apostate.” When the Hamburg banker Oppenheim had his children baptised in 1818, the Rothschilds were scandalised. “The only reason I find these people contemptible,” Carl sneered, “is that when they convert to Christianity they adopt only what is bad but nothing that is good in it.” By converting, Oppenheim had “brought about a revolution in Hamburg”: “He is sorry about it. He was weeping when I left . . . after speaking to him about it . . . However, I foresee that Oppenheim’s lead will be followed. Well, we are no custodians of others’ souls. I will remain what I am, and my children too . . .”

The brothers saw themselves as “role models” in this regard. The more they could achieve socially without converting, the weaker the arguments for conversion would seem, given that the majority of conversions were a response to continuing legal discrimination against Jews. “I am quite ready to believe that we have enough money to last us all our life,” wrote James in 1816. “But we are still young and we want to work. And [as] much for the sake of our prestige as Jews as for any other reason.” This was the way Amschel saw Nathan’s appointment as Austrian consul in London. “Though it may mean nothing to you,” he wrote, “it serves the Jewish interest. You will prevent the apostasy of quite a few Vienna Jews.” When a newspaper reported that Salomon himself had been baptised, he hastened to publish a denial. When the allegation was repeated in a French encyclopaedia fourteen years later, he insisted it be corrected in all subsequent editions.

However, while their adherence to Judaism was unbending, the brothers were far from uniformly strict in their religious observance. In Frankfurt, Amschel retained his “old-Hebrew customs and habits,” invariably eschewing work on the Sabbath, keeping kosher strictly and fasting and feasting on the appropriate holy days. At banquets, noted a contemporary journal, he sat “in true penance, as he never touches any viands or dishes that have not been cleansed or prepared in the Jewish fashion. This strict and unaffected observance of the religious injunctions of his faith is greatly to his honour; he is regarded as the most religious Jew in Frankfurt.” By the 1840s he had built a synagogue in his own house. Salomon always ate his own specially prepared kosher food, even when he invited Austrian grandees like the Metternichs to dine with him; and refused to write letters on the Sabbath and holy days.