

Their brother Nathan too was mindful of his religious duties. We know that even when he was in Manchester, where the majority of Jews were relatively poor shop-keepers and pedlars, Nathan “conformed to all the rites and ceremonies of our faith, his dinner being cooked by a Jewess and taken to him at his warehouse every day” and the shamas “bringing him the palm branch and citron daily during the Tabernacle festival.”1 When Prince Pückler tried to engage him in a religious argument, he found Nathan unexpectedly well informed, reflecting afterwards that he and “his co religionists are of older religious nobility than we Christians; they are the true aristocrats in this sphere.” Nathan’s wife Hannah later subscribed to the Holy Society of the House of Learning of the Ashkenazim in London (Hevrah Kadisha Beit Ha-Midrash Ashkenazim Be-London), a thoroughly Orthodox institution, and kept a close watch on her children’s religious conduct. When he went up to Cambridge in 1837 Mayer was warned to “avoid everything possible in infringing upon our religious duties,” specifically, to “abstain from these indulgencies such as riding on Horseback on Saturdays” and to refuse to attend chapel services in college; while his brother Nat felt the need to apologise profusely to her for missing the Day of Atonement during a trip to Switzerland four years later. James too always kept a mahzor (prayer book for the holidays) in his office. When a new baby boy was circumcised, James “thank[ed] God . . . we have one more good Jew in the family.”

However, the younger brothers were regarded by Amschel as lapsing dangerously in a number of respects. When the need arose, Nathan, Carl and James all read and wrote business letters on the Sabbath—covertly if they happened to be with Amschel. And one by one they abandoned the strict kosher diet (though not completely: the English family still avoided pork). When Carl was trying to find himself a wife in 1814, Amschel and Salomon objected to his choice of Adelheid Herz on the ground that her family did not keep kosher. The issue was the source of constant arguments. “As to piety,” wrote Carl in response to yet another complaint on the subject from Amschel, “when I am old I will be pious too. In my heart I am nothing but a Jew. I don’t wish to take care of your soul, but you wrote me once that I should find means to enable you to come occasionally to my house to eat there. That [the lack of kosher food] does not mean that I am not pious.” In 1814 James complained bitterly from Berlin: “I am really fed up with the food here, I think it is the worst one could possibly have anywhere. [Amschel] is still concerned about eating only kosher food, as he is still pious and he knows that I am not; yet he will insist that I eat with him.” Some years later Heine joked that although James had “not gone over to the Christian Church,” he had “gone over to Christian cooking.” The younger brothers also abandoned all sartorial vestiges of the ghetto.