

Nor did the Rothschilds confine themselves to loans and overdrafts. “Our friend Salomon’s devotion always touches me,” remarked Princess Melanie in her diary in May 1841, on receiving a present from him of American deer for their estate near Frankfurt. A few months later she described a visit by “Salomon and James, their nephew Anthony and Salomon’s son and finally Amschel, who made a great point of our coming to dine with him at Frankfurt next Tuesday. James brought me a pretty mother-of-pearl and bronze box from Paris, filled with sweets, which was all to the good.” At Christmas in 1843 Salomon visited the Metternichs at Ischl, bringing “lovely things to the Metternich children, such as tempted their mother to play with them herself.”

Metternich was not the only eminent Austrian to put his private financial affairs in Salomon’s hands. In 1821—in a classic example of financial speculation based on inside information—a senior Austrian commander, General von Wolzogen, asked Salomon to purchase 100,000 gulden worth of metallic bonds on his behalf. His calculations provide a fascinating insight into the dispassionate attitude of one senior military figure to the Austrian military intervention in Italy: My reasoning is as follows: either it will stay cold, or it will get hot. In the first case, [metalliques] will immediately go up anyway. If it turns hot, then it is probable that the [army?] will march into Naples and in that case I believe they [metalliques] will rise too . . . If peace remains, one can expect high prices. The only question is therefore whether to buy now or after the declaration of war. I am inclined to buy soon . . . But I leave it to you to do as you think best, and indeed not to buy at all if you do not think it advantageous.



Other political figures who feature in the accounts of the Vienna house include Stadion and the influential diplomat Apponyi, as well as a number of the most important families of the Austro-Hungarian aristocracy. Of these, the Esterházys, with their immense estates in Hungary and links to the still wealthier Thurn und Taxis family, were the most important—and problematic. Beginning with £10,000 in 1820 and 300,000 gulden in 1822, the Esterházys borrowed often from the Rothschilds. Three years later Salomon went into partnership with two leading Vienna houses, Arnstein & Eskeles and Simon G. Sina, to float a large 6.5 million gulden loan (at 6 per cent). This was secured on Prince Esterházy’s estates and was intended “definitively to reorder” the family finances. However, balance sheets for the succeeding years show Esterházy continuing to run overdrafts with Rothschild houses in London and Vienna: £28,000 in London in 1825, 2,300 gulden in Vienna three years later. By 1831 matters were bad enough for Esterházy to approach Salomon (through Metternich) for another loan. Although Salomon was hesitant, the Vienna accounts for 1832 put Esterházy’s total debts at 827,000 gulden, and three years later the debt was larger still. When the Prince was succeeded by his son Paul in 1836, there was another attempt at stabilisation in the form of a 7 million gulden lottery loan, issued jointly by Salomon and Sina. Yet another loan (for 6.4 million gulden) followed eight years later—one of a spate of major loans to the aristocracy floated by Rothschilds and Sina in the 1840s. Small wonder Esterházy “spoke very flatteringly of the family” to third parties. As in the case of Metternich, financial ties were inseparable from social and political ties. In London, Prince Esterházy dined regularly with Nathan while serving as Austrian ambassador and received much of his correspondence from Metternich via Rothschild couriers. In Vienna, the relationship appeared so close that in 1822 unfounded rumours appeared in the press suggesting that Esterházy had persuaded Salomon to abandon Judaism.