

In Frankfurt, despite the example of Electoral Hesse, the debate appeared to end in an even more complete defeat in October 1816, when a revised constitution confirmed the equality of Christian citizens only, leaving Jews as second-class Schutzgenossen (literally “protected comrades”). It was especially galling that, even as they revoked the decree of 1811, the authorities specifically cited Amschel’s garden as evidence of their enlightened attitude towards the Jewish community. If this was intended to buy off the Rothschilds, however, it failed; it merely made Amschel the target for antagonism on the part of those in the town who wished even stricter measures against the Jews—namely a wholesale return to the ghetto. As we have seen, anti-Jewish feeling in Frankfurt grew more and more overt in this period, with the performance of plays like Unser Verkehr and the publication of numerous anti-Jewish pamphlets. During the debates on the Jewish question, some members of the Senate had even been heard to propose as a “solution” that the Jews should be expelled from Frankfurt altogether “as the endeavour of these money-grabbing nomads is solely directed at the ruin of [us] Christians, so that within a few years a large part of the Christian burghers and residents will have been deprived of all happiness and prosperity.” In September 1816 a group of anxious representatives of the Jewish community wrote to the Rothschild brothers, noting “how tirelessly and eagerly you are working for us, how strong your solidarity with us is,” but admitting: “[T]he good results which we were justified in hoping for have not been achieved . . . We fear that the fortress will not capitulate before very decisive measures are taken.”

What form could such measures take? In the wake of the Frankfurt defeat, Amschel angrily talked of “hurting” the Gentile bankers in Frankfurt “by doing business, even if it entails losses.” More plausibly, the Rothschilds might make use of their rapidly increasing wealth in a more positive way. Some German Jews looked to Nathan—the richest and most influential of the brothers at this time—to provide some kind of English deus ex machina. “I hope in days to come the British who conquered Napoleon,” wrote one of the Frankfurt community’s leaders, “are going to call the Frankfurt Senate to set free Jewish slaves here as they have freed Christian slaves elsewhere.” Amschel himself urged Nathan to “have the British Minister [in Bavaria, Frederick] Lamb egged on again” to support the Jewish case. According to the brothers’ correspondence, Nathan did what he could. A number of letters credit him with securing support on the issue from the Dutch King, as well as acting to protect the interests of other Jewish communities in British jurisdiction, notably in Corfu and Hanover. “I think it might be easy to improve our lot should you approach the Prince Regent,” a Hamburg Jew named Meyerstein wrote to Nathan in 1819. “Why should the Hanoverian Jews, living in an English province, not be given the same laws conceded to their brethren in England? The barbarity of the past century has got to be stopped and it is from your direction that we expect the sun to rise also for us.” In the case of Frankfurt, of course, British influence was minimal: the best tactic still seemed to be to apply pressure in Berlin and Vienna, in the hope that the larger German states would finally force Frankfurt to soften its attitude. But here too Nathan could make a contribution. In what was to become the pattern for much of their later activities of this sort, the brothers sought to win stronger Prussian support for the Jewish case in the course of the negotiations for the 1818 sterling loan. The brothers also endeavoured to raise the issue at the Congress of Aix; indeed, Amschel argued that Salomon should go there “not for business reasons but in the interest of the whole Jewry.” It was in fact this issue which brought them into contact with Friedrich Gentz for the first time, as he and Metternich passed through Frankfurt on their way to the Congress.