

Yet in the course of the following month it became evident that Wellington was opposed to the introduction of any such bill that year; nor would he commit himself as to the next parliamentary session. When Nathan went to see him in February 1830 to “entreat” him “to do something for the Jews,” the Duke replied that “he would not commit the Government on the question of the Jews, and advised them to defer their application to Parliament, or, if they did not . . . it must be at their own risk, and he would make no promise.” In the face of this, Nathan became pessimistic. The Liberal Tory Robert Grant proceeded to introduce a petition in favour of the Jews a week later, followed on April 5 by the first of many bills—an event Nathan himself may have witnessed. Two days later, however, he informed his brother James “that the Jewish matter is not going through.” He lobbied another old Tory friend on the subject—Herries, now President of the Board of Trade—but the government position remained unchanged and the bill was duly defeated by 228 to 165 on its second reading. It was now obvious that support for Jewish emancipation was much more likely to come from the Whigs. After years of proximity to the Tories, Nathan suddenly found himself siding with the Opposition.

The emancipation issue cut across party lines: supporters included the socialist Robert Owen, the Irish Catholic Daniel O’Connell and the Liberal Tory William Huskisson, while its most vehement early opponents included William Cobbett. A flavour of the more radical opposition can be gleaned from the numerous cartoons devoted to the subject. A caricature produced shortly after the introduction of Grant’s bill (though dated March 1, 1830) depicts a bearded Jew in the House of Commons listening to Thomas Babington Macaulay’s maiden speech in support of the bill and declaring: “It’s Liberty of Conscience my peoples vants—that’s all” (illustration 6.ii). The figure bears no physical resemblance to Nathan, but the fact that he has a bill in his coat pocket bearing the legend “Cent per cent interest” makes the connection between the Jews and finance clear enough.



6.ii: Anon., “To make a shambles of the parliament house—Shakespeare,” the Looking Glass No. 3 (1830).

In a contemporaneous cartoon entitled The Wise Men of the East and the Marquiss of West, Nathan himself is depicted in conversation with Grant (see illustration 6.iii). “I did all I could to procure you the power of legislating for a religion you mock at,” Grant says, “but the narrow-minded House threw out the Bill.” Nathan replies, “Ah well, never mind: have you any Spanish to sell, I’ll give you 48 for it.” A more stereotyped Jew behind Nathan whispers, “Dat’s right, we can easily run it up to 50”; while another exclaims, “Mine Cot, Beards will not be de fashion yet, den!” In both cases a pun is intended on the word “bill”: the implication is that the Jews were more interested in the financial variety and that the proponents of a parliamentary bill for emancipation were ingenuous.