

Tory opposition continued to thwart emancipation even when the Whigs returned to power after the Reform crisis. A second bill passed its third reading in the Commons in 1833, only to founder in the Lords in the face of opposition led by Wellington and the majority of bishops; a pattern repeated the following year. During Peel’s brief ministry of 1834-5, Nathan was one of the signatories of a letter to the Prime Minister—known to be more pragmatic in his views—suggesting that the government at least back a bill for Jewish enfranchisement. But Peel declined; and the measure was taken up only when the Whigs came back in the following month. A year later, in 1836, when the Chancellor of the Exchequer Thomas Spring Rice introduced yet another emancipation bill, it too failed to get past the Lords.



6.iii: Anon., The Wise Men of the East and the Marquiss of West, McLean’s Monthly Sheet of Caricatures, No. 55 (1830).

It is hard to believe that the Tories’ opposition to emancipation had no influence on Nathan’s political views. As we shall see, his attitudes to the Reform Bill crisis underwent a sea-change between 1830 and 1832, and it seems likely that this was linked to disappointment with Wellington over emancipation. Certainly, when his sons took up the cudgels in the one major battle their father had failed to win, they did so as avowed Whigs, and even Liberals. Amschel’s garden had been saved in Frankfurt; but the next symbol of the Rothschild role in Jewish emancipation—Lionel’s seat in the House of Commons—would not be secured until twenty-two years after his father’s death. And it would be another three decades more before the Rothschilds and the Tories were reunited.





“The Exceptional Family”

Yet for all their commitment to Judaism and to the interests of their “co-religionists,” there was one important respect in which the Rothschilds sought to distance themselves from the wider Jewish community. By the 1820s they were unquestionably exceptional in financial terms. They were also exceptional in the privileged status they enjoyed relative to other Jews: this was what Heine was specifically alluding to when he used the phrase “exceptional family.” But they were also exceptional in the way they operated as a family.

Most eighteenth- and nineteenth-century family firms had a limited life-span. The idea that successive generations would lose the economic motivation—the “work ethic”—which had driven their fathers and grandfathers was far from being an invention of Thomas Mann, whose Buddenbrooks immortalised the phenomenon. It was all too obvious to Francis Baring. As he wrote ruefully in 1803, conscious already of his progeny’s lack of business acumen, “Families founded on the acquirements of an individual do not last above sixty years one with another . . . [T]he posterity of a Merchant, Banker etc., particularly when they are young, abandon the pursuit of their predecessor as beneath them, or they follow it by agents without interfering themselves, which is only a more rapid road to ruin.” In fact, the Barings survived relatively well as a financial dynasty, relinquishing control over their own bank only in the 1990s. Innumerable other nineteenth-century family businesses had far shorter lives, lasting just one or two generations. The Rothschilds took exceptional precautions to avoid this decadence.