



So far, so conventional. But Anselm’s light-hearted letter also touches on what was perhaps the most remarkable aspect of the Rothschilds’ history as a family. For the principal reason daughters were not regarded as much less desirable than sons was that the family practised a remarkably sustained strategy of endogamy.

Before 1824 Rothschilds had tended to marry members of other, similar Jewish families, often those with whom they did business. That was true of the wives of all but one of Mayer Amschel’s sons—who married, respectively, Eva Hanau, Caroline Stern, Hannah Cohen and Adelheid Herz—as well as of his daughters’ husbands—Messrs Worms, Sichel, Montefiore and the two Beyfuses. This was not unusual by nineteenth-century standards. As we have seen, the Stättigkeit imposed on the Frankfurt Jews had more or less made intermarriage within the small community of the Judengasse compulsory. Even without that compulsion, however, most people—and not only Jews—tended to marry within their own religious community, seeking out an equivalent community (as Nathan did in London) if they happened to leave their home town. After 1824, however, Rothschilds tended to marry Rothschilds. Of twenty-one marriages involving descendants of Mayer Amschel between 1824 and 1877, no fewer than fifteen were between his direct descendants. Although marriage between cousins was far from uncommon in the nineteenth century—especially among German-Jewish business dynasties—this was an extraordinary amount of intermarriage. “These Rothschilds harmonise with one another in the most remarkable fashion,” declared Heine. “Strangely enough, they even choose marriage partners from among themselves and the strands of relationship between them form complicated knots which future historians will find difficult to unravel.” It is only too true; not even the royal families of Europe were as closely inbred, though self-conscious references to “our royal family” suggest that the Rothschilds regarded them as a kind of model. This was one of the other things the Rothschilds had in common with the Saxe-Coburgs.

It began in July 1824 when James married his own niece, his brother Salomon’s daughter Betty. (Because he was so much younger than Salomon, the gap in age was not impossibly large: he was thirty-two, she nineteen.) Two years later Salomon’s son Anselm married Nathan’s eldest daughter Charlotte. There was then a ten-year lull, until the marriage of Nathan’s eldest son Lionel to Carl’s eldest daughter Charlotte—at a decisive turning point in the history of the family, as we shall see. Six years after that, Nat married James’s daughter Charlotte (the limited range of names adds to the genealogical complexity); and Carl’s son Mayer Carl married Nathan’s third daughter Louise. Although their wives did not have the surname “Rothschild,” Nathan’s other sons Anthony and Mayer also married first cousins: Louisa Montefiore (in 1840) and Juliana Cohen (in 1850). (The former was also a descendant of Mayer Amschel as her mother was Nathan’s sister Henrietta; the latter was Hannah’s niece.) And so it went on, into the fourth generation. In 1849 Carl’s third son Wilhelm Carl married Hannah Mathilde, Anselm’s second daughter; a year later his brother Adolph married her sister Caroline Julie. In 1857 James’s son Alphonse married Lionel’s daughter Leonora; in 1862 his brother Salomon James married Adèle, Mayer Carl’s daughter; and in 1877 James’s youngest son Edmond married Adelheid, Wilhelm Carl’s second daughter. Anselm’s sons Ferdinand and Salomon both married fellow Rothschilds: Lionel’s second daughter Evelina (in 1865) and Alphonse’s first daughter Bettina (in 1876). Finally, Lionel’s eldest son Nathaniel—usually known as “Natty”—married Mayer Carl’s daughter Emma Louise (in 1867); and Nat’s son James Edouard married her sister Laura Thérèse (in 1871).