

The necessary first step towards perpetuating the firm was, of course, to produce “posterity”; and, given the terms of Mayer Amschel’s will (as well, needless to say, as the social conventions of the period), that meant sons. While Amschel failed to produce any children whatsoever, his brothers produced heirs aplenty—thirteen in all. Salomon had the first, Anselm, born in 1803; Nathan had four sons, Lionel (b. 1808), Anthony (b. 1810), Nathaniel (b. 1812) and Mayer (b. 1818); Carl also had four, Mayer Carl (b. 1820), Adolph (b. 1823), Wilhelm Carl (b. 1828) and Anselm Alexander (b. 1835); and so did James: Alphonse (b. 1827), Gustave (b. 1829), Salomon (b. 1835) and Edmond (b. 1845).

When this generation duly married, male children continued to be at a premium. Indeed, the pressure to produce sons was if anything rather greater. “What do you think of my new little girl?” Anselm asked Anthony, following the birth of his second daughter Hannah Mathilde in 1832. “A boy would have been more acceptable.” (His wife Charlotte’s first child had been a boy, but he had died in infancy in 1828.) When Lionel too was presented with a daughter, Leonora, one of the senior clerks in Paris wrote to console him: “I actually compliment you that it is a daughter which our dear lady has given you—for you know it is necessary that the first child in our family is of that sex . . . it is a superstition, but that’s the way it is.” “You may have wished for a son,” he added, “but he will come—in two years you will announce him.” But when, at the appointed date, another girl was born, Anthony could not disguise his disappointment: “Congratulations to you & your good lady. In these affairs one must take what one can get.” He too had to rest content with two daughters; his brother Mayer with just one. Carl’s sons Mayer Carl and Wilhelm Carl had no fewer than ten girls between them, but no sons. It was not until 1840 that the third generation produced a boy (Lionel’s son Nathaniel, followed by Alfred two years later); and when news broke that Nat’s wife was pregnant, there was hope of a winning streak. “Nat has determined not to be outdone by the Rest of the family & intends next year to present you to his son & heir—that is the great news of the day,” enthused Anthony. “It is quite [certain] & if he intends keeping par with his eldest brother a pretty lot of little ones will be in the family & the more the happier.” It was another girl, and she died before her first birthday.

It would be wrong to infer from such remarks a crude “sexism,” however. They were more indicative of an anxiety—which lasted for some years—that the third generation would fail to produce male heirs altogether. In the eyes of Nathan’s wife Hannah, as she put it in 1832, it was “of no consequence to our gratification whether a boy or a girl, so [I] have no pity for any who choose to grumble.” Nor was this just the female point of view. Once his wife had produced a son, Anselm lost his preference for male children, as he revealed when she became pregnant again: If Carlo Dolee [apparently a nickname for Nat, whose wife was also pregnant] has fabricated a little girl or boy my offspring will . . . be very acceptable as for a husband or for a wife . . . The Public will not say the Rothschild family has been idle that year. I hope Billy will soon follow the good example, if he goes to [the spa at] Ems, he may be sure of success.