

Why did they do it? Romantic love, the conventional modern rationale for marriage, was plainly a minor consideration in the eyes of the older generation, who drew a distinction between a “marriage of convenience” and a “marriage of affection”—Carl’s typology when scouring Germany for a suitable wife for himself. “I am not in love,” he assured his brothers, when justifying his choice of Adelheid Herz. “On the contrary. If I knew [of] another, I would marry her.” Nor did Amschel marry Eva Hanau for love; according to one contemporary account, he openly acknowledged that “the one creature that I ever really loved I have never been able to call mine”; and his nephew Anselm regarded their golden wedding anniversary as marking “fifty years of matrimonial struggle.” Caroline and Salomon were less ill suited to one another; but we have already seen how little time they spent together in the years 1812-15, when he was constantly on the move as business—or rather as Nathan—dictated. Five years later not much had changed: Caroline (in Frankfurt) was urging Salomon (in Vienna) not to go to St Petersburg merely because “your Nathan wants you to”: That is really incomprehensible; is there anywhere you aren’t expected to go? Please, dear Salomon, do not let yourself be talked into it, [resist it] with all your strength and your considerable intelligence. Moreover, I do not understand your letter very clearly. For there are places in it which seem to suggest that you are going to have to go to Paris or even London. I am usually willing to accept your Nathan’s arguments for the above-mentioned business. But I cannot see the justification for this . . . Your Nathan cannot simply ignore the views of all of you . . . In any event, dear Salomon, you are not going to London without my knowing the reason why. Understood, my dear husband? You are not doing it.9



If there ever had been a romantic relationship between these two, there was not much left of it by the time Salomon finally ended his years of nomadism and settled in Vienna. She never joined him there, and the son of one of Salomon’s senior clerks recalled that by the 1840s he had developed a somewhat reckless enthusiasm for young girls.

To be sure, love could and did develop within such marriages. Nathan’s relationship with Hannah illustrates this well: her letters to her “dear Rothschild” suggest a genuine affinity, albeit one based in large part on a shared enthusiasm for making money.10 But such affinities were supposed to follow rather than precede marriage; they were not elective. As for James, he evidently treated his niece and wife, beautiful and intelligent though she was, primarily as a useful social asset. “To deprive oneself of one’s wife is difficult,” he confided in Nathan after just months of marriage. “I could not deprive myself of mine. She is an essential piece of furniture.” The James fictionalised as Nucingen by Balzac was respectful of his wife—indeed, treated her as an equal—but went to a succession of mistresses to satisfy his sexual needs and fell in love only once: with a courtesan.