

In his novel Tancred, Disraeli—who, as we shall see, came to know Nathan’s son Lionel well in the 1830s—drew on similar recollections when describing his hero’s attempt to gain an audience with the elder Sidonia, a character at least partly based on Nathan: At this moment there entered the room, from the glass door, the same young man who had ushered Tancred into the apartment. He brought a letter to Sidonia. Lord Montacute felt confused; his shyness returned to him . . . He rose, and began to say good morning when Sidonia, without taking his eyes off the letter, saw him, and waving his hand, stopped him, saying, “I settled with Lord Eskdale that you were not to go away if anything occurred which required my momentary attention.” . . .

“Write,” continued Sidonia to the clerk, “that my letters are twelve hours later than the despatches, and that the City continued quite tranquil. Let the extract from the Berlin letter be left at the same time at the Treasury. The last bulletin?”

“Consols dropping at half-past two; all the foreign funds lower; shares very active.”

They were once more alone.





Such bruising encounters in the office were later distilled into the famous “two chairs” joke, probably the most frequently reprinted Rothschild joke, which must surely have been inspired by Nathan. An eminent visitor is shown into Rothschild’s office; without looking up from his desk, Rothschild casually invites him to “take a chair.” “Do you realise whom you are addressing?” exclaims the affronted dignitary. Rothschild still does not look up: “So take two chairs.” (One of many variants has the visitor indignantly announcing himself as the Prince of Thurn und Taxis; Rothschild implicitly offers each a chair.)

Nor was it only on his own territory—his office—that Nathan was famed for his blithe disregard for social rank. Even to the dining rooms of polite society he brought the abrasive manners and harsh, puncturing humour of the Frankfurt Judengasse. When Prince Pückler was invited to dine with Nathan he was “diverted” to “hear him explain to us the pictures around the dining room, (all portraits of the sovereigns of Europe, presented through all their ministers) and talk of the originals as his very good friends, and, in a certain sense, his equals”: “Yes,” said he, “the ____ once pressed me for a loan, and in the same week in which I received his autograph letter, his father wrote to me also with his own hand from Rome to beg me for Heaven’s sake not to have any concern in it, for that I could not have to do with a more dishonest man than his son. ‘C’était sans doute très Catholique’; probably, however, the letter was written by the old ____ who hated her own son to such a degree that she used to say of him,—everybody knows how unjustly,—‘He has the heart of a t_____ with the face of an a____ .’ ”



After a dinner at which Nathan had brutally deflated a fellow guest, the German ambassador Wilhelm von Humboldt wrote to his wife: Yesterday Rothschild dined with me. He is quite crude and uneducated, but he has a great deal of intelligence and a positive genius for money. He scored off Major Martins beautifully once or twice. M. was dining with me too and kept on praising everything French. He was being fatu- ously sentimental about the horrors of war and the large numbers who had been killed. “Well,” said R., “if they had not all died, Major, you would probably still be a drummer.” You ought to have seen Martins” face.