

The obvious is perhaps worth stating here: if the Rothschild brothers really had been philistines, they would not have educated their children as well as they did. Of course, Nathan wanted his sons “to give mind, and soul, and heart, and body, and everything to business”; at the time he made that much misunderstood remark, all but one of them had completed their educations and had been working for the firm for several years. And he and his brothers recognised that there might be a conflict between higher education and a successful business apprenticeship. As Carl put it when Salomon was pondering the fifteen-year-old Anselm’s future: “I advise you not to let him study . . . more than another two years so that he should enter the business when 17 years old. Otherwise he would not be deeply attached to business.” The subsequent business career of Mayer, the only one of Nathan’s sons to attend an English university, proved that analysis to be only too accurate. But none of the brothers for a moment doubted that a successful business career was compatible with the best possible secondary education. Indeed, they viewed the latter as an essential preparation for the former. Moreover, the male Rothschilds of the third generation were in practice given even longer than Carl suggested before being expected to abandon their studies and enter the “counting house.” Judging by the first appearance of his name in the business correspondence, Anselm was twenty-three before he took a serious part in the running of the firm (though he was admitted a partner a year earlier, and presumably did routine work for his father which has gone unrecorded). Lionel was twenty when he first began to write and receive business letters; Anthony and Nat were eighteen, and Mayer twenty-one. None of Carl’s sons feature in the firm’s deliberations before the age of twenty; indeed, the pious Wilhelm Carl was not really regarded as competent to act unsupervised until he was twenty-four. Both James’s sons, Alphonse and Gustave, were nineteen before they began to write their own business letters. Given their parents’ view that the best apprenticeship was learning by doing, there is little reason to think that any of the third generation had worked for long before these first recorded appearances.

In any case, the older Rothschilds had no desire to impose on their offspring the deprivations and rigours of their own childhoods. Anselm’s mother took pride in her eleven-year-old son’s precocious letter-writing not just because it would stand him in good stead in business; she genuinely wanted him and his sister to have “a fine education” for its own sake. The influence on her of contemporary notions of Bildung is apparent in a letter she wrote to her husband in 1820 (which accompanied another letter from their now teenage son): “He is so uninhibited towards me, the good, sweet boy, which pleases me particularly, for you know, dear husband, that it has always been my aim that our dear children should not conceal from us their true, innermost feelings; and I—or rather we—have achieved it.” Nathan indulged his children in less sentimental ways. After work, he played with them, letting them (as a friend recalled) “make their equestrian exercises on your back’; indeed, on one occasion he horsed around so energetically that he managed to dislocate his shoulder. He bought them a miniature carriage with four white goats to drive about the garden at Stamford Hill. The family painted by William Armfield Hobday in 1821 was—as it looks today—a happy one: to the left, the three-year-old Mayer tries to pull a letter from his father’s hand; at Charlotte’s feet, Hannah Mayer has dropped her bonnet; and the older boys vainly attempt to restrain the family dog as it chews Lionel’s hat. Small wonder the faintest hint of a smile plays on the lips of the relaxed paterfamilias as he reclines, legs crossed, in his armchair.7 And he continued to indulge them—even to spoil them—as they grew up. At the age of seventeen, Hannah Mayer was enjoying life in Brighton, sitting for her first portrait. When Thomas Fowell Buxton met Anthony the following year, he was already “a mighty hunter; and his father lets him buy any horses he likes. He lately applied to the emperor of Morocco for a first-rate Arab horse. The emperor sent him a magnificent one, but he died as he landed in England. The poor youth said very feelingly, ‘that was the greatest misfortune he ever had suffered.’ ”