



However, the Rothschild “system” is also potentially revolutionary in itself: [I]t possesses the moral force or power which religion has lost, it can act as a surrogate for religion—indeed, it is a new religion, and when the old religion finally goes under it will provide substitutes for its practical blessings. Strangely enough, it is once again the Jews who invented this new religion . . . Murdered Judaea was as cunning as the dying Nessus, and its poisoned robe—poisoned with its own blood—consumed the strength of the Roman Hercules so effectively that his mighty limbs grew weary, armour and helmet fell away from his withered body, and his voice, once so mighty in battle, dwindled to a prayerful whine. Miserably, in a death-agony that dragged on through a thousand years, Rome dies by the Judaic poison.



Of course, this extraordinary passage says a good deal about Heine’s own highly ambivalent attitude towards Judaism (like Börne, he had converted to Christianity); but it also anticipates his later and more coherent reflections in his “Memorandum on Ludwig Börne” (1840) on the Rothschilds as revolutionaries rather than counter-revolutionaries.

Here, in perhaps the most perceptive of any contemporary commentary, Heine confronts the reader with a striking paradox: No one does more to further the revolution than the Rothschilds themselves . . . and, though it may sound even more strange, these Rothschilds, the bankers of kings, these princely pursestring-holders, whose existence might be placed in the gravest danger by a collapse of the European state system, nevertheless carry in their minds a consciousness of their revolutionary mission.



James, he suggests, is the “Nero of finance,” “reigning as absolute emperor over the stock exchanges of the world”; but, like his predecessor, the Roman Nero, he is “ultimately a powerful destroyer of patrician privilege, and the founder of a new democracy.”

The explanation which follows purports to be based on a genuine conversation Heine had with James—while “sauntering arm in arm through the streets of Paris”—and though it is possible that Heine was putting his own words in someone else’s mouth, it is sufficiently different from his earlier flights of fancy to be worth taking seriously. According to Heine, James explained how “he himself, through his system of government bonds, had created the first conditions for, and at the same time paved the way towards, social progress” and the “foundation of a new order of things.” For it was the development of mobile property in the form of the rente and other government bonds which severed the link between wealth and land, allowing the propertied classes to converge on Paris. “The importance has long been recognised of such a [common] residence for the most diverse of forces, of such a centralisation of intelligentsia and social authorities. For, without Paris, France would never have had its revolution . . . Through the system of rentes, Paris became Paris much more rapidly.” This prompts Heine to go further: I see in Rothschild one of the greatest revolutionaries who have founded modern democracy. Richelieu, Robespierre and Rothschild are for me three terroristic names, and they signify the gradual annihilation of the old aristocracy. Richelieu, Robespierre and Rothschild are Europe’s three most fearful levellers. Richelieu destroyed the sovereignty of the feudal nobility, and subjected it to that royal despotism, which either relegated it to court service, or let it rot in bumpkin-like inactivity in the provinces. Robespierre decapitated this subjugated and idle nobility. But the land remained, and its new master, the new landowner, quickly became another aristocrat just like his predecessor, whose pretensions he continued under another name. Then came Rothschild and destroyed the predominance of land, by raising the system of state bonds to supreme power, thereby mobilising property and income and at the same time endowing money with the previous privileges of the land. He thereby created a new aristocracy, it is true, but this, resting as it does on the most unreliable of elements, on money, can never play as enduringly regressive a role as the former aristocracy, which was rooted in the land, in the earth itself. For money is more fluid than water, more elusive than the air, and one can gladly forgive the impertinences of the new nobility in consideration of its ephemerality. In the twinkling of an eye, it will dissolve and evaporate.