

In Coningsby, Disraeli portrayed the younger Sidonia as a model of modern education: Shut out from universities and schools, those universities and schools which were indebted for their first knowledge of ancient philosophy to the learning and enterprise of his ancestors, the young Sidonia was fortunate in his tutor . . . [He] penetrated the highest mysteries of mathematics with a facility almost instinctive . . . The circumstances of his position, too, had early contributed to give him an unusual command over the modern languages . . . When he was nineteen, Sidonia . . . possessed a complete mastery over the principal European languages . . . At seventeen he . . . commenced his travels. He resided . . . some time in Germany, and then, having visited Italy, settled at Naples . . .



This was not far removed from the kind of education Lionel and his brothers and cousins actually received. One of the Montefiores recalled how in 1815 Lionel and Anthony had been taken away from their first teacher, “a Pole [who] used to wear a tall Polish hat and stride about the schoolroom with a cane ferociously stuck in his Wellington boots.” Instead, their parents and some friends “got Garcia, who was previously a book-keeper at Barrow and Lousada’s counting house, to establish a more select academy at Peckham, and there Lionel and Anthony . . . were sent.” The favoured curriculum was indeed modern, rather than classical, and that slant continued when the time came for a kind of modified grand tour in 1827. Aged respectively nineteen and seventeen, the two boys were despatched to see the sights of Germany—not Italy, the classicist’s favoured destination—travelling with their tutor John Darby from Frankfurt through the principal towns of Saxony, then on to Prague and Vienna, returning via Baden and Strasbourg. (Prussia was conspicuously omitted, though they do seem to have gone to Hanover in order to visit the university at Göttingen.) The aim was obviously to acquire a grounding in German Kultur: besides trailing round countless art galleries and princely piles, the brothers paid a respectful call on the aged Goethe.

It was only after this tour that Lionel and Anthony were expected to turn their minds to business: in January 1829 one of the bookkeepers in the Frankfurt office was entrusted with the task of raising Anthony’s numeracy to the level required of a banker. “I ceaselessly instruct him in all the arithmetical problems,” the new tutor reported to Nathan, “and I am glad to perceive that he has the intellectual grasp and makes good use of what I have to teach him. In due course I shall give to the young Baron systematically the knowledge of the art of arithmetic and I shall continue to explain to him arbitration of exchange and all of the business circulation of the counting house.”

Visits like the one made by Nathan’s sons to Frankfurt evidently encouraged a degree of Anglo-German parental rivalry. In 1831 Charlotte wrote to her mother Hannah urging her to “make [Mayer] write a letter in German if he can, if not, in his best writing in English to Mrs S[alomon] de R[othschild]. Uncle Charles’s boys [Mayer Carl and Wilhelm Carl] both write very well and it is sure to be compared.” Four years later it was the English Mayer’s turn to visit Germany; but this was a more academic trip than his elder brothers had made. With his tutor Dr Schlemmer he spent several months studying at the University of Leipzig before going on to Heidelberg. In this he was following in the footsteps of Anselm, the first Rothschild to attend university, who had acquired “a lively interest in science” while studying at Berlin. He then returned to England, where he became the first of many Rothschilds to study at Cambridge, first at Magdalene and then, when the college proved punctilious about his attendance at chapel (still formally a requirement for undergraduates), to larger and laxer Trinity. (Oxford was ruled out because matriculation was conditional on subscription to the thirty-nine articles; whereas in Cambridge non-conformists and Jews could become members of the university, though they could not be awarded degrees, scholarships or fellowships.)8