



The new French King Louis Philippe would, suggested Börne sarcastically in his bulletin of January 1832, have himself crowned if he is still king in a year’s time; not at St Rémy at Rheims, but at Notre Dame de la Bourse at Paris, and Rothschild will officiate as archbishop. After the coronation, pigeons will be sent out, as usual, and one of them . . . will fly to St Helena, settle on Napoleon’s grave, and laughingly inform his remains that they saw his successor anointed yesterday, not by the Pope but by a Jew; and that the present ruler of France has taken the title, “Emperor of the five per cents, King of the three per cents, Protector of bankers and exchange agents.”



In both letters, to be sure, Börne continued to harp on the familiar theme that the Rothschilds were the supporters of reaction: It is always the same game that these Rothschilds play, in order to enrich themselves at the cost of the land they exploit . . . The financiers are the nation’s worst enemies. They have done more than any to undermine the foundations of freedom, and it is unquestionable that most of the peoples of Europe would by this time be in full possession of liberty if such men as Rothschild . . . did not lend the autocrats the support of their capital.



But it was rather harder to make this argument stick when the Rothschilds had so quickly lent their support to Louis Philippe’s regime, which was plainly the product of a liberal revolution, even if it was not liberal enough for Börne. Moreover, the Rothschilds were also, as Börne said, lending money to establish Greece as an independent monarchy, which had been another liberal goal of the 1820s. Indeed, they even appeared to be in a position to influence the decision as to which prince would become the new Greek king. (“M. de Rothschild finds that all the princes of Europe are in his credit book except Prince Frederick of the Netherlands, and he concludes that the prince who has never asked him for credit is the most worthy of it.”) It therefore made more sense to argue that the Rothschilds were beginning to supplant rather than merely shore up the European monarchies: Would it not be a good thing for the world if the crowns were placed on their [the Rothschilds’] heads instead of lying at their feet as they do now? . . . Although the Rothschilds do not yet occupy thrones, they are at all events asked their advice as to the choice of a ruler when a throne falls vacant . . . Would it not be a great blessing for the world if all the kings were dismissed and the Rothschild family put on their thrones? Think of the advantages. The new dynasty would never contract a loan, as it would know better than anybody how dear such things are, and on this account alone the burden on their subjects would be alleviated by several millions a year.



Born Löw Baruch in the Frankfurt Judengasse, a convert not only to Christianity but to German nationalism, Börne had his own complex personal reasons for disliking the Rothschilds. For a rather more nuanced assessment of Rothschild power in the age of revolution, we need to turn to Börne’s friend, the poet and journalist Heinrich Heine. Before 1830 Heine thought of the Rothschilds in much the same way as other liberally inclined writers. In his “Travel Sketches,” for example, “Rothschild I” appears alongside Wellington, Metternich and the Pope as a bulwark of reaction. Even at this stage, however, Heine had an awareness of the ambivalent nature of the relationship between the Rothschilds and the established monarchies. In “The Baths of Lucca,” the Jewish Figaro-figure Hirsch-Hyacinth recalls cutting Nathan Rothschild’s corns: This happened in his inner sanctum while he sat on his green armchair as though it were a throne. He spoke like a king, with courtiers all around him; he ordered them about and sent messages to all the kings of the world; and while I was cutting his corns, I thought to myself: what you now have in your hand is the foot of the man whose own hands hold the whole world. Now you are somebody too: if you cut too deep down below he’ll lose his temper up above and he’ll cut the kings more sharply. That was the greatest moment of my life.