

But, while James’s reservations faded quickly, in Nathan’s case disdain for aristocratic trappings persisted, and perhaps ran deeper. When Prince Pückler visited the English Rothschilds in 1827, he was treated to a bizarre after-dinner performance, as an evidently tipsy Nathan donned “his new Austrian consular uniform, which, as he said, his friend M[etternich] had send him from Vienna”: [He] showed it to us, and even suffered himself to be persuaded to try it on before the looking glass, and to walk about in it. And, as virtuosi when they have once begun never know when to stop, he now sent for other magnificent Court dresses, and changed his toilette several times, as if he had been on the stage . . .

It was . . . rather droll to see how this otherwise serious tradesman like man tried to assume the various bendings and bowings, and the light and gracious air, of a courtier, and, not in the least disconcerted by our laughing, assured us, with as much confidence as joviality that N.M.R., if he liked, could act any part; and, with the help of five or six glasses of wine extra, could make as good a figure at Court as the best of them.





As Pückler’s evidently somewhat mixed feelings suggest, this was surely a characteristic bid by Nathan to épater l’aristocratie. He might be willing on occasion to exchange his sober surtout for the gaudy apparel of the old order; but he regarded it as little more than fancy dress. In its way, this vivid scene—of a tipsy Jewish banker making fun of the Habsburg Empire’s diplomatic finery in front of an impecunious prince—encapsulates the deep ambivalence of the Rothschilds’ relationship with the Restoration social order.





“Fine Education”

Despite their reputation as philistines, the younger Rothschild brothers took at least some interest in what we would now call “high culture”—something of a misnomer given the rapid development of a “public sphere” in this period as a more or less free market for the production and consumption of music, drama, books and paintings. This interest was partly a logical consequence of entertaining in the ways described above: it was, at the very least, difficult to own a large house without acquiring pictures and other ornaments to decorate its rooms. At the same time, in order to be able to communicate with members of the social elite about matters other than money and politics, a basic knowledge of their favourite painters, composers and authors was a prerequisite. Yet busy middle-aged bankers (all the brothers save James were over forty in 1820) generally make poor students of the arts. True, they had all inherited from their father an appreciation of antique objets d’art, and were discerning about the gifts they sent their favourite politicians. They commissioned portraits of themselves, their wives and children from respectable artists like Sir William Beechey, Louis Amié Grosclaude and Moritz Daniel Oppenheim;6 and in both Frankfurt and Paris they had regular boxes reserved at the theatre. But James was the only member of the second generation to show any serious interest in culture on his own account. He read Schiller and Goethe when he was in his twenties, for example, and in the 1820s retained an artist named Allard on 5 francs a month, as well as subscribing to the Courrier des Spectacles and Journal des Théâtres. His brothers tended to take the view that this sort of thing was better made available to their children.