





EIGHT

Sudden Revolutions (1830-1833)


In the present state of Europe something great & decisive must be done or its kingdoms and their population will be soon again in worse confusion than they were under the French Revolution and the influence of Napoleon. The march of mind is too rapid to permit the old arrangements of society to continue long as they are. The modern extraordinary advance in the arts and sciences, will ’ere long, if I am not greatly deceived, change the whole organisation of the social systems over the world greatly to the benefit of all; but it may very suddenly render all anticipated wealth, as money is, of very little use. It may be well therefore, without losing the advantages which money gives under the existing arrangements of society, to secure also similar benefits in case of sudden revolutions in all the states of Europe which may now any day take place.

—ROBERT OWEN TO HANNAH ROTHSCHILD, JULY 1828.1





In July 1830 the French King Charles X was overthrown by a combination of parliamentary opposition and popular violence in Paris. In something like a political chain-reaction, comparable changes of regime occurred or were attempted (with varying degrees of violence) in Brussels, Warsaw, Modena and Bologna, as well as in a number of German states, notably Brunswick, Hesse-Kassel and Saxony, and in Portugal. In Belgium, Italy and Poland, the revolutionaries were as much concerned to free themselves from foreign rule as to achieve constitutional reforms. Elsewhere, constitutional reforms were enacted without the deposition of a monarch. This was the case not only in England, Scotland and Ireland—sometimes neglected in accounts of the 1830 revolution—but also in Hanover, where the change of monarch was the result of George IV’s not untimely death in June 1830. In Baden, Württemberg and Bavaria, rulers felt constrained to make concessions to liberals. Nor did political instability end in 1832, by which time the revolts in Poland and Italy had been crushed and Holland had been obliged to accept the secession of Belgium. Uncertainty about the stability of new political arrangements persisted throughout Europe until the middle of the decade and beyond.

The fact that the Rothschilds were able to survive these political upheavals led many observers to conclude that, as Byron and others had earlier suspected, their power was actually as great as, if not greater than, that of the kings to whom they lent money. In November 1931, in his tenth bulletin from Paris, Ludwig Börne explicitly “equated Rothschild . . . with kings”: [T]hat should certainly not annoy him, even if he should not wish to belong in their ranks, because he should know best how far below par a king stands in Paris today. But he is the great dealer in all state bonds, who gives monarchs the power to spite freedom and deprives peoples of the courage to resist violence. Rothschild is the high priest of fear, the Goddess on whose altar liberty, patriotism, honour and all civic virtues are sacrificed. Rothschild should sell off all his paper in one hour on the stock exchange, so that they crash into the deepest abyss; then he should rush into my arms and feel how strongly I press him to my heart.