



Heine returned again and again during the 1840s to the subject of Rothschild power. In the journal of 1840-41 later published as Lutezia, for example, he caricatured the relationship between James’s state of health or mood and the price of rentes, and coined the famous pun: “[M]oney is the god of our time and Rothschild is his prophet.” The Rothschilds also crop up in the poems “Romanzero,” “Germany” and “Simplicissimus.”2 But he never wrote with such penetrating insight as he did in “Ludwig Börne”—partly because his personal and financial relations with the family grew somewhat closer after 1840. As we shall see, Heine was singularly perceptive in identifying the Rothschilds as agents as much of social revolution as of reaction, even if their revolutionary role was less conscious than he suggested. Nor was he alone in making this point, though no one expressed it better. A lesser writer declared that “the Rothschild brothers [had] become the hierophants of the new religion,” the founders of a new “Moneycracy.” Brooding in Venice after the fall of the Bourbon regime, the arch-conservative Chateaubriand remarked bleakly that “the Kings [had] become the chamberlains of Salomon, Baron de Rothschild.”





The Revolution and the Rente

It is always easy, with the benefit of hindsight, to find fault with historical figures who fail to foresee revolutions. But revolutions are not necessarily the products of predictable forces (as the case of Eastern Europe in 1989 well illustrates), much as historians may like to discover these after the fact. The accession of Charles X in 1824 and the fall of Villèle three years later following the conversion fiasco should not be seen as harbingers of crisis in France. For the government of the vicomte de Martignac formed in January 1828 seemed to be successfully steering a course between the liberal forces represented in the Chamber of Deputies and the conservative, clerical tendencies of the court. When Nathan’s daughter Charlotte was in Paris in 1829 she found James giving “a dinner party for the liberals & the Ministers, [as] it is best to keep friends with all parties.” Although the April parliamentary session was every bit as “stormy” as Charlotte had been warned to expect, James remained optimistic. There were periods of stagnation on the bourse and occasional reports of bread riots in the wake of poor harvests, but the vital barometer of financial confidence, the rente, suggested that the regime was in good health. In May 1829, the price of 3 per cent rentes stood at 76.6; a year later it was above 84, having reached a peak of 86 in December. Even the dismissal of Martignac and the appointment of the ultra-conservative Jules de Polignac in his place on August 9, 1829, did not obviously herald a crisis. Rentes actually rose when the new ministry was announced, and continued to rise with only minor dips until May 1830.

Under these circumstances, it was hardly rash of James to outbid the intense competition for a relatively modest government loan in early 1830, needed to finance a popularity-boosting military adventure in Algeria. As he saw it, there was a contradiction between the anti-government rhetoric of the Parisian press and the reality of financial stability: “On the one hand the whole world is screaming that the Ministry is bringing about a revolution in France and on the other hand all the various consortiums are seen to be fighting among themselves to lay their hands on a lousy 4 million rentes.” The government might well face “some very stormy times” when the Chamber met in March; but the bourse remained “very good.” As a banker, James naturally put his money on the market’s view. By the time fear of a major constitutional crisis began to manifest itself at the bourse, he was committed to the new loan—and hence to the regime.