



For Heine, Nathan already has the power to “cut” the kings to whom he lends. Yet his Rothschilds have not lost sight of their own lowly and Jewish origins. Nathan’s bank in London is a glorified “pawnshop” and when Hirsch-Hyacinth is introduced to Salomon as a former seller of lottery tickets, he invites him to dine with him, saying: “I am something like that myself, I am the chief agent of the Rothschild lottery.” “He treated me,” says Hirsch-Hyacinth, “like his equal, quite famillionaire” (ganz famillionär). That much analysed pun hints at an idea to which Heine later returned: that, despite their enormous wealth, the Rothschilds were far from being mere props of the traditional social hierarchy.

The same point underlies the memorable allegory in which Hirsch-Hyacinth describes a children’s fancy-dress ball given by Salomon: The children wore lovely fancy dress, and they played at making loans. They were dressed up like kings, with crowns on their heads, but there was one of the bigger lads who was dressed exactly like old Nathan Rothschild. He played his part very well, kept both hands in his trouser-pockets, rattled his money and shook with bad temper when one of the little kings wanted to borrow off him—only a little lad with the white coat and red trousers [Austria] got a kindly pat on the cheek and was praised: “You’re my boy, my pet, I’m proud of you; but your cousin Michel [probably Germany] had better keep away from me, I’ll give nothing to a fool like that who expends more in a day than he has coming in a year; he’ll make some trouble yet in the world and spoil my business.” As true as the Lord shall help me, the boy played his part wonderfully well, especially when he helped a fat child dressed in white satin with real silver lilies [France] in its effort to walk and said to it occasionally: “Now, you, behave yourself, make an honest living, and see that they don’t chase you out again, or I’ll lose my money.” I assure you, Herr Doktor, it was a pleasure to listen to that lad; and the other children too—dear sweet children they all were—played their parts extremely well—until the cake was brought in and they all started fighting for the best piece [and] tore the crowns off one another’s heads . . .”



Once again, Heine’s Nathan feels contempt for the various rulers who approach him for loans: it is he who is their master. In an unpublished passage, Heine made it clear that he shared that contempt for “stupid princes,” “but before Nathan Rothschild I tremble with fear. Before you can say Jack Robinson, he could send a few kings, stockbrokers, and policemen to my rooms and have me carried to the fortress prison.”

In an unpublished passage of “The Baths of Lucca,” Heine sought to analyse the nature of the Rothschilds’ power more precisely. Here he acknowledges that in the short term it served to shore up the reactionary regimes: When I think about political economy in these our latter days it becomes ever clearer to me that without the Rothschilds’ help the financial embarrassment of most states would have been exploited by subversives wanting to mislead the populace into upsetting whatever order or disorder constituted the status quo. Revolutions are generally triggered off by deficiency of money; by preventing such deficiencies, the Rothschild system may serve to preserve peace in Europe. This system, or rather, Nathan Rothschild, its inventor, is still providing firm foundations for such peace: it does not inhibit one state from making war on another exactly as before, but it does make it difficult for the people to overthrow established authority . . . Religion is no longer able to guarantee the governments that the people will remain peaceful; the Rothschild system of loans can perform the task much better.