

8.ii: The price of 3 per cent and 4 per cent rentes, May 1830-May 1831.



He, Lionel and even Hannah—who was in Paris for her daughter’s accouche ment—watched hypnotised by the hourly fluctuations of the market, waiting in vain for the crisis to “blow over.”6 Indeed, James began to buy new rentes in the hope of stabilising the market: by November 1830 his total holding may have amounted to as much as 30 million francs (nominal). But still the prices fell. “We have,” he lamented, “too many rentes hanging round our neck and are unable to compete with the speculators on the same level.” Five months later Lionel confessed to his father: “We have been all the time so misled by the abundancy of money and scarcity of stock, & by the peaceable assurances of the King, that we never could make up our minds to sell.” Writing from Berlin, Anselm urged a final liquidation before rentes sank any further. After much prevarication—“I cannot decide to accept a loss of 40 per cent”—James was ultimately forced to sell heavily at the bottom of the market in March 1831. “Unfortunately,” he told Nathan, echoing Apponyi, “my fortune has melted away because I have been realising [that is, selling].” He had “so depleted” his capital “that I do not wish to look at the balance.”

Moreover, the French crash affected other bonds. A German cartoon of 1830 or 1831 shows four of the Rothschilds (“the Krähwinkler,” after the imaginary German town of Krähwinkel) vainly struggling to keep some falling bonds in the air with the aid of bellows (see illustration 8.iii). It is impossible to quantify exactly the extent of the losses suffered by the Paris house at this time, as the relevant accounts have not survived; but for the London house total losses in 1830 were more than £56,000, 5 per cent of the house’s capital, and it seems safe to assume that the damage was worse across the Channel. Comparable losses bankrupted Laffitte, whose firm collapsed even as he reached the zenith of his political influence.



8.iii: Anon., Die Krähwinkler suchen die Papiere in die Höhe zu treiben (1830-31).

As it was, James had to endure a measure of embarrassment. In November 1830 he was forced to suspend payments due to the government for the pre-Revolution loan. Nor could he deny that “that damned Ouvrard” had supplanted him as the dominant figure on the bourse: “For the past six months, the man has had a lot of good fortune and so the whole world follows whatever he does . . . Whatever move he makes the whole stock exchange will follow suit.” When James sought to participate in a new government loan in March 1831, another old rival was brutally frank. “For several months now,” Hottinguer told him, “your establishment no longer makes the same positive impression [as in the past] on public opinion.”7 James felt obliged to speak to the other bankers “in a stiff tone and to ‘show them my teeth’ as they must appreciate that we are not to be treated off-handedly.” But it was some time before he was able to restore his credibility in the French financial world. Indeed, Lionel began to detect in his uncle something close to a loss of nerve. “Uncle James is so much shaken by this revolution,” he confided in his father, “that I assure you he is no more what he was, if he sees things looking well, he says, we must go to the old prices, and if the contrary is the case and the r[ente]s fall, then he gets immediately frightened and sells at the lowest price.”