

The crisis of 1830 provides a classic illustration of the difficulty bankers (and investors) always have when trying to choose between selling a falling security at a loss or holding on to it in the hope of a rise—but at the risk of a further fall. Contrary to Corti’s suggestion that he was blind to the impending crisis, James had been given a clear warning as early as February, when the Finance Minister outlined to him yet another conversion scheme. When James expressed doubts as to whether the government would command the necessary parliamentary majority to enact such a measure, he was left in no doubt what would happen: “If . . . the Chamber should be totally opposed to the Government then they are determined to dissolve the Chamber and to pass a law calling for fresh elections and thus engineer the formation of a new Chamber.” But James hesitated: You know very well, my dear Nathan, what chambers and ministers are like. Whether the King will have the necessary courage to follow the above plan when the time comes to do so, and whether the Chamber will allow this to happen, I don’t know. It is a diabolical situation . . . and if I can manage to extricate myself I would dearly like to do so, for I am not at all enamoured of this situation where a Minister pits himself against the public.3



Instead of trying to “extricate” himself, he therefore opted to sit tight—and was encouraged to do so by Nathan, who advised him only to sell “at a profit” (that is, to hang on in the hope of better prices). Partly, James made the mistake of trusting too much in the assurances of Polignac, who seemed to have “the courage of the devil” when he saw him in February. “There is only one thing that can be done over here,” he told Nathan shortly before the Chamber convened at the beginning of March, “and that is to remain quiet for the time being and to observe things from the sidelines because the devil is not as black as he appears to be.” On this basis, Nathan blithely assured Charles Greville that “Polignac’s Government will stand by the King’s support and Polignac’s own courage.”4 The problem was that he and his brother now held a substantial amount of 4 per cent rentes—to a nominal value of around 25 million francs (£1 million)—which they had intended gradually to sell on to brokers and investors at a profit. If they began to accelerate their sales at a time when the 4 per cents already were worth slightly less than they had paid for them, prices would very probably fall further. It is no wonder James called Polignac a devil: he had made an authentically Faustian pact with him.

This became painfully obvious when the parliamentary session began. James saw at once “that the King will have to choose between the Chambers and the Ministry.” But, he reasoned, “I don’t want to do anything, because as long as I remain firm, the people will not have the courage to set about depressing the rentes and I will thus ride out the storm.” By 221 votes to 181, the deputies passed an address to the King stating that “concord between the political views of your government and the wishes of your people . . . does not exist today,” whereupon (as James had been warned to expect) the King dissolved the Chamber and called for new elections. Far from selling rentes, however, James found himself having to buy them to shore up the market—and his friend the “devil”: Well, Polignac promised me that he will not instigate a coup d’état, that is, he will not make any move that is illegal and that he will remain faithful with his Ministers, so I went ahead and bought 100,000 francs of rentes [3.3 million nominal] because I had told him, “If you remain within the law then I promise you that there will be a rise,” and I kept my word for the [3 per cent] rentes now stand at 82.40 when they had opened at 81.40 . . . Well, while we don’t have any Chambers the Ministry may well get some new Ministers and matters will then be sorted out. If we manage to gain three months then everything will be resolved.