

Of course, this would not have been the case if the revolutionary wave of 1830-32 had affected the other Rothschild houses as directly as it affected the French house. It is important to note that it could have. There were widespread fears in 1830 that Naples would succumb once again to revolution as well as the Papal states, and the German reverberations might have been felt more strongly than they were in Vienna. As it was, Salomon confided in Gentz in November 1830 that he was “10 million [gulden] poorer than he had been six months before.” In Frankfurt too there were grounds for anxiety, not least because of events in neighbouring Hesse-Kassel. The Elector William II (who had succeeded his father in 1821) was one of those rulers who came unstuck in 1830, when citizens’ assemblies in Kassel, Hanau and Fulda demanded the summoning of a parliament (Landtag). Initially, the main bone of contention was William’s overt cohabitation with his mistress; but the looting of customs houses on the state border suggests that economic grievances also played a part. Since 1823 the Elector had not had recourse to the Rothschilds for financial assistance. But in the crisis of 1830 his officials appealed to Amschel for a small advance of 150,000 gulden. As his chief minister put it: “Your most humble servants are not in a position to propose a way of obtaining the advance which is most urgently needed other than through the house of Rothschild.” They were not the only ones: requests were also received from hard-pressed governments in Hanover, Württemberg and Oldenburg. Given the growing risk of German revolutions on the French model, however, Amschel was prepared to lend the Elector only 100,000 gulden.

Yet when the Elector’s son Frederick William was installed as co-regent and accepted a constitution which was the most liberal yet seen in Germany, Amschel’s attitude changed. In 1831 he arranged two loans to the new regime totalling 1.35 million gulden. In many ways, this was analogous to James’s defection from Charles X to Louis Philippe in Paris. And, as in France, it did not take long for the more advanced liberals to become dissillusioned with the new ruler. Amschel nevertheless stuck to the new ruler even as his popularity declined, just as James stuck to Louis Philippe. He continued to act as banker to Frederick William and his unpopular wife9 even after the Hessian government resumed a course (under the firmly anti-liberal Ludwig Hassenpflug) which led inevitably to a messy constitutional crisis. In short, Amschel blew with the wind. He and his brothers evidently had little respect for the various German princes endeavouring to retain their traditional authority. Salomon advised him “not to pay attention to the declamations and discussions” of the King of Württemberg “as I know this prince better than you: his views are always wrong and his opinions are always changing, and whether he is courageous or cowardly makes no odds, [as] I have more confidence in the opinion of a child than in that of this prince.” But once Metternich’s influence began to make itself felt in Germany after the revolutionary high-water mark of the Ham bach festival, the Frankfurt house wept no tears. Even this very modest German revolution had cost Amschel money, as Anthony found when he visited Frankfurt. The failure of the putsch in Frankfurt attempted by a small and incompetent group of radicals in April 1833 was a welcome sign that the political tide was ebbing.