

Nathan in London also experienced his share of political turbulence. Of course, events in Britain were less violent than those on the continent. It would nevertheless be a mistake to overlook the close parallels between British reform on the one hand and French revolution on the other, not least because contemporaries were so conscious of these, and had no way of being sure that the former would avert the latter. The issues at stake were not so different: the freedom of the press; the reduction of religious disabilities in political life (which had already caused a serious political crisis in 1829); the extension of the electoral franchise; the constitutional position of the crown relative to ministers and that of the upper house of parliament relative to the lower. The cholera came to London too.10 More importantly, the financial consequences of political crisis were very similar, if less dramatic in London. Had the Reform crisis in Britain been even slightly more serious, then James might have found his brother much less free to lend assistance.

From the vantage point of Paris, it seemed at first unlikely that the Whig ministry of Earl Grey would survive. Indeed, as late as March 5, 1831—four days after Lord John Russell introduced the Reform Bill—James wrote to Salomon assuring him that “Peel, Palmerston and Wellington are coming to power.” But this was wishful thinking on the part of his old Tory friends (Herries was his source for this tip). For his part, James was more inclined to think that an English revolution was in preparation, similar to the one he himself had experienced the year before, “because should the Bill be passed, then this will be seen as a fatal blow to England, and if on the other hand the Bill is not passed then one can expect a great deal of unrest.” When Parliament was dissolved in April, James had a sense of déjà vu. As he put it to Lionel: “If the Reform Bill passes, it will bring the same results as the revolution did here, the King wanted to take away from the people all their rights, which brought the revolution. In England the King gives the people more than their rights, which will have consequences as bad as the contrary has had.” He made the same point directly to Nathan: I might be mistaken, but the initial impression that the dissolution of Parliament in England has made on me is the same as . . . our dissolution made when, to start with, no one viewed the matter as giving cause for concern but then we fell some 30 per cent and I hope to God this will not be repeated this time in England. But I am very anxious . . . Let us get down to the nitty gritty. I am not at all pleased with the situation in England.



As James saw it, “a lot of antagonism has been generated against the wealthier classes, and England has only been strong until now precisely because they [the government] had the support of the wealthy class.” The Reform Bill might seem moderate, but “the supporters of . . . Reform will almost certainly make further demands later on.” He fervently wished England to “put a stop to the progress of the infamous liberal spirit.” “The plebeians believe that a Parliamentary reform will provide them with [free] bread and cake,” he warned Nathan, “and just like here, they are revolutionaries at heart. Once the Reform Bill has been passed, they will come up with new demands.” The riots in Bristol and elsewhere in October 1831 seemed to confirm this diagnosis.