



By the time he did see the danger, however, it was too late. In two days of intense fighting which cost the lives of 800 protesters and 200 soldiers, the troops loyal to Charles X were driven out of Paris. Talk of mediation by moderate liberals like the bankers Jacques Laffitte and Casimir Périer was suddenly redundant, as was the King’s belated offer to withdraw the ordinances. With the capital on the verge of anarchy, new institutions redolent of the 1790s were hastily improvised: a municipal committee and a national guard led by that old republican warhorse Lafayette. As Salomon uneasily reported to Metternich on July 30, “the tricolour flag is flying on all public buildings.” Lionel described a euphorically insurgent Paris: The streets are crowded with persons, all laughing and as gay as if they had come from some Dance, in the squares & open places all the Garde Nationale & Royal Troops who had delivered up their arms, marching & being cheered by the people, in every corner the three coloured flags & every person with a red, blue & white cockade, in the Boulevard & streets every hundred yards the fine large trees cut down and the pavement taken up & piled up against them & broken doors &c so that nothing can pass . . . these barricades, as they call them, are not only in the principal streets, but in all the small ones, so that it was impossible for the soldiers & artillery to pass anywhere.



Small wonder James was beetle-browed when the historian Jules Michelet glimpsed him in his carriage. Small wonder he took the precaution of burying his bonds in the grounds of Salomon’s house at Suresnes.

Yet James survived. The traditional explanation for this is that he was a skilful turncoat, but the reality is more complex. It is undeniable that he switched sides in July 1830 with alacrity and relief. Apart from the offer of a rural hiding place to Vitrolles, he did nothing of substance to assist the outgoing regime, rejecting all requests from the ousted monarch for money until it was clear that he was leaving the country. Indeed, his nephew exulted in Charles’s overthrow: “Never was there a more glorious week for France, this people have [sic] behaved in a way that will be admired by every person, and will make them be reckoned now amongst the first of nations . . . It will be a good lesson for other governm[en]ts.” When Polignac was put on trial later in the year, James shed no tears: “I assure you that, as far as I am concerned, for all the good that Polignac has done for us, he might as well be damned.” James was also quick to broadcast his support for the new regime, ostentatiously donating 15,000 francs for the care of those wounded in the street-fighting. Not only did Anselm do his bit in the national guard (a bourgeois defence force of which the family strongly approved); James even dressed up his three-year-old son Alphonse in a miniature guard’s uniform. It is also true that the liberals’ decision to offer first the office of lieutenant general and then the crown to the duc d’Orléans was a stroke of good luck for James; as we have seen, he had already made the new King a “good friend” in the 1820s. From the Rothschild point of view, a constitutional monarchy was preferable to an absolute regime, and far better than a republic: as Salomon characteristically put it after watching Louis Philippe take the coronation oath to uphold the slightly revised charter: “Thank God that we have come so far that the matter has ended so well, for otherwise the Rentes would not have stood at 79 but would have fallen to 39 God forbid.” James’s relations with some of the key figures in the new government—notably the two bankers Laffitte and Périer—were also relatively good, though the extent of genuine amity among such business rivals should not be exaggerated. Talleyrand, who was the linchpin of Louis Philippe’s diplomacy in London, was persuaded to bank with Nathan. Sebastiani, the Foreign Minister from late 1830, was “on the most friendly terms” with James, who called on him “every morning”; relations with his successor de Broglie were also close.