

The metaphor of an ailing government, unfortunately, became a reality in the spring of 1832—just when Lionel began to sense a real stabilisation of the domestic political situation. As Salomon fretted, it was “unpleasant to admit” that stability depended “entirely upon a single individual.” The full significance of this dependence suddenly became clear when Paris was struck by the cholera epidemic which swept westwards from Russia in 1831-2, claiming the lives of 18,000 people. Not only did the epidemic cause new riots in the city and “complete paralysis” on the bourse; it also afflicted Périer himself. Once again James was obliged to put on a public show of confidence, staying in Paris while thousands of wealthy Parisians fled to the countryside. But the combination of the premier’s death (on May 16) and the landing of the Bourbon duchesse de Berry in the south of the country was yet another blow to political stability. It was not until November that the threat of a “Carlist” civil war was entirely dispelled by the duchesse’s arrest. Meanwhile Paris continued to be subjected to republican demonstrations and riots, such as those occasioned by the funeral of General Lamarque, another cholera victim.

Although James and Lionel grew increasingly confident that the regime was secure after 1832—warmly welcoming every legal restriction imposed on republican activities—there were political crises of varying degrees of intensity throughout the 1830s. Quite apart from periodic ministerial crises, there were a number of attempts on the King’s life, working class unrest in Lyon in 1834, an abortive republican coup in 1839 and an equally abortive Bonapartist invasion in 1840. On closer inspection, relations between the Rothschilds and the July Monarchy were only superficially intimate; as James’s private correspondence makes clear, he regarded Louis Philippe and most of his ministers as incompetent. The King was “duplicitous”; the Finance Minister Humann “an ass”; Thiers “a little man,” and so on. “Well, my dear Amschel,” wrote James dismissively as yet another government fell in early 1839, “I can assure you that within two years these old Ministers will be back again in their old posts because our French Ministers are just like serviettes: after a period of time they require the attention of a washerwoman, and once they have had a rest they are as good [as new] again.”



8.i: H. Delaporte, James de Rothschild and Louis Philippe, La Caricature, No. 67 (June 23, 1831).

James’s contempt was rooted in his own traumatic economic experience during the revolution. Between May 1830 and April 1831 the price of 3 and 4 per cent rentes slid inexorably downwards to reach a nadir of 46 and 75 respectively, a fall of 30-40 per cent (see illustration 8.ii). This was despite the closing of the bourse during the July days and the injection of 50 million francs by the Banque de France in August. It was not until the end of 1831 that prices showed any sign of stabilising. Given that on the eve of the crisis James and Nathan had held a total of 6 million francs “nominal” of the two kinds of security, for which they had paid 5.36 million francs, their losses could have been as much as 2.1 million francs (£86,000) on the rente account alone. James sold at least some of these rentes before the nadir was reached, but as before he was reluctant to cut his losses. “We are sitting in a bowl of soup and we must now wait for it to be cooked,” he told Nathan in late August. “Every day there are so many rentes for sale but there are no buyers to be found . . . I hope that they will go up, God willing, and then one must get out of these. I no longer have the confidence which I had previously, and it will be a long time yet before the old feeling of trust returns once more.”