

James himself became increasingly fatalistic in 1831. “We can now expect many years of unrest here in France,” he told Nathan gloomily in July, “and regrettably, I fear we will lose our fortune here, and have no hope of preventing this from happening, because the people never know what they want.” “For some time now, I have been very sick,” he wrote a month later, requesting that Salomon’s son Anselm return to Paris to assist him: Every day we have new scares, and every day new surprises hit us. Good news is followed by a fall, and bad news brings a rise in its wake. At night one goes to sleep, and is then awoken by a drum making a terrible din in the street. “Please hide all your securities without delay.” . . . I promise you, so help me God, my arms are trembling, as things have gone badly wrong for me. I did some buying, so prices fell. When I sell, prices go up. It is absolutely disgusting.



By October he was feeling “half frantic,” “nervous” and isolated: “The world is speculating against me, and I am speculating against the world.” It was not until early 1832 that James began to recover his confidence. Curiously, he seems to have rather relished riding out the cholera epidemic, and was pleasantly surprised when Périer’s death caused only a minor fall. Only when matters began to improve in the summer was he able to retreat to his house at Boulogne, where he took to bed in a state of complete exhaustion.





Consols and the Constitution

The principal reason for James’s financial survival was the role played by the other Rothschild houses in bailing him out. Here, not for the last time, the bank’s multinational character proved an invaluable source of strength. Nathan’s first reaction to the news of the events in Paris was to purchase and borrow large quantities of silver and gold from the Bank of England—he bought gold alone worth £779,000—and send it at once to his brother. This is what James meant when he repeatedly praised Nathan’s “decency,” for it allowed him to continue paying the money due to the French Treasury under the terms of the loan agreement concluded earlier in the year—a vital show of financial strength. As Hannah told her husband proudly, “Your exertion in sending so much money gives great pleasure . . . You have dear Rothschild behaved uncommonly well and every one is quite satisfied with you.” One reason Nathan was able to bail his brother out was that, as The Times later said, he had managed to sell a substantial proportion of his own 4 per cent rentes before the revolution broke out.8 The London house was again a source of support in March 1831, when James was seeking to participate in a new French loan: access to the London market remained James’s trump card in Paris. The Naples house also seems to have assisted by sending silver; its surviving accounts show that half-yearly profits were unaffected by the revolution. Indirectly, the fact that the Frankfurt and Vienna houses remained on a sound footing also helped.