

Heine was ultimately right, then, when he said that James “appreciated the political capacities of Louis Philippe from the first, and . . . always stayed on an intimate footing with that grand master of politics.” Indeed, even the later anti-Semitic writer Drumont was not far wrong when he later spoke of an “affinity” between James and Louis Philippe based on their common “adoration of money”: we know that James gave Louis Philippe a personal loan of over 2 million francs in April 1840 and Heine attributed the “great attentions paid to [Rothschild] at court” to the King’s “financial plight.” Although Stendhal’s witty and well-connected “Monsieur Leuwen” can hardly have been modelled on James, as has sometimes been claimed—he is not Jewish, for example, and his French is much too elegant—his political influence as portrayed by Stendhal closely corresponds to that wielded by James at the time the novel was written (1836).5 “The newspapers write so much about the ministers speculating with us,” reported Lionel in 1834, “that they don’t like to receive us every day.” The Rothschilds’ private correspondence reveals the truth of such press reports, and suggests that it was only a slight exaggeration to claim, as one Austrian source did, that “in all Ministries and in all the Departments [Rothschild] has his creatures of all ranks to bring him every kind of information.” At the same time, the social barriers which had still existed under the Restoration all but disappeared in the reign of the “Citizen King”: members of the royal family as well as ministers and ambassadors were happy to accept James’s invitations to dinners, balls and hunting parties.

Nevertheless, the cosiness of the relationship which developed between James and Louis Philippe’s regime in the course of the 1830s should not blind us to the fact that, at least until 1833, the Rothschilds were far from convinced that the regime would endure. And with good reason. The example of Spain suggested the possibility of a protracted civil war between rival claimants to the throne. More important, recent French history gave little encouragement to proponents of a constitutional monarchy. Every time crowds took to the streets of Paris—calling for the execution of Polignac in October 1830, for example—the fear recurred that the monarchy would be swept aside by the supporters of a republic. In December “precautions” had to be taken when James received warnings “that they [republicans] intend attacking the house tonight & taking everything.” Lionel’s assessment was not unrealistic: “This party although not so very large makes itself appear considerably more so, by their active conduct, they make use of all the nonsense of the first revolution & wish to make this one resemble it in every respect: this frightens many persons.”

More pessimistic observers like the Prussian ambassador Werther warned James that Louis Philippe would “go the same way as Louis XVI.” “The old revolution started in a similar manner,” James’s dinner guests told him, “and the situation now is beginning to look ominously alike. We can’t see how anyone here can feel secure and we are surprised that you, who are so wealthy, are prepared to remain in such a country, when, at any one time, one has no idea what the next day might bring.” Nor was a new republic all that James had to fear. There was also the more recent memory of imperial glory, which a smaller number of Bonapartists sought to rekindle. Finally, there was the newer phenomenon of working class unrest, which flared up periodically not only in Paris but in Lyon and other industrial centres about which the Rothschilds at this stage knew little.