

Contemporaries were impressed by the way James quickly resumed the lavish entertaining for which he was already famous, throwing a “crowded and brilliant” ball as early as January 15, 1831. But this was only the day after a violent anti-clerical riot, and, as the Austrian ambassador described it, the city was still echoing to the Marseillaise as the Rothschilds’ guests danced. Louis Philippe’s son the duc d’Orléans relayed his apologies through an aide-de-camp, who explained that he was at the head of his regiment and that the republic was being proclaimed in the streets: Mme de Rothschild was dying of fear, imagining the pillage of her house; despite that, we kept on dancing. When I engaged Mlle de Laborde for a galop, her mother told me that a glow that could be seen in the sky was none other than the bishop’s house at Conflans, which the rioters had set on fire.

“It’s terrifying, yes, it’s frightful,” said the young lady. “But let’s dance while we can today. If it is true that we are going to have the republic tomorrow, that will mean the end of feasts and balls for ages.” . . . The ball lasted until four in the morning and there was no trouble. M. de Rothschild, despite his great desire to appear gay, is sad in his soul, for his money is melting in his vaults like an icicle in the heat.





The combination of outward bravado and inner caution continued as long as there was such violence in the streets of Paris. But the mood at these events was always tense. In January 1832 the duc d’Orléans was affronted when he heard himself referred to by his nickname (“le grand poulot”) by a Legitimist guest at one of James’s parties—though it is not the case that he subsequently refused invitations to the rue Laffitte.

Even in periods of relative political tranquillity, French politics seemed volatile (especially to Rothschilds raised in London), with more frequent changes of ministry than in England, and more friction between crown and parliament. All these intricate political shifts had to be followed closely, for, as James put it, “a lot depends on what sort of Ministry we get.” In February 1831, for example, an anxious James sought reassurance from Louis Philippe that the crumbling Laffitte ministry would not be replaced by a more liberally inclined administration. He and Lionel were “consoled” to hear that the most likely successor would be another banker, Périer, and that Périer intended to reduce the King’s direct influence over policy. As we shall see, this was one of the most important changes of government of the period—and one which James claimed to have personally brought about. However, Périer’s hold on power was always tenuous. July 1831—when elections unfortunately coincided with the anniversary of revolution—was a time of renewed political unsteadiness, with Laffitte failing by only a handful of votes to secure election as president of the Chamber. When Périer nevertheless resigned, James was appalled. Rothschild relief when he returned to office after a matter of days was considerable. Throughout 1831, the Paris letters monitored the health of his ministry—particularly its difficulties over reform of the House of Peers—with the obsessive anxiety of relatives around a loved one’s bedside. The cartoonist Delaporte vividly caught the volatile mood of French politics in June 1831 when he depicted it as a funfair. To the left James and Ouvrard vie for control of a see-saw; in the centre Périer struggles to register on the “Dynamometer or Test of Strength for the use and instruction of ministers”; to the right Louis Philippe slumps unconscious (see illustration 8.i).