



But how far was this mere dinner-table bragging—like Nathan’s to Prince Pückler in the 1820s? Does the brothers’ private correspondence substantiate the claim that they used their position of influence to preserve peace after 1829?

Here it is necessary to distinguish the Rothschilds’ use of financial leverage—principally their ability to refuse loans to governments contemplating war—from the less tangible influence which the Rothschilds were able to exercise in their capacity as a channel of diplomatic communication. This second function grew rapidly in importance in the course of the 1830s, though it had already begun to develop in the previous decade. In essence, statesmen and diplomats began to make use of the Rothschilds’ network of communication for two reasons: because it was quicker than the official courier systems used for relaying diplomatic correspondence, and because messages of a non-binding nature could be sent from government to government indirectly via the brothers’ own correspondence with one another. It is not hard to see why the brothers were willing to provide this service: it gave them advance knowledge of foreign policy as it was being formed, and this in turn allowed them to make better-informed investment decisions. The difficulty for the historian is that the brothers did not always explicitly distinguish their own views from those of ministers when acting as a diplomatic channel: it is from this period that they began to use the word “we” in their letters not only in the sense of “we Rothschilds,” but also in the sense of “our government,” the first hint of an identification with the five different states where the brothers now lived. Nor is it always apparent whether it was the Rothschilds who were actually influencing the direction of policy, or policy which was influencing the Rothschilds.





Lines of Communication

The development and nature of the brothers’ communications network is therefore essential to an understanding of the financial diplomacy of the 1830s. As usual, a certain amount of mythology needs to be stripped away—above all, the notion that the Rothschilds, like Disraeli’s Sidonia, were at the centre of an almost supernatural intelligence service: “No Minister of State had such communication with secret agents and political spies . . . To these sources he owed that knowledge of strange and hidden things which often startled those who listened to him . . . The secret history of the world was his pastime.” It is true that by the end of the 1840s they had established a formidable network of agents and regular correspondents, an important function of which was to keep New Court abreast of economic and political developments the world over. But in the twenty years after Waterloo (the news of which was the first great coup of Rothschild communications) their system was more rudimentary. Like anybody who wished to conduct international correspondence, their letters—and sometimes their lives—were at the mercy of the elements. In 1817, Salomon and his wife were “99 per cent” drowned when the carriage taking them from Paris to Rotterdam was caught in a storm while crossing a river. The whole journey lasted around seventy-two hours. That was exceptional: letters sent from Paris to Frankfurt usually took just forty-eight hours in 1814; but mail from London could take up to a week to reach Frankfurt, and the service from Paris to Berlin took nine days in 1817. Compulsive correspondents as they were—even scribbling letters in antechambers while waiting to see ministers—the brothers were always trying to find ways of speeding up the postal service. As we have seen, from 1815, if not before, Nathan was relying on his agents at Dover and Calais to expedite his letters by paying premiums to the captains of ships for express delivery. It seems he also sometimes sent copies of the same letter by more than one route, to reduce the risk of delays. In 1814 Amschel proposed an ingenious scheme for overcoming delays at the Frankfurt post office: if the exchange rate rose, his brothers should send their letters in blue envelopes; if it fell, in red, “then Mayer at the post office can immediately let me know if I have a red or a blue letter, which saves half a day.”