

But this did not solve the problem that many of the offices in Germany through which the brothers’ letters passed were “lodges” under the control of the Austrian secret police, so that mail was routinely opened and copied if it appeared to contain politically sensitive or useful information. The same lack of confidentiality ruled out anything more than occasional use of the diplomatic “bags” sent by courier from capital to capital. There was therefore no alternative but to employ private couriers, which the Rothschilds began to do (at the latest) in 1814. The problem was that couriers were expensive, and the brothers constantly bickered about when their use was justified: if couriers were sent too often, operating costs mounted, but if they were not sent, vital news could arrive late. A related problem was that the very arrival of a courier alerted competitors to the probability of important news: letters to third parties were therefore sometimes backdated and couriers sent in disguise to put rivals off the scent. By the mid-1820s, with costs less of a concern, couriers were being sent regularly: in December 1825 alone, the Paris house sent eighteen couriers to Calais (and hence to London), three to Saarbrücken, one to Brussels and one to Naples. The practice was habit-forming: in 1827 Salomon was infuriated when he could not find a courier willing to set off from Vienna for Strasbourg at 10 p.m. on Christmas Day.

Unfortunately—as with every innovation in communications—it was not long before the Rothschilds’ rivals were sending just as many couriers of their own. Moreover, no courier ever arrived soon enough: James’s complaint in 1833 that a courier from London had arrived “one hour too late” was the classic expression of the perennial capitalist desire for faster communications. From 1824, carrier pigeons were also employed, though it was apparently not until the 1840s that the brothers used these regularly enough to warrant a crude code: “A B in our pigeon dispatches means buy stock, the news is good. C D . . . means sell stock the news is bad.” It was not until after the mid-1830s that the development of the railway, the telegraph and the steamship opened a new era in communications—one in which it would be a good deal harder for the Rothschilds to steal a march on their competitors. In one of his first references to “telegraphic communication,” James complained to Nathan: “Over here people are too well informed and there is therefore little opportunity to do anything.” By 1840 Carl was advising the Paris house not to send couriers to Naples, as the steamer arrived just as quickly and couriers merely alerted the “small speculators” that something was up. Another important point is that as press censorship became less strict after 1830, it became unnecessary to provide so much detailed political news in private letters: by the 1840s, Nat routinely referred his brothers to the French newspapers where ten years before his uncle would have written the latest political news himself.