

Throughout these periods of crisis, the Rothschild letters were the channel through which the views of kings, ministers and diplomats could most rapidly be exchanged. But they also allowed the Rothschilds to make their own views known not only to one another but to the political figures to whom appropriately translated copies were circulated. A central leitmotif of the brothers’ own commentary was their awareness of the potentially explosive interaction between international and domestic politics. This was especially pronounced in Paris, where fear of war was inseparable from fear of a radicalisation of French domestic politics. “The Government here in France is all for peace,” warned James on September 29, 1830, “but if they are threatened too much, then the king says that he would no longer be master of his house and the people don’t want to be threatened like little children.” James constantly fretted that, if the other powers were too aggressive in countering revolution in Belgium or elsewhere, more bellicose politicians would come to power in France. The difficulty was that even those ministers to whom he and Lionel gave their qualified backing were sometimes obliged to assuage public feeling by speaking in a bellicose manner themselves; hence the repeated reassurances from James that such utterances were only for domestic consumption and should not be taken literally abroad. When Sebastiani was appointed Foreign Minister in Laffitte’s new government (November 1830), James immediately rushed to see him. In fact, the message he was able to relay to London and Vienna was much the same as the King’s a few weeks before: “If they are looking for an excuse to wage war against us, then we are fit and ready for them but we will make every possible effort to prevent it from happening.” However, James concluded optimistically that “there is every likelihood that peace will be maintained.” Provided Russia did not think of intervening on behalf of Holland, France would tell the Belgians “that they shouldn’t eliminate the House of Orange from their calculations and that they will not be able to count on our support if they behave stupidly.” The difficulty was that, as James admitted, the government was simultaneously “asking for eighty thousand men [while] saying ‘we are all for peace’ . . . [T]here has been such a degree of fervour and activity at the War Department over here that it would seem that they already planned to make war in fourteen days’ time. Our newspapers are now furiously screaming for war and yesterday the whole world thought that war was about to break out.” Nevertheless, he still maintained that Laffitte was “for peace and he is only asking for the army so as to be able to defend peace.” Talk of war was merely to “keep the public mind occupied.” It was for this reason that James urged the Banque de France to avert Laffitte’s bankruptcy in early 1831; a change of government in France, he was convinced, would increase the danger of war. Throughout January he assured his brothers of the government’s peaceful intent, despite the increasingly febrile mood in Paris.