

Lionel acknowledged that there was a parallel between France and England. “We have had a revolution and are now quiet; in England you are in the middle of your revolution, & you must wait ’til it is over.” However, he was far less worried by this than his uncle. This was partly a reflection of his liberal outlook. “I am very pleased to see that this Reform Bill has had a little effect upon some of the aristocracy,” he commented in a revealing letter to his parents. “It is a very good thing, some of those great persons were really insupportable, the great difference that they always made between the different classes will soon be done away with, & the society in England will be more like that here, which is by far more agreeable.” There is more than a hint of Disraeli’s fictional Adrian Neuchatel here (“Well; we City men must see what we can do against the dukes”).

But Lionel’s attitude was rooted in pragmatic considerations: it had more to do with the connection between the prospects of the Reform Bill and the price of government bonds. Between January 1830 (when they stood at 95.6) and March 1831 (75.4), consol prices fell by 20 per cent—a less dramatic fall than in Paris, but nevertheless a substantial decline. The sharpest fall came between October 1830 and January the following year (see illustration 8.iv), but prices remained below their average level in 1829 (91) until 1834.

Although international concerns were paramount in the City (as they were on the Paris bourse), domestic factors also played a part in this crisis. Notoriously, the Duke of Wellington’s intransigent speech against reform on November 11 provoked a fall of more than six points, though the slide had actually begun two months before. At the same time—and this was more of a problem than in France—there was a sharp monetary tightening in 1830-31 as the Bank of England’s reserve fell, providing the inspiration for the Radical Francis Place’s famous slogan of the following year: “To stop the Duke, go for [meaning withdraw] gold!” In short, it began to seem as if the financial markets wanted the Reform Bill to pass. In Paris, James made this connection as early as March 1831, just after the bill had passed its second reading by a single vote. “That the Reformers are winning,” he argued in early May, “can at the present moment only have a positive effect and cause a rise in the stocks.” Lionel agreed, expecting the passage of the bill to produce “a very great effect,” and strongly favouring the creation of new peers to force the bill through the Lords. Both were prepared for the Lords’ rejection of the bill to cause a further fall in prices.

By contrast, the man on the spot seems to have been less ready to see the connection between Reform and financial recovery. This was partly because Nathan’s identification with Wellington—which led to his windows being broken by demonstrators—made him instinctively anti-Reform. But it was also partly because the fluctuations of the London market after March 1831 were less severe than those in more volatile Paris. Consol prices in fact remained relatively stable when the Lords rejected the bill in October 1831. This puzzled even some members of the British government. When the Vice-President of the Board of Trade, Charles Poulett Thomson, dined with James the following month, he declared: “Thank God, I have part of my money invested in foreign stocks, but I consider our country is very sick, and am surprised that stocks stand so high.” Nevertheless, by February 1832 Nathan appears to have accepted that a Reform Bill would have to be passed. There is no other way of interpreting his attitude when Wellington was called on to form an anti-Reform government following William IV’s refusal to create fifty new peers. As Charles Arbuthnot told the Duke, Rothschild . . . came to tell me that if you let it be known, as soon as you meet Parliament that, whatever may be your own opinion of Reform, you are resolved not to disappoint expectations which are so greatly raised . . . you will surmount all your difficulties. He says that among the monied men there is an alarm lest there should be such an opposition to all Reform as would cause commotions . . . He assured me that the general feeling was that you would surmount your difficulties if men’s minds were tranquillised as above stated, and if, having the reins in your hand, you were resolved to keep them. He is determined, he said, to keep up the Funds to his utmost, and he is confident he will succeed.