

That of course was the whole idea; or rather the principal aim of Rothschild communications was, by getting political news first, to buy or sell securities before the news had influenced the markets as a whole. Yet this was not always achieved. The fact that the Rothschilds broke the news of the French revolution of July 1830 not only to the British Foreign Secretary Lord Aberdeen in London but also (via Frankfurt) to Metternich in Bohemia is well known. But it is worth pointing out that their reports were not at first believed. And, as we have seen, the outbreak of the revolution caught the Rothschilds themselves completely by surprise, plunging the French house into an economic crisis from which it was only with difficulty extricated.





Bankers’ Diplomacy

The Rothschild letters reveal the extent and limitations of this communications system in the turbulent years after July 1830. In Paris, James’s political connections were second to none. “I am constantly being consulted about everything,” James told Nathan in 1831, and that never really changed: just as he later claimed to Countess Nesselrode, he really did see the King, his ministers and the principal ambassadors on an almost daily basis. Nathan too seems to have had access to senior government figures, notably the diplomat Frederick Lamb, in addition to key foreign diplomats in London like Talleyrand, Esterházy and Bülow; but there is no question that his influence was less than it had been under the Tories. In Vienna, Salomon continued to enjoy direct access to Metternich, and relayed copies of his brothers’ letters to him whenever they contained diplomatically important information. By comparison, the Frankfurt and Naples houses were somewhat out of the great power “loop.” Influence in the other key capitals—St Petersburg and Berlin, as well as Brussels and the Hague—was limited to that which could be exercised through agents (for example, Gasser in Russia and Richtenberger in Belgium) or by occasional personal visits.

The first diplomatic question to be discussed via Rothschild correspondence in 1830 was whether the great powers would actually recognise Louis Philippe as king or intervene against the new regime. On July 31 James wrote to Nathan: “I hope to God that your Government is not thinking of intervening, for if they do so, then we will get a general war.” Lionel summed up the argument for recognition a fortnight later: [O]nly one thing that is completely requisite is that the king should be immediately recognised, if it is not done soon, one cannot say what may be the end . . . Until the king is recognised the neighbouring provinces may always wish to join this Governmt.[;] this will encourage also the disturbances there . . . France only wishes peace, wants nothing from other countries and knows that it only has to cultivate its own resources to be one of the greatest nations[;] at present there are in France 1,500,000 men in the National guard, all armed fit for service, besides these the whole army[;] what use [would] it be for other powers to think of making an attack on this country[?] . . . Uncle James was with the king today, being a member of a company who paid their respects to him[;] the king gave him the highest assurances of peace and of his good wishes, and of his hopes that everything will go on in the best way possible.