

So it was in fact for a relatively short period—between around 1815 and 1835—that the Rothschild courier service had a real edge on alternative forms of communication. During those years, the Rothschilds were able to offer a distinctive service to those politicians and diplomats whom they wished to cultivate. Not only could they offer them private banking services; they could also deliver their letters ahead of the regular post. While in London in 1822, Chateaubriand received “an important despatch” from the duchesse de Duras through her “protégé Rothschild.” At Verona in the same year and at Pressburg in 1825, Metternich made use of Salomon’s couriers to Vienna and London, evidently putting more trust in the Rothschilds’ couriers than his own. The idea soon caught on. By 1823, “receiving news from Rothschild” was an integral part of the Countess Nesselrode’s routine. In 1826 it was reported that: the Rothschild clerks who travel as couriers from Naples to Paris about once or twice a month take with them all the despatches of the French, English and Spanish ministers accredited in Naples, Rome and Florence. In addition to this not inconsiderable correspondence, they also deal with the communications passing between the Courts of Naples and Rome and their legations at Turin, Paris, London, Madrid, Lisbon etc. as well as all private letters that are of any importance.



When a minor crisis in Franco-Austrian relations blew up in 1826, it was a Rothschild courier who carried Villèle’s placatory note to Metternich. Perhaps the most distinguished—if not the most powerful—enthusiasts for the Rothschild postal service after 1840 were the young British Queen Victoria and her consort Prince Albert. It was probably the latter—whose Uncle Leopold was an old Rothschild friend—who introduced the former to the system.1 From the moment he arrived in England, Albert (through his close adviser Christian von Stockmar and his British secretary George Anson) made regular use of Rothschild couriers for his correspondence with the continent. Soon Victoria was doing the same, as well as relying on the Rothschilds to arrange minor banking services and even hotel reservations. In June 1841 she assured Leopold that she “always” sent all her letters to Germany “wh. are of any real consequence . . . thro’ Rothschild wh. is perfectly safe and very quick.”

All this meant that the Rothschilds were in a position to provide a unique news service to the European elite. Major political events as well as confidential information could be relayed from one city to another well ahead of official channels. Nathan’s early news of the outcome of Waterloo was only the first of many such coups. As early as 1817 James was offering to relay details of French diplomatic despatches from Paris to London—made available by a “friend” in government circles—so that they reached Nathan before the despatches themselves reached the French ambassador. The British ambassador in Paris also began to rely on Nathan for advance news from London. In 1818 a British diplomat bound for the Aix Congress was “struck very much” by Nathan’s “correct information as to the details of our party and his knowledge of the persons likely to compose it, some of whose names I believe had not even transpired at the Foreign Office.” When the duc de Berry was assassinated in February 1820, it was the Rothschilds who broke the story in Frankfurt and Vienna. Likewise, when Queen Caroline died in 1821, it was again the Rothschilds who spread the news to Paris. Canning, as we have seen, disliked the fact that the Rothschilds constantly scooped British ambassadorial reports; but he could hardly afford to ignore news like the Turkish capitulation at Acker man. By 1830, as Talleyrand observed, “The English Cabinet always obtain their information by [Rothschild] ten or twelve hours before the arrival of Lord Stuart’s despatches, and this is not to be wondered at, seeing that the vessels which carry Rothschild’s couriers belong to that firm, they take no passengers, and start at all hours . . .” Villèle too had to heed Rothschild information, even though he (like Canning) strongly suspected the brothers were manipulating the news to influence the stock market.