



Louis Philippe’s message to James at that meeting—“My most ardent desires are centred upon the peace of Europe, and I hope that the states will resume their former friendly relations with France”—was duly passed on to Metternich through the Austrian ambassador Apponyi.

However, recognition of Louis Philippe did not, as Lionel had hoped, prevent revolutionary outbreaks elsewhere. From the moment news reached Paris of the “full-blown revolution” which had broken out in Brussels on August 25, a new possibility arose: that the spread of revolution outside France would precipitate a war between France and one or more of the conservative powers, Prussia, Russia and Austria—and perhaps even England. This was a far more plausible scenario than the possibility of direct foreign intervention in France for two reasons. Firstly, the other powers had not only treaty obligations (dating from 1814-15) but also strategic interests in Belgium. Secondly, foreign intervention in Belgium, or anywhere else where revolutions broke out, was likely to move the French regime to the left, because of the historic link between republicanism and revolutionary internationalism. Metternich was not the only one who remembered the 1790s, when France had combined domestic “anarchy” with dramatic military expansion.

James’s first action on hearing of the Belgian revolt was thus to broker a meeting between the French Foreign Minister Molé and the Prussian ambassador, in the hope of averting a military confrontation between the two powers. He also urged Nathan to oppose any British-sponsored intervention on behalf of the Dutch King, having concluded (along with Hannah and Lionel) that Belgian claims to independence were practically (and perhaps also in principle) defensible. At the same time, fearful that the revolutionary spirit might spread to Naples and Spain (as it had in the 1820s), James relayed a veiled warning from Louis Philippe to Metternich that “he was opposing revolutionaries in all countries as far as his position as a constitutional monarch allowed him to do, but . . . that he was compelled in his position to show a certain regard for Liberal aspirations”; the King of Naples should therefore make “a few concessions in the general interest of the country and in accordance with the progress of contemporary ideas.” A few days later Molé told James that France might be prepared to go to war if France were “surrounded by a large number of [Prussian and Austrian] troops,” a fear of “general war” echoed by a number of foreign diplomats including Lamb, who raised the possibility of British intervention.

There was relief when, after discussions between Talleyrand and Aberdeen, the whole Belgian question was referred to arbitration by representatives of the great powers in London. However, even before an armistice had been reached between the Belgians and the Dutch, news arrived that a revolt had broken out in Warsaw against Russian rule. In fact, it may well have been this development which did most to prevent war over Belgium, as prior to the revolt the Tsar had been preparing to send troops from Poland to support Holland. The fact that it took the Russian army from February until October 1831 to crush the revolt may well have been the main reason there was no general war. But at the time the spread of revolution eastwards seemed only to increase the chances of international conflict. The protracted arguments about the extent of the new Belgian state, its neutral status and the choice of its king served only to prolong uncertainty throughout the first half of 1831, with the Rothschilds once again relaying proposals and counter-proposals from Paris to London.2 Then came the news of revolts in Italy: not, as had been feared, in Naples, but in the duchies of Modena and Parma (February 1831) and the Papal states (March).