



8.iv: The weekly closing price of 3 per cent consols, 1828-1832.



Or, as Moses Montefiore summarised Nathan’s argument more pithily, the Duke should “form a Liberal Government, and . . . consent to some reforms . . . he must go with the world, for the world would not with him.” This was no more than a circuitous way of telling Wellington to throw in the towel, which he duly did two days later.

What made Nathan change his mind? The obvious answer is that he genuinely feared another financial crisis of the sort which had driven Wellington from office the previous autumn. Consol prices had already fallen slightly—from 85 on May 9 to 83.25 on May 12—and it may be (as some observers suspected) that Nathan also warned Wellington of a renewed run on the Bank of England’s reserve. Yet the “panic” in Paris was not as great as Lionel had anticipated, and the predictions that Grey’s return would boost consol prices “to their former level” proved wrong. They were in fact scarcely affected by the Duke’s resignation or by the passage of the Reform Bill itself; if anything, they reopened slightly lower after the royal assent was granted. Another possible explanation is that the British Rothschilds underwent a kind of political conversion. As we have seen, there is at least some evidence that from as early as 1829 Nathan, his wife and his children were shifting their political ground because of Tory opposition to Jewish emancipation. In addition, the Whigs appeared better able than the Tories to cope with the new threats of Irish political Catholicism and English radicalism. The enthusiasm of Anthony and Lionel for the Whig victory in the 1832 elections was sincere; and there is no evidence of Rothschild support when, largely at the King’s instigation, Peel attempted to form a government in 1834. Nor is it without significance that Nathan was willing to manage the £15 million loan necessary to compensate the slave-owners after the government abolished slavery. Buxton’s recollections of Nathan are often quoted; but the significance of their dining together is seldom pointed out. In fact, Buxton was the leader of the Anti-Slavery Society, and his meeting with Nathan came immediately after the legislation freeing the slaves had been passed. Just as James quickly aligned himself with the doctrinaire liberals after the revolution in France, so too, it seems, did Nathan bend with the Whiggish wind of reform in England.

Heine thus undoubtedly exaggerated when he sought to portray “Rothschild” as a revolutionary. But he was absolutely right in identifying the brothers’ lack of commitment to the politics of reaction. When reform came—and even when it came by violence—they accepted it.





NINE

The Chains of Peace (1830-1833)


Those who want war will doubtless turn to other bankers.

—FRIEDRICH GENTZ, 1830





Despite the ease with which they shifted allegiances from Bourbon to Orléans, from Tory to Whig, the Rothschilds did not survive the 1830 revolution purely by adapting to domestic political change. For the internal threat—the threat which prompted James to bury bonds in the gardens at Suresnes—was in many ways the lesser threat posed by the revolutions of the period. Far more serious from a financial point of view was the possibility that the revolutions might lead indirectly to a war between the great powers. The most striking point to emerge from the private correspondence of the period is that this was the Rothschilds’ real fear; and it is easy to see why. A revolution—or even a reform crisis—primarily affected bonds in one country. A war would have caused a severe slump in the price of all government securities in all markets. A domestic crisis in Paris could be withstood provided London, Frankfurt, Vienna and Naples stayed quiet. A European war would have hit all five houses simultaneously. The Rothschild correspondence shows that this fear was paramount in 1830-32. “You can’t begin to imagine what might happen should we get war, God forbid,” wrote James in October 1830, “for if that were the case, then all the securities would suffer such a fall that it would be impossible to sell anything.” A month later he sought to quantify the risk: “We have a holding of 900,000 rentes [30 million francs nominal]; if peace is preserved they will be worth 75 per cent, while in case of war they will drop to 45 per cent . . . I am convinced that if peace is maintained rentes will improve in three months by at least 10 per cent . . .”