

This helps explain why so many contemporaries believed that the Rothschilds not only favoured peace but used their financial leverage to preserve it. Ludwig Börne, for example, explicitly argued that Rothschild sales of Austrian government bonds had limited Metternich’s diplomatic room for manoeuvre in 1831, when the Prince was itching to check forcibly the spread of revolution not only in Italy but in Belgium. He also implied strongly that the Rothschilds were keen to see France adopting a more pacific policy towards Austria: “If the house of Rothschild sat on the throne of France, the world would be relieved of the great dread of a war between that powerful house and the house of Habsburg.” Similar claims were made by political insiders too, for example by the Austrian diplomat Count Prokesch von Osten in December 1830: “It is all a question of ways and means and what Rothschild says is decisive, and he won’t give any money for war.” Two years later the Austrian Finance Minister Baron Kübeck regarded Salomon as synonymous with “peace.” Nor was it only Austria which was perceived to be subject to Rothschild pressure: Metternich and his ambassador in Paris, Apponyi, alleged that the French government was even more susceptible. As early as 1828, Prince Pückler was moved to compare the source of the Thames “with Napoleon who, born incognito in Ajaccio, made all the thrones of the earth quake . . . the avalanche which launches itself under the claw of a starling and five minutes later buries a village—and . . . Rothschild, whose father sold ribbons, and without whom no power in Europe today seemed able to make war.” The Prussian diplomat Achim von Arnim said much the same in the 1840s when he observed how few governments were unconstrained by the “golden chains of that House.”

Such claims very quickly became integral to the Rothschild myth. In his anti-Semitic tract The Jews—Kings of the Epoch (1846), Alphonse Toussenel made the point succinctly: “The Jew speculates on peace, that is on a rise, and that explains why peace in Europe has lasted for fifteen years.” Later writers put it even more crudely. Both Capefigue and Chirac purported to quote a Rothschild saying: “There will be no war because the Rothschilds do not want it.” In Morton’s words, “the brothers became the most militant pacifists ever.” Gutle Rothschild is frequently credited with the declaration: “It won’t come to war; my sons won’t provide money for it.”

Publicly, the brothers liked to encourage such notions, as it made them appear both potent and benign. “Do you know who is viceroy and even king in France?” the Countess Nesselrode asked her husband in December 1840. “It is Rothschild. At his dinner, just recently, I had plenty of time for a lengthy chat with him; without saying anything to him to give away my own views, I induced him to express himself freely. He is bored with [the French premier] Thiers, and as for his ministers”: “I know them all,” he said, “ I see them every day and as soon as I discern that the course they are following is contrary to the interests of the governments, I call on the king, whom I see whenever I wish, and I inform him of my observations. As he knows that I have a lot to lose, and that all I desire is peace, he has every confidence in me, listens to me and takes account of all that I say to him.”