

Between March 1831 and March 1832 there was a series of “flashpoints” when war involving more than one of the great powers seemed to come perilously close, and on each occasion the Rothschilds worked frenetically to diminish the tension. The first crisis raised the possibility not only of Austrian intervention in the Papal states but also of French moves in support of the revolutionaries. James and Salomon were much involved in the war of words which duly broke out between Paris and Vienna. Ultimately, Austria did intervene, not only in Modena (which the French tacitly accepted) but also in Bologna in response to an appeal from Gregory XVI; action which, after much prevarication, elicited a more or less direct threat of war from the French government—relayed, yet again, by James. This was probably the moment at which a general war came closest; it was undoubtedly the moment when both the British and French bond markets touched their lowest points. Here the evidence of Rothschild involvement in inter-government communication is especially strong, with James taking a hand in the drafting of a crucial French note to Austria calling for international arbitration (on the Belgian model).3 By mid-April, James was sure that “the crisis in Italy [was] over” and that Anglo-French unity would avoid war over Belgium.

The second flashpoint came in August 1831 over Belgium. After months of uncertainty about the election of Leopold of Saxe-Coburg as King of the Belgians (exacerbated by continued fighting in Poland and news of Austrian reprisals against Italian liberals), the Dutch invasion of Belgium raised the possibility of a general war once more. But again the powers drew back. Neither Prussia nor Russia supported the Dutch move and the British government—after some tense negotiations—sanctioned the French decision to send an expeditionary force to Belgium, provided it withdrew once the Dutch had been driven out. It was only during October that the danger of war over Belgium gradually receded; though even the signing of the 24 Articles by Belgium on November 15 was far from the breakthrough it initially seemed, as Prussia, Austria and Russia took until May 1832 to ratify them, and the Dutch King continued to withhold his signature.

The third war scare came in February 1832 as a result of fresh unrest in the Papal states. Once again Austrian troops were called in, and once again the French sought to take a hand. Indeed, this time a French force was actually sent to occupy the port of Ancona—“a serious blunder” in James’s view. However, this was far less serious than the earlier crises (as the muted reaction of the markets testified) and there was never any real prospect of a serious breach between Paris and Vienna. The final war scare of the post-revolutionary period came in the autumn of 1832, when France pressed once again for military intervention to force the Dutch to accept the 24 Articles. Even when Britain agreed to act jointly against Holland, this once again raised the spectre of a Prussian or Russian retaliation. The Convention of London of May 1832 was a stopgap, as it left the Belgians in Luxembourg (apart from its fortress) and Limburg (apart from Maastricht) in breach of the 24 Articles. But it sufficed to preserve the peace until the definitive international settlement of 1839.