

James came to feel that his brother was trying too hard to secure Russian business. “As far as I am concerned, Russia can go to the Devil, and we can quite happily do without them,” he wrote when yet another loan was bruited in 1834. “Under no circumstances should you personally write to Petersburg for you have been refused enough times. Don’t give them another opportunity to embarrass you.” “Do you think that we will ever be on friendly terms with Russia?” he asked two years later. He evidently thought not. It is hard to find a better illustration of the limits of Rothschild financial power.

Even where a partner was resident there were difficulties. In London, the disintegration of Tory power which began with Catholic emancipation and was completed by the failure of Peel’s 1834-5 ministry unquestionably led to a decline of Rothschild influence over financial policy. Althorp, Grey’s Chancellor, was decidedly unimpressed by Nathan when the latter sought to ingratiate himself in December 1830. “The result of a good long conversation,” noted Althorp, “was that I was satisfied he must think me the greatest fool that ever existed or he never would have supposed that he could so grossly deceive me as he appeared to wish to do.” And whatever sympathy Nathan may have come to feel towards Grey’s government, he was never given much inside political information; indeed Grey’s resignation in 1834 took him wholly by surprise. However, the decline of Nathan’s political influence had less to do with the door being “shut in his face” by the Whigs than with the fact that British financial policy largely rendered him superfluous during the 1830s. With only one exception—the £15 million loan to compensate the slave owners in 1835—there were no major borrowings by British governments in this period. Expenditure was tending to fall and revenue, despite continuing piecemeal reductions in indirect tax, was stable. For this reason, Nathan’s leverage in London was much less than James’s in Paris. Although Nathan was ready and willing to act as a channel for inter-governmental messages, he was not really in a position to influence their content. It was a matter of luck rather than Rothschild design that the Whig government was keen to avert war over Belgium.

By contrast, there is evidence that James succeeded in using financial leverage to discourage an aggressive policy in France, though the strength of his position should not be exaggerated. The revolution had left the Paris house in an extremely vulnerable state, saddled with large amounts of depreciating 3 and 5 per cent rentes and with payments totalling 10 million francs still outstanding to the Treasury for the 4 per cent Polignac loan. On the other hand, the new French government was forced to begin borrowing almost immediately, issuing substantial quantities of treasury bills. James’s immediate reaction to this was characteristic: there were, he told Nathan as early as December 1830, “big deals to be made here,” and it was his intention not to be excluded from them. Despite his heavy criticism of Laffitte’s foreign policy, at no point did he withdraw from the discussions about financing the government’s deficit. His reasons were straightforward. As he explained to his brothers in March 1831, “doing business with the current Government will, I think, bring in its wake a rise in the rentes.” In any case, “the businessmen are all in agreement about the loan here, and I shall go with them, because I don’t want to be out of it.”