



He repeated his misgivings a week later: “I can assure you that if we support Russia against Poland I am not at all certain that I won’t be clubbed to death, because public opinion here is passionately behind Poland.” Nevertheless, he was obviously prepared to risk public hostility if the terms of the loan were sufficiently attractive. It is noteworthy that these discussions took place on the eve of the Poles’ decisive defeat at Ostrolenka. Indeed, Nathan managed to sell some guns to the Russian government just a few days after the battle. James was “extremely happy” at the profit thereby realised; once again, his only concern was to avoid bad publicity: I beg you, in God’s name, not to provide your name unless it is absolutely essential, that is, to register that “Rothschild” has sold “guns” and please keep this information under wraps, as otherwise I am liable to be shot, for it will be said that I am selling guns to facilitate the shooting of the Poles. Yesterday a friend of mine who is a newspaper correspondent came to see me and showed me a newspaper article which claimed that we were providing funds to Luxembourg so that they could suppress the Belgians. He had not written the article but believe me, dear Nathan, now that the general feeling amongst the public has veered to liberalism one must be that much more careful. That is why you should make every effort to prevent the information reaching the newspapers.



The idea of a loan (now for £1 million) resurfaced again at the end of 1832. Again, James felt nervous, this time imagining the English press “tearing us apart, claiming that we are providing the Russian Tsar with loans which will enable him to wage war.” But once again he was prepared to run this risk. After all, “it is not as if one can conquer the world with £1 million.” And to be on the safe side Lionel argued that “in case of war the . . . clause ought to exist . . . that we are not bound to continue our payments” (a device used for other Rothschild loans in this and later periods, as we shall see). However, as James predicted, Kankrin once again “bamboozled” Nathan by using the Rothschild offer merely to secure improved terms from Hope, the Russian government’s traditional banker. The idea that the Rothschilds had been competing to make this loan would have come as a surprise to those French émigrés—supporters of Charles X, who banked on a Russian-led counter-revolution—who were convinced that the Rothschilds had “fallen to a prodigious extent under revolutionary influence” and now served “the revolutionary movement . . . under the leadership of the London [Rothschild], and of Talleyrand.” After all, this was the last opportunity when a Russian intervention might have averted the imposition of the 24 Articles on Holland. It is possible that Nathan and James genuinely believed that if they handled the loan instead of Hope—especially as they envisaged lending a much smaller sum than the Dutch bank—they would be able to exert pressure on Russia not to intervene. Alternatively, Nathan’s warning after the Hope coup that Russia was bent on war was disingenuous. It is tempting to conclude that he was prepared to shut his eyes to the possibility of Russian aggression if he could only win back his influence at St Petersburg.