



Five days later he “urgently begged” Salomon to continue “pestering” Metternich “as to the importance of strengthening the ministry here and . . . maintain[ing] peace, which is so necessary to Europe, the Prince alone having the power to maintain it.” “The whole depends upon the question of war or peace,” wrote Lionel on March 31. “This govt. is for peace, but must be supported by the other powers and must not go against the public opinion, or it would give too much strength to the opposition, which would then bring us war immediately.”

Yet even the appointment of Périer did not wholly allay James’s fears of French aggression, especially when it became known that Austria intended to intervene in the Papal states regardless of the change of ministry in Paris. Events in Italy, Belgium and Poland periodically threatened to stir up liberal sentiment in Paris, leaving the government with little choice but to fight or resign. In the summer of 1831 there was even an economic argument for a more aggressive policy, as Lionel remarked: “There is [sic] in France too many young men, without employment and money and to get rid of them war is requisite, party spirit is also strong, and without a war, we should see the present king driven away.” Louis Philippe appeared to share this view, and James watched with apprehension as Périer’s position seemed to crumble. When Périer resigned at the beginning of August, James predicted “war within four days” if an “ultra-liberal” ministry took his place. Not for the last time, Périer survived politically by taking limited military action against Holland with the tacit approval of the other powers.

The same scenario was more or less replayed in January and February 1832. First James warned that Périer would resign if the final terms of the Belgian settlement were unsatisfactory to France. Then Périer sent a military force to Ancona in reply to the return of Austrian troops to the Papal states. Even after Périer’s death, the pattern repeated itself. With Soult eager to despatch the army against the Dutch once again in October 1832, James sought to secure British support for intervention by warning Nathan: “If the government here, God forbid, does not survive, we will then get a republican administration, and then I expect things to be very black indeed. That is why everything now depends on the Belgian problem. Should England decide not to stand by France, we will then become very sick here, for the world is opposed to the doctrinaires.”

There was a very similar link between domestic and foreign policy in Britain. The possibility, though remote, never entirely disappeared that a Tory government might revert to Pittite tradition and intervene against a revolutionary France. On the other hand, when the Whigs came to power in 1830, James at once visualised an equally alarming scenario: if the new government turned out to be “radicals” then “our ministry will have to be more liberal and consequently, the Belgian problem will be that much more difficult to resolve, and England may possibly enter into a treaty with France so that we could find ourselves at war with the rest of Europe.” “All now depends on England,” wrote James to Nathan in January 1831, during the search for a suitable Belgian king. “The foreign powers would never declare war without England as an ally . . . You see, dear Nathan, how important it is for you to be constantly vigilant, because whether or not we will have war depends on whether or not England will yield on the question of Belgium.” But Nathan’s Tory friends were unconvinced by James’s arguments, least of all when he threw his weight behind Périer. As Nathan wrote to James shortly after the start of the Reform Bill debates, Herries says that Peel will certainly be asked to join the ministry, that Wellington will become Foreign Minister and that, unless France gives way, he is convinced that the British Army will go to Germany . . . It would be well for you to tell the king that he must hold himself aloof, and not trifle with England, for she is not to be trifled with . . . England has no faith in your ministers who want nothing but revolutions, in which old Lafayette and I know not who else assists. Your king and his ministers have only to show that they don’t want war: they must not change their tone from day to day. Go to the king and tell him that Peel, Palmerston and Wellington are coming to power.