

Yet James was soon forced to acknowledge a growing appetite for war over Belgium even within the government, an appetite which was only whetted when the news reached Paris of the revolutions in Modena and Parma. James reacted promptly. According to his own account, he told Louis Philippe: You are being pushed into a state of war, even though you have no interest in any Belgian [territory] . . . and is it wise for the French to take on such a proud stance? And now do you want us to go ahead and declare war on the foreigners? Your Majesty, you are being deceived. Your ministers have lost the confidence of the public. You should appoint Périer and then all the people, including the wealthy section of the population, will support him, and this will demonstrate that you mean business.



Laffitte, he told his brother, was bent on a course of “complete anarchy”: This morning I was at Laffitte’s and he said to me, “If France does not declare war on Austria, then, in a matter of three weeks, the king will no longer be king and will lose his head.” I told him, how could he possibly give such bad advice to the king, to which he replied that the king no longer consults with him. In short, Laffitte views the situation as already lost . . . Tomorrow, I will ask the king and perhaps I might even go to see him today.



It would appear that James’s “talking to the king had the desired effect”: Laffitte resigned just over a week later.

James’s support for Périer was thus inseparable from the idea that he would pursue a peaceful policy; by the same token, James knew that he would be able to survive in office only if the other powers made concessions too. This was the strategy on which he pinned his hopes of stabilisation in France. In a characteristic letter intended for Metternich’s eyes, James urged Salomon that Austria should “support” Périer as the French politician least likely to go to war: Now, my dear Salomon, you must see that if my friend Périer takes office his ministry is supported, for thirty-two million people making a revolution are a danger to all countries. “And,” Périer said to me, “if people want to do something for the king, they should try to give France a piece of Belgium; that would really strengthen the king’s position, but he does not press for it.” . . . Now I tell you that when Périer is in the saddle it depends on the [other] powers whether they have war or not . . . I tell the whole world that the powers only want peace . . . [W]e can’t say yet what will happen, but I am confident because of Périer, as if we have war, he will suffer losses on his properties and factories; for that reason I believe in peace . . . When we are certain of peace abroad we shall have peace at home.



“Périer,” he assured Nathan, “is a stroke of luck from God, as he will maintain peace, or at least I hope he will.” He and Lionel were even led to believe that “if Périer comes in, it is to be one of his conditions, that Austria should be allowed to interfere in the Italian affairs without any notice being taken of it.” As soon as Périer’s appointment was confirmed, James repeated his appeal for Austrian backing: [W]e have a ministry which wants peace, and they want to do all that is in their power for peace to be maintained. [But] if the powers want peace to be maintained, then they will have to strengthen the “Peace ministry” and enable it to demonstrate [to the public] that the powers have no intention of attacking France. It would now be very helpful if both Russia and Austria were to issue a declaration that they will remain on the sidelines, and that they will not attack France, and such a move would calm the populace, for over here they firmly believe that as soon as Russia has resolved its problems in Poland, they will then turn their attention to France . . . I went to the king and pointed out to him that my whole fortune and family were in France and, consequently, I would not dream of misleading him and lulling him into believing that the foreign powers wanted peace when, in truth, they were planning to make war and, anyway, for whose benefit would such a ploy be? . . . If they should opt for Périer, then their credit will rise and everything will improve . . . Well, all now depends on the foreign powers and you will have to make every effort towards that end, for, should we be unsuccessful in maintaining peace, then no power will be able to preserve its credit.