



But this argument would not have cut any ice if Prussia too had not been in need of new funds to pay for the rising costs of her military preparations. For although Prussia was, in James’s words, “of all Powers, least in a position to demand war, and most [keen] to avoid it,” she could not ignore the threat of a major war (whether over Belgium or Poland) which recurred throughout 1831 and 1832. Rother’s letter to the King suggests that he had been dissuaded, probably by Amschel, from attempting to float a new issue of bonds. Instead, the Rothschilds offered to make substantial short term cash-advances of up to 5 million thaler against treasury bills and to lend their support to a lottery loan. It was this offer which was decisive in securing the postponement of the conversion, discussion of which resumed only in 1833, by which time Prussian 4 per cents had recovered to 92 and “the present political situation gives no more cause for serious concern.”5 In other words, the Rothschilds still had some financial leverage in Berlin; but it was only sufficient to secure concessions over the conversion. There is no evidence of any attempt during this period to influence Prussian foreign policy: all the Rothschilds got out of Frederick William was some porcelain and (for Nat) the title of Privy Commercial Councillor, by way of grudging thanks.

If their power was limited in Berlin, the Rothschilds’ influence in St Petersburg was almost non-existent. True, Russia needed money more than any of the great powers to fight her war against the Poles. But relations between the Rothschilds and the the Russian Finance Minister Kankrin had never been good, so even when the Russians directly approached their agent Gasser for a loan in early 1831, James was wary. “The Minister must be terribly short of money,” he reflected. “That means he will not be able to fulfil his commitments, and, should it occur to the good man not to pay his interest, we will then be left floundering.” He argued for taking any loan only on commission and issuing it in small tranches, opposing Nathan’s decision to offer an immediate advance of £400,000. “In the event of war breaking out,” he warned, “neither France, nor Russia nor Prussia will meet their interest payments, and, by God, they will all use the excuse of war to justify the non-payment of the interest due.” On the other hand, as Anselm argued, if the danger of war disappeared—especially if Russia won a decisive victory in Poland—the government would have no need of their services. Only as long as the crisis lasted would the government need money badly enough to “submit to any conditions.” In fact, James’s real anxiety was political: he had no objection to lending the Russian government as much as £5 million provided the fact could be kept secret in Paris, where sympathy for the Poles was fervent. “It is a foregone conclusion,” he pointed out, that we will be severely criticised in the newspapers, otherwise, I have no objections to proceeding on this basis . . . [S]hould the Poles indeed have achieved a victory, this will ease matters considerably, as we must make every effort to co-operate with the liberal[s]. Would it perhaps be possible to claim that the minister will be arranging the loan in conjunction with Gasser and in his name? . . . Well, I suggest we consider . . . very carefully how we can possibly prevent our involvement in this matter becoming public knowledge.