



This shot across the bows does much to illuminate the Rothschilds’ subsequent transition from Toryism to Whiggery. The Whig position, as relayed by Nathan on March 18, was far more congenial to James: “If France does not remain quiet, but takes action against the other three powers, we shall join the three powers, but if the other three powers take action against France, we shall join France.” James’s fear that the Reform Bill would be defeated and the Tories returned to power was therefore more to do with the international situation than with his support for the bill itself, for “a Wellington ministry would declare war on France without hesitation.” As Lionel observed in June 1831, confusion about British politics tended to reduce the chances of a Belgian settlement, because “all the time the King of Holland reckons upon a change in the ministry.” James made the same point four months later: “The passage of your bill is being closely watched, as people believe that, should the ministry resign, we will then have war.” When Russia was hesitating about ratifying the 24 Articles on Holland, Lionel posed the question: “What can Russia do alone[?], everything depends upon the Reform Bill, if that passes and the present ministry remain[s] in, England & France are quite strong enough to make all the other powers tremble.”

This illuminates Nathan’s decision not to support Wellington when he was unexpectedly returned to office in May 1832. It was not just that Nathan feared internal “commotions” if an anti-Reform government stayed in office; it was also that “the foreign ministers”—he instanced Talleyrand, Weissenburg and Bülow—were “in great anxiety lest the King of Holland should be led to expect such support from the new government as would lead to war.” This analysis was echoed six months later, when news of the Whig election victory was generally welcomed by James, Lionel and Anthony as “the best guarantee of peace in Europe” and the stability of the French government. In the dying moments of the Belgian crisis, when the possibility of Russian intervention surfaced for the last time, Nathan indicated the extent and nature of his conversion in a letter to James: You must write to our brother Salomon, to tell Metternich not to let himself be bamboozled into war by Russia, for Pozzo [the Russian ambassador in Paris] is with the king and was not well received, and he and Lieven [the Russian ambassador in London] are intriguing to make Austria and Prussia declare war. I have, however, been informed in a reliable quarter [presumably Bülow] that Prussia will not go to war, and that they are making a great mistake, because England and France jointly can do a great deal. We shall keep peace, there won’t be war . . . Write and tell Salomon that Neumann [the Austrian ambassador] is always spending a great deal of time with Pozzo and believes our government to be weak. The man is seven-eighths mistaken and now Pozzo has not been well received. The king invited him to Brighton and he sat six places from the king. The king asked him how long he would stay here. He replied, “Six weeks”; and now we know that Russia wants war, and Metternich is being bamboozled by those people. Pozzo and those folk are making themselves ridiculous and do not understand England, so ask our good brother Salomon to tell Prince Metternich not to let himself be bamboozled by Russia. Pozzo is here simply to spy and I am convinced that England is stronger than she was in the time of Wellington. Now, my dear brother, don’t let yourself be bamboozled by anyone. If England and France hold together, it will be difficult to touch them. Write this to brother Salomon.