

The problem was that some of the money being raised was obviously wanted for military purposes (this was confirmed by “a colonel in the War Ministry who is on my payroll”). Indeed, James and Nathan themselves sold around 28,000 British guns and offered to sell other military supplies to the French government at around this time—a remarkable kind of “hedging,” given their vocal pacifism. There was no real guarantee that French armaments were for purely defensive purposes, except that the higher costs of war would be unfinanceable. James pinned much hope on this idea that “an outbreak of war would be very dangerous [to the French government],” adding: “I assure you that they will have to raise loan after loan to be able to pay the interest.” When Sebastiani talked of France’s refusing to be “bossed about” in February 1831, James was sceptical: “Basically they have no funds in reserve. With what will they wage war? Consequently, I am convinced we will have no war, no matter what others might say.”

This helps explain James’s support for Périer, for the latter seemed to recognise the fiscal constraint on French policy: Périer told me, “. . . If we choose war, we will be unable to meet our debts, and I am therefore not prepared to join the ministry only to see the Treasury slide into bankruptcy the following day . . .” In short, he will not join without first being reassured that we can maintain peace . . . Should Périer not join the government, then I fear that the Treasury here faces bankruptcy for they will have to issue a loan at 5 per cent.



It therefore made sense to give Périer financial as well as moral support, not least because the combination of peace and a properly funded loan would lead to a rise in the price of rentes: I will speak to Périer and may sell a loan on commission. The Treasury is in need of funds . . . We must assist the government by providing funds, and ensure that the bankers participate, as it is in my interest to provide these people with funds, so that . . . I can make my exit from all this . . . I think that Périer will boost the value of your stocks . . . I want to tell you that we can perhaps do business with Périer.



But the fact remained that James had no way of preventing the money thus raised from being used to fight a war. He simply lacked the bargaining power to insist on the clause suggested by Nathan “that in case of war those payments that have not been made . . . are not to be enforced.” The most he could do was to hope that Périer would not be “too belligerent [over Austrian intervention in Bologna], as we must of course remember that the people wish to raise a loan.” There is some circumstantial evidence that such financial considerations inclined the French government to avoid war with Austria over the Papal states. Market expectations that the loan would stabilise the fiscal position ran counter to pessimism about the dangers of war. Indeed, the fact that the French Finance Minister Louis exploited a slight rally in April to demand better terms for the loan was regarded by James as a sign of the government’s peaceful intentions. That the ambassadors of potentially hostile powers like Werther (Prussia) and Pozzo (Russia) were personally interested in taking a share of the loan also suggested to Lionel that peace would be preserved. Nevertheless, James’s overwhelming sense in the spring of 1831 was one of impotence. “I am master of nothing,” he confessed to Nathan. “Times are no longer what they were. Previously, we would have taken on [such] a loan . . . by ourselves.”