



10.iii: Richard Dighton, A View from the Royal Exchange (1817).



10.iv: Thomas Jones, A PILLAR of the EXCHANGE (1829).

Less subtle artists went further, accentuating Nathan’s protruding lower lip and stomach in ways which were unmistakably hostile. The French artist Jean-Pierre Dantan, for example, made a terracotta statuette of Nathan in 1832 which ranks as one of the most grotesque of all Rothschild caricatures. Here Nathan’s lips droop obscenely from beneath the brim of his hat like those of a large cod, while his distended belly defies gravity atop his skinny legs. Thackeray omitted the fat stomach in his sketch of N. M. Rothschild, Esq. which accompanied the lines quoted above (see illustration 10.v); but the final verses left no doubt that the author found Nathan physically repulsive: Oh Plutus! your graces are queerly bestowed!

Else sure we should think you behaved infra dig.,

When with favours surpassing, it joys you to load

A greasy-faced compound of donkey and pig.

Here, just as he stands with his head pointed thus,

At full length, gentle reader, we lay him before ye;

And we then leave the Jew (what we wish he’d leave us,

But we fear to no purpose), a lone in his glory.





10.v: William Makepeace Thackeray, N. M. ROTHSCHILD ESQ., National Standard, May 18, 1833).

While the numerous silhouettes produced after Nathan’s death—most of which used the title The Shadow of a Great Man—were more sympathetic, they were not exactly flattering either. Even the various portraits of Nathan commissioned by the family do not really attempt to glamorise him. It is true that some who saw him at work detected, or thought they detected, a faintly heroic aura. The American visitor quoted above declared that “there was something commanding in his air and manner, and the deferential respect which seemed voluntarily rendered him by those who approached him showed that he was no ordinary person. ‘Who is that?’ was the natural question, ‘The King of the Jews,’ was the reply.” But, whatever his temperamental resemblance to Napoleon, the Emperor’s financial counterpart and nemesis was never recast by the romantic imagination in a heroic mould. What contemporaries saw was a fat man buying and selling pieces of paper: The persons crowding around him, were presenting bills of exchange. He would glance for a moment at a paper, return it, and with an affir matory nod, turn to the next individual pressing for an audience. Two well-looking young men, with somewhat an air of dandyism, stood beside him making a memorandum to assist in the recollections of bargains regulating the whole Continental exchanges of the day.



Nor was his brother James any more ostentatious. In 1837 a Parisian journalist went in search of “M. de Rothschild in person . . . the name which is in every mouth, the Grand Orient of the rente, the key to the safes of all Europe.” He was surprised to see how modestly “the sovereign” entered “his capital”: M. de Rothschild’s appearances are of short duration, between 3 and 3.25 p.m., that is to say, five or ten minutes before the close of business . . . He usually arrives accompanied by one of his nephews, but his entrance creates not the slightest sensation. People surround him eagerly, above all the brokers who are almost importunate, which does not prevent him from listening to them and replying to them with his habitual good humour. He himself greets and approaches first some of his fellow bankers; his conversation is never long and no one whispers a word of it; the bell rings [and] people start to leave; they go, and he goes just like everyone else—with no more ceremony than accompanied his arrival.