

In truth, the Rothschilds themselves had their doubts about the wisdom of it. At first, James was tempted to let two English banks, Wilson & Co. and Wright & Co., take the lead, for two reasons: First, we are Jews, and if we should have a different Pope who is an evil man, he will say to himself that he could earn a ticket to Paradise if he refuses to pay anything to Jews. Secondly, I think the Pope’s financial situation is in a bad state, similar to that of Spain, and if they should decide not to pay their interest, we will then not be involved with them directly.



At the same time, he and Lionel feared that while the British banks would find it easy to sell their shares, because of “the certainty of [their] being able to place amongst their Catholic friends, all their shares,” the Rothschilds, “having quite a different connexion & not having the confidence of the friends of His Holiness, should have no employment for this stock & should be obliged to lock up our own money in it.” This partly explains the Rothschilds’ uncharacteristic caution in proposing to take the loan in three separate tranches, retaining the option to withdraw after the first. On the other hand, the stabilisation of Papal finances promised at least short term and diplomatic benefits, because (as Périer, Pozzo and Apponyi all agreed) “the Pope, if he is in need of money, and he receives the same, will then ensure that peaceful conditions are maintained.” Moreover, there was much more public demand for the loan than James had anticipated, leading to a hasty last-minute renegotiation of the deal to the disadvantage of Wilson and Wright, who found themselves cut out. The loan, issued at 70 but soon rising above 79, turned out to be a “most excellent little business,” Lionel reported with relief. Although the recurrence of unrest in February 1832 caused a temporary setback, the bonds surged to a peak of 83 that summer and rose with only minor checks to reach par in 1835.

At first sight, there was something contradictory about all this, an echo of Heine’s point about the Rothschilds’ ambivalence towards revolution: they lent at one and the same time to revolutionary states like Belgium and conservative states like the Papacy. On closer inspection, the rationale was consistent: the Rothschilds made money available to new states if they had the backing of the five great powers. Formal or informal guarantees made loans attractive whether they were to an independent Belgium or a superficially reforming Papacy. In that sense, they were merely carrying on the policy which they had begun in the 1820s and which contemporaries had misrepresented when they called them bankers to the Holy Alliance. The obvious precursor to their support for Belgium was their loan to Greece. As early as February 1830, when Leopold of Saxe-Coburg was being touted as a possible monarch for the new kingdom, James urged Nathan: to pay a visit to your Coburg for there is business to be made from Greece. England has already agreed that if Coburg is prepared to accept, then they will guarantee to pay the country the same every month as France and Russia and he is negotiating with them that England should join in granting the guarantee together with France and Russia.