



This was premature. It was not until May 1832 that a treaty was signed by the powers guaranteeing a loan to the new King, and he was a Bavarian rather than a Coburg prince (much less the Dutch prince predicted by Ludwig Börne). But the Rothschilds were still determined to handle the loan, and fought a hard battle for control against the Bavarian banker d’Eichthal and the Spaniard Aguado. Greece herself might be “worthless,” but a 60 million franc loan guaranteed by France, England and Russia looked a sure thing. The feeling was mutual. Apponyi spoke for all the diplomats when he said: “Mr. Rothschild, it must not happen that such a large deal, in which all the Powers are interested, should be completed without your participation.” 7 By contrast, where the powers had difficulty in agreeing—for example over Portugal, where the years 1830-34 saw the return of Dom Pedro from Brazil and his successful deposition of his brother Dom Miguel—the Rothschilds kept their distance.

In a multi-polar world, in which five powers with distinct interests sought to resolve international crises without resorting to war, the Rothschilds acted not so much to ensure peace—their power was more limited than that—as to underwrite it once it had been made.





TEN

The World’s Bankers


The Rothschilds are the wonders of modern banking . . . We see

the descendants of Judah, after a persecution of two thousand

years, peering above kings, rising higher than emperors, and

holding a whole continent in the hollow of their hands. The

Rothschilds govern a Christian world. Not a cabinet moves

without their advice. They stretch their hand, with equal ease,

from Petersburg to Vienna, from Vienna to Paris, from Paris to

London, from London to Washington. Baron Rothschild, the

head of the house, is the true king of Judah, the prince of the

captivity, the Messiah so long looked for by this extraordinary

people. He holds the keys of peace or war, blessing or cursing . .

. They are the brokers and counsellors of the kings of Europe

and of the republican chiefs of America. What more can they

desire?

—NILES WEEKLY REGISTER, 1835-36





In the years after 1832, as fears of revolution and war gradually subsided, the Rothschilds appeared to increase the geographical extent of their financial influence. The American author of the passage quoted above was just one of many writers to comment on this expansion. At around the same time, Thomas Raikes observed in his journal: “The Rothschilds, who began by sweeping out a shop at Manchester, have become the metallic sovereigns of Europe. From their different establishments in Paris, London, Vienna, Frankfurt, Petersburg [sic] and Naples, they have obtained a control over the European exchanges which no party ever before could accomplish, and they now seem to hold the strings of the public purse. No sovereign without their assistance now could raise a loan.” As Prince Pückler had put it, punning on the German word Gläubiger (believer or creditor), “the great R[othschild] could be compared with the Sultan, for the latter was the ruler of all believers, while the former was the creditor of all rulers.” The German economist Friedrich List agreed: Rothschild was “the pride of Israel, the mighty lender and master of all the coined and uncoined silver and gold in the Old World, before whose money box Kings and Emperors humbly bow”—in short, the “King of Kings.” William Makepeace Thackeray made the same point in some early and undistinguished verses published in the short-lived National Standard in 1833: Here’s the pillar of ’Change! Nathan Rothschild himself,