

You know that, taking the sum of our holdings of metalliques at Frankfurt, Paris, London and Vienna—that is, the holdings of the four banks which really constitute one bank—the total amounts to several millions. Now, you cannot ride two horses at once; if our firm were forced to sell . . . what price could we expect to get? . . . We should be forced to realise our metalliques, whether we wished to or not. What would the capitalists and the commercial world say to the issue of two metalliques loans in one year, when the payments in respect of the first loan are not due to be completed until December? Such action might produce a sharp fall in metalliques. The government would not be able to get further loans at a low rate of interest, a blow would be dealt to the credit of Austria’s finances and the government would fail to achieve its object . . . Moreover, what would the public say to a new loan? “There will be war—there must be a war, as Austria is issuing another loan.” Even if we were not forced to sell, as we should be, prices would fall sharply and Austria’s credit would be severely damaged . . . [This is] my conviction as to what would happen if there were to be even a whisper of a suggestion that another loan should be issued this year.

At first sight, this does indeed seem like the exertion of financial pressure with a view to limiting Metternich’s room for aggressive manoeuvre. But it is important to realise that it came at a time of relatively low international tension: the Austrians had by now ratified the 24 Articles and the dispute over Ancona had been resolved. On closer inspection, it looks more like a primarily financial argument to avoid a slump in the price of Austrian bonds which would have been detrimental to the Vienna house’s balance sheet. Salomon was not opposing a loan altogether: for purely technical reasons, he was arguing that “if it is essential to get money, it is much better to issue Treasury bills, and get in twelve millions of silver for the bank . . . a procedure which costs the government hardly anything and provides it with money for six to eight months.” A year later he and the three other Vienna houses were perfectly happy to participate in another issue of metalliques worth 40 million florins, and in 1834 to a lottery loan of 25 million gulden. If these were chains of peace, they did not bind tightly.





Underwriting Peace

In fact, it was not so much by denying governments money as by making it available to them that the Rothschilds were able to give weight to their diplomatic efforts. The classic illustration of this point is the way they responded to requests for credit from the areas where revolutions had broken out.

The Rothschilds had been doing business with the Belgian-based Société Générale since 1827. Within days of the revolution in Brussels, James had re-established contact with it and over a period of months advanced over a million francs to help it weather the storm of revolution. At the same time, he and Nathan discussed a possible loan to Holland, presumably as a carrot to persuade the Dutch King to accept the secession of Belgium; Salomon saw such a loan as a way of helping “to control our war mongers.” But Nathan could also wield a stick: when the Dutch invaded Belgium in August 1831 he at once offered to sell guns to the government in Brussels. Only when the Dutch had withdrawn and appeared to be about to accept the loss of Belgium, did he and James revive the possibility of a 6 per cent loan to the Dutch King, “for if he has the money, he will not consider any warlike actions”—and needless to say, “a lot of money could be earned from the Dutch government.”