

With whose fame every bourse in the universe rings;

The first Baron Juif; by the grace of his pelf,

Not “the king of the Jews,” but “the Jew of the kings.”





The great incarnation of cents and consols,

The eighths, halves and quarters, scrip, options and shares;

Who plays with new kings as young Misses with dolls;

The monarch undoubted of bulls and of bears!





Cartoonists echoed and even amplified such comments. One English print dating from 1829 shows Nathan as “the great humming top spinning a loan,” with kings bowing before him as he distributes coins to them (see illustration 10.i).

Perhaps the most potent (and pejorative) of all such images was produced by an anonymous German cartoonist in around 1840.1 Die Generalpumpe portrays a grotesquely caricatured Jew—evidently a composite Rothschild—as a giant money pump, a play on the double meaning of the German pumpen, to pump or to lend (see illustration 10.ii). The central figure stands knee-deep in a sack full of gold; his bulging stomach is the earth itself, with a louis d’or (labelled “earth’s axis”) for a North Pole or belly-button; and on his head he wears a paper crown bearing the names of major Rothschild loans of the 1820s and 1830s (the Prussian, Russian,



10.i: “A. C.” [Crowhill], The Great Humming Top spinning a Loan (1820).



10.ii: Die Generalpumpe (c. 1840).

Neapolitan, Austrian and Portuguese). According to the badge on his waistcoat, he is no less than “the Executor of the Court of all the World.” Two diminutive figures on either side grip the monster’s fingers, as if working the pump (though it is not clear how far they really control its motion). One on the left represents a Turk, one on the right an Austrian. Beneath are the recipients of Rothschild money, into whose cash-boxes and hats streams of coins flow. The Egyptian ruler Mehemet Ali and his son Ibrahim Pasha are depicted on the left, spoon-feeding the Sultan; below them sits a bespectacled figure with a bulldog who may represent a British Chancellor of the Exchequer (though the couple behind him “Edouard and Kunigunde” are not easily identifiable). On the other side, there is no mistaking Louis Philippe and the French politician Adolphe Thiers; the less instantly recognisable character to their right is probably the Spanish general Baldomero Espartero. But although these individuals are the recipients of Rothschild’s money, they are also entangled in thorny tendrils which sprout from his bulging money bag. So too are the smaller figures beneath them: the people standing at a closed customs post marked “Imports Prohibited” and those passing through an open one marked “Imports Allowed or New Income”; the soldiers massed on the right bank of the Rhine; and those beneath Espartero begging for their “unpaid wages.” Rothschild, the cartoon suggests, not only pumps money to the world, but sucks it back like a monstrous heart.

The Pillar

There was, however, something of a discrepancy between this imposing image of international power and the quite humdrum appearance of what Nathan Rothschild and his brothers actually did. The real Rothschilds bore little resemblance to the sinister figure portrayed in Die Generalpumpe. According to one of the many curious visitors drawn to the City to see him doing business at the Royal Exchange,2 Nathan was “a very common looking person, with heavy features, flabby pendent lips, and a projected fish eye. His figure, which was stout, awkward and ungainly, was enveloped in the loose folds of an ample surtout.” We have numerous portraits and caricatures which bear this description out. One of the earliest is an etching by Richard Dighton entitled A View from the Royal Exchange and first published in October 1817 (see illustration 10.iii). It is a side view of a man in a black coat and top hat, stomach thrust forward, one hand in his pocket, the other holding a sheet of paper. The image proved a popular one with illustrators: Nathan appears in a similar pose in George Cruikshank’s The Royal Exchange (1821) and in his Beauties of Brighton (1826). Each time it was reproduced, however, it changed subtly. Thomas Jones added a nice detail in his 1829 version A Pillar of the Exchange, which depicted Nathan in front of his favourite pillar at the south-east corner of the exchange (see illustration 10.iv). There is a clever ambiguity to the juxtaposition: Nathan is like the pillar in his solidity and immobility, but there is also an implied contrast between the whiteness and regularity of the pillar and Nathan’s black, protuberant shape.