

To some, this restless aptitude could seem almost diabolical. “There is,” observed one who watched Nathan at work, a rigidity and tension in his features that would make you fancy, if you did not see that it was not so, that someone was pinching him behind and that he was either afraid or ashamed to say so. Eyes are usually denominated the windows of the soul, but here you would conclude that the windows are false ones, or that there were no soul to look out of them. There comes not one pencil of light from the interior, neither is there one scintillation of that which comes from without reflected in any direction. The whole puts you in mind of a skin to let, and you wonder why it stands upright without at least something in it. By-and-by another figure comes up to it. It then steps two paces aside, and the most inquisitive glance that you ever saw . . . is drawn out of the erewhile fixed and leaden eye, as if one were drawing a sword from a scabbard. The visiting figure, which has the appearance of coming by accident and not by design, stops but a second or two, in the course of which looks are exchanged which, though you cannot translate, you feel must be of important meaning. After these, the eyes are sheathed up again, and the figure resumes its stony posture. During the morning, numbers of visitors come, all of whom meet with a similar reception and vanish in a similar manner; and last of all, the figure itself vanishes, leaving you utterly at a loss as to what can be its nature and its functions.



Overdone though it is, this account nevertheless captures another intimidating quality which contemporaries often remarked upon: Nathan’s tendency to veer between sang-froid and sudden, alarming action. In 1821 he was reported to have received the threat of assassination “with a smile, and after returning his thanks for the intelligence, with the observation, that as he felt he had never done wrong to any individual, he could not entertain the idea that any persons could have formed so atrocious a design as that described, and that he really thought the affair unworthy of his attention.” Two years later, however, when he found a stranger occupying his usual place at the Royal Exchange, he became “so excited by being displaced that it was some time before he could compose himself and commence business.” The Circular to Bankers tactfully alluded to Nathan’s “strong and unfettered will” and the “pride of temper resulting from his high new position which made him bear down at any personal risk all opposition.” This overbearing quality, as we have seen, often spilled over into his correspondence. “The language which Mr Rothschild could use when his anger overbalances his discretion,” recalled one who had evidently witnessed him in full flow, “was a licence allowed to his wealth . . . His mode of dictating letters was characteristic of a mind entirely absorbed by money-making; and his ravings when he found a bill unexpectedly protested, were translated into mercantile language ere they were fit to meet a correspondent’s eye.”