



This gives a flavour of the complex calculations involved, and the very narrow differentials the brothers sought to exploit. As a multinational partnership, they were uniquely positioned to do such business.

Yet the Rothschilds were not as dominant in the market for bills as they were in the market for bonds. In his influential survey of the City, Lombard Street, Walter Bagehot called them “the greatest . . . of the foreign bill-brokers”; but this accolade properly belonged to the Barings. In 1825 Nathan’s acceptances totalled £300,000 compared with £520,000 for Baring Brothers. Twenty-five years later, acceptances at New Court had risen to £540,000, but the figure for the Barings was £1.9 million; and the gap widened still further in the second half of the century, when new-comers like the Kleinworts made the running. Apart from the obvious fact that the Rothschilds put government finance first—it is almost invariably discussed before commercial business in the brothers’ private correspondence—this primarily reflected the fact that the greater part of the bills business was generated by transatlantic trade, rather than by trade between Britain and continental Europe, which the Rothschilds were better placed to finance. As we shall see, there were attempts to increase the Rothschild share of the American market, but they were only fitful; throughout the first half of the nineteenth century, the Barings had the upper hand there.

Bill-broking led naturally into numerous connected avenues of activity. One of the most important of these, from an early date, was the international bullion market. As Nathan stated in his 1832 testimony, there was often a gap between the total volume of bills representing British imports and those representing exports; in the terms of contemporary classical economics, a trade deficit or surplus automatically necessitated a movement of specie out of or into London provided it was big enough to pay the cost of shipping and insuring specie, as well as melting and re-minting if necessary. When the exchange rate reached the so-called “gold points” it paid to import or export gold (or silver in some countries). For the Rothschilds, transfers of gold from England to the continent had been a vital stepping stone towards direct involvement in English war finance before 1815, and the brothers never lost their interest in the bullion business, doing substantial amounts of business with the Bank of England and the Banque de France. This was what Nathan alluded to when he loftily told a Hamburg house: “My business . . . consists entirely in Government transactions & Bank operations.” Here too complex calculations were involved, especially when coins were being melted down into bars to be re-minted in another market. “And now, dear Nathan,” wrote James in another typical letter, “[when thinking of buying] silver at 11 grain gold, where you can consider the rest as profit, a lot will depend on the assay, for ½ grain is equivalent to ⅞ per cent. Well, at 591/8, this is equivalent to 25.82 francs, and one has the chance here to make a profit when it is being assayed, and I therefore strongly urge you not to let the opportunity pass by.” “The van loaded with silver ingots” which blocked Prince Pückler’s access to New Court was no rare sight: to judge by the brothers’ letters, consignments of bullion worth tens of thousands of pounds regularly passed between Paris and London.