

Table 10c: The nominal value of loans issued by the London and Frankfurt houses, 1820-1859 (by decade, £).



Sources: Ayer, Century of finance, pp. 16-81; Berghoeffer, Meyer Amschel, pp. 29-42, 206-28.

These figures confirm that the Rothschilds (and especially the London house) were throughout the period the dominant force in international bond issues. Between 1815 and 1859 the London house issued altogether fifty loans, primarily for governments, the nominal value of which was around £250 million—very roughly a tenth of total British overseas assets in the 1850s. By comparison, Baring Brothers issued just fourteen loans in the same period, to a nominal amount of £66 million. Table 10d shows the regional distribution of loans—including a small number of quite large private sector issues—in which the London house participated between 1818 and 1846. These figures show that the contemporary view of the Rothschilds as “bankers to the Holy Alliance” was exaggerated; the London house’s biggest clients were France and Britain, with Prussia, Russia and Austria some way behind.

Table 10d: Loans issued by the London house, 1818-1846 (by recipient).



Source: Ayer, Century of finance, pp. 14-42.

It is relatively easy to show the importance of government bonds in the balance sheets of the various houses. The earliest surviving balance sheet of the London house (that of 1828) reveals that a very large proportion of the bank’s assets—more than a quarter—were invested in British government bonds. The proportion rises to 37 per cent if its holdings of Danish government stock are added. In the same year, 35 per cent of the French house’s assets took the form of French 3 per cent rentes. The “state securities account” comprised exactly the same proportion of the Vienna house’s assets, suggesting some sort of rough Rothschild policy to keep the proportion of (supposedly) “gilt-edged” securities at around a third. However, it is much harder to compute the profits made from such issues. Commissions and other charges varied considerably from case to case, as we have seen; and some major issues actually lost large sums (the French loan of 1830, for example). In any case, much of the money which the brothers made on the bond market came not from issuing new bonds, but from speculating in existing bonds. Here too precise figures are hard to come by. To judge by the records which have survived, accounts were made up primarily with a view to calculating the returns on specific lines of business or transactions and ensuring that there were no discrepancies between the various inter-Rothschild accounts. Like the ledgers of most nineteenth-century firms, the London house’s did not group its transactions according to type: purchases and sales of all kinds were logged as they occurred and then totted up at the end of the year. It would in theory be possible to add together the profits obtained from purchases and sales of government bonds, but it would be exceedingly laborious and it has not been attempted here. The Naples house had a “rentes account,” but it also maintained separate accounts for its dealings in other government securities—Neapolitan, Roman and so on. Because it constantly changed its half-yearly accounting conventions, creating new accounts as it went along, it is well-nigh impossible to make more than an impressionistic assessment of its activities. The most that can be said is that the lion’s share of its profits came from between five and ten joint accounts, some with other Rothschild houses, some with other Italian-based banks; from commissions charged on transactions for third parties; and from interest on various unspecified loans.