

Although initially intended to run for just three years, this agreement in fact remained in force until 1825. However, it would be wrong to infer from this a high level of fraternal harmony. Quite apart from the periodic disputes described in previous chapters, the four continental brothers on one occasion felt obliged to draw up a separate agreement between themselves, the terms of which suggest a quite serious rift between themselves and Nathan.3 Significantly, the 1825 agreement restored the 1815 system whereby profits were shared equally, reflecting the fact that the capital of both the Frankfurt and Paris houses had grown so rapidly as to outstrip that of the London house. On the other hand, Nathan’s personal share continued to be counted as more than a quarter of the joint capital, which now stood at more than £4 million. Moreover, although Salomon and Carl had more or less settled in Vienna and Naples, their houses were not given equal status with the original three, and continued to be treated as mere “branch establishments” of the Frankfurt house, without any separate capital until 1828 (and thereafter relatively little). This was probably intended to check the centrifugal tendencies discussed above. The partners now bound themselves to “mutually inform each other . . . of all the transactions, of whatever nature they may be, which have occurred” on a monthly rather than weekly basis.

The 1825 agreement also saw the first steps taken to bring the next generation into the firm, with the decision to admit Salomon’s son Anselm as a partner following his marriage to Nathan’s daughter Charlotte. The brothers were experiencing the first intimations of mortality: the 1825 documents included a clause permitting Amschel to withdraw from the business “if the work becomes too hard for him,” and sought to anticipate possible disputes over inheritance by binding each of the partners’ heirs to accept whatever their share might be without resort to law. It was specifically stated that, if the heirs of a deceased partner took legal action against the surviving partners, a third of the deceased’s share of capital would be forfeit and would be given to the poor of Frankfurt, London and Paris!4

In describing their terms, it is easy to lose sight of the secrecy of these agreements, which such sanctions were intended to preserve. When the brothers met at Frankfurt in August 1828 to take stock of what had been a relatively disappointing three years, Nathan’s wife and two of his sons were present but were wholly excluded from the negotiations, just as they would be eight years later. “Papa and his Brothers with Anselm are almost continually engaged in deliberating upon the arrangement of their concerns,” reported Hannah, “which are held in the Tower in the Garden and are perfectly secret.” The most she could say was that “every thing among the family seemed to be going on with much unanimity.” This was probably something of a relief to her, as the accounts drawn up in 1828 revealed that, though the partners’ personal shares remained formally unchanged, the relative importance of the London house had continued to decline. Its share of the total capital was now just over 27 per cent, compared with 42 per cent in 1818. This share increased only very slightly in the eight years which intervened before the next such meeting at Frankfurt—the fateful 1836 gathering during which Nathan unexpectedly died. As a result, the continental partners were able to secure new and potentially more favourable terms for the distribution of profits: henceforth, Nathan would receive 60 per cent of the profits of the London house but just 10 per cent of the profits from Frankfurt, Naples and Vienna, while his brothers would each get 10 per cent from the London house and 22.5 per cent from the continental houses.5 This rule—which undoubtedly increased the relative autonomy of the London house—was retained despite Nathan’s death: all his rights were simply transferred to his four sons.