



Of course, the fact that the other brothers appealed to Nathan when they fell out shows how far Nathan remained “the commanding general”—the pillar on which the entire Rothschild edifice rested, as unshakeable as the pillar he stood beside at the Royal Exchange. But disputes such as these suggest that additional buttresses were needed to preserve that edifice intact.





The Rothschild System

If there was a single “secret” of Rothschild success it was the system of co-operation between the five houses which made them, when considered as a whole, the largest bank in the world, while at the same time dispersing their financial influence in five major financial centres spread across Europe. This multinational system was regulated by the partnership agreements which were drawn up and revised every few years and which were, in effect, the constitution of a financial federation. The earliest such agreement, as we have seen, had been drawn up in 1810, but this was untypical because of Mayer Amschel’s continuing dominance and the wartime exclusion of Nathan. It was the three-year contract of 1815 between all five brothers which was the first authentically “federal” agreement. The crux of the matter at this stage was the superior wealth of the London house. According to the preamble of the agreement, the brothers’ “partnership property in London[,] at Paris and at Frankfurt on the Main consists of the sum of £500,000 or thereabouts,” but most of this was evidently Nathan’s. The contract sought to redefine the brothers’ collective assets by excluding some items (presumably real estate), and redistributing some £200,000 in the form of promissory notes of £50,000 each from Nathan to his four brothers. The resulting shares of a total notional capital of £336,000 were Nathan, 27 per cent; Amschel and Salomon, 20 per cent each; Carl and James, 16 per cent each. Moreover, it was agreed to defray all expenses from the London house’s revenues and to share net profits at the end of each year equally.

In the three years during which this contract ran, as we have seen, the brothers’ capital grew at a phenomenal rate, from £336,000 to £1,772,000. So much of this increase was due to Nathan’s immensely successful speculations in consols that, although the proportions of the total capital were more or less unchanged, his brothers now agreed to weight the distribution of profits in his favour. As Carl saw it, Nathan should have a bigger part than a fifth. He has a big family, he needs more. Whatever you arrange, I will give my agreement . . . You told me yourself that Nathan has to be given [some] prerogatives. We owe everything, really everything to him. He saved us. We wanted to take a jump earlier [that is, to sell] and he kept us back.



There were now technically “three joint mercantile establishments [conducted] under . . . the . . . five partners’ mutual responsibility”: N. M. Rothschild in London, M. A. von Rothschild & Söhne in Frankfurt and James’s new house in Paris, de Rothschild Frères. Henceforth, half of all the profits of the London house would go to Nathan, while his brothers would receive an eighth each; he would also receive four-sixteenths of the profits of the other two houses, while his brothers received three-sixteenths apiece. The 1818 agreement also introduced a new system whereby each of the partners received 4 per cent of their individual capital share per annum by way of an income to cover their expenses (both business and domestic); any lump sums spent on legacies for children, houses or landed estates were to be deducted from the individual’s capital. In addition, “to preserve regularity in the books and accounts . . . it has been determined that in the running transactions of the three joint establishments although they form but one general joint concern each respectively is to charge exchange, brokerage, postages, stamps and interest pro and contra at the rate of 5 per cent.” To reinforce the sense of collective identity it was now specified that each House had to inform the others of the transactions it carried out on a weekly basis.