

There are, unfortunately, no complete data for the profits of the Paris, Frankfurt or Vienna houses in this period. In the French case, the only surviving figures are for the years 1824-28, and all they tell us is the extent of the damage done to James’s position by the crisis of 1825 (when his losses totalled no less than £356,000) and the speed with which he recovered from the setback (his profits in the succeeding two years were £44,000 and £124,000). However, it is possible to infer average annual profits for all the houses from the combined capital accounts (table 10b), though the different periods which elapsed between agreements make these a rather approximate guide to performance. These suggest—rather unexpectedly—that the London house was in fact the least economically successful of the three principal Rothschild houses: average annual profits were higher at both Frankfurt and Paris for the period 1818-44. Nathan’s brothers—and Amschel in particular—have often suffered in comparison with the man they regarded as their “commanding general”; but even in the period of Nathan’s dominance, the Frankfurt house was more profitable than the London house. The Vienna house too was highly profitable in view of its small capital base.

10.vi: N. M. Rothschild & Sons, annual profits as a percentage of capital, 1830-1849.



Table 10b: Average annual profits of the five Rothschild houses, 1818-1844 (£ thousand).



Source: As table 10a.

The question, of course, is whether it is legitimate to make such comparisons when the houses were still regarded by the partners as inseparably linked. The Rothschild correspondence indicates that the individual houses derived a substantial part of their profits from a collective strategy whose architect before 1836 was Nathan. There would have been no need for the brothers to write so frequently and in such detail to one another if this had not been the case. Nor would the fundamental principle of profit-sharing have lasted for long if the individual partners had not continued to feel dependent on one another. The balance sheets of the Naples house give a good indication of how inextricable the activities of the five houses were: between 1825 and 1850 the share of its assets which were monies owed to it by the other Rothschild houses was rarely less than 18 per cent and sometimes as much as 30 per cent. This seems to have been the case for all the houses. In 1828 some 31 per cent of the assets of the Paris house were credits to the other Rothschilds, mainly to New Court.

How exactly did the brothers make their money? Thus far, we have principally been concerned with the Rothschilds’ business in government bonds, as (to judge by their letters) this was the activity which interested them most in the period before 1836. It was also the activity which most impressed contemporaries, because of its obvious political implications. Table 10c provides figures for the total nominal value of the loans issued by the London and Frankfurt houses in the period (unfortunately, no lists of issues appear to exist for the other houses).