

By comparison, the Rothschilds had much more time for those larger banks whom they regarded primarily as rivals, but whose co-operation they sometimes sought for very large operations: the Barings, Thomas Wilson and Goldschmidt in London; Laffitte, Hottinguer and Mallet in Paris; Geymüller, Sina and Eskeles in Vienna; and Bethmann and Gontard in Frankfurt. Far from wishing such competitors ill—as they had in the decade of cut-throat competition after 1814—the Rothschilds increasingly came to see their existence as complementary, so long as their own position as primus inter pares remained unchallenged. The 1830s and 1840s saw the emergence of informal syndicates and shifting coalitions of banks in all the major financial centres. At the same time, by dint of their size, the Rothschilds came to see themselves as bearing a degree of responsibility for the stability of the banking system as a whole. This explains their reluctance to see their rivals fail. In the 1820s they had watched the collapse of Parish with almost callous indifference. In the subsequent decades, by contrast, they were occasionally willing, for the sake of financial stability, to come to their competitors’ rescue, as in the case of Laffitte in 1831 and 1838. Salomon’s arguments for assisting Geymüller in 1841 are illuminating: To sit back and watch the bankruptcy of a man of 65 years—of a house which has existed for so long, a house which was in the first rank here—and not to be able to help . . . was just impossible . . . If Steiner and Geymüller do have to stop their payments, what a spectacle it would be, what an impression it would make abroad, as well as in Frankfurt and other German markets, because several million—as many as 3 or 4 million—gulden of acceptances and bills would be turned away from both these houses.



In this case, Salomon was overruled by his brothers and nephews. But his sense of responsibility for financial stability in general also informed Lionel’s atttitude to the protracted debate on monetary policy in England. In 1839 he reported to his uncle on “the measures to be enacted with regard to the joint stock banks” (a new generation of which had proliferated since the mid-1820s) and their likely “effect upon our internal money concerns.” “The question,” as he put it, “is how to keep these gentlemen from getting too fat and getting themselves and the country into scrapes without too much cramping the circulation.”

In all this, the Rothschilds were increasingly beginning to think in a way fundamentally similar to that characteristic of central bankers. This is scarcely to be wondered at. In the first half of the nineteenth century, the central banks of England and France continued to be partly private institutions, albeit with evolving public responsibilities governed by statute. In terms of their financial resources, they were in fact the only banks comparable with the Rothschilds, though of course they were national where the Rothschilds were international, and the Rothschilds had no interest in resisting their monopolisation of note-issue. The relationships between the Rothschilds and the European central banks were thus almost always close and sometimes symbiotic. We have already seen how Nathan made use of the Bank of England for short-term loans during the 1820s; how, in return, he had come to its rescue in 1825; and how it had provided the advances of bullion needed to bail out James in 1830. Small wonder his evidence to the 1832 Bank Committee was so positive: “I feel the management and I know that it is good.” After the 1830-32 crisis, James appears to have been on a similar footing with the Banque de France; and Salomon’s relations with the Austrian Nationalbank were even closer.