





’Change

In 1836 James gave his nephews some advice about how to sell securities on the Paris stock exchange: When you are buying or selling rentes, try not to look at making a profit, but rather your aim should be to get the brokers used to the idea that they need to come to you . . . [O]ne initially has to make some sacrifices so that the people then get used to the idea to come to you, my dear nephews, and as such one first has to spread the sugar about in order to catch the birds later on.



It is easy for the historian to lose sight of that throng of brokers attracted by the Rothschild “sugar,” for the simple reason that most of their dealings were conducted orally rather than by correspondence. Yet the brokers were the indispensable worker-ants of nineteenth-century finance. As with the banks they dealt with, the Rothschilds had their favourites: Menet & Cazenove in London, for example, who sold foreign stocks amounting to £2 million for Rothschilds in 1834 alone, and £1.4 million the following year; and the partnership founded by John Helbert Israel and his nephew John Wagg. However, even these were treated rather in the manner of casually hired grouse-beaters: Alfred Wagg recalled how “on the fortnightly settlement days my grandfather or father would go over to New Court with a statement of the position across which Baron Lionel would write £500 or £1,000, being an arbitrary fee which he fixed as our renumeration, varying in amount according to the humour he was in.” In any case, it made tactical sense to deal with many brokers, above all because of the need to conduct some operations surreptitiously.

When contemporaries called Nathan “the master of the exchange,” they were not wholly exaggerating: by the late 1820s the positions he took were watched closely by smaller traders who—not unreasonably—credited him with superior information and intuition. This meant that overt Rothschild sales or purchases could trigger a general flight from or into a particular stock, a ripple effect the brothers generally did not like to encourage. Stories abound about Nathan’s techniques for averting such imitation. “If he possessed news calculated to make the funds rise, he would commission the broker who acted on his behalf [initially] to sell half a million.” “It was a common practice with this mighty speculator to have one set of agents selling, and another buying the same stock so that there was no ascertaining what in reality was the object of his manoeuvres.”7 In Vienna, Salomon delegated much of his stock market business to a jobber whom he paid “a fixed salary of 12,000 gulden, irrespective of his immense commissions”: This person used to wait upon Rothschild early every morning, when together they concerted their plans for the day’s operations. The stock-jobber had his clients and customers not only in the Bourse but also in the “Panduren-Lager” [the unofficial bourse in the Grünangergasse café where out-of-hours trading went on] with whom he concluded his purchases and sales. He kept a number of runners in his employ, whose sole duty it was to run backwards and forwards from him to Rothschild’s with reports of all the fluctuations in prices.