

Nathan’s eldest son Lionel also passed through his apprenticeship years with flying colours. In 1828 he was formally “initiated into the business” when he was appointed “Lieutenant General” while Nathan travelled to Frankfurt to meet his brothers. “You are now the General all on your own,” wrote James, offering avuncular encouragement, “and you will no doubt attend to the business very nicely.” “Make some nice business deals, like a man,” he added a few days later. “Show that you are a clever and good businessman.” Three years later, as he struggled to remain afloat in the wake of the 1830 revolution, James’s tone was altogether less patronising: Should you, dear Nathan, not need him [Lionel] you know how much pleasure it would give me to have him here with us. It is always better to work in pairs rather than singly. In spite of our unfortunately doing very little business here, it is nevertheless always useful to act as a pair. If it should be too inconvenient to allow him to come here, I would then be obliged if you could send one of your other sons here, whom I always treat like one of my own children. I hope that Lionel has no reason to complain about me and that he will return here.



When Lionel was sent to Brussels, James expressed his unease at being left “on my own” in Paris. By 1833 Lionel seemed to his sister a “complete man of business”: “[He] calls to pay his respects in the morning and we do not see him again until dinner at 7.” His trip to Madrid in 1835 was judged a success; and he stepped into his father’s shoes in 1836 apparently without difficulty.

By contrast, Lionel’s younger brothers were more reluctant bankers. Anthony had to cut short his first apprenticeship in Frankfurt because of a romantic entanglement of which his father disapproved, and harboured an intense dislike of “that stinking place” thereafter (a feeling shared by his brothers). By comparison with Paris and London, Frankfurt had little to offer in the way of fleshpots; worse, their Uncle Amschel worked longer hours than his nephews were used to: from 8 a.m. to 7 p.m., six days a week. (Nathan plainly did not drive his sons as hard as he had once driven himself.) Even in the more congenial atmosphere of Paris, Anthony was found wanting. As James put it tactfully, although he was “hard working,” he failed “to bring the deals which after all will remain for future generations.” His uncles tried their best. James encouraged him to “observe all the wheeling and dealing” as he negotiated a major contract; Salomon sought to “instil in him a degree of steeliness which on the one hand will teach the young man not to be too quarrelsome, and on the other hand, not to be too tempestuous.” But Anthony never entirely lost his unreliable reputation: as late as 1840 his brother Nat felt obliged to protest at the “very coarse language” of his letters. “I do not like him to write to me exactly as if I were his servant,” he complained to Lionel. “I do not think I am touchy but there is a way of saying things which is particularly offensive and our good brother Billy [Anthony’s nickname] sometimes adopts that way.”