



Such threats were idle. Weisweiller might possess “a triple dose of vanity,” but he had made himself more or less indispensable. Thus it was decided to send Mayer to Madrid only for the few months when Weisweiller was abroad getting married: as Nat put it, “Weisweiller’s absence will oblige Tup [Mayer’s nickname] to exert himself & will enable him at once to be master, whilst later W. will be there & it wd not be so easy for Mayer to put him immediately in his proper position.” When Anthony sought to bring Weisweiller to heel, he made little headway: He complained as usual and was as cold as ice, until I told him in plain terms that as long as he did our business in Madrid to our satisfaction, we would make no change, but if he went on giving himself airs and thought our gratitude insufficient, it would be impossible for him to stay in Madrid and one of us would be obliged to go hitherto [sic] . . . He is an uncommonly clever agent and it would be difficult to replace him, but I have seldom or never seen a more disagreeable cold hearted calculating agent. His vanity is excessive.



Instead, another agent, Hanau, was sent to the United States, where he almost immediately incurred the partners’ irritation by over-hasty dealings—though one suspects that, if he had taken more time to learn the ropes, he would have been criticised for idling. Only the Rothschilds could have found fault with an agent for “directing too much of his attention towards finding out all the business he could for us.”

To correct a long-standing misapprehension, it is important to distinguish between salaried agents like Weisweiller and associated banks with whom the Rothschilds corresponded regularly and did business on a preferential basis. To list all these would be tedious: by the end of the 1840s the Rothschilds had such associates in Amsterdam, Baltimore, Berlin, Cologne, Constantinople, Florence, Hamburg, Milan, Odessa, Rome and Trieste, to name just some of the more important. Two famous German banking names are sometimes erroneously said to have been Rothschild agents in their early years: Warburg and Bleichröder. In fact, they were merely two of these many associates, and before 1848 there was nothing unusual about the modest role they played in the bank’s network. Nevertheless, the two cases are of interest because they illustrate how much value smaller banks (especially in Germany) attached to establishing some sort of connection—however tenuous—with the Rothschilds.

The Warburgs began lobbying for Rothschild business in Hamburg as early as 1814, though regular dealings were not established until the 1830s, and preference continued to be given to Carl Heine (the poet Heinrich’s uncle) until the 1860s.6 In much the same way, Samuel Bleichröder attempted to supplant the Mendelssohns as the Rothschilds’ favoured banker in Berlin; again, despite much sycophancy, it was not until the 1860s that his son Gerson was accorded any special status, largely on account of his proximity to Bismarck and the good-quality political news this enabled him to provide. Even then, he continued to be treated with a measure of disdain: “Bleichröder?” James was heard to exclaim to Herbert Bismarck. “What is Bleichröder? Bleichröder is the one per cent I let him have.” Many other banks performed the same role in the Rothschilds’ operations, participating in major bond issues, helping to facilitate large bullion transfers and engaging in occasional arbitrage transactions: the Oppenheims in Cologne, the Schröders in London and the Banque de Bordeaux, to name just three. At this stage in their histories, all were minor players.