

This is . . . the policy . . . of the whole European Continent at the present moment: everywhere, efforts are [afoot] to introduce a spirit of commercial enterprise, to revive trade where it has languished, and to discover new channels in which it may be directed . . . [I] request you will bring this subject before the consideration of my Lord Liverpool, who will no doubt perceive in these facts additional grounds for persevering in that liberal principle upon which His Majesty’s Government has acted, by removing every obstacle in the way of an open, free and unrestricted trade.





10.vii: I. Nussgieg, after G. Geissler, Der Musterreiter (1825).

This was a well-judged appeal to the economic liberalism of the government; but then came the crux of the matter. According to Nathan, the existing marine insurance companies lacked: that energy and those liberal extended views which are necessary, at the present day, to retain the advantages which they have hitherto monopolised, and I am sure I shall be borne out in the assertion that if insurancies are to be tied up by their old fashioned modes of thinking and acting, Establishments of a similar nature will arise in every part of the Continent, and will eventually wrest from their hands the business which they now conduct exclusively.



The government was evidently persuaded, for the bill received the royal assent in June. However, one of the new company’s shareholders (who was also an underwriter at Lloyd’s) managed to obtain an injunction to restrain the Alliance from becoming involved in marine insurance on the ground that this went beyond its original objects. As a result, a second company had to be created, the “Alliance Marine Assurance Company,” also with capital of £5 million.

The Rothschilds’ new incarnation as insurers was initially greeted with some public scepticism. A contemporary cartoon (A New Court Fire Screen, by “an Amateur”) depicts a stagecoach loaded with a group of country investors and their bags of money drawing up in front of the “Hollow Alliance Fire and Life Preserving Office” (see illustration 10.viii). The office has three entrances: one marked “German Porter’s Lodge,” one marked “English Porter’s Lodge” and one in the middle, in front of which three men (Rothschild, Montefiore and Gompertz) converse in French. Nathan declares, “Ma fois, c’est entre nous,” Montefiore replies, “C’est bien fait pour mon beau père,” and Gompertz mutters, “Experience makes men wiser.” Another sign to the left reads “No Holidays except Dog Days and the Fifth of November,” while on the other side the office hours are stated: “From Sun rise to Moonshine.” Above the middle door there is a notice: “No Persons to be admitted but those with empty heads and full pockets.” The English porter tells the newly arrived investors: “No! All full at a premium,” but his German counterpart cries, “No! No! Open your door in order to get plenty of room to take in our Gentry Friends.”

Yet this cynical assessment was unfounded. Unlike so many of the joint-stock companies of the period, the Alliance was no mere vehicle for mulcting naive investors, but a securely founded enterprise with a long and prosperous future ahead of it. After two years at 4 New Court, next door to Rothschilds, it moved to Bartholomew Lane. Nor was this the only Rothschild foray into insurance. In 1839 they became involved (albeit less directly) in the rapidly developing Rhineland market, lending their support to the Colonia fire insurance company set up by the Oppenheims and others. This connection survived the turbulent events of the 1840s (in particular the great Hamburg fire of 1842, which all but exhausted the company’s resources), and in 1852 the London, Frankfurt and Paris houses were involved again as major shareholders in the Cologne Reinsurance Society.