

This explains the great difficulty the Rothschilds experienced when they had to entrust their interests in remote cities like Madrid, St Petersburg or New York to men who had generally begun their careers as clerks. For inevitably these agents could not be treated as mere office-boys, subject to daily orders from the partners and denied all real responsibility. No matter how many letters were sent from New Court, the men on the ground were bound to be better informed about the places where they lived. Sometimes they had to take decisions quickly, so that consultation with London or Paris could only be retrospective. And no matter how often it was asserted that they were mere agents of the great Rothschilds, they naturally acquired considerable local status in their own right, disposing as they did over substantial resources. All this the Rothschilds found extremely hard to stomach. They constantly suspected their most valuable agents of disloyalty—above all, of trading on their own account—and complained endlessly of their insolence, independence and incompetence. “I noticed that Gasser [the St Petersburg agent] has no interest at all in our business affairs,” James wrote to Nathan in 1829 on hearing of a large consignment of silver bound for Russia: Another man, realising that so much silver is due to arrive, would say, “I will meanwhile send you a remittance,” but no, nothing of the kind occurred to him. He wrote to me and enquired whether I wanted to make with him c/meta [a joint account] for three months which would give him more courage to operate. Well, we will have to send one of our own people over there, someone who shows greater loyalty to our House. Well, thank God, you will soon have grown up sons.



Gasser was repeatedly the target of such criticism. In 1838 James threatened to stop paying his salary (14,000 roubles a year), which he considered excessive, instead paying him a quarter per cent of “whatever business we do with him.” As so often, the charge was that Gasser was putting his own interests before those of the firm. “Under no circumstances should you write even a single word to Gasser,” fumed James a year later. “That stiff dog, who is only too glad to hold on to your money at no cost to himself, is doing you more harm than any good he could possibly render.” Even Lazare Richtenberger—established in Brussels in 1832 as the first fully fledged Rothschild agent—was occasionally dismissed as an “ass.” Despite his proximity and punctilious subservience, even he sometimes made the mistake of acting in advance of James’s instructions.

Perhaps the most important Rothschild agent in the 1830s was Daniel Weisweiller, their man in Madrid, whose name was first discussed for the job in 1834. Weisweiller had apparently won a reputation as a “businessman” in the Frankfurt office, and his correspondence over the years was detailed to a fault. But it was not long before he too was suspected of neglecting his masters’ interests. By 1843 there was even talk of replacing “that young man, whose pretensions [according to Anselm] become more unagreeable [sic] every year”: I think really the man is half cracked & fancies himself of the highest importance . . . By today’s post I shall . . . write to my father about Landau that he may prepare himself for Madrid . . . [T]he best were [if] one of us could or would go to Madrid . . . but you may rely that I shall not mention Mayer in my letter to London as your good Mama wishes him to remain in England. I think Landau will do very well in Madrid when once he knows the terrain, he is very clear . . . [and,] belonging to a very respectable family[,] he will never express such ridiculous preten tions [sic] as Weisweiller does & will not fail to continue doing.