



Of growing importance as a non-exclusive source of financial information (and misinformation) in this period was, of course, the press. It might be thought that the proliferation of newspapers in the nineteenth century tended to erode the advantages which the Rothschilds were able to derive from their private system of communications; and to some extent this was the case. On the other hand, the existence of financial pages in newspapers presented new opportunities for influencing the markets which the Rothschilds were not slow to exploit. This was not at first easy: as we have seen, in the 1820s the Rothschilds were more often the targets of press criticism than manipulators of the media, and there were always radical and reactionary journals which remained unremittingly hostile to them. Gradually, however, a group of papers emerged over which the bank could exercise at least some influence. We have already noted how Salomon was able, through Gentz, to exert pressure on the German Allgemeine Zeitung, and its use of Heinrich Heine as a correspondent in the 1830s also ensured relatively positive (if satirical) coverage of James’s activities. James himself appears to have steadily increased his influence over papers like the Moniteur Universel and the Journal des Débats. “Yesterday a deprecatory article concerning us was published in one of the newspapers,” wrote James to Nathan in 1832. “If this article should appear in one of the larger newspapers, we will then publish a response here.” “Well,” he told his nephews five years later, following some sensitive negotiations in Spain, “I am arranging for several articles to be printed in the newspapers for this will make an impression in Madrid and in London because your English newspapers often follow in the footsteps of our French ones and it is good if one can regulate public opinion.” By 1839 he could assure his nephews confidently that he would “see to it” that the French government was “attacked in all the newspapers” if it had the temerity to oppose his railway plans. “If one can’t make oneself loved then one has to make oneself feared,” he declared, repeating a favourite Mayer Amschel maxim. “Newspapers can make a strong impact.”

Nathan too responded to early press attacks by establishing what was to be an enduring relationship with the most influential of all British papers: The Times. In the 1820s he had been attacked on a number of occasions by the Morning Chronicle: for example, it alleged in 1829 that one of its rivals, the Courier, had used inside information from the Foreign Office about a change of ministry in France as the basis for a stock market speculation with Nathan: the editor allegedly “told Montefiore, Montefiore told Rothschild, and a very neat stock job was got up with the rapidity of lightning.” In fact, it was more often Nathan who was in a position to provide the papers with news—in particular, political communications relayed by his brothers from Vienna and Paris. Indeed, it was partly their common interest in speedy communication which brought the Rothschilds and The Times together: by the end of the 1830s they were effectively sharing a pigeon-post service between Boulogne and London. Perhaps more importantly, Nathan struck up a friendship with Thomas Massa Alsager, who had joined The Times in 1817 as a City correspondent and was one of its leading financial writers until 1846.8 Although the closeness of the link should not be exaggerated (Alsager at times expressed concern about the scale of British capital export, which no one had done more to encourage than Nathan), nevertheless the Radicals and Chartists who accused the paper of being “the Jew’s harp” were not wholly fantasising. In 1842 Anselm wrote to his cousins enclosing a new “regulation which the Prussian Govt. intends issuing about the poor Jews”: [T]he King of Prussia being very vain & much affected when the Journal des Débats or the English disapprove his Govt. it would be very desirable for those papers to contain from time to time articles in favour of the Jews. As you know well the leading men of The Times, you will easily obtain from them the insertion of some articles, & I will then send you some German articles you may have translated.