

Nat had an altogether more placid temperament than Anthony, but he too seems to have chafed at the constraints of his apprenticeship. “You must know,” he confided in his sister Charlotte, “that I have been about a month in London, I go regularly to the counting house with Papa & try as much as possible to become an accomplished man of business which however I find rather a difficult thing to do.” When he was sent to Naples he liked it even less, as he complained to his brother Lionel: I have now rather a tender subject to touch upon, namely myself. I have frequently written to you my great dislike of Naples which I assure you increases every day, I assure you however I should not mind that at all, but then I am afraid I am of no service & that I should be much better employed in London where I certainly might learn business in about a twentieth of the time & twenty times as well as here . . . [D]o my dearest Rabbi write to Papa & tell him to let us come home.



In the end, it was once again James who took charge, putting Nat through a thorough year’s training “just like any other apprentice, to enable him to learn how to keep the books in order.” Nat was, he assured Nathan, “a very nice boy . . . and I can guarantee you that, if he is prepared to listen, he will become the most skilful of all.” Indeed, Nat seems to have become James’s favourite nephew: soon he was talking of “teaching the good young man all that I know.” By 1833 he felt his protégé was ready for a foreign mission, though the choice of destination—Constantinople, during the prolonged Greek loan wrangle—was probably not a wise one. Ultimately, it was Nat’s fate to live and work almost all his life in his Parisian uncle’s shadow, never quite ceasing to be a disgruntled English gentleman in exile, constantly dismayed by the political volatility of the French, and quietly counting the long hours he had to spend in “the stinking counting house.”

Why, when they had so many sons—twelve in all—did Nathan and his brothers not follow their father’s example and establish at least some of them in new financial centres? This is not easy to answer. While their sons were still young, the brothers seem to have thought of establishing new houses in Madrid or St Petersburg. And later there was intermittent talk of sending one of the members of the younger generation to the United States. But the plan for a “sixth house” on the other side of the Atlantic remained no more than a pipe-dream. The best explanation for this is that they trusted five of their sons—Anselm, Lionel, Mayer Carl, Adolph and Alphonse —enough to groom them as their successors, but the others insufficiently to give them the major responsibility of setting up new houses. For if Anthony and Nat seemed to lack the spark of financial ability and dedication their uncles were looking for, they were at least competent by comparison with Nathan’s youngest son Mayer, a would-be country squire, or the Orthodox zealot Wilhelm Carl. Another obstacle appears to have been Nathan’s widow Hannah, who resolutely refused to allow her younger sons to be posted overseas.