

Instead, the Rothschilds had to rely on a small group of paid agents. Of course, since the very early days in the Judengasse there had always been non-family members employed as clerks. We know little about these shadowy letter-writers and bookkeepers, save that the partners preferred to exclude them from executive activity: they were regarded as drones, to be worked hard, treated well—and watched carefully. Some were little more than servants, like the cheerful Jakob who was injured in a coach crash in 1814 while delivering a consignment of gold to Warsaw (“better to be hurt in the legs than hurt in the gold,” he joked). Others were skilled linguists and accountants. In 1818 there were at least nine clerks in the Frankfurt office: Radius and Kremm, who were responsible for the book-keeping; Berend, who conducted the correspondence and ledger for all Frankfurt transactions; Geiger, who also handled Frankfurt business and matters relating to coupons; his father, who dealt with current accounts; Hamburg, who conducted all correspondence with titled customers; his brother, who dealt with foreign letters; Heisler, who looked after bills of exchange; and Kaiser, who took care of domestic matters. There was also an office boy in the accounts department and an apprentice letter-copier. To Carl, however, they were all “the young people,” and when he contemplated the running costs of the office (150,000 gulden a year, or around £14,000), he suspected them of “trickery”—remembering, no doubt, his father’s experience with Hirsch Liebmann. The Paris house was even smaller (and cheaper): at around the same time, James estimated that he spent 34,000 francs a year (£1,700) on eight clerks, a porter, a messenger, two servants and a coachman.

Often the clerks were drawn from extended families similar to the Rothschilds’. In Vienna, a key role was played by the Goldschmidt family, which included Salomon’s chief clerk Moritz Goldschmidt, who had moved from Frankfurt to Vienna with Salomon in 1803, and his sons Julius, Jacob and Alexander, who worked in Vienna, Frankfurt and Paris respectively. Relations of the Goldschmidts were also regarded as trustworthy: one of Moritz’s nephews worked for Rothschilds in Amsterdam, but died young. Another nephew (Moritz) worked at the London house for eighteen years, while a third (Ignaz Bauer) was sent to Spain to assist Weisweiller.

Inevitably, the numbers of staff had to be increased to keep pace with the amount of business, so that by the 1830s New Court alone employed between thirty and forty people, earning between £50 and £500 a year. But the paternalistic attitudes of the partners persisted. “Pray let the Clerks have a good dinner,” wrote Lionel on the occasion of his wedding in 1836, “and get all drunk or if they like . . . I think they might make a party to Greenwich; if some of them are too proud, let them make two parties and take their better halves with [them].” The nearest thing to an incentive was that “on our becoming the contractors of an English and foreign loan [we] generally allowed the clerks a small interest independent of a gratuity at Christmas which of late years we have allowed them.” When it became apparent that both Nat and Anthony might have to leave their posts in London and Paris to attend their father’s deathbed, there was consternation: for the first time ever, it was necessary to give the senior clerks in both houses powers of attorney, a responsibility which had previously been conferred only on members of the family. In the case of London, there was some doubt about who should actually be appointed, suggesting the absence of any formal hierarchy within the office. Part of the problem was that Nathan’s monopoly over executive decision-making had encouraged a degree of indolence among his own employees, who were spared difficult decisions and all but guaranteed bonuses.