



Such manipulation of the media goes on in much the same way today, of course, and it is difficult to fault the Rothschilds for seeking to influence an often hostile press. More difficult for a modern reader to judge are the financial practices of a period when there was little formal regulation and the rapid pace of financial innovation left such legislation as did exist lagging some way behind. There is no question that the Rothschilds took full advantage of the fluidity of the financial environment; but it would be quite anachronistic to level retrospective charges of “insider dealing,” or any of the other modern forms of fraud which were then unknown. In the Comédie humaine, Balzac’s Nucingen—the German-Jewish banker modelled on James—is reputed to have made his fortune by a succession of essentially bogus bankruptcies. These operations are described in considerable—and entertaining—detail, but they make little economic sense; nor do they correspond in any way to the reality of Rothschild practices. In fact, there appear to have been only a few legal actions brought against Nathan alleging financial malpractice, and in only one case did the charges stick. In 1823, for example, a subscriber to the 1822 Neapolitan loan claimed that Nathan had sought to retain his deposit of £1,255 without handing over the relevant stock certificates: the case was thrown out, and it would appear that it was actually the plaintiff, a London corn-merchant named Hennings, who had acted in bad faith (refusing to pay the money due when the bonds were falling as a result of the French invasion of Spain, then attempting to pay belatedly when they began to recover).

The one case which went against Nathan was filed in 1829 by a man named Brookman, who alleged that the Rothschilds had deliberately given him bad investment advice, and had then charged him for sales and purchases of stocks which had not in fact taken place. In 1818, Brookman claimed, Nathan had advised him to sell 20,000 francs of French rentes and invest in the new Prussian sterling loan then being issued by the London house. Not only had this been bad advice—rentes had promptly risen 10 per cent, while the Prussian bonds fell 7 per cent—it had also been disingenuous, for instead of selling Brookman’s rentes to a third party, Nathan had kept them for himself. Contrary to Brookman’s instructions, he had then sold the Prussian bonds, advising a fresh purchase of rentes worth 115,000 francs. “As in the previous cases, the moment the plaintiff bought, down went the stock into which he purchased, and the plaintiff is then advised to sell . . . The moment the plaintiff ’s rentes were sold, up went the market.” Brookman had then asked that the money be reinvested in rentes, but shortly after that decided to sell again. According to the accounts of the Paris house, there had been “regular charges for exchange, interest, brokerage and commission” deducted from Brookman’s account for each transaction; yet there had in reality been no actual purchases or sales of rentes, which had remained in the Rothschilds’ hands all along. Nathan’s counsel sought to argue that Brookman was merely a “veteran stock-jobber,” that the accounts in question had been settled ten years before and that such book transactions were routine; but the court was unimpressed. According to the Vice-Chancellor’s scathing judgement, Nathan was guilty of having made “fallacious statements,” and he was ordered to pay to Brookman “the amount of all the sums which he has lost or ought to have received,” plus 5 per cent interest, plus costs. Predictably, the case inspired yet another cartoon of Nathan, The Man Wot Knows How to Drive a Bargain, which portrayed Nathan as a dealer in old clothes, carrying a sack marked “French Rentes £20,000” (see illustration 10.ix).