

Firstly, Nathan called on his sons to “carry on in harmony and peace the banking house founded by me under my name in London.” Secondly, he stressed that they were to do so in consultation with his widow: “My dear wife Hannah . . . is to co-operate with my sons on all important occasions and to have a vote upon all consultations. It is my express desire that they shall not embark on any transaction of importance without having previously demanded her motherly advice . . .” Thirdly, he expressed his earnest wish that the association between my firm in London, now carried on by my four sons, and the other Houses, which my four dear brothers direct, shall be allowed to continue, that they shall continue to remain partners together . . . I thereby recommend my sons in their business always willingly to follow the advice and recommendations of my brothers . . .



Finally, as his brother recalled, Nathan spelt out a series of amendments to the new partnership agreement: On his deathbed, Nathan asked me to have the contract renewed with his surviving sons, with the provision that it should not be terminated within a period of five years . . . The firm of N. M. Rothschild [thus] remains unaltered, the sons together acting as a unit with one vote in the partnership. The whole trading capital of the four brothers and of the late N. M. Rothschild cannot be touched for the next five years, and nobody can draw anything out of the working capital, while we have reduced the interest that we draw individually from four to three per cent, so that the partnership as a whole will, with God’s help, still further improve its position in the five years, as the proportion of the funds which can be spent has been reduced, and there is no necessity for the young men to be drawn into speculative ventures.



These wishes were duly incorporated in a hastily drafted annexe to the original agreement.

The practical provisions for the future having been made, Nathan proffered some parting advice: [He] charged his eldest son, and through him all those who were not present, always to apply all their efforts to keep the business property intact and not to participate in any risky ventures. He gave them much wise counsel, bade them avoid all evil company and always to keep in the way of true virtue, religion and righteousness. My late brother told them that the world would now try to make money out of us, so that it behoved them to be all the more careful, and he remarked that, whether any son had £50,000 more or less, was a matter of indifference to him. All that mattered was that they should hold together in unity.



“He died,” Salomon wrote, “in the full possession of his faculties, and ten minutes before his death he said, as he received the last consolations of religion that are customary with us: “It is not necessary that I should pray so much, for, believe me, according to my convictions I have not sinned.” . . . [Then] to my daughter Betty, as she took leave of him, he said in the truly British style, ‘Good night for ever.’ ”