

Left alone in charge of the Paris office for the first time, Anthony felt ill at ease, though this was a consequence more of boredom than of the burdens of responsibility. “Am not in good spirits,” he complained to his brother Nat, similarly situated in London. “Nothing is so disagreeable than to remain alone. Everything is uncommonly flat . . . How do you amuse yourself quite alone? You are better off than I am for here they have all gone and shut up the house, so I dine every day at a Cabaret [tavern].” The Paris market was in the traditional summer doldrums, and his uncle James’s advice from Brussels—where he and Nathan had stopped briefly on business—had scarcely been an encouragement to undertake new business: In my opinion you should try to leave everything alone until your good father returns, and if anyone should put a proposal to you, you should reply that you will first have to consult your father, and you will thereby gain some time and some peace and quiet. Don’t take any of this to heart and take my advice, hold on to your money and don’t spend any of it.



Nat, by contrast, was under pressure, for his father preferred to keep his sons busy in his absence. No sooner had he arrived in Frankfurt than he despatched a characteristically restless letter, not only urging Nat to buy this security or sell that, but also exerting an indirect pressure on his brother in Paris: You must always put Anthony in the way of selling, as he belongs to the Bull party and does not like to sell until you have made some few purchases, therefore when the prices are low you can buy a little and encourage Billy [Anthony] to do business and write to him at the same time, that you are pleased and satisfied with his remittances and with everything he does. I have written to him, that every day he must do something whatever may be the price, the same you can write to him.



A few days later—before James himself had arrived in Frankfurt—Nathan wrote directly to Anthony telling him “to keep business going” and “keep yourselves occupied.” Neither he nor Nat could feel comfortable on receiving such contradictory instructions from their father and uncle.

Lionel too was faintly disgruntled. He was impatient to be married. Though the match was an arranged one, intended primarily to strengthen the links between the London and Naples branches of the family—and to prevent precious family capital going to outsiders—he had fallen in love with his future wife, or at least had persuaded himself that he had. He was also eager to leave Frankfurt. As he put it to his brother Anthony, he was “heartily glad the day for me quitting beautiful Frankfurt will soon be here”; for, like all the younger Rothschilds who had grown up in England, he found his father’s birthplace not only tediously provincial but also socially uncomfortable, in that the generality of Jews in Frankfurt were still subject to more legal discrimination than their counterparts in London or Paris, even if he and his family were to some extent exempted. His unease was only increased by his father’s late arrival from Brussels, and by every subsequent delay.