

Besides the wedding itself, there were two ulterior motives for this large family gathering—one of the biggest Rothschild conclaves of the nineteenth century, and without question the most important. Lionel’s marriage to Charlotte was not the first endogamous marriage in the family’s history: as we have seen, their uncle James had married their cousin (and his own niece) Betty in 1824; and Anselm had married his cousin Charlotte two years later. More—many more—such intermarriages were to follow. The only question, as Lionel put it, was “how the younger branches of the family will agree”; or, to be precise, who would be paired off with whom. This was the real reason for the presence in Frankfurt of the numerous younger siblings and cousins: they were being assessed for their potential compatibility. Thus Carl’s son Mayer Carl was tentatively identified as a suitable match for Lionel’s youngest sister Louise; Louisa Montefiore was discussed as a possible wife for Anthony; Joseph Montefiore was spurned by both Hannah Mayer and Louise; and their brother Mayer ruled out as a husband for James’s Charlotte. The marriage market evidently provided more entertainment for mothers than for daughters: Hannah Mayer complained of “dreadful tedious long dinners every day” punctuated by German and embroidery lessons. “Only fancy,” wrote a dismayed Louise to her brother in London: “to be seated as I am sometimes between Grossmutter and aunt Eva and to be stuffed so full as scarcely to be able to breathe.” The tedium was relieved only by her daily music lesson with Rossini.

The third reason for the family gathering—and the most important—was business. Accustomed though they were to reaching major business decisions on the basis of their regular correspondence, even the five Rothschild brothers sometimes found face-to-face meetings indispensable. In the years before 1836 James had often crossed the Channel to meet Nathan, and Nathan had sometimes reciprocated; Salomon, the most peripatetic of the five, had been a frequent visitor to Paris and still travelled back and forth regularly between Frankfurt and Vienna; while Carl too divided his time between Naples, where he did business, and Frankfurt, where he preferred to educate his children. Yet the regularity of such shuttling had declined over the years as the brothers had aged, and as their business and family commitments in their respective places of residence had increased. The last time all five had met together had been in 1828.

The most important item on their agenda in 1836 was nothing less than their future relations with one another. Since 1810, as we have seen, the house of Rothschild had been a partnership, based primarily on a detailed, legally binding contract as well as on the wills of the various partners, which determined how individual shares in the firm would be passed on to the next generation. It had been the custom to revise and renew the partnership agreement every few years: thus there had been new contracts in 1815, 1818, 1825—when Salomon’s son Anselm had been admitted as a sleeping partner—and 1828, when he had become a “real Associé.” Since then, Nathan’s three elder sons, Lionel, Anthony and Nat, had all entered the firm to serve their financial apprenticeships. By 1836 Nathan felt his eldest son was ready to become a partner on the same footing as Anselm; and it was primarily to agree the terms of his elevation that the brothers now met.