

Five days later a carrier pigeon from Boulogne conveyed the news to London in a single, three word sentence: “Il est mort.”





Legacy and Legend

The deaths of only a handful of individuals in the nineteenth century can be said to have had economic effects comparable with those caused by the death of Nathan Rothschild. When the Austrian Emperor Francis had died a year before, there had been a minor panic on the Viennese stock exchange and the price of Austrian government bonds had fallen sharply; but the Rothschilds had intervened to prop up the markets. When Nathan died, by contrast, it appeared that the markets’ strongest prop had been removed. The financial press had been anxiously reporting on Nathan’s health for nearly a week before the news of his death was first published. On July 27 The Times had felt able to report (wrongly) that his condition was “not at all dangerous.” On August 2 it categorically denied reports in other papers that he had died. But, as its “Money Market and City Intelligence” column admitted, opinion in the City was less sanguine: The dangerous state in which Mr Rothschild remained, by the accounts from Frankfort, has again today had its effect upon Spanish and Portuguese securities, and a further depression of 1½ per cent has taken place with them . . . [I]t seems generally accepted that the firm would call in all the loans advanced upon those securities by Mr Rothschild, and hence the anxiety of the borrowers to dispose of their stock, so as to be in a position to meet the demands upon them. The sales today were extensive, but from the weak state of the market it was, in fact, possible to realize but a limited amount . . . There was very little business doing in the share market. Consols have partly recovered the depression they sustained on Saturday, in consequence of the accounts from Frankfort above referred to, but they do not, on the whole, present a very firm appearance.



When the news of Nathan’s death was finally confirmed the following day, there was—paradoxically—a slight rally, suggesting that the markets had been discounting the event: Government securities of all descriptions, but more particularly those of the foreign markets, have been falling in value during the week, in anticipation of this event, but its confirmation has had a contrary effect, probably on account of the understanding there is that his business, under the management of his sons, will go on as usual.



However, this was only temporary. For Nathan’s death coincided with, and perhaps also exacerbated, the onset of the international financial crisis which had been developing throughout his illness.

The period from May 1834 until July 1836 had been one of general financial stability. The price of consols had fallen below 90 only in a handful of weeks, and it had been above 91 for the last six months of the period. But from the first week of August—when the news of Nathan’s death broke—until the end of the year, it fell steadily, reaching a nadir of 87 in November (see illustration 11.i). Just days before, on July 21, Bank rate (in effect, the Bank of England’s base lending rate) had been raised for the first time in nine years from 4 to 4.5 per cent; on September 1, it went up by another half point. The Rothschilds’ own profit and loss accounts show that in 1836 the London house suffered its first loss—equivalent to more than 4 per cent of its capital—since the revolutionary year of 1830. These losses very probably accrued in the second half of the year.