

Only one shadow hung over the brothers’ deliberations and over the nuptial preparations beyond their closed doors; and that was the fact that Nathan Rothschild was dying. Or rather he was ill; for no one could conceive that the man who, since the death of his father in 1812, had been the unquestioned leader of the house of Rothschild, might die at the very height of his powers. While at Brussels, Nathan had suffered a recurrence of an earlier complaint, probably an ischio-rectal abscess. As his wife put it, he had “again a visit from his most unpleasant visitor, a disagreeable boil in a most inconvenient place and [which] annoys him considerably particularly in sitting down.” His son was more blunt: “Papa has a most terrible boil on his bottom and suffers very much from it. He has not yet been able to leave his bed and has a great deal of pain. The movement of the carriage inflamed it, so that he requires now double rest.”

The final illness and death of Nathan Rothschild is a case study in the inadequacies of nineteenth-century medicine. The German doctors may not actually have killed their patient by their interventions, which aimed, not unreasonably, at draining the abscess; but they inflicted excruciating pain on him, unmitigated by any form of anaesthesia. Shortly after his arrival, an attempt was made to lance the boil, but another swelling quickly formed which “creates the same pain and confinement as the first.” “This, dear Anthony,” reported his distraught wife, “is very distressing as these things are so painful . . . but the doctors assure us of no danger. You know how impatient Papa is if he is ill,” she concluded hurriedly, “and I therefore must go to him.” “The large opening,” Lionel was able to report on June 13, “has been running famously and no other operation, it is expected, will be necessary. Professor Chelius arrived this morning and found both wounds in a much more forward state than he had imagined; in fact he is quite satisfied with the way they are going on and assures us that only time is requisite to see Papa quite restored.” His mother was equally reassured by this “celebrated Professor from Heidelberg, who unites great safeness of manner and incessant attention, with renowned ability” and by his “assurances that there is nothing more forming and the opening [is] going on well.”

Needless to say, Nathan’s illness blighted the wedding celebrations. Although the bride’s parents decided to proceed with the ball they had planned to give on June 13, the bride herself was so “agitated” that she could not attend. Yet Nathan—with the phenomenal resolve which had characterised his whole life—refused to have the wedding postponed on his account. Indeed, he insisted on being present at it. On the day of the wedding, as his wife recorded, “he took courage at 6 o’clock in the morning to get up and walk to Charlotte’s which he effected tolerably and afterwards dressed—and went to Charles’s [Carl’s] to be present at the celebration of the ceremony.” “Everything passed off perfectly well,” the relieved groom was able to report to his absent brothers that afternoon. “Papa was well enough to come . . . and as his complaint is only one that gives pain, it required but a little resolution, of which you know Papa has enough. The ceremony lasted but half an hour and was very solemn . . . [It] went off uncommonly well as Papa was there and our family circle complete.” Indeed, Nathan seems to have gone out of his way to play down his illness, trying “with jokes of every kind . . . to shorten the speech of the worthy Rabbi and to cheer up those present.” It was an act. Immediately after the ceremony, “he was seized with the excessive pain which usually comes on about 2 o’clock and lasts for 6 hours.” Rather than return to the hotel, he was put to bed in his daughter’s house. While the newlyweds departed for a brief twenty-four-hour honeymoon at Wilhelmsbad,1 an increasingly irritable Nathan submitted once again to the surgeon’s knife. Although he bore “all his operations and dressing without a murmur,” he was now worried enough to insist that his doctor and erstwhile neighbour in New Court, Benjamin Travers, be summoned.