



Her groom—and also her cousin—was Nathan’s eldest son Lionel. He was twenty-seven, and already an experienced businessman, having recently played a pivotal role in his father’s intricate financial operations in Spain. To judge by his letters, he was a rather solemn, serious young man, conscious already of his daunting responsibility, as the eldest son, to preserve his father’s remarkable financial achievements; but also increasingly aware of a more general obligation to advance the cause of Jewish emancipation not only in England, where he had been born and brought up, but throughout Europe. He was presentable, if not handsome, and not a little amorous.

For weeks the women of the family in Frankfurt had been preparing for the great event: Gutle, the betrothed couple’s grandmother, now aged eighty-two; Eva, her eldest son Amschel’s wife; the bride’s mother, Adelheid; as well as Lionel’s eldest sister Charlotte, who had married her cousin Anselm ten years before, and was now bringing up their three children, with another on the way. The Rothschild houses in Frankfurt were being vigorously “washed and cleaned” in preparation for the anticipated round of family dinners: Amschel’s house, with his beloved garden, in the northern suburbs of the town; his elegant town house on the Zeil; Anselm’s newly acquired “palace” in the Neue Mainzer Strasse; and the more modest house in the same street used by Carl and his family when they were in Frankfurt rather than Naples. The original family home in the former Judengasse—where Gutle stubbornly continued to live, despite her sons’ great wealth—seems not to have been considered a fit venue for the festivities.

Of the London-based Rothschilds, Lionel himself was among the first to arrive; his youngest brother Mayer was already there, as he was in the process of completing his studies in Germany. Their father set off from London at the beginning of June, accompanied by his wife and two unmarried daughters, the vivacious Hannah Mayer and the musically inclined Louise. Left behind in London to mind the office at New Court was Nathan’s third son, Nat. His other son Anthony was in Paris, where he would perform the same deputising role when his uncle James also left for Frankfurt. This he did on June 4, preceded by his wife Betty and their four young children: Charlotte, the eldest at eleven, Alphonse, Gustave and the baby Salomon James. They arrived in Frankfurt eight days later. Just before them, James’s brother Salomon had arrived from Vienna accompanied by his son Anselm. While they naturally stayed at the house in the Neue Mainzer Strasse where Anselm’s wife Charlotte and the children awaited them, the less frequent visitors to Frankfurt had to be put up in hotels: the London Rothschilds were booked into the Römische Kaiser, the Paris Rothschilds stayed at the Russische Hof, and the Montefiores—doubly related to the Rothschilds by marriage—in the Englische Hof. Altogether, by the time all had assembled, there were around thirty-six Rothschilds in Frankfurt. Perhaps not surprisingly, there were few other guests: the only “outsiders” referred to in the surviving correspondence are Mayer’s tutor, Dr Schlemmer, and the composer Gioacchino Rossini, a friend of both James and Lionel, whose role was “to add to the gaiety of our party.”