

For six weeks the family waited in vain for Nathan to recover. By the end of June he was well enough to resume dictating his orders to Nat via Lionel, but the final negotiation of the partnership agreement was postponed—to the evident irritation of James, who complained of eye-ache and longed for the comfort of a spa. Lionel was equally impatient. “Papa is going on pretty well but slowly,” he told his brothers. “Every day we have a family dinner which is long and tedious and all the day long they are running from one house to the other, doing nothing and talking of nothing.” But the doctors continued to open and drain the wounds of “hardness,” “matter” and “fibres” with little sign of real improvement in the long-suffering patient, who sought comfort in “Soda Water, Lavender, Oranges, Arrowroot and fruit” sent by courier from England. “The second [wound] was opened this morning,” reported Lionel on July 9, a month after his father had arrived in Frankfurt. “Papa underwent the operation with the greatest possible courage and all the time made jokes. The wound was larger than the first as the boil was most terribly deep and must have been very painful.” And so it went on, with the gathering financial crisis eerily mirroring the patient’s condition.

Finally, on July 24, Nathan lapsed into a “violent” fever and was plainly “in danger”—probably the onset of septicaemia. The next day, in an agitated and near-delirious state, he summoned his son. “He has this instant called me,” an anxious Lionel wrote to Nat, to write that he wishes you to go on selling English Securities and Exchequer Bills, as well as £20,000 India Stock more. You are also to send an account of the different Stocks on hand. I do not know if I misunderstood him, but I did not like to ask for an explanation. [He also] said you are to sell . . . the securities that the Portuguese Government has given for the money they owe us, not minding one or two per cent.



To Lionel, such sales across the board—and heedless of losses as large as 2 per cent—seemed so out of character as to be almost incomprehensible. Suddenly conscious that their father was dying, Nat and Anthony prepared to leave for Frankfurt. 2 But on July 28, before they could reach him, his brothers, his wife and the two sons present gathered round what was now unmistakably Nathan’s deathbed.

It was a decisive as well as fraught moment in the history of the firm: for the head of the family was dying before the new partnership agreement had been signed. As Salomon told the Austrian Chancellor Metternich in a letter written less than two weeks after his brother’s death: “The agreements between us for a further period of three years [had] been drawn up, embodying every point, and they were ready for signature, for we still believed that our late brother would, with God’s help, recover. However, this was not to be, fate had decided otherwise.” Yet Nathan had just enough energy left for a final exercise of his domineering will. Salomon described how “three days before his death he told me all his thoughts and wishes with regard to the will which he then drew up, and which I then had written out in accordance with his intentions.” He was not always coherent now: his brothers remarked how he alternated between “more decisive demands” and “utterances already gradually interrupted and obscured by his sufferings.” But his message to the family was intelligible enough. Above all, they were to maintain “harmony, constant love and firm unity”—a conscious echo of his own father’s last words. What that meant in practice he spelt out with characteristic precision.