

Yet this example of apparently Nucingen-like behaviour is worth mentioning precisely because it seems to be unique. In reality, the Rothschilds of this period were more often the victims of fraud—not to mention straightforward robbery—than its perpetrators. In 1824 a Frenchman named Doloret—who had also brought an unsuccessful action against Nathan over the Neapolitan loan—fraudulently obtained from the London house bills worth £9,670, drawn in his favour on the Paris house. A year later one of James’s clerks stole a quantity of banknotes (perhaps as much as 1.5 million francs) by smuggling them out of the office in a spe-cially designed belt. A similar robbery occurred at New Court in 1838, when an eighteen-year-old clerk named Samuel Green absconded with a cheque for £2,900. In 1839 it was the turn of the Paris house. There was a much bigger robbery from the Madrid office six years later, with gold and securities worth around £40,000 being stolen. And seven cases of Spanish piastres worth around £5,600 were stolen from a Rothschild coach on its way from London to Paris in 1845. Nor were fraud and robbery the only threats the Rothschilds had to contend with. In 1863 a young man who had lost heavily on the bourse sought to extort 100,000 francs from James by sending him threatening letters. Such crimes were perhaps the inevitable price the Rothschilds paid for their celebrity. For what more tempting target did the nineteenth century have to offer its aspirant crooks than the world’s bankers?



10.ix: “A Sharpshooter,” The Man Wot Knows How to Drive a Bargain (July 14, 1829).





ELEVEN

“Il est mort” (1836)


Sidonia had foreseen . . . that, after the exhaustion of a war of

twenty-five years, Europe must require capital to carry on peace.

He reaped the due reward of his sagacity. Europe did require

money, and Sidonia was ready to lend it to Europe. France

wanted some; Austria more; Prussia a little; Russia a few mil

lions. Sidonia could furnish them all . . . It is not difficult to

conceive that, after having pursued the career we have inti

mated for about ten years, Sidonia had become one of the most

considerable personages in Europe. He had established a

brother, or a near relative, in whom he could confide, in most of

the principal capitals. He was lord and master of the money

market of the world and of course virtually lord and master of

everything else. He literally held the revenues of Southern Italy

in pawn; and monarchs and ministers of all countries courted

his advice and were guided by his suggestions. He was still in the

vigour of life, and was not a mere money-making machine. He

had a general intelligence equal to his position, and looked for

ward to the period when some relaxation from his vast enter

prises might enable him to direct his energies to great objects of

public benefit. But in the height of his vast prosperity he sud

denly died.

—DISRAELI, CONINGSBY





A Wedding and a Funeral

On June 15, 1836, a wedding took place in Frankfurt. The bride was Carl’s daughter Charlotte. She had turned seventeen just two days before and was, it was generally agreed, rather beautiful. Her future mother-in-law—an exacting judge—found her as “beautiful as members have already said and her manner agreeable,” “simple and amiable.” This was not just familial pride. When Benjamin Disraeli met Charlotte for the first time the following year, he was struck by her “tall, graceful, dark, and clear” looks: “picturesquely dressed [in] a robe of yellow silk, a hat and feathers, with a sort of “Sévigne” [bandeau] beneath of magnificent pearls,” she looked “quite a Murillo” and was “universally admired.” The two characters in his fiction which she later inspired—Eva Besso in Tancred and Mrs Neuchatel in Endymion—are both fascinating and exotic beauties, especially the former: That face presented the perfection of oriental beauty; such as it existed in Eden, such as it may yet occasionally be found among the favoured races in the favoured climes . . . The countenance was oval, yet the head was small. The complexion was neither fair nor dark, yet it possessed the brilliancy of the north without its dryness, and the softness peculiar to the children of the sun without its moisture. A rich subdued and equable tint overspread this visage, though the skin was so transparent that you occasionally caught the streaky spleandour of some vein like the dappled shades in the fine peel of beautiful fruit. But it was the eye and its overspreading arch that all the Orient spake . . .