

Apart from the new partnership agreement, there were other matters which the brothers needed to discuss. The year 1836 was critical in the history of their operations in Spain, where a bloody civil war was raging; and there were also important transactions afoot with respect to Greece, Naples and Belgium, all countries in which the brothers had a financial interest. In addition, three of the brothers had recently begun to involve themselves in an entirely new line of business: the financing of railway construction. James in particular was deeply embroiled in battles for control of the fast-developing French rail network—business which to some extent depended on his access, through Nathan, to the larger British capital market. Yet it was far from obvious that Nathan himself approved of this new direction the firm was taking. The first British railway “mania” was reaching its peak in 1836, when no fewer than twenty-nine new railway companies were chartered; but he, in common with all but one of the established London banks, had played no part in it. His preference was for stepping up the bank’s involvement in the United States, continuing to concentrate on making loans to states and financing trade, rather than investing in industrial concerns. Here too, however, there was matter for discussion, not least because of the brewing financial crisis on the other side of the Atlantic, the beginnings of which had begun to manifest themselves (in the form of a monetary tightening in London) on the eve of the brothers’ meeting.

The negotiations went on between the partners in strict secrecy: all other family members were excluded. “They are now all assembled,” reported Lionel to his brother, “that is, the four are alone in [Papa’]s room and we are shut out. Papa I believe said something about our having a share in the London profit. They all seem to let him do as he likes. I do not know . . . whether they think of getting him round by good words and coaxing.” “The Family arrangements go on very amicably,” thought his mother. “There has been no difference.” By June 12 it appeared that Nathan had got his way without the “high words” his son had feared: Papa proposed that we should have half the profits of the London House and that he should have only half the profit the others make. Everything was agreed to immediately and not a word said. I was not in the room but this morning have heard so . . . I am sure you will be pleased in knowing that they all are pleased with each other and that there have not been any disputes . . . They all are very satisfied with the different cash accounts and did not expect to have seen the Houses so flourishing.



“All parties,” it seemed, were “inclined to keep the peace.” Such fraternal harmony was evidently somewhat unusual. “Till now, thank heavens, there has not been one angry word between the Brothers,” wrote Lionel with evident surprise. “They pass their time at [Papa’s room] and the [counting] house, and dine altogether at one of the three houses quite en famille.” It was one of the rare occasions when the five brothers lived up to the first of the three ideals enshrined in their adopted motto: “Concordia.” The Frankfurt artist Moritz Daniel Oppenheim captured this mood of harmony in the portraits he painted of the five brothers to mark the occasion.