

But all this, it transpires, was for a higher purpose: for Nathan lent the money only “on one condition . . . the re-establishment of Judah’s kingdom—the rebuilding of thy towers, Oh! Jerusalem!”: That most elaborate of bad jokes, history, will, no doubt, say that the Jew Rothschild lent the Nazarene elder called Lord Liverpool, the sum necessary to crush Napoleon Buonaparte, in consideration of some such Judean motive as 25 per cent interest. The writers of history, in that case, will, as usual, lie . . . Rothschild was commanded to lend the money . . . [in return for] the restoration of Judea to our ancient race; the guarantee of England for the independence of the kingdom of Judea . . . In twelve hours, the millions were in the possession of the minister, and a secret agreement, guaranteed by the sign manual of royalty, was in the possession of Rothschild, for the restoration of Judea in 21 years from the day on which Napoleon should finally be driven from France.



And here is the twist in the tale: This very year my task should have been completed; would have been completed, but he, Rothschild . . . at the twelfth hour proved false . . . His long round of success (unchecked save once when I reproved his presumption with the loss of a hundred thousand pounds in a single day’s business in Spanish Stock) . . . made him more and more purse-proud . . . [so] that it was rather with grief than surprise that I recently heard from his own lips that he had basely sold the agreement for the restoration of Judea for the promise of a petty English Emancipation Bill for our people, and a petty English peerage for himself. This delectable job, this high-minded bargain, was to be completed in the ensuing years, by which time the purse-proud, haughty renegade reckoned upon being worth 5,000,000 £ of money. He was already worth above four.



But of course, having betrayed his master, these vain dreams could only be dashed. “His talisman disappeared, and I took care he should know it had disappeared forever. He never ventured upon the Exchange again, or the scribe who wrote his will should have been saved much trouble and time.”

Did I give him the talisman, to enable him like Sampson to Gideon to intrude his family and found a peerage among the Normans? or to stifle his conscience with the weight of riches? or to flatter it with ostentatious charities? No Israelite can put his hand to the plough of this great work, look back and live!

In this bizarre fantasy, Nathan’s death therefore becomes his punishment for his failure to fulfil his promise to restore Palestine to the Jews; and the narrator moves on in search of a new “heaven-appointed champion” to bear the talisman. Like a Jewish version of the Nibelung saga, with its magic ring which corrupts as it empowers, the story of the “Hebrew talisman” vividly illustrates the mystique that as early as 1840 had begun to surround the career of Nathan Rothschild and his brothers.

It is a good illustration of the wide currency of such legends that, shortly after Nathan’s death an American paper—evidently not a Jewish one—reported that “an extra number of watchmen, after the interment, will be placed at the grave for a length of time, to prevent the committal of any sacrilegious act towards the deceased.” We suppose that this is a hint to “our peo plesh” [sic] to keep their fingers off the fingerer of millions. A rumor is current that a large sum is bid for one of his ogles—in the hope that a “Jew’s eye” would be worth a fortune.