

Nathan’s Times obituarist—probably his friend Thomas Massa Alsager—was not exaggerating when he called Nathan’s death “one of the most important events for the city and perhaps for Europe, which has occurred for a very long time”: for his “financial transactions [had] certainly pervaded the whole of the continent, and may be said for years past to have exercised more or less influence on money business of every description.” “The variations of all stocks & their wild fluctuations,” remarked Alexander Baring, “seem to arise much from Nathan’s death. In the end the emancipation of the money market will be a benefit, but the sudden cessation of a despotic rule is apt to exhibit such symptoms.” Similar views were expressed some months later in a pamphlet on monetary matters by David Salomons, who described Nathan’s death as “an event of some importance in the derangement of the circulation of the country”: It is well known with what dexterity that eminent individual managed the exchanges; how he prided himself in distributing his immense resources so that no operation of his own should abstract for a lengthened period the bullion of the Bank of England; and although it may be urged he kept the exchanges in an artificial state, and therefore produced no ultimate good, yet the sudden withdrawal of this artificial aid in an inopportune moment has tended to aggravate evils which his energy and promptitude might have checked. The difficulties which we have been experiencing since his death induce me to think that no one ever displayed greater ability than he did in equalising the exchanges; and I attribute much of the late embarrassment to the loss of that activity, zeal and enterprise, which he always displayed in times of financial difficulty, and although the operations of his important house are continued, it is impossible at once to replace that moral influence which the acknowledged good judgement of the head of that opulent firm had established for himself not only in Great Britain but throughout the whole of the commercial world.



It is understandable, then, that the financial world paid more than ordinary respects to the deceased. As The Times described it, Nathan’s funeral cortège on the morning of Monday, August 8 was headed by a party of the city police four a-breast, followed by an inspector on horseback; next came several other city officers, and these were immediately followed by the hearse. The sons and immediate relations of the deceased followed in mourning coaches; and the whole line of these vehicles consisted of 40, containing numerous branches of the Goldsmid, Cohen, Samuel and Israel families. After the mourning coaches came the carriages of the deceased and his two sons, and behind these the carriages of the Lord Mayor, Mr Sheriff Salomons, and a line of foreign Ambassadors’ and noblemen’s carriages, in all to the number of 35. The whole procession consequently consisted of 75 carriages; and it was more than a quarter of an hour in passing through Cornhill. The crowd of people who had come to this part of the city was so great that many of the shops were shut to protect the windows from the pressure and there was scarcely a window in the line that was not crowded with spectators.