

“Vould you like von?”





Feydeau was naturally mortified by this humiliating treatment, especially as James’s wife and daughter were evidently witnesses to it. However, he tried to put a brave face on it: “You are a thousand times too kind,” I replied, taking a step backwards, “but I would prefer an order.”

The baron was not perturbed. He nailed me cruelly by saying:

“Buy five Northern shares for cash.”

The price of five Northern shares then being around 50 francs, the amount I could make from such an attractive transaction was just 12 francs and 50 centimes.





Such brutal treatment of underlings was, according to Feydeau, quite routine (a view corroborated by Alexander Herzen’s description of a visit to the rue Laffitte in 1849):3 “You are annoying me! Dat isn’t true! Leaf me in peace!” were the civilities he addressed to me . . . whenever I took it upon myself to make some observation concerning an order. It is necessary to bear in mind that because of the peculiar language which he spoke and his accent, it was not always easy to understand him.

One day, prompted by a stock market price which annoyed him, he became so angry that he tore my quotation in two, obliging me to make it up again, and called me a “blested impecile!”





Others—even fellow Jews—fared just as badly: “ ‘Ah! Dere you are, you tamned thief of a Cherman Chew!’ he said one day to one of his coreligionists, a jobber, as he came into his office . . . The unfortunate man stood crushed, deflated, speechless and blank-faced. Perhaps he took it for a compliment.” The occasion when a broker named Manuel dared to speak his mind to James had become part of bourse mythology. “Good day, baron,” he had said, as he entered James’s office. “How are you keeping?”

“Vat’s dat got to do vit you?” James had retorted cantankerously.

“You are quite right,” exclaimed Manuel. “You could drop down dead as I stand here, and I would no more care than if a dog died.”

Small wonder so many of his Parisian contemporaries assumed that James was Nathan’s heir.

Yet it is far from clear that James ever wielded the same power within the Rothschild family that his brother had. He was undoubtedly quick to try to impose his authority on his nephews following Nathan’s death. One of the first letters he wrote to Lionel and his brothers under the new dispensation of 1836 began in no uncertain terms: I would ask you kindly, my dear nephews, to pay a little more attention to my letters, because quite frankly I was very cross today, for I would very much have wished to continue working with London in the same way that I had done in the past with your late father, and not to have to write argumentative letters, for a business can only be managed well if one pays as much attention to the smaller business transactions as one does to the larger ones.



And there followed three specific sins of omission allegedly perpetrated by the London house. Such rebukes were issued on a fairly regular basis over the next decade, with James’s favourite criticism being that his nephews were too busy hunting to read, much less answer, their uncle’s letters. Pointed allusions to the way things had been in Nathan’s day were also regularly made, not only by James but by all the brothers. “You can now see how right I was,” wrote Salomon patronisingly in September 1837, when I wrote you about the business deals and you will now have to admit it, my dear children . . . We now have to push the business with the bills, my dear children. This is what your late father had always said. Whenever he saw that others wanted to push us out of a business deal he always wrote, “My dear brother, we have to push it through.” It is all the same whether we make a loss or a profit, whether we earn something or suffer a loss, we must not, nor should we let anyone grow above our heads or we will be simply pushed aside. I hope that you will now listen to my advice, my dear nephews, and irrespective of whether we make a profit or a loss we have to push.