

11.i: The weekly closing price of 3 per cent consols in 1836.





The occasion was appropriately commemorated. A lithograph was produced, The Shadow of a Great Man, which depicted in silhouette the already well-known image of Nathan in front of his pillar in the Royal Exchange, holding four keys to represent the succession of his four sons (see illustration 11.ii). This image was reproduced by several different artists, including one of Nathan’s own clerks (see illustration 11.iii).

Just two days after the funeral, the poetaster William Heseltine published his “Reflections at the Grave of N. M. Rothschild Esq.,” verses which tempered formu laic praise of “the Croesus of the Land” with just a hint of realism:



11.ii: Mons. Edouart, The Shadow of a Great Man, published by J. Knight, Standidge and Lemon (August 6, 1836).



11.iii: R. Cullen, SHADOW of the late N. M. ROTHSCHILD ESQ. (1837).

. . . Europe’s kings in adverse hour

Have sought and found thine aid.

More than their swords thy gold hath done,

In many a bloodless triumph won,

And many a panic stay’d . . .

Upon thy struggling path of life

Strong lights and shades were cast,

Which led through toil, suspense and strife

To triumph at the last!

In the continual conflict then,

With selfish, artful, flattering men

Through which thy spirit pass’d

What wonder though some stains of earth,

Were blended with thine inward worth.

Though cold unto a stranger’s sight,

Thy heart was generous found,

Nor didst thou, like the Upas, blight

The lowly shrubs around;

But friends, protected at thy side,

Grew with thy growth and flourish’d wide

In safe and prosperous ground:

As unto Egypt’s saviour came,

All that could boast of Israel’s name.



Mourning rings and broaches were produced, as well as a medal featuring Nathan’s face. There was even a printed silk mourning scarf, again picturing Nathan at his pillar, bearing a rather more succinct tribute (in four languages)—“Equally Distinguished for his Commercial Skill & Enterprize & for his Charitable and Benevolent Disposition”—as well as a list of his best-known loans and a statement of his total wealth. Such mementoes (as the scarf’s multilingual text suggests) reached an international audience. Copies of the scarf itself were sold in Vienna; Heseltine’s verses inspired a similar German tribute; and obituaries appeared not only in the English press but also in the Journal des Débats and (at Salomon’s prompting) in the Allgemeine Zeitung.

Needless to say, it was not only the financial community which mourned the great man’s demise. As The Times mentioned, the diplomatic and political world was also well represented at the funeral: among the mourners were the Prussian, Russian, Austrian and Neapolitan ambassadors, as well Lord Stewart and—according to one account—the Duke of Marlborough. And, of course, the Jewish community also turned out in force. “A great number of Jews . . . had assembled long before the hour fixed for the funeral” and a special delegation of children from the Jews’ Free School preceded the coffin. At the Great Synagogue in Duke Place, the Chief Rabbi Solomon Hirschell preached a sermon; and Nathan’s remains were finally buried in the north-west corner of the Jewish burial ground in Whitechapel Road. Seven members of the community of the Great Synagogue attended New Court daily in the year after Nathan’s death to form the required “minyan” for the Kaddish, the traditional prayers for the dead.