



As Nathan Rothschild died, a myth was born which was to prove as enduringly potent and dangerous as any myth of the nineteenth century.

Succession

To whom—in reality—did the “talisman” of Rothschild leadership pass on the death of “the commanding general?” The traditional assumption has been that the youngest of the five brothers, James, immediately inherited Nathan’s mantle. That was his friend Heine’s view. “Since the death of his distinguished brother in England, all the political significance of the House of Rothschild” was concentrated in his hands, he wrote not long afterwards. “The head, or rather the brain, of this family is Baron James, a remarkable man . . .” It is not difficult to see why Heine assumed this. In an earlier piece written in March 1841, he had portrayed James only half-ironically as a kind of financial emperor, literally holding court in the rue Laffitte at the centre of “a labyrinth of halls, a barracks of wealth.” Indeed, he noticed that James—in imitation of his brother Nathan—had begun to decorate his office with “busts of all the European monarchs who have contracted loans from his firm.” Like Nathan too, James was an intimidating figure in this, his natural habitat. “One must have respect for this man,” Heine went on, “if only because of the respect he inspires in others”: I like best to visit him in the offices of his banking house, where I can philosophically observe people—not only the Chosen People, but all the others too—bow and scrape before him. There you may watch a twisting and bending of backbones such as the most accomplished acrobat would find difficult. I have seen people who twitched convulsively when they drew near the great Baron as though they had touched a Voltaic battery. Even while approaching the door of his private office many experience a thrill of awe such as Moses once felt on Mount Horeb when he realised that he was standing on holy ground. And just as Moses then removed his shoes, so many a broker or commission agent who dared to enter Rothschild’s inner sanctum would willingly remove his boots if he were not afraid that the odour of his feet might give offence.



“That inner sanctum is a remarkable place indeed,” Heine continued; “it inspires sublime thoughts and feelings, like the sight of the ocean or the starry heavens. Here we may see the littleness of man and the greatness of God.”

Of course, Heine was letting his comic imagination run away with him completely when he described “a stock exchange speculator” doffing his hat respectfully before James’s “mighty” chamber pot; or an unidentified friend offering to “give half his nose to purchase” the honour of lunch with the Baron. But the recollections of just such a minor denizen of the bourse, Ernest Feydeau, vividly confirm the quasi-regal status James enjoyed in Paris, an irascible despot in a chaotic court, besieged from nine in the morning until the bourse closed at four by a procession of sycophantic brokers, jobbers and assorted hangers-on. James, recalled Feydeau (who visited the rue Laffitte regularly in the 1850s), felt obliged to receive all these sullen, busy people, sometimes sickeningly banal, almost all of them obsequious in their manner, dull in their solicitations, servile in their flattery. Leaning back in his chair, he absent-mindedly took the quotation handed to him by each of these uninteresting beings, who filed from door to door in front of his desk, barely cast a glance over it, sometimes allowing himself the malicious pleasure of dropping it in his wastepaper basket, usually giving it back to whoever had presented it to him and passing on to another.