

How are we to account for this extraordinary public interest in the death of a German-born, Jewish banker? The obvious answer is that Nathan Rothschild was quite simply the richest man in Britain and therefore, given Britain’s economic lead at this time, almost certainly the richest man in the world. His share of the combined capital of the five houses which he ran in partnership with his brothers was £1,478,541 when he died (a quarter of the total of just over £6 million). He had also given his children before his death around £800,000, and was able in his will to bequeath in total a further £1,192,500 to them and other members of his family. This implies that Nathan’s total wealth—excluding his properties in Piccadilly and Gunnersbury Park but including money he had already given his children prior to making his will—was around £3.5 million.

This was a fortune vastly in excess of the Rothschilds’ nearest banking rivals in London, Baring Brothers, whose capital in the year of Nathan’s death was a mere £776,650. It also easily outstripped the money accumulated by contemporary industrialists and the largely inherited fortunes of the country’s wealthiest aristocratic landowners. Rubinstein’s figures for British millionaires do not give precise figures for fortunes in excess of £1 million before 1858; but it seems unlikely that any of the eleven other individuals listed for the period 1810-56 left his heirs as much as Nathan: the nearest was that of the banker William J. Denison, who left £2.3 million including real estate worth £600,000 in 1849. It was not until 1857 that someone left more than Nathan to his heirs—the textile warehouseman and Anglo-American banker James Morrison, who left between £4 million and £6 million at his death. Nathan not only died richer than the ironmaster Richard Crawshay and the cotton manufacturers Robert Peel and Richard Arkwright; he also left more than the Duke of Queensberry, the Duke of Sutherland and the Duke of Cleveland.

Of course, it is far from easy to compare a fortune such as Nathan’s, which overwhelmingly took the form of financial assets, with the wealth of the great landowners. However, the incomes from their different forms of capital can be compared. The available figures suggest that a handful of aristocrats had incomes comparably large, if not slightly larger: the Duke of Northumberland, Earl Grosvenor, the Marquess of Stafford and the Earl of Bridgewater were all said to have £100,000 a year “clear of everything” in 1819; and not far behind them were the dukes of Bedford, Richmond, Sutherland and Buccleuch, the marquesses of Westminster and Bute, and the earls of Derby, Lonsdale, Dudley and Leicester. The 6th Duke of Devonshire, to take one example, had an income of between £80,000 and £100,000 in the decade of Nathan’s death. By comparison, Nathan’s income in the last five full years of his life (taking the average profits of the London house as a proxy) averaged £87,623 per annum.

However, these figures overlook a vital factor which gave Nathan financial superiority over his noble contemporaries. He had debtors: they had debts. By the 1830s the Duke of Devonshire’s lavish lifestyle had increased the encumbrances on his estates from £593,000 to £700,000; and interest charges on these debts consumed fully half of his income, with a further £36,000 per annum being consumed by the costs of his household at Chatsworth. Indeed, a number of the great landowners were heading rapidly for the financial rocks at the very time that Nathan died. By 1844 the Duke’s debts were just short of £1 million, and he was increasingly obliged to sell off land to keep afloat. In 1848 the Duke of Buckingham actually went bankrupt, with encumbrances on his estates in excess of £1.5 million. The idea that Nathan Rothschild had died “leaving Property to the Amount of 5,000,000 Sterling” was therefore in itself a matter for public curiosity, not to say astonishment: hence its publication at the very centre of the mourning scarf described above. The figure may have been a slight exaggeration, but it was a pardonable one. In terms of net wealth he was in a league of his own.