



As he ran this depressing gauntlet day after day, Feydeau never ceased to marvel at the “truly infernal din, the bewildering disorder in the middle of which the baron found the means of handling—every day, and without an instant of respite—the most colossal financial operations.” The office was filled with the deafening and unceasing cacophony, the incessant racket produced by the banging of doors, the coming and going of employees carrying despatches or requesting signatures. The importunities of the brokers’ clerks and the jobbers looking for orders added no little noise to the tumult, which gave the office of “Monsieur le baron” an air akin to the Tower of Babel. Here all the tongues of the world were spoken, including Hebrew. A crowd of friends of all three sexes—men, women and beggars—followed one after the other throughout the day, all in quest of news. There were jewellers opening their cases of precious stones before the baron’s ailing eyes, porcelain dealers and art dealers coming to offer their choicest items. Pretty women wove their way everywhere, soliciting for information—or something else. And across this merciless and incessant procession, while the brain of the toiling millionaire must have been bursting under the accumulation of figures and calculations, the youngest of his sons—a large and chubby-cheeked child whom I can still picture—would periodically charge in, using his father’s cane as a horse, and blowing on his trumpet like the angel of the valley of J[eh]osaphat.

And the poor baron did not utter a word of complaint, did not so much as frown.





He “did not even have the right to eat and sleep in peace. From five in the morning, in winter and in summer, the bringers and takers of news besieged his door . . . When business required it, he dined with his entire family in a small room beside his office, seasoning his meal with stock exchange quotations, while the procession of brokers continued round his dinner table with merciless persistence.” Indeed, at times James seemed to Feydeau less a king holding court than a prisoner of his own work ethic. What else could explain the willingess of a man who was already so rich to continue working under such gruelling conditions but “a singular tyranny of habit, as much as a commendable sentiment of professional ambition?”

Ultimately, however, James was more to be abhorred for his tyranny towards others—including Feydeau himself—than pitied: One of [his] malicious habits . . . consisted in not saying a word, not even lifting his eyes to look at the intermediary, leaving him there, with a look of embarrassment, his hat in his hand and standing on one leg, and passing his quotation successively to all the members of his family, who paid scarcely any more attention to it than he had. One day, when he had played this wretched trick on me, and as I was showing, despite myself, some impatience, he felt obliged to pay me a courtesy, after his fashion, in the charitable aim of calming me down. It was the month of January, and on the table there was a dish full of large, white strawberries. With his fork he picked the most appetising of these strawberries, the one which lay on the top of the pile, and, presenting it to me as he might have done to a parrot, said: