



Not long after, James wrote to point out “that in the lifetime of your dear Papa he used to give us discount notes at 2½ per cent and that, as good bills can now be freely discounted in London at 3 per cent, the other houses take advantage of it . . . so that if you wish us to be able to compete with them and do business you must discount for us on the same terms.” Amschel harped on the same theme. He and James could only agree in 1839 that “the loss of our brother Nathan was a terrible blow and one can’t expect that youngsters will get the same respect, fear and trust as do the older generation.”

Yet—as James’s complaint about preferential discounting suggests—the most serious complaint made by the continental Rothschilds was that the London house was neglecting their interests; and, as we have seen, just the same had been alleged on a number of occasions before Nathan’s death. Indeed, it might be said to testify to the success of his sons in defending their relative autonomy that this charge was being heard again within just over a year of his death. It was frequently repeated thereafter. In September 1839, for example, James accused the London house of collecting half the profits on their business in Spain but leaving the Paris house to run all the risks. “I think that it is only right and proper,” he complained irritably, “that we share the other business operations where the Paris House runs just as much of the risk as does London, and that no House has any advantage over the other, for as soon as one House notices such behaviour in the other this will generate a feeling of mistrust and everything will then simply collapse, God forbid.” A week later he repeated his grievance. “As long as I am alive,” he told Nat, “I will never countenance that one of our Houses should seek to achieve an advantage over another or perpetrate an injustice [against another].” But “when you [meaning the London house] see that a deal is going well then you say, ‘Let us keep it here,’ whereas if it is not going well then you give a share of it to the Paris House. My dear and good Nat, this sort of attitude acts as a dampener and only gives rise to annoying correspondence.” Such minor disputes about the collective accounts between the houses became more frequent. There was also friction in 1840 and 1841, when both James and Amschel accused their nephews of sending bills to rival banks in Paris and Frankfurt.

For their part, the younger Rothschilds were often irritated by the older. “I assure you that it is a great bother to arrange with people who are so very sententious about money affairs,” grumbled Anthony to Lionel, at a time when all four of his uncles seemed to be taking an inordinate interest in his marriage plans. “I assure you that although Uncle Charles is your father in law, that the less one has to do with this gentleman, the better.” Amschel’s will, which he constantly redrafted in the hope of exerting some sort of leverage over his nephews, was another source of discontent.