

The phantom narrator therefore makes himself visible (“clad in the flowing robes of the far East,” he is “pallid as a corpse . . . with hoary hair and beard” and “great black eyes, that shot forth lurid fires, upon which no mortal could look and not tremble”). “I spake the words of power, and the talisman was once more committed to a man of my persecuted race,” on this occasion in the form of “a ring holding the keys of his rifled drawers.” “I gave to that ring the influence and might of the signet of the wise Solomon. Having done this, I commanded the young man to name some wish for instant accomplishment; and ere he had thrice, according to my instructions, whirled the ring upon his forefinger, steps were heard.” A man enters (later revealed to be a prince), weighed down with a huge bag of gold, which he entrusts to the young man. Needless to say, it contains “the very sum for which he had wished aloud while making his first essay of the power of the talisman.”

“Men of the accursed and plundering race!” the narrator exclaims, revealing at last the identity of the chosen one: Ye whose estates were within a brief space to have been within his grasp; ye, whose equipages and whose liveried lacquies I so lately saw following to his premature grave the man of Israel whom I thus enabled to war upon ye in your vulnerable quarter,—accursed and detested Nazarenes—the young Israelite, to whom I thus committed the Talisman, and who thus early and thus fully experienced its mighty power—he who for years despoiled you of the gold which ye make to yourselves, even as a god—that man whom ye fawned upon, even while you hated him, and knew that he despised you—that man was NATHAN MEYER [sic] ROTHSCHILD. [He] waxed wealthy, more wealthy than any who had gone before him, his riches astonished the gentiles and very justly they said, such amazing wealth could not be amassed by one man, in so short a time by any human agency—they were right, it was the agency of the talisman . . .



There then follows a brief but classic mythologised account of Nathan’s rise from the ruins of looted Frankfurt to fame and fortune. “He came by my direction to this paradise of loan-contracting and speculating fools, and became the leviathan of the money markets of Europe . . . the loan contractor, the jobber, and the money lender of the gentile kings.” When Napoleon (encouraged by the narrator) invaded Russia, “Rothschild was right speedy to make [his] ruin utter and inevitable—not to be repaired.” When the Emperor returned from Elba, “by whom was his hope blasted? . . . simply by Nathan Meyer [sic] Rothschild armed with the Talisman.” The British government needed money not only to pay Wellington’s army at Waterloo, but also to bribe “the Generals and the Senators of France” to desert Napoleon. “There was but one man on earth who both COULD and would provide the millions of golden pounds, required for the instant purposes of the English minister.—That man was ROTHSCHILD. By my instructions, he let the Minister have the hard gold . . .”