

What was even more remarkable was how much more Nathan Rothschild was worth when he died than when he had first arrived in Britain. According to his own account, he had arrived in England with just £20,000. Moreover, he had worked his way up into the City from the much less refined textiles sector, having begun his British business career as a cloth merchant in Manchester. He, more than most wealthy Jews of the nineteenth century, really had gone from “rags” to riches. As such, he embodied perfectly the developing nineteenth-century ideal of the self-made man. And of course he was not the only rich Rothschild. Muhlstein’s figures suggest that James was already probably the richest man in France. In the less prosperous parts of Europe where they lived, Amschel, Salomon and Carl were even further ahead of their rivals. Together, the Rothschilds were without question the richest family in the world.

To poorer Jews in particular, Nathan’s extraordinary rise to riches had an almost mystical significance—hence the legend of the “Hebrew talisman,” the magical source of his good luck, which became associated with him in Jewish lore. This extraordinary story—a version of which was published by an anonymous author in London just four years after Nathan’s death—is one of the most bizarre early examples of what might be called the “Rothschild myth.” Although apparently by a Jewish author, the possibility that (like the later and much better known Protocols of the Elders of Zion) it was in fact the work of an anti-Jewish agent provocateur cannot be ruled out, so militant is its tone. Indeed, the story anticipates many of the more fantastic allegations of the overtly anti-Rothschild French pamphleteers of the 1840s.

The story is narrated by a mysterious phantom, who describes himself as “detesting . . . the followers of the Nazarene, with a most holy and fervent detestation” and having been “doomed to long ages of agony and travail” by “the avenging one of Nazareth.” He is the custodian of a talisman, which confers on its holder magical powers. “Could I not command gold? Yea . . . had I not the talisman?—Had I not the ineffable words?—Could I not buy the whole evil race, from the false prophet even to the lowest among the evil genii?—Could I not task them in the midnight incantation, and, lo! would not plenty make the hearts of my people glad at sunrise?” His aim is to give the talisman to “a zealous hater of the Nazarenes,—a man exceedingly desirous of working their degradation and destruction . . . a champion to avenge the wrongs of Israel.”

Arriving in Frankfurt during the Napoleonic occupation of the town, the narrator witnesses hideous scenes of pillage by French troops. The Frankfurt Jews in particular are the objects of systematic extortion. In a looted office in the heart of the Jewish quarter, he comes across a young man, “his eyes . . . red with much weeping, and his cheeks pale and haggard, as much with sorrow and long vigils.” As he looks on, a French soldier bursts into the office demanding yet more money. “ ‘God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob!’ [the young man] exclaimed, as, kneeling, he lifted up his trembling hands to the east, ‘how long, O God! how long? . . . How long . . . shall the unbeliever triumph, and thy people be a jest and a bye word?’ ” Unmoved, the Frenchman seizes his last remaining object of value, the family teraphim (household shrine). After he departs, the young man “cursed the Nazarenes, and prayed in fervent tones that he might have the power to crush them, and vowed by the ineffable name of Jehovah to lose no opportunity of despoiling their wealth, and trampling down, yea, utterly bruising, their black and unsparing and unbelieving hearts.” “Here,” declares the narrator, “was a servant fit for the great master—here a champion fit for the great cause. His wrongs . . . would make him a faithful and very zealous foeman of the Nazarene of whatever nation. Here was, at length, the man, the long hoped, the long sought, who should build up the temple of the Lord, and make Israel and Judah feared and obeyed in all the quarters of the earth.”