



This last allusion was to the parallel project to marry Mayer Carl to Louise, Hannah Mayer’s younger sister.

In due course, James’s confidence was amply vindicated. “I am pleased to note, my dear Anthony, that you are so in love,” he was able to write approvingly in November 1839; a few days later came the announcement of his engagement to Louisa Montefiore; by February they were married and the recipients of pointedly warm congratulations. Three years later—as planned—Mayer Carl married his cousin Louise in London. In August of the same year Nat married another cousin, James’s daughter Charlotte. The contrast between this last, exuberant occasion and the miserable weddings of 1836 and 1839 could not have been more complete: The ceremony was performed [at Ferrières] in a little temple erected for that purpose in the garden, the road to it strewn with rose-leaves. After the ceremony some went back to Paris, but the greater part remained, with whist, billiards, walking in the garden etc. . . . Billy & I had a bottle of champagne. At 7 we dined in the orangery, which was beautifully arranged. Lots of toasts were drunk. Your Uncle James proposed the King’s health in a very good speech.



A pattern had been established—or rather, re-established—which would be continued into the 1870s.

It is a moot point how far such arranged, endogamous marriages were happy. James’s marriage to Betty seemed to many contemporaries to have paired beauty with the beast: “She handsome—he vulgar,” was how the British diplomat Lord William Russell summed it up in 1843; others were struck by Betty’s more refined manners and cultural sophistication. (This was roughly the way Heinrich Heine saw the couple, though he never underrated James’s intellect; and it is not too far removed from the portrayal of Nucingen and his wife by Balzac—though he never underrated Madame. Nucingen’s fundamental toughness.) Yet Betty’s letters suggest a genuine and deep affection for her husband and there is no evidence whatever of marital strife.

In London, Lionel and his cousin Charlotte, who were married in 1836, also seemed ill matched to some outsiders. He was an industrious, conscientious man, dedicated to his father’s firm and to the cause of Jewish emancipation, but not passionate in his personal relations, nor sophisticated in his cultural tastes. When Disraeli says of Sidonia, “he was susceptible of deep emotions, but not for individuals,” we are perhaps not far from the true Lionel. She, by contrast, was not only very good-looking, but one of the most intellectually gifted Rothschilds of her generation. It is hard to believe, judging from the frequently mordant, not to say downright malicious tone of her voluminous letters and diaries—with their troubling subtext of frustrated boredom—that she was wholly fulfilled as “Baroness de Rothschild,” wife, mother, hostess and do-gooder. “Ever since I became your wife,” she wrote to her husband in a rare outburst, “I have had to do what others want, never what I would like to do. Pray that I shall be compensated in Heaven.” Disraeli gives some hints of this in his fictionalised relationship between the Neuchatels in Endymion: Adrian had married, when very young, a lady selected by his father. The selection seemed a good one. She was the daughter of a most eminent banker, and had herself, though that was of slight importance, a large portion. She was a woman of abilities, highly cultivated . . . And yet Mrs. Neuchatel was not a contented spirit; and though she appreciated the great qualities of her husband and viewed him even with reverence as well as affection, she scarcely contributed to his happiness as much as became her. And for this reason . . . Mrs Neuchatel had imbibed not merely a contempt for money, but an absolute hatred of it . . . In one respect the alliance between Adrian and his wife was not an unfortunate one . . . Adrian . . . was so absorbed by his own great affairs, was a man at the same time of so serene a temper and so supreme a will, that the over-refined fantasies of his wife produced not the slightest effect on the course of his life.