

In doing so, it might be thought, Lionel was surrendering an advantage. Indeed, he surrendered even more by leaving the 1836 system intact for the distribution of the combined profits, which had specified that 10 per cent of the continental houses’ profits went to the London house. “As I was quite sure that it would have given rise to disagreeable disputes or discussions,” Lionel reported to his brothers, “and I am quite certain we should have got nothing by it, I of course said not a word about our having a larger share of the profits; thank God for what we have and may we have to divide as much the next time we meet.” However, Lionel’s objective was primarily to retain the relative autonomy of the London house. His real victory was to defeat James’s proposal—first put forward nearly thirty years before—that the partnership between the five houses should be made public: Uncle James wanted this act of partnership, without any mention of our money matters so that he might show it at Paris, in case they wanted to know who the partners of the House are—now, as we in London always have said that our house has nothing to do with any others we just want to avoid having any document which anyone might show, the agreement with all the money matters is not likely to be produced but one as was proposed might very easily have been made public and will therefore not be made, they immediately agreed to my observations.



Thanks to Lionel, the precise nature of the relationship between the five houses remained shrouded in mystery, a secret between the partners and their lawyers. Such secrecy was a Rothschild tradition; but it seems reasonable to conclude that Lionel already preferred not be bound too tightly to the other four houses.

“Thank God for what we have”: that sentiment was typical of Nathan’s sons. Both Nat and Anthony had used almost exactly the same phrase just a few months before: “We must thank God for what we have got & try to keep it.” Indeed, it is tempting to identify a “generation gap” in entrepreneurial attitudes as one explanation for the disagreements of the 1830s and 1840s. There is no question that New Court was a more financially staid place than it had been under Nathan: there was less bond market speculation and more bill-broking for example. “We prefer dealing largely with a little less profit to keeping a very large stock on hand and holding out for very high prices,” wrote Nat to his brothers from Paris, one of many essentially cautious business maxims he committed to paper. Exiled as he was on the other side of the Channel, he tended to interpret differences between New Court and the rue Laffitte as national in character. “The more I see,” his younger brother declared when he visited Paris in 1846, “I am convinced the more, there is no place like our old New Court. Where would the rubbishy French shares be, if we did not support them? I think we may give ourselves a few airs and be as great men as others.” But it is hard to imagine Nathan saying such a thing. Although only sixteen years separated Lionel and his uncle James, their attitudes to business were separated by much more. For James and his brothers retained the restless, insecure drive born of the Frankfurt ghetto. “Whenever we write to you that other people are more attentive to what is going on and do more business, you immediately assume that we are trying to pick a quarrel with you,” James wrote to his nephews in a somewhat pained letter of 1845. “However, I assure you, my dear nephews, I have nothing of the sort in mind, but my heart breaks when I see how everyone is trying to push us out of [every] business deal. [Even] the stone on the wall is envious and is our enemy.” That tendency to regard all competition as a threat was not something the next generation could inherit.