



Nat made a final effort to defend his sister, but was firmly sat on by his uncle.

The most striking point about James’s response is, of course, the way he equated “religion” with endogamy: “pride in religion” meant, if his words are to be taken literally, intermarriage within the Rothschild family “so that the fortune would stay inside the family.” We may well ask how much this eminently practical principle had to do with “religion” at all. For the thrust of James’s argument was not that younger Rothschilds should marry only other Jews; it was that they should marry only other Rothschilds. By encouraging other members of the family to follow their own inclinations, Hannah Mayer’s rebellion had jeopardised “all the nicely conceived projects . . . that Mayer will marry Anselm’s daughter, that Lionel’s daughter will marry the child of another member of the family.” In Disraeli’s Coningsby, it is said of the younger Sidonia that “no earthly considerations would ever induce him to impair that purity of race on which he prides himself ” by marrying a Christian. Yet in reality “earthly considerations” counted for as much in the eyes of some Rothschilds as any racial or religious exclusivity. James came close to admitting this in his letter: “Don’t imagine, my dear Nat, that I have taken to playing the role of a religious man, but I must admit that I take a lot of pride in my religion and very much wish that my children will do the same.” This tallies with what we know of his religiosity: as Nat was well aware, James was far from strict in his observance. Like his brothers, he dutifully played his part within the Jewish community, supporting the Society for the Encouragment and Aid of [Jewish] Indigents in 1843 and asking the Education Minister “why no Jews had been appointed to the academic council of Bordeaux” in 1847. He campaigned as energetically as any Rothschild to improve the civil rights of Jewish communities outside France (where full religious equality had been secured in 1830). But fundamentally his loyalty to his religion was clannish: few, if any, Jews were on a par with the Rothschilds; nevertheless, every Rothschild had to be a Jew.

James’s appeal was heeded. When—just months after Hannah Mayer’s marriage—Anthony was suspected of harbouring similar intentions, his uncle Amschel leant on him heavily to abide by the “nicely conceived project” that he marry one of his Montefiore cousins, Louisa (sometimes called Louise). This time the pressure was effective, not least because Anthony was at once less romantic and more biddable than his sister. “Uncle A. was a regular bother asking me about getting married,” he complained to his brothers, “and writing to Uncle S. that I only waited until his death to marry a Christian . . . I told him quite short that if Aunt Henrietta [Montefiore] would cash up, I was ready, when he said of course he would not advise me [to do so] without Louis[a] had the same fortune as Joseph and Nathaniel. So, I said very well, and I believe he wrote to that effect—for later we left much better friends.” James was apparently less worried about Anthony than Amschel. “I am absolutely convinced,” he wrote from Naples, in a letter which shows how much attention the uncles were now paying to the marriage question, that Anthony does not intend to marry the girl. He is a very weak person but I don’t think that, even for a moment, such a silly idea could enter his head. He is weak and is easily led and I give you my word that I don’t treat this matter lightly and when I am back in Paris again I will do everything in my power to bring this affair to an end. When I was in Paris I often discussed this matter with him but as you well know, my dear Amschel, people would much rather lay down in a ready-made and warm bed. Regrettably, he considers the whole matter to be rather [?humorous]. Well, you can rest assured that one can no longer tell the youngsters what to do as one could previously. As our good [brother] Salomon is coming to Paris too, God willing, so we will deal with this matter then . . . I am delighted to see that the discussions with our brother Carl’s son have been successfully concluded and that everything will be well, God willing.