



In part, James’s argument was about the structure of authority within the family and the obedience the younger generation owed to their elders: What sort of an example will it set for our children when a girl says, “I will marry against the wish of my family?” I don’t even want to take the notion of religion into account . . . I should then be expected to welcome and entertain this girl as if nothing at all had happened? Why should my children, or my children’s children, ever follow the wishes of their parents if they don’t get punished?



But “the main point,” as he put it, was “religion”: I and the rest of our family have . . . always brought our offspring up from their early childhood with the sense that their love is to be confined to members of the family, that their attachment for one another would prevent them from getting any ideas of marrying anyone other than one of the family so that the fortune would stay inside the family. Who will give me any assurance that my own children will do what I tell them if they see that there is no punishment forthcoming? What if my own daughter, after she has married, should say, “I am miserable because I didn’t marry a Duke although I had enough money to do so, and I see that, despite the fact that this woman renounced her religion, and despite the fact that [she] married against the wishes of her family, she is nevertheless accepted [by the family]. It would have been the same with me?” Do you really think that all the nicely conceived projects [will come to fruition]—that is, that Mayer will marry Anselm’s daughter, that Lionel’s daughter will marry the child of another member of the family so that the great fortune and the Rothschild name will continue to be honoured and transmitted [to future generations]—if one doesn’t put a stop to this?



Finally, James added some reflections on the social implications of the marriage (evidently in response to points made by Nat): Of course, one could perhaps take some steps to prevent this from happening but society may well look askance at such measures. This may indeed be the case but I personally don’t entirely share this opinion . . . [T]he very society which you think is today rejecting you because you are not being very friendly to it over a sister who is behaving against the wishes of her family, that very same society will be just as friendly to you and will hold you in even greater esteem when they see that you stick to your principles and are not prepared to be upset by empty words. The honest and upright man will always value a man of similar character. Adieu.



Admittedly, James added a disclaimer to this impassioned outburst. Nat “should view this as my, and only my, thoughts and feelings and don’t think that I want in any way to influence your mother or any other member of the family. It would be unseemly and I don’t wish to do so. Everyone is entitled to do what he wants.” But these were empty words. He concluded by asking Nat to show his eldest brother Lionel his letter “and I am sure that he shares my opinion.” For the first time since his brother’s death, James was speaking in the unmistakable tone of the new head of the family, secure in the knowledge that the majority of its members were equally dismayed, if not more so. A letter dated the following day from Anthony—who was in Paris during the crisis—confirms this impression: What they wish us to do is not to receive H[annah] M[ayer] for the present and that is easily understood. They say: a sister is married against the consent of one’s family; if after two months you will receive her—what example will it have upon the remainder part of the family[?] They say: will my daughter, who sees her cousin who married against the consent of all her family received by them, will she marry whom I like[?]—no, she will also fall in love with a Christian and God knows what the boys will also do . . . I recommend you . . . now for your own sake and also to keep the union amongst us—not to receive H. M. for the present.