





The Crime and Punishment of Hannah Mayer

In the classic topos of the nineteenth-century novel, it is the aristocratic family which disapproves of the mercantile match. Fitzroy’s family undoubtedly did disapprove, cutting off his allowance. However, they did not disapprove nearly as violently as the Rothschilds. This was not, in fact, the first time Hannah Mayer had formed an attachment to a Gentile: before her father’s death, according to one account, Prince Edmond de Clary had proposed to her in Paris. Then Nathan had bluntly dismissed the idea; and when his brother James heard of her new affair with Fitzroy, he was no more sympathetic: Well, my dear Lionel, your letters wherein you speak about the distressing circumstances and the love affair of your sister Hannah Mayer break our heart. You can imagine why this is so because nothing could possibly be more disastrous for our family, for our continued well-being, for our good name and for our honour than such a decision, God forbid. I hardly even dare mention it. To renounce our religion, the religion of our [father] Rabbi Mayer [Amschel] Rothschild of blessed memory, the religion which, thank God, made us so great.



Yet James was from the outset pessimistic about the likelihood of stopping her a second time. This was not so much because he felt he lacked Nathan’s patriarchal power; for Nathan had formally stated in his will that his younger daughters could marry only with the consent of their mother and brothers, with his own brothers having the final, binding word in the event of a disagreement. The real problem was that the financial sanctions intended to enforce this clause were an insufficient deterrent. On her father’s death, Hannah Mayer had received £12,500, having already been given the same sum on attaining her majority, as well as a further £50,000 which was invested in the family bank to yield 4 per cent per annum. Had she married with her family’s blessing, she would have received another £50,000 as a dowry; but this was money she evidently felt she could do without. James advised his nephews to inform their uncle Salomon of Hannah’s intentions, but was doubtful whether he would be able “to do any more good as far as this issue is concerned than I can.” He also agreed to come to London before February 20 to try to dissuade his niece in person. “But,” he wrote gloomily, whether our trip will turn out to be successful and what kind of impression this will make on the public, this I can’t possibly predict, or whether Hannah Mayer will take any notice of our well-meaning advice when she well knows that the only purpose of our visit to London is to frustrate her love adventure. I am more inclined to believe that in view of this girl’s independent character we are more likely to exasperate her even more than convince her to abandon this ill-starred love affair. However, I want nothing more than the well-being of our family and nothing will prevent me from going to London . . . I am extremely concerned.