

The successful suitor proved to be the artist and architect Sir Coutts Lindsay, a prosperous but Bohemian figure twice her age with a Scottish estate, ten thousand a year, a suspiciously close friendship with Lady Virginia Somers and a shady retinue of plebeian mistresses and bastards. When Charlotte paid one of her numerous half-patronising, half-prurient visits to her sister-in-law’s house in Upper Grosvenor Square—ostensibly to offer her congratulations—she: found her very ill and completely overcome by her conflicting feelings; she had been crying and sobbing almost shrieking, and is indeed so much to be pitied that the congratulations died on my lips. The marriage itself, ceci entre nous, does not satisfy her completely, for the bridegroom elect is forty, and has grey locks, and perhaps her ambition would have soared higher, and selected a nobleman with a grand title for her daughter.



With poetic justice, Blanche had followed Hannah Mayer’s own example, set twenty-five years before, by choosing a husband for love and in spite of her mother’s wishes. Though the latter sought to make the best of a bad job—Sir Coutts, she insisted, was “the most fascinating person I ever met”—Charlotte omitted no defect in her back-handed descriptions of the bridegroom (he was “picturesque,” “one-sided,” his gifts to his fiancée were miserly, and so on).

Nor was this the end of Hannah Mayer’s “punishment.” From the moment of her engagement, Blanche appeared to distance herself from her ailing mother, and cut herself off almost completely from the Rothschilds. According to Charlotte—who poured pity over her sister-in-law while simultaneously kindling antipathy towards the new “Lady Lindsay”—she visited her mother’s bedside as infrequently as possible. She was (variously) “utterly heartless,” “the heartless bride,” “a heartless serpent,” “quite affected and namby pamby,” “an icicle,” “a horrible humbug and heartless hypocrite,” “that heartless, incomprehensible woman,” “the unnatural daughter” and “that horrible Blanche.” The object of this torrent of vituperation was “immensely happy at being Lady Lindsay, and far too much so, to feel deep anxiety for her suffering and perhaps dying mother.” When Charlotte paid a call on her, she found “the heartless staring creature giggling and grinning and simpering while she asked after her dying mother as if the poor sufferer had had a mere cold.”

By mid-November the end was in sight. “Poor Aunt H.M.’s married life and widowed existence have become one chain of such uninterrupted sorrow and suffering,” she told her son, “that, for her sake, one can hardly wish to see her days prolonged. As for Blanche—no one need waste a moment’s pity upon her.—She is either a monster or an enigma. It is less disagreeable to look upon her in the light of the latter, and not to un-riddle her character.” “I feel very sad,” she added the next day, “when I think of such a life of torture, and of a deathbed so lonely. Blanche arrives at 5 o’clock in the evening, stays five minutes, and then departs. Do not mention this heartless behaviour as it is a perfect disgrace to our family, and must shock the domestics from whom constant fidelity is expected.” And so it went on. “Upon the plea that the invalid is too weak to bear even her adored presence beyond five or six minutes in the course of the day, [she] never puts her foot into the house before 5 o’clock in the evening, viz not before the shades of evening put an end to her drawing, in Sir C. Lindsay’s studio; then she arrives novel in hand, while her unfortunate mother carries on the unequal battle with disease and death.”