

Yet even without such differences of attitude, there would probably have been increased friction between the five houses, for it was the inevitable price of success. By the mid-1830s each of the five Rothschild houses had securely established itself as the pre-eminent force in the public finances of its respective base country. Admittedly, the great powers were inclined to draw in their horns in the wake of the revolutionary crisis of 1830-33. With the exception of the 1835 loan to indemnify the West Indian slave-owners, Britain, France and Austria did not borrow big sums until 1839-41. Nevertheless, the experience of the revolutionary alarms of the early 1830s had cemented the links between the three main Rothschild houses and the states where they were based. On the part of Lionel and his brothers, there was evidently a degree of emotional identification with England. Salomon too, influenced by his growing intimacy with Metternich, was increasingly inclined to give consideration to Austrian imperial interests. Even James, for all his disdain for the ministers of Louis Philippe, could not wholly avoid taking national priorities into account. Such national identifications did not greatly matter if peace prevailed in Europe. But when the interests of the great powers clashed, as they periodically did, it was less and less easy for the Rothschilds to remain neutral.

The Rothschilds’ natural response to the reduced capital needs of the great powers was to seek business elsewhere. However, there were few regions of the world in which the European powers had no interest, and no regions in which their interests coincided perfectly. In four areas—Iberia, America, the Low Countries and the Near East—the challenge was to arrive at a policy which was in the Rothschilds’ collective interest even when the national interests of their “local” governments were in conflict. This was difficult enough while Nathan was still in charge; after his death it became all but impossible.





III

Uncles and Nephews





TWELVE

Love and Debt


[T]he very society which you think is today rejecting you because you are not being very friendly to it over a sister who is behaving against the wishes of her family, that very same society will be just as friendly to you and will hold you in even greater esteem when they see that you stick to your principles . . .

—JAMES TO NAT, JULY 16, 1839





On April 29, 1839, a catastrophe befell the Rothschilds—or so it seemed to the family at the time. Less than three years after the unexpected death of Nathan at the very height of his powers, his second daughter, Hannah Mayer, renounced Judaism to marry a Christian.

In every other respect, the Hon. Henry Fitzroy might have been thought a perfectly suitable, indeed desirable, spouse for the daughter of a German-Jewish immigrant who owed his fortune to “trade.” True, he was the younger son of Lord Southampton, and therefore unlikely to inherit much in the way of a title or land; on the other hand, at the age of thirty-two he was already (after Magdalen, Oxford, and Trinity, Cambridge) Deputy Lieutenant for Northamptonshire and MP for Lewes, with realistic prospects of one day achieving political office. Not that this was a consideration in the mind of Hannah Mayer. At some point in 1838 she had fallen in love with the dark-haired, blue-eyed young man. It was an apostasy for which she would never wholly be forgiven.