

The reality was that, in terms of resources, the London, Paris and Frankfurt houses were now quite evenly matched, so that no one of them was really in a position to dictate to the others as Nathan once had. “My very dear nephews,” James had to write apologetically, following a disagreement in March 1838, “I am very pleased with you and I fervently request of you not to take my words à la lettre because one has to put up with such torments over here that at times one becomes very critical and discontented. My nerves are about to snap and I am easily irritated.” Nor was James in a position to dominate his brothers. When Amschel made one of his periodic threats to give up business on the ground of ill health, James rushed off to Frankfurt; but it was on Salomon, his son Anselm and Carl’s eldest son Mayer Carl that the onus of responsibility naturally fell, reflecting the closer community of business interest between Frankfurt, Vienna and Naples. When James himself was taken seriously ill in the winter of 1838-9, any thought of his playing the role of “commanding general” had to be put aside. Indeed, there were few, if any, occasions before 1848 when he explicitly opposed his elder brothers’ wishes. As Nat commented when Salomon demanded a bigger share of some railway and state loan business, “here we are in the habit of giving way to Frankfurt.”

As in the past, the older Rothschilds sought to counteract the firm’s centrifugal tendencies by appealing to the hallowed principle of fraternal “concordia”: “In what has our strength been until now?” remonstrated James in 1839, when he and his nephews were once again at odds. “Only in that people knew that one place will support the other . . . [A]s you well know, the well-being of our family is closer to my heart than anything else.” In 1841 Amschel felt so worried about the extent of internecine friction that he sent all his brothers and nephews a passionate appeal for family unity, invoking the memory of Mayer Amschel. “Let us do business again in peace and in harmony and not quarrel with each other,” pleaded James the following year. “If peace reigns between us this will only bring us good fortune and blessings and both you and we should not lack anything.”

Perhaps wisely, it was decided when the partners met at Paris that same year to leave the 1836 agreement unaltered, as—in Hannah’s words—“the Elder Brothers appear to be content with things as they are and require no change.” However, she added significantly: “The counting house of each[,] having their [sic] own capital[,] should be independent, and they must regulate the income of each party to make all those concerned equally so[;] the Elder Members’ capital being so much greater they have more to say.” This was also the view of her elder sons. Two years later, Lionel was able to modify the partnership agreement in precisely that way. By formally withdrawing £340,250 from their personal share of the combined capital, he and his brothers brought their proportion—and therefore the amount of annual interest they received, calculated as 3 per cent of that proportion—into line with those of their uncles, ending the situation whereby Nathan had been the biggest “shareholder.”