



In fact, James was prevented from visiting England by a bout of illness. Instead, he suggested that Hannah Mayer—chaperoned by her mother—come to stay with him in Switzerland, where he planned to continue his convalescence. This suggested “diversion” came too late. The very day after James sent his invitation, the wedding took place at St George’s in Hanover Square. Only her brother Nat attended the service, the bride’s mother having escorted her no further than the church gates. A few weeks later the scandal made it into The Times: It is confirmed that the condition imposed upon Miss Rothschild on her marrying the Hon. Mr. Fitzroy was that she should embrace the Christian religion. This is the first instance of a member of the Rothschild family abandoning the faith of their fathers, a circumstance which makes the deeper impression at their native place [Frankfurt], as they had hitherto distinguished themselves by their adherence to the Jewish creed. It is said that the bride’s uncles are by no means pleased with a match which renders a change of religion necessary.



This last was an understatement. “I admit quite frankly,” wrote an incandescent James from Paris, that the story about Hannah Mayer made me so ill that I did not have the courage to pick up a pen and write about this matter. She has unfortunately robbed our whole family of its pride and caused us such harm that it can no longer be redressed. You say, my dear Nat, that she has found everything except for religion. However, I believe that [religion] means everything. Our good fortune and our blessings depend upon it. We shall therefore wipe her from our memory and never again during my lifetime will I or any other member of our family see or receive her. We now want to wish her all the best and banish her from our memory as if she had never existed.



Even her own mother echoed these sentiments. “The first impressions and regrets experienced on account of the recent Marriage,” she told her son Nat, “is [sic] only exceeded by a desire to avoid any similar circumstances so very much against the habits and inclinations of us all.” Although she confided that she would “be most happy to receive daily bulletins of Domestic as well as all other concerns in which I so strongly participate if there should be any news from an Individual who still so much interests me,” that individual had irrevocably “separated herself from me.” Nat—and he alone—stood by Hannah Mayer. In July he wrote to James arguing that his sister had done “no more than marry ‘a Christian in a Christian country.’ ” The response this elicited from his uncle deserves to be quoted at length for the light it sheds on the older generation’s attitudes to the subject. “From the beginning,” thundered James, who had evidently been nursing his wrath, “I correctly predicted that . . . this most unfortunate matter . . . would disrupt the unity of our family . . . and I can tell you that this event has made me so ill that I honestly think that I may not survive it”: I would like to know what more one could do than to abandon one’s own religion and publicly declare that since the age of fifteen one never had any thought of doing anything else. My dear Nat, both as your friend and Uncle I want to give you my very frank and honest opinion . . . We are determined that, as long as the Almighty grants us good health, neither we nor my children will again come into contact with Hannah Mayer, for it is not only one thing [which has brought us to this decision] but so many that I could fill endless pages.