

On the night of December 1, 1864, Hannah Mayer finally expired. Her life had been, Charlotte reflected, using carefully chosen words, “a long martyrdom”; indeed, in her last weeks she had sometimes looked “like one of the lovely martyrs so much admired in Italian picture-galleries and churches.” But Charlotte, like her uncle James, did not interpret Hannah Mayer’s downfall in purely religious terms: it irked her that her sister-in-law’s will had omitted to dispose of £7,000 in a savings account, money which passed by default to the Lindsays. The idea of Rothschild money passing into other hands still rankled, a quarter of a century after Hannah Mayer’s initial lapse from grace. Retribution even followed her to the grave and beyond, for Charlotte missed no transgression on the part of Blanche Lindsay, notably her absence from her mother’s funeral (where “the Duke of Grafton, Lord Charles Fitzroy and Lord Southampton, who had known and seen the deceased so little . . . never alluded to her but talked of railroads, horses etc.”) and her attempt to sell the portraits she had inherited of her Rothschild grandparents (“To sell her grandmother and her grandfather; it is not to be believed”). Everything—her louche Pre-Raphaelite dresses, her widening girth, her deteriorating eyesight—could be construed as a consequence of her mother’s peculiar form of original sin. And when her marriage foundered on the rocks of Lindsay’s habitual infidelity, Anselm’s son Ferdinand could not resist predicting that she would “repent . . . in the long run” her decision to “leave the conjugal room.” Even as late as 1882, it seems, Hannah Mayer’s crime, though punished, had not been forgiven.





City and Country

Nothing tells us more about the nineteenth-century Rothschilds’ exceptionally acute sense of kinship than their treatment of Hannah Mayer. The paradox is that her persecution coincided with an acceleration in the pace of the family’s social and cultural assimilation. By not only marrying a Christian but converting to Christianity, she had crossed one of the few barriers which remained between the Rothschilds and the European social elite, and perhaps the only one which the Rothschilds themselves wished to preserve.

In his satirical “Book of Snobs,” published in Punch in 1846-7, Thackeray cited “the Scharlachschild family at Paris, Naples, Frankfort &c.” as the archetypes of the “Banking Snob,” who “receives all the world into his circle,” dispensing “princely hospitalities” and “entertain[ing] all the world, even the poor, at their fêtes.” This was not far wide of the mark. In the decade after Nathan’s death, the Rothschilds greatly increased the amount of time and energy they devoted to social and cultural pursuits, with James in the vanguard. To begin with, their residences grew grander and more numerous in both town and country. In 1836 James commissioned the architect, designer and theatre producer Charles-Edmond Duponchel to reconstruct and redecorate his rue Laffitte hôtel, with money no object. The result was the quintessential millionaire’s palace, combining extravagant historicist decoration with the latest modern comforts. Among Duponchel’s more spectacular touches was a wood-panelled salon in the Renaissance style which was dominated by Joseph-Nicholas Robert-Fleury’s series of Renaissance scenes (including Charles V in Spain, Luther preaching and Henry VIII hunting), but which also subtly juxtaposed the Rothschild arms with those of the Medici. (There was also a billiard room with a Pom peii-style mural by François-Edouard Picot.) But this was historicism with all mod cons. Central heating was provided for the ground floor salons and dining room by four brick ovens in the cellars, and all floors had running water from tanks on the top floor. There were also four large closed tanks for waste in the cellar, to say nothing of gas lighting in the form of moustached statuettes holding mock torches. Salomon’s house next door was given similar treatment, as was the new hôtel Talleyrand which James acquired in 1838 in the more fashionable rue Saint-Florentin in the 8th arrondissement.