

The roof was carved and gilt in the honeycomb style prevalent in the Saracenic buildings; the walls were hung with leather stamped in rich and vivid patterns; the floor was a flood of mosaic; about were statues of negroes of human size with faces of wild expression, and holding in their outstretched hands silver torches that blazed with an almost painful brilliancy.

From this inner hall a double staircase of white marble led to the grand suite of apartments.

These saloons, lofty, spacious, and numerous, had been decorated principally in encaustic by the most celebrated artists of Munich. The three principal rooms were only separated from each other by columns, covered with rich hangings, on this night drawn aside. The decoration of each chamber was appropriate to its purpose. On the walls of the ball room nymphs and heroes move in measure in Sicilian landscapes, or on the azure shores of the Aegean waters. From the ceiling beautiful divinities threw garlands on the guests . . . A large saloon abounded in ottomans and easy chairs . . .





James also spent substantial sums on his château house outside Paris at Ferrières, turning it into a state-of-the art gentleman’s country retreat. Here the theme was English. A laundry was built by the architect Joseph-Antoine Froelicher in the mock-Tudor style and in 1840 James added a model farm, sending the estate manager to England to pick up tips. He later added an English-style dairy as well as a brick-kiln and British-made machinery to make water pipes for the estate. There were also stables, a riding school and riding track, not to mention an orangerie and a new garden laid out by Placide Massey. When his sister-in-law Hannah visited Ferrières in 1842 she found it “most imposing.” Once again, aristocratic guests like Apponyi and Princess Lieven, who came to stay two years later, were less easy to impress. According to Apponyi—though a hint of aristocratic irony is detectable here—the Princess was much impressed by “the superb laundry” James and Betty had built in the grounds, “a veritable chef-d’oeuvre of the genre, picturesque and very convenient.” However, when shown to her room—once reserved for the late duc d’Orléans—the Princess complained that the mattresses were “hard and damp,” so that they had to be “changed, dried, beaten, placed and replaced.” Apponyi himself ridiculed the stables James had built, “a superb and totally pompous construction in the style of Louis XIII.” “Perhaps it is a little too beautiful,” he mused, “as this palace somewhat overwhelms the château itself.” The supercilious diplomat also found fault with the pond, which he thought “too near the house,” and the absence of formal gardens and flowerbeds. “Park and garden are not separated,” he observed disapprovingly, “so that the game can come right into the court of the château.” Yet even this most discerning of guests had to concede that the interiors “left nothing to be desired”: Everything is in good taste and is very magnificent. There are some beautiful pictures and an infinity of beautiful things of all descriptions, suits of armour, statuettes, ewers in silver gilt, ivory or gold, enriched by pearls and precious stones, consoles in bronze, iron, silver, in old lacquer, then vases of every kind, decorated with precious stones, then antique cabinets encrusted with ivory and silver, and Florentine mosaics. The guests’ rooms are comfortably furnished, without excessive luxury, but with good carpets, good settees, armchairs, mirrors, excellent beds, wash-hand basins with plenty of towels . . .