

The Rothschilds also acquired rural retreats in the vicinity of Frankfurt during this period. In 1835 Amschel bought a country Schloss at Grüneburg and two years later Carl acquired a similar property, the Günthersburg. In fact, the literal translation (“castle”) somewhat exaggerates the size of the original houses, and at 150 acres or so their grounds were relatively modest. In one respect, however, the Frankfurt Rothschilds were more ambitious than their relatives, for they were the first members of the family to build their own country houses rather than merely renovate the existing buildings. This gave rise to an aesthetic debate within the family, in which the English (represented at Frankfurt by Anselm’s wife Charlotte and Mayer Carl’s wife Louise) emphatically lost.

In 1840 Mayer Carl commissioned Rumpf to build a new “country residence” at Günthersburg. The design was not dissimilar to that of the Untermainkai house, with Doric pilasters across the ground and first floors and Corinthian ones on the upper floors of the two side projections. “The house is large and when finished will be a magnificent residence,” reported his mother-in-law Hannah, “but the grounds and garden do not accord with English taste.” Her son shared her opinion: it would be “a most magnificent house, large enough to hold us all” and the garden would be “pretty,” “but it is a pity that such a large house is not in the middle of 10,000 acres about ten miles from the town.”1 The argument continued when Anselm resolved to build a new “garden house” on the Grüneburg estate.2 Doubtless remembering her childhood at Gunnersbury, his wife Charlotte insisted that the new house be “perfectly English” in style, and asked her brothers to supply designs from London. “I am hesitating between the Elizabethan and the cottage style,” she told her mother. “She wants some of the Gothic, Elizabethan and all sorts,” reported Lionel somewhat dismissively. “Not a palace but a good sized House.” But she was evidently overruled. The design she and her husband eventually agreed on was for a long rectangular house in the style of a Loire château. With its tower-like projections at the corners, its layers of sandstone on the ground floor, its balustrades, obelisks, volutes and chimneys, it was an eclectic edifice. The only concession to Charlotte was a tall neo-Gothic brick tower at the northern end of the park—a conspicuously English touch.





Elite Pursuits

Such arguments about architectural style are indicative of an important sea-change in Rothschild attitudes in the period which followed Nathan’s death. Before 1836, as we have seen, he and his brothers had tended to regard the acquisition of more spacious residences in an essentially functional light: apart from simply being more comfortable, they provided settings where the great and the good could be wined and dined—and pumped for useful news or lucrative business. After 1836, the endless round of dinner parties and balls continued. The ball in March 1836 which James threw to show off his refurbished hôtel was probably not untypical: “As at all Rothschild soirées,” Heine reported, the guests were “a strictly selected set of aristocratic illustrations, able to make an impression by reason of great name or high rank or (in the case of the ladies) beauty and finery.” Contemporaries generally agreed on this: whereas before 1830 there had been one or two Restoration grandees who had continued to decline James’s invitations, after the advent of the “bourgeois monarchy” the faubourg Saint-Germain had less cause to remain aloof. “The company all the elite of Paris,” was Disraeli’s succinct summary of the guests invited to the ball he attended at Salomon’s in 1843. The guest lists of dinners given by James tell much the same story.