

Outside France and England, as we have seen, there were limits on how much property the Rothschilds, as Jews, could acquire. After 1830 these restrictions began to crumble. In 1841 Carl bought himself the Villa Pignatelli near Naples, which his daughter fondly remembered as “a paradise upon earth, with a view over the bay and the islands, over the celebrated Mount Vesuvius, the most animated street and the Villa Reale, the Neapolitan Kensington Gardens.” It was more difficult in Vienna, however, where Salomon continued to live in the rented Hotel zum Römischen Kaiser in the Renngasse. Of course, he owned property elsewhere, in Paris as well as in Frankfurt. But there was a principle at stake—or so Salomon argued in a “special appeal” he addressed to Metternich in January 1837 concerning “the destiny of my co-religionists . . . the hopes of so many fathers of families and the highest aspirations of thousands of human beings.” When the government once again refused to grant any general relaxation of discrimination—lest “the public . . . suddenly draw the conclusion that full emancipation of the Jews is contemplated”—Salomon faced a dilemma; for Metternich intimated that the Emperor was willing, at his own discretion and as a special privilege, to grant individual Jews permission to own houses in Vienna. This was the old story of the prince and the Hofjude, whereby the state “bought off ” the Jewish banker on whom it was dependent with special exemptions. Salomon did not rush to take advantage of this offer; but in 1842—five years later—he succumbed. His request to own real estate in the city was speedily granted, allowing him finally to buy the Renngasse hotel as well as the adjoining house, which he demolished and rebuilt. As he acknowledged, this—along with the grant of honorary citizenship which went with it—made him “a privileged exception in the midst of my fellow believers, who . . . [ought to] have the right to enjoy the same rights as those who belong to other religious confessions.”

It might be thought that this compromise ran counter to the stance taken on questions of Jewish civil rights by other members of the family; but, like Mayer Amschel before them, most Rothschilds seem to have seen general rights and individual privileges as complementary rather than dichotomous: if the former could not be had, the latter should be accepted. Salomon was not criticised for his decision to accept Metternich’s offer. Indeed, even before he did, one of his English nephews was urging him “to get permission from Prince Metternich to purchase an estate in Bohemia.” In 1843 Salomon took his advice, though it was in fact in neighbouring Moravia that he sought the Emperor’s permission not only to buy an estate but also to pass it on to his heirs. Once again he was obliged to adopt the tones of the humble but deserving court Jew, listing his various financial contributions to the Empire as “adequate proof of his unshakeable devotion to the Austrian monarchy” and expressing his “most ardent desire to own property in a country whose rulers have shown him so many signal marks of their favour.” Again the petition was granted, despite the reservations of the Moravian estates. As one official put it, Salomon’s “position in society is so exceptional that he has been entirely removed from the ordinary circumstances of his co-religionists; his remarkable qualities and rare intelligence make it entirely inappropriate to apply strictly in his case the regulations in force with regard to other Israelites.” The Lord Chancellor Count Inzághy was rather more candid: it was, he argued, highly desirable that Baron Rothschild should be more closely bound to the Imperial State of Austria by the investment of his money in real property in this country; and . . . it would create a very strange impression abroad if his particular wish to settle permanently in that country, where he has been so actively engaged for a long period of years, and has been associated with the Government in more extensive and important transactions than has ever been the case before with a private individual, were to be refused after the special distinctions that have been conferred upon him.