

It would be wrong, however, to exaggerate the homogeneity of Rothschild collections even at this early period. When Nat bought Velazquez’s Lady with Fan, he observed that “pictures are something like ladies, everyone must please himself and select according to his taste . . . It would not please everyone as the face is not a pretty one, although very well painted.” His brother Lionel’s enthusiasm for eighteenth-century English artists was not shared by James (and was in many ways ahead of its time in Britain too). In 1846 he acquired Sir Joshua Reynolds’s Portrait of Master Braddyl at Christie’s, the first of several Reynolds works (the others were his Portrait of Mrs Lloyd, Portrait of Miss Meyer as Hebe and Snake in the Grass: Love Unbinding the Zone of Beauty). Later he turned to Thomas Gainsborough, buying his Portrait of the Hon. Frances Duncombe for £1,500 in 1871 and his Portrait of Mrs Sheridan the following year at Christie’s. He also owned George Romney’s Portait of Emma, Lady Hamilton and works by Sir William Beechey and John Hoppner. This enthusiasm for relatively recent portraits of individuals quite unrelated (and in all probability unknown) to the Rothschilds is especially surprising, though later in the nineteenth century such works were all the rage. Lionel’s youngest brother Mayer owned a Gainsborough too—a fox-coursing scene—but he also bought works by Cranach and Titian, who are not represented in other Rothschild collections of the period.

The Frankfurt Rothschilds had rather different tastes again. It is hard to imagine Wilhelm Tischbein’s Goethe in the Campagna di Roma (which Mayer Carl bought in 1846) hanging in Paris or London, for example. In any case, Mayer Carl was a good deal more interested in gold and silver ornaments than in paintings. Although his English cousins collected objets d’art too—among Lionel’s prized possessions was the so-called “Lycurgus cup,” an ancient Alexandrian or Byzantine glass goblet—they were less systematic. By the 1870s Mayer Carl had accumulated a dazzling “Goldschatz” of 5,000 items, among them such treasures as Wentzel Jamnitzer’s Merkelsche Tafelaufsatz, a masterpiece of the German Renaissance, and an ivory horn on silver gilt in the same style—in fact a contemporary forgery by Reinhold Vasters, but a brilliant one.

Evidently, the Rothschilds were little interested in the art of their own day—although the myth-makers have exaggerated this indifference. The story that James antagonised two artists, Jadin and Horace Vernet, in his efforts to secure a cut-price portrait seems implausible; it cannot be right that Vernet took his revenge by depicting James as a cowardly Jew in On the way to Smala, because the figure in question bears no resemblance whatever to him or any other Rothschild. What is true is that, with very few exceptions, the only contemporary paintings the family owned were portraits they commissioned themselves: for example, Alfred de Dreux’s portait of Lionel driving a gig (1838), Sir Francis Grant’s portrait of the four brothers riding to hounds (1841), Ary Scheffer’s portrait of James’s daughter Charlotte and Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres’ portrait of his wife Betty (1848)—not to mention the numerous family pictures painted by Moritz Daniel Oppenheim and the portraits of James by artists like Charles-Emile Champmartin, Louis-Amié Grosclaude and Hippolyte Flandrin.