

But it was the art of seventeenth-century Holland which the family found most attractive. In 1840 James bought Rembrandt’s The Standard Bearer from George IV’s collection, which he hung in the grand salon at the rue Laffitte; he also owned the same artist’s Portrait of a Young Man (which was in the sitting room) as well as Franz Hals’s Portait of a Nobleman and works by Anthony van Dyck, Peter Paul Rubens, Jacob van Ruisdael and Philips Wouwermans. In 1836 Lionel bought Gerard ter Borch’s Young Lady with her Page in Frankfurt, and a year later added four paintings by Wouwermans from the sale of the duchesse de Berry’s collection as well as three by Jan van der Heyden, including Rosendaal Castle and his View of Haarlem . He bought two more Wouwermans works and a Pieter de Hooch from George Lucy’s collection in 1845. By the time the German art expert Gustav Waagen visited him in Piccadilly in around 1850, his collection included three paintings by Meindert Hobbema, three by van Ruisdael, a Paulus Potter, a Karel du Jardin, an Adam Pynacker, two Jan Wynants and an Isaac van Ostade. He later added two pictures by Nicolaes Berchem, five works by Aalbert Cuyp—including his View on a Frozen River—six paintings by the van Mieris, father and son, two by Gaspar Netscher, three by Gerard ter Borch and seven by David Teniers the Younger, as well as still-lifes by Jan David de Heem, Jan van Huysum, Rachel Ruysh, Jan Weenix and Peter Gysels. This taste was evidently shared by his brother Anthony: in 1833 he bought a picture of a nurse and child playing with a goat which appeared to bear Rembrandt’s signature (it was later reattributed to Nicolaes Maes when the signature was shown to be a forgery) and by 1850 had acquired works by Wouwermans, Teniers, Van Dyck, Rubens and van Ostade.

That something resembling a collective “Rothschild taste” developed in this period is not surprising, as to a large extent the family acted in concert, alerting one another to major sales and acting for one another in different markets. In 1840 James asked Anthony “to dispose of the Rembrandt if it could be done with advantage,” but “on reflection” decided against buying a Murillo through his nephew. He and his nephews sought to ensure that a major Roman collection was auctioned in Paris rather than London in 1841. “We want to do it together,” wrote James. “Perhaps we will get some nice paintings.” Typically, when two Murillos were offered for auction in Paris in 1843, Nat considered buying them for his mother, though in the end he left them to Salomon’s wife Caroline. By the time of her death, Hannah owned works by Murillo, Cuyp and Teniers, all probably bought for her by her sons. There was also a natural shared tendency to favour secular subjects over religious works—perhaps the best explanation for the over-representation of Dutch artists—though this was far from being a rule. Interestingly, the Rothschilds bought not only Old Testament scenes (such as Paul Delaroche’s Moses in the Bullrushes) but also some works of explicitly Christian iconography. In 1840 Lionel acquired Murillo’s Infant Christ as the Good Shepherd from a London dealer and he later purchased Domenichino’s Head of a Magdalene and Andrea del Sarto’s Madonna and Child; while James owned Jan van Eyck and Petrus Christi’s Chartreux Madonna and a Luini Virgin and Child. In 1846 Anthony was given Van Dyck’s The Abbot Scaglia Adoring the Virgin and Child by his father-in-law.