

Here we have to walk after the dogs and to seek for the game, which is a much greater excitement and at the same time more fatiguing. In the beginning the Baron was very eager and followed the dogs very well, and was rather lucky in killing about 15, but he soon got tired, when I was then able to shoot a little and killed about as many . . . [T]he walking is a little fatiguing, as the heath in most places is nearly up to one’s knees.

The younger generation evidently relished the discomfiture of “the Baron”: both Nat and Anselm gleefully visualised James returning to Paris clad “as a real highlander, in a tartan dress, the claymore in his hand and exhibiting a flourishing view of stout legs and calves.”

The hunting preferred by James’s English nephews was stag-hunting on horseback with hounds. Probably at Mayer’s instigation, they began hunting with a pack of staghounds in the Vale of Aylesbury in 1839, renting stables and kennels at Tring Park. It was this new enthusiasm, more than anything else, which prompted the purchase of Mentmore three years later. By 1840, “turning out the stag” was a recreation attracting not only the male Rothschilds but their wives to Buckinghamshire, though it was not until five years later that they felt ready to hold a public hunt. The most passionate Rothschild testaments to the pleasures of the chase come, poignantly, from Nat, the exile in Paris, whose early letters abound with allusions to hunting. “What magic there is in a pair of leather breeches,” he wrote home in 1842. “I have half a mind to put a pair on and gallop round the bois de Boulogne—old Tup [Mayer] would exclaim, “Go it, you cockney!” Write more about hunting & whether old Tup manages to tumble into the dirty black ditches, how H. Fitzroy was induced to go out with the staghounds—everything is of interest to us poor fellows who can only hunt through the columns of Bell’s Life.” And in the same year: “We are going to Lady Ailesbury’s tonight. I’d sooner have a run for 40 minutes across the vale than look at her ugly face without a veil.” In 1841 Sir Francis Grant was commissioned to paint all four brothers at full tilt on their hunters, resplendent in matching scarlet coats and top hats. In fact, it was seldom that all four were able to ride to hounds together.

It is tempting to conclude from such evidence that the fad for stag-hunting was nothing more than the hedonism of wealthy youth, the stuff which would later be immortalised by Surtees and Siegfried Sassoon. Yet there is a phrase of Nat’s which hints at something more. “Ride like trumps,” he exhorted his brothers in 1840, “and do not let the Queen’s people fancy we are all tailors.” As in Paris, hunting inevitably had a social significance: it meant mixing with members of the aristocracy, including courtiers, men who would tend to be accomplished riders. It mattered to the sons of the textile merchant Nathan Rothschild to prove that they were not “all tailors” by acquitting themselves well over the hedges and gates of Buckinghamshire. And of course it was good exercise: something which their grandfather, confined in the Judengasse, had been denied and their father had scorned. It is not inconceivable that the older Rothschilds’ very sedentary lifestyles made them susceptible to the kind of ailment which killed Nathan. On the other hand, the fact that Nat suffered a serious injury as a result of a riding accident bore out his father’s warnings many years before about the incompatibility of bankers and horses.