

Even more important than their role as performers, however, was their role as teachers. This was especially important for female Rothschilds, who were encouraged from an early age to excel at the keyboard (the piano was perhaps the nearest thing the nineteenth century had to the television, with the difference that it required skill to operate). Not surprisingly, Nathan and his brothers gave them the best tutors money could buy. Charlotte’s livre d’or, in which she invited her teachers to jot musical mementoes, records many of their names: Moscheles appears there, as does Mendelssohn, Vincenzo Bellini (who inscribed the song “Dolente immagine di Fille mia,” which he had composed in 1821), Louis Spohr (who contributed a version of his song “Nachgefühl”), Rossini (who added one of his many settings of “Mi lagnero tacendo” from Metastio’s Siroe) and Giacomo Meyerbeer (who offered a song called “The Rare Flower”). In the 1840s Charlotte’s contributors included the elderly Luigi Cherubini (who wrote in the aria “Canto d’Armida” from his opera Armida abbandonata) and Chopin (who added a version of the Mazurka Op. 67 no. 4). Rossini also wrote a six page piano solo for her as a “Petit Souvenir.” Charlotte’s sister Hannah Mayer was also an accomplished harpist and took lessons from Parish Alvars, who dedicated his Serenade Op. 83 to her; and when the youngest sister Louise showed musical leanings, Rossini himself offered to give her singing lessons. He was, she reported to her father, “very good natured and always comes at the hour and day I like.” When the two were together in Frankfurt three years later, she had lessons with him every day. Chopin too gave lessons to a number of Rothschild women: not only to Nathan’s daughter Charlotte but also to her daughter Hannah Mathilde and to Betty’s daughter, another Charlotte. Indeed, he dedicated two pieces to members of the family: the Waltz, Op. 64, No. 2 and the Ballade, Op. 52. With such a source of inspiration, it is not surprising the girls themselves tried their hand at composition: the younger Charlotte published four short piano pieces while Hannah Mathilde composed piano pieces, an orchestral waltz and six sets of songs, including settings of Victor Hugo, Théophile Gautier, Goethe and Longfellow—the most successful of which (“Si vous n’avez rien à me dire”) was performed at the Paris Opéra by the soprano Adelina Patti.

The Rothschilds not only employed musicians to perform and teach, however; they also mixed with them socially and enjoyed their company. Meyerbeer dined with Betty and James in 1833, for example, and Rossini was invited to Lionel’s wedding in 1836 primarily as a friend—“to add to the gaiety of our party”—rather than as an entertainer or teacher. As he himself put it, “the entire purpose . . . was to attend at Frankfurt the marriage of Lionel Rotschildt [sic], my very dear friend.” James and he remained friendly throughout their lives. Similarly, Chopin was said to have “loved the house of Rothschild and that this house loved him”; after his premature death in 1848, his pupil Charlotte preserved “a touching remembrance of him”—a cushion she herself had embroidered for him. Such intimacy with musicians was somewhat unconventional. When the Rossinis dined with Nathan at a fairly aristocratic gathering shortly before the wedding, Lady Grenville commented sniffily that it was “Madame Rossini[’s] . . . first appearance in decent company I believe.” But the composer and his wife were there partly in order to liven up the proceedings. Anthony’s account of the private recital he heard Liszt give in 1842 is illuminating, showing how the Rothschilds derived pleasure not only from the playing but also from the company of such stars of nineteenth-century romanticism. “The most extraordinary player in the world,” he reported to his wife, was as curious to look at as to hear, with his long hair at times streaming over his face, at others completely thrown back by a violent toss of the head, his wild eyes which he now and then turns on every side as if to mean sometimes “Am I not wonderful?” at others that he is delighted with his own performance. Dearest, he is an agreeable and talkative man in society, and is no doubt a dear and pleasant companion.