

We have already encountered some of Heine’s most penetrating commentaries on the nature of Rothschild power before and after the 1830 revolution. It is now time to say something about his relationship to the family. The nephew of the Hamburg banker Salomon Heine, he had been intended by his mother for a career in banking and seems to have had some sort of encounter with Nathan—“a fat Jew in Lombard Street, St. Swithin’s Lane”—in London in 1827. Indeed, Nathan may have been the “famous merchant, with whom I wished to be an apprentice millionaire” who told him he “had no talent for business.” By 1834, however, he had struck up a very different relationship with the French Rothschilds. A number of anecdotes exist which cast Heine as a kind of licensed jester at the court of Baron James. When the Austrian playwright Grillparzer dined with Heine (and Rossini) at the Rothschilds’, he was shocked: “It was apparent that his hosts were afraid of Heine, and he exploited their fear by slyly poking fun at them at every opportunity. But it is not admissible to dine with people whom you don’t care for. If you despise a person you should not dine with him. In point of fact, our acquaintance did not progress after this.”

Barbs of the sort Grillparzer alluded to invariably cast James as Heine’s slow witted straight-man. “Dr Heine,” he asks, “could you tell me why this wine is called ‘Lachrymae Christi’?” “All you have to do is translate,” Heine answers. “Christ weeps when rich Jews can afford such good wines while so many poor folk go hungry and thirsty.” “Comment trouvez-vous mon chenil?” says James, welcoming some guests to his house. “Don’t you know that chenil means dog-kennel?” chips in Heine. “If you have so low an opinion of yourself, at least don’t trumpet it abroad!” Rothschild contemplates the filthy state of the River Seine and observes that its source is perfectly clear; Heine replies: “Yes, M. le baron; and I hear that your late father was a most honest man.” A third party expresses a desire to meet James. “He only wants to get to know him,” quips Heine, “because he doesn’t know him.”

Such anecdotes seem superficially plausible in the light of the more satirical passages about James in Heine’s journalism. Yet the surviving correspondence suggests a rather different relationship, in which Heine increasingly came to play the more or less humble supplicant to James’s indulgent patron. As we have seen, one of the first references Heine made to James was in Ludwig Börne, in which he suggested that James’s development of financial capital made him as much of a social “revolutionary” as Richelieu and Robespierre. Though a fairly outrageous parallel, this was far from insulting; if anything, it rather exaggerated James’s influence. Surprisingly, Heine felt nervous enough about the liberties he had taken—apparently quoting at length from a private conversation with James—that he took the precaution of sending a copy of the proofs to his wife Betty. “You now have in your hands the corpus delicti that gives me some anxiety,” he wrote. “May I still appear before you? . . . Perhaps you will forgive me with a merry smile. For my part I cannot reproach myself enough for having spoken, not with ill intent, but in an unbecoming manner, of a family that conceals so much nobility of feeling and so much good will.”