



As we shall see, this last remark was a pointed allusion to Heine’s own relationship with James; but leaving that aside—and making due allowance for Heine’s satirical hyperbole—it is obvious that the above passage (published in 1843 in the Augsburger Zeitung) could hardly have been written of a man with no interest in the arts. Even if James himself was no expert, he admired expertise—and that is a very different thing from being a philistine. When another ambitious young man of letters (also, like Heine, a converted Jew) first met James at a dinner in Paris the year before, he hit the nail on the head. “I found him,” Benjamin Disraeli told his sister, “a happy mixture of the French Dandy & the orange boy. He spoke to me with[ou]t ceremony with ‘I believe you know my nephew.’ ” The “orange boy” in James was most strongly evident in the strong Frankfurt accent with which he spoke French, and in the peremptory manner which he shared with his brother in London; but the “French Dandy” was the man within, who always enjoyed the company of artists, musicians and writers. An English visitor to Paris in the 1850s noticed this too, when she called on “Mme. de Roth . . . whose poetic abode has more the air of the palace of a wealthy artist than the hôtel of a millionaire.” For all his rough manners, James was, in his heart, something of an aesthete—even a Bohemian—though he indulged this trait vicariously, surrounding himself with beautiful objects and introducing one or two of their more entertaining creators into his otherwise stuffy social round. Something similar could be said of his English nephews, whose love of hunting was only one facet of their wide-ranging activity beyond the walls of the counting house.

It was on other walls that the “acculturation” of the Rothschilds was perhaps most immediately obvious—specifically, on the walls of their houses, which gradually became covered with paintings of the very highest quality. The first picture of note bought by a Rothschild was French artist Jean-Baptiste Greuze’s The Milkmaid —a typically rustic-romantic work of the late rococo—which James acquired as early as 1818. Greuze was a favourite Rothschild artist: James bought another of his paintings—Little Girl with Bouquet—from the auction of Cardinal Fesch’s estate in 1845, and his nephew Lionel began his collection by buying his Virtue Faltering at Phillips’ auctioneers in 1831; he later acquired four other works by the same artist, among them The Parting Kiss. His brother Anthony owned another two, including The Nursery. Such pictures complemented the numerous items of ancien régime furniture and ornamentation acquired by the family, like the Marie Antoinette secretaires and Sèvres porcelain owned by James. Another favourite artist was the seventeenth-century Spanish artist Bartolomé Estebán Murillo, whose work Lionel may have discovered when he went to Madrid in 1834, where, as he freely admitted, he spent “all my leisure time . . . in running about after pictures which are in very great number but few good ones.” By the end of the 1840s he, his uncle and his mother all owned Murillos.