

It would be a mistake to explain all this solely in terms of family (or individual) “taste.” For the “Old Masters” were attractive to men like James and Lionel for reasons other than the strictly aesthetic. Quite apart from their value as “status symbols,” celebrated paintings were as much a form of investment in the nineteenth century as they are today. The fact that James’s entire collection was insured for 10 million francs (£400,000) is indicative of the scale of the investment undertaken in this period: in 1844 that sum was equivalent to a quarter of James’s share in the combined capital of the five houses. Moreover, the market was a lively one, still feeling the ripples generated by the French Revolution: by uprooting so much of the French aristocracy, the Revolution had made numerous private collections available to new buyers, and the practice of selling them en bloc at auction had continued into the nineteenth century. It was another revolution, that of 1830, which ultimately led to the sale of the duchesse de Berry’s collection, one of the most important early sources of Rothschild art; 1848 saw the great Stowe auction. Despite the frequency of such sales, the demand for Old Masters often tended to outstrip supply. It speaks for itself that a picture like Velazquez’s Lady with Fan could sell (to Nat) for 12,700 francs in 1843, more than three times more than the banker Aguado had paid for it just six years before.

Given their immense wealth, the Rothschilds could afford to outbid almost anyone, and some members of the family seemed inclined to do so. As Mayer said while shopping for Italian sculpture in 1846, “one ought always to buy the very best of everything and not to mind the price,” on the ground that “the very best” could only appreciate in value. But the political upheavals of 1848-9, when the art market slumped as steeply as the financial markets, called that bullish assumption into question. In later life, James was always content to let a picture go to another bidder if he felt the price was excessive. In 1860 he bid 3,000 guineas for a Rubens, only to see it go to someone else for 7,500. “Fabulous prices,” commented James; “I don’t have the money to pay 10,000 guineas for a Murillo” (especially when the artist’s Christ as the Good Shepherd had cost just over £3,000 twenty years before). Of course, he of all people did have the money; but, compulsive investor that he was, he hated the idea of buying at what might prove to be the peak of the market.

Piano Lessons

Art, then, was an investment as well as a form of decoration. The Rothschilds’ enthusiasm for music is perhaps less easily explained. That the Rothschilds patron ised some of the most famous composers and performers of the nineteenth century is well known; and the most obvious reason for this is that musicians were a prerequisite for a successful soirée or a ball. In January 1828, for example, Nathan was able to treat his dinner guests to a post-prandial performance by Ignaz Moscheles—Felix Mendelssohn’s tutor. Similarly, when the maréchal de Castellane had dined with James the year before, the star performer was Rossini, to whom Salomon had been introduced by Metternich at the Congress of Verona five years before. It is also said—though scholars debate the authenticity of the story—that Chopin’s career in Paris was launched by a performance he gave at the rue Laffitte in 1832. He played there again in 1843 alongside his pupil Karl Filtsch, whose playing James was reported to “adore.” Other notable performers who played at Rothschild houses included Mendelssohn himself, Franz Liszt, the pianist and conductor Charles Hallé and the violinist Joseph Joachim.