

Spain was politically not so very different, though economically she had much more to offer than Portugal. Here too the source of conflict was dynastic: did Salic law—giving preference to the male line—apply in Spain, in which case Ferdinand VII’s brother Carlos was his rightful heir; or should the throne pass to his only child, Isabella, born in 1830? Technically, Isabella’s case was the stronger: although Salic law had been introduced in 1713, it had been repealed—albeit secretly—by Carlos IV in the Pragmatic Sanction of 1789, and Ferdinand took the precaution of publi cising this fact five months before his daughter’s birth. On the other hand, when he fell ill in 1832, it became apparent that his brother Carlos had enough might (if not right) on his side to challenge Isabella’s claim, forcing her mother Maria Christina into temporarily revoking the Pragmatic Sanction. Ferdinand’s unexpected recovery forced Carlos to flee to Portugal, but civil war was now more or less inevitable. When the king finally died in September 1833, Carlos revealed that he had no intention of recognising Maria Christina’s regency, returning to Spain to mobilise his supporters ten months later. As in Portugal, the dynastic dispute had an ideological significance: Carlos was the Spanish Dom Miguel, the reactionary “wicked uncle,” while his sister-in-law Christina (after an initial dalliance with reforming absolutism in the person of Cea Bermudez) allied herself with “moderate” liberals like Martinez de la Rosa, and therefore enjoyed conditional support from the more “progressive” democrats who harked back to the revolution of 1820. The war also had a regional dimension: while Carlism was strongest in the countryside of Navarre and the Basque provinces, Isabella’s cause appealed more to the bureaucrats of Madrid and the financiers of the country’s main commercial centres.

There were four reasons for offering financial support to the government of the young Queen. As in the case of Portugal, there were the short-run profits to be made from selling new, high yield bonds to investors bored with increasingly predictable consols and rentes; but of course such bonds could just as easily be issued for Don Carlos. The decision to plump for Isabella was partly diplomatic: the Quadruple Alliance of 1834 between Britain, Portugal, Spain and (later) France seemed to signal unequivocal foreign support for Isabella’s regime from the two powers who traditionally wielded most influence in the Peninsula. More importantly, however, Spain (unlike Portugal) had a particular kind of asset which proved irresistibly attractive to the Rothschilds as a security for any loans: the mercury mines of Almadén to the west of Ciudad Real, one of only two major sources of the metal in the world at this time. For over three centuries, the mines had played a pivotal role in the international monetary system because of the use of mercury (or “quicksilver” as the Rothschilds preferred to call it) in the refining of silver and gold in Latin America. This in itself made them attractive to bankers. The crucial point was that the Spanish government traditionally sold the rights to work the mines and to market their output to private companies, most famously mortgaging them in the sixteenth century to the Augsburg bankers, the Fuggers. Decisively, these mines were controlled by Isabella’s forces for most of the civil war. Finally, despite the dramatic contraction of her American empire, Spain still had lucrative commercial ties with her remaining colonies, notably Cuba and the Philippines; the former in particular was attractive to the Rothschilds because of its importance in the tobacco trade.