



It is also worth noting how much more sympathetically Nucingen is portrayed here, suggesting the influence of the growing friendship between Balzac and James. Nucingen knows he is making a fool of himself: “Hêdre hâmûreusse à mon hâche, cheu zai piène que rienne n’ai blis ritiquille; mai ké foullez-vû? za y êde!” (“Etre amoureux à mon âge, je sais bien que rien n’est plus ridicule; mais que voulez-vous? ça y est!”) And he manages to recover some dignity when she spurns his advances, writing her an elegant and sensitive letter—in perfect French.

By contrast, Nucingen’s final appearances in Un Homme d’affaires (1845) and La Cousine Bette (1846) are brief: here he is merely the last resort of desperate borrowers like Maxime de Trailles, the Balzac-like wastrel Desroches and Baron Hulot, the poor Bonapartist functionary in need of a dowry for his daughter. By this time, the exigencies of his own financial position were plainly uppermost in the writer’s mind: the dedication of a book about disreputable creditors to James on the eve of Balzac’s own request for financial assistance is thus revealed as a characteristic joke. Even the sum of money which Hulot tries to borrow from Nucingen is similar to the amount Balzac borrowed from James in the same year La Cousine Bette was published. Historians are usually nervous of using literature as evidence; but when art so closely imitates life, and in doing so sheds so much light on the otherwise obscure private life of a man like James de Rothschild, it would be a pity to ignore it.





THIRTEEN

Quicksilver and Hickory (1834-1839)


I simply can’t see why, when we ask you for the time being not to do something or other, then, without any particular reason, the very same thing happens, because everyone must know what is best for the place where he resides.

—JAMES TO HIS ENGLISH NEPHEWS, OCTOBER 1836





The Rothschild system of issuing and trading bonds for the European powers was immensely lucrative as well as giving the family real political leverage. Yet it had its limits. When the Rothschilds attempted to extend their geographical reach to new regions in the course of the 1830s, they encountered difficulties. With the benefit of hindsight, the historian can see that one of the greatest omissions of the period was the failure to establish a stable and reliable Rothschild base in the United States of America. However, to see why this did not happen it is necessary to unravel a complex story of trial and error which had its roots in the highly unstable finances of Spain and Portugal; for the route which led the Rothschilds to the Americas started here.





Iberian Dilemmas

While the rest of Europe had revolutions, it might be said, Iberia had dynastic civil wars. Superficially, there were ideological divisions, as elsewhere, between ultra-conservative clericals, moderate constitutional liberals and more radical democrats. Fundamentally, however, the politics of Spain and Portugal in the 1830s and the 1840s had more in common with the politics of the Wars of the Roses. From a banker’s point of view, there is nothing a priori wrong with civil war in a foreign country. Like any other kind of war, civil wars require money and with domestic tax systems in disarray that money usually has to be borrowed. Though they were more cautious than other bankers, the Rothschilds proved ready and willing to lend to whichever side they thought would win in both Portugal and Spain. Their principal concern in the first phase of this involvement was that other powers might become embroiled in the conflicts, leading to the general European war which was the Rothschilds’ recurrent nightmare. As it turned out, no such escalation occurred, though Britain, France and Austria all sought to interfere indirectly in the affairs of the Peninsula. The real difficulty was that, in the absence of decisive foreign intervention, the Iberian civil wars dragged on inconclusively. This meant that by the late 1830s the interest was no longer being paid on loans raised just a few years before. As a result, Spanish and Portuguese bonds performed the same role in the bond market of the 1830s as had been played by Latin American bonds in the 1820s: as James put it succinctly (and repeatedly), they were little better than “shit.”