

In all this, an important role was played by James’s wife Betty, with whom Heine had conducted what might be described as an elegant flirtation in the 1830s. They had met at James’s Boulogne château: looking back many years later, Heine recalled in a letter to Betty “the sunny day in Boulogne where you first appeared to me with all your magical charm.” The meeting must have taken place some time before 1834, when he sent her a copy of his new book Der Salon, signing himself as “Ihr ergebener Schützling”—“your faithful protégé.” A year later, he described her to a friend as his “earliest patroness in Paris.” When he wrote promising to visit her, he could not resist adding that her “pretty, smiling face” was “constantly in his memory.” Nor did he confine such expressions to private communications, praising her in one of his articles of the 1830s as “not only one of the best looking women in Paris but [one] who is also distinguished in intellect and knowledge.” Nothing is more futile than for the historian to try to infer the intensity of such an attraction, much less the real nature of such a relationship, from a few written remnants; but these seem more than merely formal compliments to the wife of a patron. “I discovered the other day by chance,” he wrote to her in 1840, enclosing the proofs of Ludwig Börne, “that the beautiful lady whom I took to be only intelligent and virtuous also possesses a great soul. Baron James is indeed the richest of men—but not because of his money . . . Please believe, Mme la baronne, that the interest I take in your house is of no common sort; and accept my assurance of complete devotion for the rest of my days.” Yet at some point in the 1840s the friendship began to fade. He continued to send her his books: in 1847 copies of Atta Troll and a poem called “The Angel” which may have been inspired by her; in 1852 a copy of Romancero; two years later the Vermischte Schriften and in 1855 his Poèmes et légendes. But they saw little of one another—she became, as he put it, “a doubting Thomas” towards him—perhaps because of Heine’s deteriorating health; perhaps because he disapproved of the Rothschilds’ role in the 1848 revolutions;4 most probably because, as Heine had foreseen, his need for money corrupted the relationship.

The contrast between Heine’s relationship with the Rothschilds and that of his French contemporary Balzac is pronounced; indeed, they are like mirror images of each another. While Heine fretted that James might take umbrage at his writings, Balzac blithely caricatured him with only the most perfunctory disclaimers. While Heine decorously flirted with James’s wife, Balzac sought to palm off one of his old mistresses on him. And while Heine agonised about accepting share options from the Rothschilds, Balzac happily borrowed from James and sought to avoid repaying him for as long as possible. In a famous aside, Balzac described encountering Heine and James in the street one day in 1837: “C’est-à-dire tout l’esprit et tout l’argent des Juifs.” It was the latter which interested him more, though with characteristic egocentricity he persistently misspelt James’s name, usually as “Rostchild.”