

The trouble with selling “rubbish” is that some naive investors—or unlucky speculators—will inevitably be left holding it when the interest ceases to be paid; and they are unlikely to think very highly of the original vendor. For the sake of their own reputation, and therefore their ability successfully to float future bond issues, it was in the Rothschilds’ interest to avoid a Portuguese default. As early as March 1835 James was nervously suggesting that the Rothschilds “should send someone over there [to Lisbon] two months before the interest falls due so as to assist the Government. We are too deeply involved in this matter not to try to render any assistance we can to these people.” By May it was obvious that even with a change of Finance Minister there was not going to be enough cash to pay the interest due that year. “I think that we will have to pay the interest,” he concluded gloomily. The disadvantage of this, however, was that bondholders would “get accustomed to the idea that you will [always] have to extend your helping hand, and in the end you will be unable to retreat.”

As it turned out, however, Nathan’s plan for a further £1 million advance was rejected in favour of a more generous offer by Goldschmidt, prompting a wave of retaliatory selling by the Rothschild houses in London and Paris. “There is no occasion for our supporting the market now that others have interfered in the Portuguese affairs,” wrote Lionel angrily from his dying father’s bedside in Frankfurt. “We can job in and out and only study our own advantage.” James was beside himself at the conduct of the Lisbon government: “The miserable Portuguese Minister wants to cut the throat of his own credit so that one can’t tell the world with any degree of certainty that the interest will be paid, and so he makes it appear as if he wants to bring everything down.” “Your Portuguese are giving me a fever,” he wrote to London in December 1836. “Never before in my life has anything upset me so much. These people are nothing more than the scum of the earth.” The only aim now was to “persuade the public that these people have positively decided to ruin the credit and that we on our part have been doing everything in our power to prevent this.” “We have to get out of this shit as quickly as we can,” he reiterated a day later, “because we are dealing here with thoroughly disreputable people and with a minister who speculates on the demise of his own country.”

Yet when the same problem arose in 1837 Lionel had no option but to offer once again to bail the government out: after all, the bonds on which the interest was due were still the bonds which had been issued by Rothschilds two years before. James too could see no alternative but to offer another short-term advance, especially now that the Rothschilds’ old friends the Saxe-Coburgs had become involved through Ferdinand’s marriage to Maria. The strategy in 1837 was to give Lisbon one final injection of cash “to prevent it being said that a Rothschild loan was not paid,” and then to pull out. Even this attempt at damage-limitation misfired, leading to a protracted and highly embarrassing legal wrangle with the Portuguese government. 1 Lionel sought to rationalise what had happened: Portuguese bonds might have fallen from 75 to 25, but “still our name is not lost.” His uncle was unconvinced. “I don’t wish to speculate with any money whatsoever on this muck” was more or less his last word on the subject of Portugal. Subsequent attempts to involve the Rothschilds in the country’s finances were firmly rebuffed. Nor did their rivals let them forget the débâcle. When Barings were approached for a loan in 1846, one of the partners argued strongly against any involvement on the grounds that “Portuguese credit has been so tainted by the mismanagement of the Jews and Jobbers . . . that it would not be a very desirable connexion for any House wishing to stand well with the public.”