

The two first met at Aix in the summer of 1832. James at once took to the mercurial writer, who combined the carnal appetites of Byron with the prose output of Dickens. He immediately offered to assist him with his plan to visit Italy, offering a letter of introduction to Carl and the use of his couriers to Naples. A few months later, having heard nothing more, James wrote to remind Balzac of his offer and to invite him to dinner, chiding him affably for not calling on them since his return to Paris. In Vienna two years later, Balzac took advantage of this goodwill by borrowing 500 francs from Salomon against a bill drawn on his unsuspecting publisher in Paris. He also seems to have asked Betty that same November for some kind of guarantee during negotiations with another publisher.

Relations were at their most cordial in the mid-1840s. In 1842 Balzac offered James tickets for his disastrous play Les Ressources de Quinola (appropriately enough, about the sinking of a steamship), and two years later dedicated Un Homme d’affaires to “Monsieur le Baron James de Rothschild / Conseil Général d’Autriche à Paris, Banquier.”5 In return, James forwarded his letters to the Polish Countess he was wooing and eased her passage through customs when she went to Naples. More importantly, he provided Balzac with 150 shares in the new Northern railway line in 1846; having paid the first instalment, the writer promptly borrowed 17,000 francs from James, offering the shares as security. He also borrowed a further sum—around 50,000 francs—by mortgaging his fiancée’s Polish estate in order to buy a large house in the rue Fortunée. As he prepared to leave for Poland in 1846, Balzac even asked James to help him establish his former housekeeper (and mistress) in a stamp shop, for which a licence was required. Balzac’s account of the negotiations is worth quoting for the light it sheds on James’s capacity for Rabelaisian banter: Rotschild . . . asked me whether she was pretty, whether I had had her. “A hundred and twenty-one times,” I told him, “and, if you want her, I’ll give you her.”

“Does she have children?” he inquired.

“No, but give her some.”

“I’m sorry, but I protect only women with children.” This was his way of escaping. Had she had children he would have said he never protected immorality.

“Well now, do you actually believe, Baron, that you can split hairs with me? I’m a Northern shareholder! I am going to write you out a note, and you’ll take care of my business as if it were a railway with 400,000 shares.”

“How’s that?” he said. “If you can make me do it, I’ll admire you all the more.”

“And you shall do it,” I told him, “otherwise, I’ll turn your wife loose on you so she can keep an eye on you.”

He burst out laughing and fell back into his armchair saying: “I give in out of sheer exhaustion; business is killing me. Make out your note.”

I made it out and went to see Madame James.





Presumably Balzac considered the complete edition of his works which he sent to Betty that same year repayment enough for all these favours.