

There were also, on the other hand, three difficulties attendant on any financial involvement with Spain. Firstly, and most obviously, there was the confusion caused by the country’s protracted and inconclusive civil war. It was not until 1839—six years after Ferdinand’s death—that the Carlist forces were effectively defeated. During that period, there were repeated changes of government in Madrid, as “Moderados” and “Progresistas” (to give the factions their later names) vied for control, the latter pressing for a more parliamentary and anti-clerical regime than Maria Christina had ever intended. Matters were further complicated by the growth in political influence of the leading military commanders; indeed it was one of these, General Baldomero Espartero, who, with Progresista support, forced Maria Christina to abdicate as Regent just a year after leading her forces to victory. Espartero in turn was ousted in 1843 and replaced a year later by his rival General Narváez, who presided over what amounted to a decade of Moderado hegemony until yet another revolution in 1854.

The second argument against involvement in this unstable country was furnished by the bonds issued under the liberal regime of the early 1820s, the so-called “Cortes” (that is, parliament) bonds, which King Ferdinand had refused to honour following the suppression of the revolution. A law of 1831 formally “deferred” interest payments on these bonds for forty years, but this was scant consolation to the investors who had bought them; and the English holders of the Cortes bonds were determined to oppose any further issues of Spanish paper on the London stock exchange until they had secured better terms. Events were to reveal the extreme difficulty of re-establishing Spanish credit internationally with memories of default so fresh. Finally, the support of the so-called “Northern courts”—Austria, Russia and Prussia—for the Carlist cause proved to be stronger than their support for Dom Miguel. Even if he could not contemplate direct military intervention, Metternich proved able to exert considerable diplomatic influence over events in Spain.

For all these reasons, the Rothschilds were initially reluctant to act alone in Spain. As early as December 1830 James and Nathan entered a kind of “sleeping” partnership (in return for a 2.5 per cent commission on sales) with the company which leased the Almadén mines in that year. This was intended as a first step towards greater involvement. “When the time comes that the Government wants to farm it out,” James observed to his brother, “you will then be well placed to know exactly who all the customers are and how much one can sell and you will then find it that much easier to submit a proposal for the whole sum.” More problematically, as it proved, James committed the Rothschilds to share all Spanish financial business with a consortium of Paris bankers led by the Spaniard Aguado. This provided a degree of camouflage for speculative dealings in existing Spanish paper (for the Cortes bonds continued to be traded, though at a price of around 30); but it placed awkward restrictions on Rothschild room for manoeuvre when new business had to be discussed with the Spanish government. By the summer of 1833, when a major tobacco deal came to nothing, Lionel was already finding the agreement with Aguado and his associates more a hindrance than a help.