

This resemblance was not coincidental. For earlier events in Latin America were not only responsible for sending inveterate troublemakers like Dom Pedro back to Europe; they also fundamentally weakened the fiscal systems of both Portugal and Spain, which had come to rely heavily on the revenues from their transatlantic empires. Portugal and Spain were thus not merely politically unstable; in many ways that was also true of France, where a similar kind of dynastic feud had seemed a possibility after 1830. The Iberian problem was one of chronic national insolvency. Trying to make money from two countries which recurrently teetered on the verge of bankruptcy proved much less easy than the more sanguine Rothschilds initially assumed.

The Portuguese story is the less complex of the two; it also proved to be the less lucrative. We have already seen that Nathan had interested himself in the affairs of Portugal and her sister-kingdom Brazil in the 1820s, arranging loans for both, secure in the knowledge that this was a traditional British sphere of interest. In doing so, he had unwittingly been lending to both the combatants in the impending civil war: Dom Miguel, whose coup he had backed in 1828, and his brother Dom Pedro, the Emperor of Brazil and father of Maria II, the Queen of Portugal whom Miguel had overthrown. In April 1831 Pedro was forced to abdicate in Brazil in favour of his son; he at once set off for France, intent on restoring his daughter to power in Portugal. For no very good reason, French liberals (and some British Whigs) tended to assume that Pedro was a kindred spirit, casting Miguel as a kind of Portuguese Charles X. Pedro therefore had little difficulty in raising money in Paris and men in London, and by July 1832 was able to seize control of Oporto. However, in the absence of popular support it took him until May 1834 finally to secure Miguel’s surrender—a victory which he mainly owed to the assistance he received from the English sea captain Charles Napier. Four months later Pedro himself expired, having lived just long enough to restore his daughter to power.

Yet that did not bring Portugal’s political troubles to an end. Finding Maria a suitable husband proved harder than expected when her first consort, the Duke of Leuchtenberg, died after just four months of marriage, and a replacement—Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg, nephew of the Belgian King—was not found until 1836. More seriously, Maria’s supporters quickly split into two rival factions: moderate “Chartists” (loyal to the constitution of 1826) and more radical “Septembrists” (who looked further back to the more liberal 1822 version). Shortly after Maria’s marriage to Ferdinand, the latter faction forcibly seized power. The Chartists attempted to do the same in 1837 and succeeded five years later. In 1846 there was yet another revolution, which precipitated joint Anglo-Spanish intervention the following year.

The Rothschilds watched the unfolding of the Portuguese civil war with mixed feelings, loath to miss out on any lucrative new business, but worried that the conflict might escalate. By 1832 James had begun tentatively to participate in the operations of the Spanish financier Juan Alvarez Mendizábal, who had issued a £2 million loan for Pedro in Paris the year before. This was a gamble, for although there was indirect British and French support for Pedro, Austrian-backed support for Miguel could not be ruled out. Moreover, Miguel was able to raise a 40 million franc loan in Paris that same year. This explains why James was so pessimistic about the “Portuguese rubbish” from the outset. His view was that only a guarantee from Britain and France would make a Portuguese loan into “a nice piece of business”; but this Palmerston (wisely) refused to give. It is therefore not unreasonable to conclude that, when he and Nathan issued a £4 million loan for the restored government of Maria II in 1835, they were consciously dealing in what might today be called “junk bonds.” For, even with Pedro dead and Miguel exiled, the likelihood of Portugal maintaining interest payments on these bonds was low. Thus James regarded those to whom he sold the bonds as, to put it mildly, naive. “We have a great many asses who have been buying this shit,” he candidly reported to Nathan in early April. The 3 per cent bonds—which the Rothschilds issued at 67.5—enjoyed a temporary vogue, but within a matter of months were sliding rapidly as political instability persisted in Lisbon. Within a year they had fallen to 55; and by 1839 they stood at just 25. James later explained the rationale of the Rothschild involvement: such bonds were “the only thing on which one can gamble and speculate, for what is there to gain from the French rentes? Nothing. So the world is now speculating on this shit. One can gamble with these but one can never hold on to them.” In other words, these high-yielding bonds were never seriously regarded as assets for long-term investors. They were mere speculative objects.