

All along, the Rothschilds had suffered from a lack of first-hand knowledge of Spanish affairs: none of them had visited Madrid and there was no dedicated full-time employee there until July. This explains why in August 1834 it was decided to send Lionel (accompanied by the lawyer Adolphe Crémieux) to thrash out some kind of agreement with Toreno face to face. The British ambassador was impressed by the young man’s negotiating skills; however, the Rothschild correspondence reveals that Toreno was able to convince Lionel that a fully fledged loan to Spain was now the only way of averting outright bankruptcy and the advent of a republican government. Anselm alone agreed. James and Nathan by now were interested solely in retrieving the money they had advanced to Toreno’s predecessor. In January 1835 they reluctantly agreed to accept the equivalent of 15 million francs as a share of the new loan to be issued by Ardouin. Salomon later estimated their losses on the contract at 1.6 million francs.

Yet Lionel’s negotiations achieved what proved to be a more important concession from Toreno; for during his stay at Madrid the contract for the Almadén mines fell due for renewal. As we have seen, the Rothschilds already had a stake in the mines and they had begun to think of increasing their control over the Spanish mercury market during 1834. Indeed, Lionel had explicitly suggested asking for the mines as a guarantee for the 15 million francs advanced. He now outbid four other companies to secure the new contract—essentially by bribing Toreno and the Queen and by offering, instead of a sealed bid, to pay 5 per cent more than the highest rival bid. The following year the contract was renegotiated in such a way that it became rather more advantageous for the Rothschilds. This was the beginning of a long and profitable involvement. According to the Rothschilds’ own estimates, the mines at the time of the 1835 agreement were producing between 16,000 and 18,000 hundredweight of mercury a year. Under the 1835 contract, they paid the government rather more (54.5 pesetas or £2.18 per hundredweight) than they had paid under the previous contract (37 pesetas); but were then able to resell the mercury in London for 76-80 pesetas or to silver refineries in Mexico for as much as 150 pesetas per hundredweight. In sterling terms, that represented a profit of at the very least £13,000 a year, with the possibility of more if the output of the mines could be increased without depressing prices. When production was stepped up in 1838, the Rothschilds’ annual income from the mines rose to £32,000, though this level of output proved unsustainable. That amounted to more than 13 per cent of the total net revenue from the mines—and no less than 38 per cent of the London house’s profits (though half the money was shared with the Paris house). By the 1840s, 20 per cent was James’s target return from Almadén.

The acquisition of the mercury rights also signalled a radical change of policy. From now on, rather than issue bonds for Spain against effectively worthless paper securities, they would finance the country’s chronically unreliable government by making relatively short-run advances on the royalties they had to pay for the Almadén mercury. Later, similar advances would be made on the basis of copper and tobacco from Cuba. Commodities thus proved to be the best kind of security for loans to unstable states. In his comic poem “Romancero” Heine joked that Mendizábal (who became Finance Minister in 1835) had pawned an ancient pearl necklace “to cover certain / deficits in state finances”; these had duly appeared “at the Tuileries . . . shimmering on the neck of Madame Solomon, baroness.” Contemporaries would probably have recognised the allusion to the “jewels” of Almadén.