

Rothschild interest in the US dates from the early 1830s, when an opportunity arose to arrange the payment of a million pounds owing to the Treasury in Washington from France. This coup led to the Rothschilds replacing the Barings as the federal government’s London agents. At the same time, Nathan and James began to interest themselves for the first time in American state loans and commercial finance. American exports of cotton and tobacco to Europe were advancing by leaps and bounds, and by the mid-1830s the London and Paris houses were doing a considerable volume of business in the bills generated by this trade, advancing substantial sums to a number of American bankers, notably J. L. and S. I. Joseph. In the American financial crisis of 1836-7, they and all the other firms with which the Rothschilds had dealings got into serious difficulties; and it was at this point that the Rothschilds were forced to make a decision about the future of their involvement in the US, and above all about the nature of their representation there.

The “appointment” of August Belmont (originally Schönberg) as the Rothschilds’ agent in New York was an accident. Belmont had joined the Frankfurt house as an apprentice at the age of fifteen, and had risen rapidly through the ranks, getting up at 5 a.m. each morning to improve his French, English and arithmetic. By 1834 he was acting as secretary to one of the partners, visiting Paris, Naples and Rome; and in 1837 it was decided to send him across the Atlantic. However, contrary to a report in the Allgemeine Zeitung des Judenthums, the intention was definitely not that Belmont should establish himself as the bank’s New York agent. His orders were to take stock of the financial crisis there—to “let us know what is going on and one can then decide accordingly what to do”—and then to proceed to Havana. This planned itinerary reveals that, in James’s view, the family’s interests in Cuba were what mattered: as he put it, quite apart from existing commitments there of around £100,000, “Spain receives all her income from that land and it is one of the most profitable business ventures.” By contrast, he and his nephews had managed to reduce their commitments in the US to just £9,000 by the end of April, and James was prepared to write this remainder off as “a lost cause.” The possibility of establishing a Rothschild house in New York was not wholly ruled out, for James recognised the American market’s potential and was convinced that there were bargains to be snapped up from the “shipwreck” left by the banking crisis; but he evidently regarded this as a job far in excess of Belmont’s capabilities. His trip was intended to be of short duration; indeed, there was not even any question of his taking over the Havana office. What James really wanted was for a Rothschild to go to America.

But who? The debate on this question illuminates the fundamental problem which was to bedevil the Rothschilds’ American policy for decades to come: no one wanted to go there—witness James’s vain attempts to persuade his nephews to accept the mission. Anthony, he claimed, had “long indicated that he would like to go to America [and] would gladly make use of this opportunity:” I am strongly urging him to do so without delay. We have so many interests in that country and in Havana that one of us should immediately go over there. However, I don’t believe that you, my dear Anselm, should go there. It is Anthony’s turn to do so. I know very well that it is not a pleasure trip but the business has to be attended to and you, my dear Anselm, can’t go there, firstly, because my brother Amschel is not feeling well enough to remain in Frankfurt with my brother Carl this coming summer. The latter also wants to take the waters . . . and thirdly, you are a married man whereas Anthony is a bachelor so that I can’t see any reason whatsoever why it should not be Anthony rather than you who should go. Well, I don’t have anyone here who knows English . . . I think that it will be possible to earn a lot of money in America. The American funds which one can sell in London will be purchasable in America for next to nothing, for no House has any credit over there and . . . one can earn some very nice profits. Well, once you are in America you can then send Belmont ahead of you to Havana . . . In short, my dear nephew, I urge you to think it over very carefully but whatever plan you decide to proceed with the main thing is that you do it without any delays.