



13.i: Anon., No. 1. CITY POLITICS—JEW-DISH-US CAKEMAN: WHO’S FOR A SLICE? WHO’S FOR A SLICE? (1834 or 1835).



13.ii: Anon., No. 2. CITY POLITICS—JEW-DISH-US CAKEMAN. DAT RICE CAKE SOLD VERY WELL (1834 or 1835).

It is not easy to see why Nathan acted as he did. It is possible that he (along with Anselm) was lulled by the announcement of the Quadruple Alliance into thinking that the danger of civil war would fade, though there is no indication of any official nudge in this direction from Palmerston; on the contrary, Palmerston’s man in Madrid, Charles Villiers, indignantly accused Nathan of “doing” the Spanish government with “not very advantageous conditions.” The most likely explanation was that he wanted to pre-empt a rival bid by Thomas Wilson or Aguado and establish himself (or James) as “court banker” to Maria Christina, in anticipation of a major new loan and conversion operation when the Cortes finally met. He plainly had a plan ready to convert the old Cortes bonds and probably also anticipated short-run speculative profits, assuming that the announcement of a Rothschild advance would boost their prices. One (admittedly hostile) Austrian diplomat recalled his saying: “I must grant it [the loan] because if I don’t, somebody else will.” Whatever his motive, the advance was uncharacteristically reckless. As James, Lionel and Anselm had all foreseen, the other French bankers promptly sued James, on the ground that Nathan had acted without due regard to the consortium contract. Only by offering Aguado a new agreement to share any future loan was James able to avert a costly defeat in the courts. Nor did the Spanish government’s promise to bring the question of the deferred bonds before the new Cortes satisfy the Committee of the stock exchange in London. In Paris too the markets were unconvinced by Nathan’s plan: Spanish bonds fell sharply in late June. Worse still, no sooner had the 15 million francs been paid over than a new Finance Minister took over in Madrid who a month later reneged on the agreement, claiming that the Rothschilds had promised to lend twice the amount; this too Nathan had been warned to expect.

It is not known for sure why the Minister in question, Toreno, was (as James put it) an “enemy.” Partly, he was responding to domestic pressure to deal with Spanish bankers like Ardouin, with whom he concluded an alternative loan agreement for £4 million; more importantly, he was intent on a drastic “reduction” of the existing Spanish public debt—a conversion which would have cut the nominal value of Spanish bonds by as much as 75 per cent—something the Rothschilds regarded as a “declaration of bankruptcy.” To make matters worse, Toreno’s appointment coincided with the return of Don Carlos to Spain and an outbreak of cholera in Madrid. With Apponyi, the Austrian ambassador in Paris, issuing dire warnings as to the consequences of French intervention against Carlos, the price of Spanish bonds plummeted, occasioning suicides and murder threats on the Paris bourse. Yet the Rothschilds, while doing their fair share of selling, could not risk an all-out financial “war” against Toreno, for the top priority in the midst of this débâcle was to retrieve as much as possible of Nathan’s 15 million francs, if only in the form of “those stinking [bonds] with which he is going bankrupt.” It was, as James said, “an awful mess”; and it revealed very starkly the limitations of financial power when confronted by a government unafraid of the international bond market. “All I want you to declare is that we will get our money back and I ask nothing further of you,” James implored the Spanish representative. “My commission is now over,” the latter replied, “I have been recalled.” In vain, James appealed to the ambassador, to the French government and to Toreno himself. “My dear Nathan,” he admitted, putting his finger on the Rothschilds’ fundamental weakness, “we don’t have any troops to force the Government to do that which it does not want to do.”