

The decisive moment in the civil war coincided with the Frankfurt family “summit” and Nathan’s death. Ultimately, despite pressure from the French government to come to Maria Christina’s assistance, the Rothschilds kept on selling Spanish bonds; indeed, Nathan’s last instructions to his sons were to liquidate all their holdings. After his death, this clear-out continued, so that by 1837 the Rothschilds had more or less withdrawn completely from the market for Spanish bonds. The Spanish Prime Minister was now “that stinking Mendizábal,” whom James had “never trusted”; Spanish bonds—now trading as low as 19—were simply “muck” or “shit.” The fact that Salomon moved so quickly after Nathan’s death to secure for Lionel the Austrian consulship in London also seems to point to the importance of Metternich’s leverage.

However, although Metternich appeared to have won, the private Rothschild letters show that if France and Britain had intervened militarily—rather than just financially—the Rothschilds might well have resumed large-scale lending to Spain. In ditching Mendizábal, Nathan was not merely bowing to pressure from Vienna. He was acting out of self-interest, in the belief that any loan to Spain was bound to fail in the absence of military intervention: no Spanish government could now afford to pay both the interest on its external debt and an army big enough to beat the Carlists. Despite all that Salomon had said to Metternich, by March 1836 James was privately itching for France to intervene. As he put it to Nathan following an inconclusive meeting with Louis Philippe and Thiers: If we should be so fortunate that we, over here, decide to intervene [in Spain], this could make a difference for us of many hundreds of thousands of pounds sterling, and we could earn a great deal of money, because we could then calmly deal in bills, quicksilver and everything else, but, unfortunately, I don’t have any influence, nor indeed, does anyone else have influence over the King . . . I hope to God that they will indeed decide to intervene and you can then imagine how much business this will generate. I spoke so much [in favour of intervention] that my tongue nearly fell out of my throat.



When the possibility of French intervention surfaced again in July, he and Lionel were again briefly enthused, only to be disappointed at the half-heartedness of the measures taken.4 It was the same story when Thiers failed to overcome the King’s opposition to intervention in the spring of 1837. Nor should it be assumed that the Rothschilds’ refusal to back a full-scale loan to Mendizábal implied a complete withdrawal from Spanish finances. Before long, the practice of making advances on the mercury from the Almadén mines was resumed (despite Salomon’s assurances to the contrary to Metternich), making sums of the order of £100,000 available to the government. James also became increasingly interested in the revenue Spain was earning from Havana. In January 1837 some sort of deal was proposed by Mendizábal involving a buy-back of the deferred Cortes bonds in return for bills on Havana. Interestingly, the Rothschilds—Salomon included—were keen to do this, provided it could be kept secret. They were also continuing to pay the salaries of Spanish diplomats in Paris at this time, an arrangement dating back to 1834. Where they drew the line was at issuing bonds. Even when the idea was put forward for a loan secured on Cuban revenues, they showed little serious inclination to get involved (though this hesitation was probably reinforced by the impact of the 1837 American crisis in Cuba and by the contemporaneous gains made by Don Carlos in Spain).