



Nor was that all. Salomon even went so far as to suggest that Nathan’s error had put the entire future of the brothers’ partnership in jeopardy: I myself do not yet know when we brothers will meet; whether the affair of the Spanish Loan will cause a split we shall see. I am sixty, my brother at Frankfurt is sixty-two; I have only two children and if I live very carefully I can live on the interest of my capital; I have fortunately only to provide for my son, as my Betty is as rich as her father. I do not mean that I intend to give up business but only to see to it that I can sleep peacefully. The Spanish affair has completely ruined my nerves; it is not the loss of money, for even if the whole 15,000,000 francs had been lost my share would have been only 3,000,000, but the unpleasantness which we have had with this business. Now Nathan Mayer Rothschild has four grown-up sons, and Carl has two younger boys, so they manage on the basis of a dozen heads. Because my father has so disposed we shall probably have to remain together, but I must confess that it has all very much tired and exhausted

Your,

S. M. v. Rothschild.





For good measure, Salomon then accused the Russian ambassador Pozzo of slandering James because he had been excluded from a profitable issue of Austrian bonds. This was no mere charade: the Rothschilds’ private correspondence indicates how strongly Salomon felt on this issue. As late as 1840—after Don Carlos had been defeated—James could still tell his nephews: [W]e can’t make a loan for Spain under our own name, unless a guarantee is provided by England and by France and . . . nevertheless I tell you, my dear nephews, I don’t want to have anything to do with it . . . [I]t is only if the Governments provide us with the necessary guarantees that we can give the Northern Powers a reason, otherwise I can tell you, my dear nephews, that the first thing which my good Salomon will do will be to withdraw from the business. Do you think that this deal will generate a large enough profit to justify doing something like this?



It has generally been assumed that on this issue Metternich’s political power prevailed over the Rothschilds’ financial interests. Armed with good-quality intelligence and making the most of Salomon’s desire to acquire the title of Austrian consul for his son and nephews, Metternich appears to have succeeded in scuppering the project of an Anglo-French guaranteed loan to Toreno’s mercurial successor, Mendizábal. Like the British ambassador in Spain, Mendizábal assumed that the Rothschilds would back this project, not least because of his business links with James, with whom he had done business in Portuguese bonds.3 But Nathan—apparently responding to Salomon’s pressure—chose to leak the Anglo-French plan to Vienna and more or less deliberately allowed the project to fall through, leaving Mendizábal high and dry. Indeed, he told Palmerston that he had no confidence in the solvency of Mendizábal’s government. When the British Foreign Secretary pointed out that the planned sale of crown lands would raise money, Nathan replied with a characteristically earthy image: “Yes, in time, but not in time for the May dividend. It is like telling me at seven o’clock when I want my dinner [that] there is a calf feeding in a field a mile off.” Contrary to the widespread expectation in diplomatic circles that they were itching to make such a guaranteed loan, in fact Nathan and James were steadily baling out of Spanish bonds altogether.