

Of course, the Spanish government may have hoped that the mercury deal would lure the Rothschilds into making a full-scale loan. But in this they were sorely disappointed. True, by the spring of 1835 James was feeling more sanguine about Spain following the success of Ardouin’s loan. This, however, proved to be short-lived as the Carlists seemed to gain the upper hand. The key question now became whether any foreign power would intervene to decide the outcome of the civil war. This had always been a possibility: France had intervened in Spain just over a decade before and there had been abortive liberal expeditions in the wake of the 1830 revolution. The Quadruple Alliance also seemed to imply some sort of British action on behalf of Maria Christina’s regime (provided the Whigs stayed in power). But it was only after Toreno had wrecked his financial plans that Nathan became a convert to the idea of military intervention, as did Lionel. James, summoned to London to decide the next move, once again wavered. The experience of the early 1830s had made him deeply suspicious of the more hawkish French politicians, and he was inclined to reinforce Louis Philippe’s pacific inclinations against the projects for intervention hatched by Thiers. On the other hand, he found it difficult to oppose his elder brother on the Spanish issue and gradually came round to supporting intervention. By contrast, their brother Salomon—who had all along had his doubts about getting involved with Spain—now acted energetically to counter Nathan’s arguments for intervention, ultimately going to extraordinary lengths to dissociate himself from his brother’s actions in his correspondence with Metternich.

Metternich had been kept well informed of Nathan’s actions by the Austrian chargé d’affaires in London, Hummelauer, and a junior official named Kirchner who was supposedly assisting Nathan with his consular duties. He therefore knew that Nathan was arguing for British intervention; indeed, Nathan appears to have admitted it openly to the Austrian ambassador Esterházy. To clear himself of guilt by association, Salomon therefore had to write one of the most extraordinary of all Rothschild letters, addressed to his senior clerk in Vienna, Leopold von Wertheimstein, but explicitly intended for Metternich’s eyes. He began by claiming that the collapse in Spanish bond prices following Toreno’s appointment as Finance Minister had been engineered by the Rothschilds as an act of “vengeance” on Toreno for the losses he had caused them. According to accounts which Salomon enclosed, Nathan had sold no less than £2 million of Spanish bonds, ruining Toreno’s credit and proving that the Rothschilds were now “confirmed enemies of Spain.” Not only that, but Salomon and James had then gone to see Talleyrand, Guizot, Broglie and Louis Philippe himself to argue “that France’s credit would go to the devil if they intervened, and that they would have to face a second and third revolution.” There was therefore no question of the Rothschilds lending “a single farthing” more to Spain. As if to convince Metternich of his sincerity, Salomon’s letter concluded by heaping abuse on Nathan’s head. “My brother Nathan Mayer,” he wrote, is one of the ablest men as far as the Exchequer and price movements are concerned but has no special aptitude in other matters . . . [H]e is a child in politics . . . [and] believes that the Powers will be pleased by intervention . . . In other matters that are not concerned with the Bourse, [he] is not particularly bright; he is exceedingly competent in his office, but apart from that, between ourselves, he can hardly spell his own name. This brother of mine, however, is so disgusted with Spain that he can hardly bear himself, just like all of us, only perhaps he feels it more because he realises that he made the advance of 15,000,000 francs without asking any of his partners about it.