

A quite different diplomatic complication arose in the mid-1840s when the powers began to debate the question of Queen Isabella’s marriage. The French wished to marry Isabella to her hypochondriac (and, they hoped, impotent) cousin Francisco de Asis and her sister to one of Louis Philippe’s sons, the duc de Montpensier; Palmerston, appreciating that this might one day put a grandson of Louis Philippe on the Spanish throne, favoured the inevitable Coburg; while Metternich argued for a marriage between Isabella and Don Carlos’s son Montemolin, to bridge symbolically the dynastic rift. There was an economic subtext, as usual, with France and Britain seeking trade agreements with Spain, as well as the usual talk of internationally guaranteed loans and renewed efforts by the British bondholders to get their unpaid interest. There was a good deal of excitement about this at the time, including fanciful rumours in Madrid that James was refusing to lend money to Spain until Isabella had settled the succession question by having a son. However, the Rothschilds were little more than reluctant onlookers and occasional messengers in all this: it merely hardened them in their resolve to abandon Spanish bonds. When Guizot and his ambassador in Madrid interpreted James’s refusal to back a loan to Narváez and Mon as a vote of no confidence in their marriage schemes, they failed to see that this was merely the continuation of a Rothschild policy dating back fully ten years. Once again the great powers’ conflicting interests threatened to impinge on the interests of the Rothschild houses; but this time a position of neutrality was easier to sustain as none of the Queen’s possible spouses posed a threat to the Almadén monopoly. Control of the mines remained the sole object of Rothschild policy in Spain. Nor was it to be their last step away from “pure” finance and commerce, into the very different business of mineral extraction (and later also refining).

Yet even the commitment to Almadén was not unconditional. On the contrary: when the mercury contract came up for renewal in 1847, the Rothschilds were so unimpressed by the terms the Spanish government was prepared to offer that they began to contemplate withdrawal. This partly reflected their assessment of the world mercury market. Lionel Davidson’s confirmation in 1845 of the existence of substantial mercury deposits in Mexico raised the possibility of discoveries elsewhere in the New World. (The price which the Rothschilds had to pay for the mercury monopoly crept up steadily from 54.5 pesetas in the beginning to 70 pesetas in 1850, while the price at which it could be sold abroad began to slip following these discoveries.) With demand falling especially low in the depressed economic conditions of 1847, the Rothschilds not unreasonably expected the government to improve its terms. For a government which was struggling financially, the choice was between maximising revenue from the mines and securing further cash advances from the Rothschilds. Opting for the former, the Minister elected to publish his offer, effectively ruling out further bargaining. The result was deadlock, with Spanish requests for an advance of £600,000 being firmly refused in the absence of better terms for the mercury contract. As James put it, “If one could earn 20 per cent then I would be all in favour of going ahead with the deal, but as matters stand at present we stand to make only a trivial sum . . . I can’t see the big fortunes we stand to make from this deal, nor why we should invest our money in such a venture in these present times.” By now, as we shall see, James had found more lucrative financial opportunities.