

The debate over whether to increase or diminish this involvement in Spain placed a greater strain on familial harmony than any other issue the Rothschilds had to contend with before 1848; indeed, it is not too much to say that it threatened to break up the partnership between the five houses. Nathan was evidently keen to play a bigger and more independent role in Spanish finances, a position consistently supported by his nephew Anselm and rather less consistently by Lionel. James vacillated endlessly, one day seeing all the advantages, the next day seeing only the risks: “With this country there is a lot of money to be made, but on the other hand, one could lose a great deal of one’s reputation”—this was James’s constant refrain throughout the 1830s. “You know my dear Papa how he [James] is,” wrote Lionel impatiently: “One minute he is for and one minute he is against the Business.” Unlike his own son, Salomon was generally opposed to direct—or, to be precise, overt—involvement, primarily because of the intense pressure to which he was subjected by Metternich. But he too was inclined to waver: “Be so good as to read Uncle Salomon’s letters,” Lionel urged his father sarcastically in March 1834, “the first for the Spanish , the second against, the third for.”

Nathan’s initial strategy seems to have been to secure some sort of agreement on the old Cortes bonds as the prelude to any new Spanish loan. However, all the Spanish negotiators with whom the Rothschilds dealt carefully avoided giving a commitment on the issue. After exceptionally convoluted and protracted negotiations, Nathan decided to ignore the warnings of Metternich, the Austrian ambassador Apponyi, the Russian ambassador Pozzo and no fewer than three French ministers (Broglie, Rigny and Soult), all of whom strongly advised the Rothschilds to avoid Spain.2 Despite the reservations of James and Lionel, who continued to argue for, at most, a joint and preferably anonymous operation with the Paris consortium, on April 18 Nathan unilaterally proposed to advance the Spanish government 15 million francs to pay the interest due at the end of June on its undeferred bonds. He had obtained no firm guarantee from Madrid that the Cortes bonds would be revalued, merely an empty promise that the issue would be raised when the Cortes met. Nor did he receive any security for his advance when the agreement was signed with the Spanish ambassador in Paris and a representative of the Bank of San Fernando on June 7. As the Carlist-inclined Duke of Wellington sardonically observed, the Rothschilds were now well and truly “in the boat”; and, just as Metternich and the rest had predicted, “the boat” began to sink almost at once. Given the country’s notorious record of default, it is not surprising that Nathan’s decision to involve himself in Spanish finances attracted satirical comment. Two cartoons portrayed him as a “Jew-dish-us cakeman,” standing by his trademark pillar selling a “rice cake” marked “Loan” (see illustrations 13.i and 13.ii). “Who’s for a slice? Who’s for a slice?” reads the caption on the first. “All Hot! All Hot! Take care you don’t burn your Fingers, Plenty of cakes but none like I make.” From his pocket portrudes a bill marked “Spanish.” The second cartoon shows the “cakeman” with his stall under his arm, having sold the cake. “Dat rice cake sold very well—I hope it vill agree wid my customers—I vil make anoder.”