

Of course, it would have been difficult to retain control of the lucrative mercury business without making any concessions to the Spanish government. A shot was fired across Rothschild bows when, not long after the fall of Mendizábal in August 1837, the Cortes sought to revoke the Almadén contract, arguing that it had been improperly modified two years before. Defenders of the 1835 contract in Madrid warned that, if deprived of the Almadén mines, the Rothschilds might back Don Carlos “for they are the monetary dynasty of Europe, and a new lever in the balance of power, which might decide the success of the Pretender by inclining the scales in his favour.” But only by agreeing to make more (and larger) advances on mercury and Havana bills were the Rothschilds able to retain the contract; and increasingly they had to allow their agent Weisweiller considerable latitude in the granting of such advances to avoid similar challenges, even turning a blind eye to the partnership he struck up with the governor of the Queen’s court, Manuel Gaviria. Of all the threats to their position, the biggest was probably posed by the banker Aguado, who returned to dangle the possibility of a large loan in front of the new Espartero government, with a view—so the Rothschilds suspected—to challenging their monopoly at Almadén. The new Finance Minister Alejandro Mon did his best to convince James that without a loan of £5 million the Rothschilds would lose the mines. But Salomon, with Metternich still breathing down his neck, continued to oppose involvement in any such loan unless it could be done through a “front” like the Bank of San Fernando; and James remained leery of the purely economic risks involved (not least because the Carlists managed to occupy Almadén briefly in the course of April 1838). Once again it proved possible to hold on to the mines by means of large advances, which fluctuated between around £200,000 and £400,000. In 1839, with the Carlist threat more or less dead, there was renewed talk of a loan, but the Rothschilds still declined to be involved, showing much more interest in establishing some kind of tobacco monopoly. As James shrewdly anticipated, the defeat of Don Carlos merely unleashed the Moderado opposition to Espartero, replacing one form of political instability with another.

The price of this strategy—which gave the Spanish government as much money as a bond issue, if not more—was a good deal of Austrian irritation. Despite their best efforts, the Rothschilds could not hope to conceal what they were up to from Metternich (it was at this point that they began to realise that Kirchner was effectively spying on them). Yet the consequences were not serious: even James’s fears that Lionel might lose his Austrian consulship proved unfounded. Throughout the successive revolutions, coups and pronunciamentos of the early 1840s, Rothschild policy remained consistent: to hang on to Almadén (albeit on rather less lucrative terms), to expand their involvement with the Cuban and Philippines trade, but to eschew bond issues. Politically, their position remained ambiguous: they apparently continued to act as Maria Christina’s bankers even after Espartero had overthrown her, while at the same time leaving Weisweiller to maintain normal service first with Espartero and then with his Moderado successor Narváez. This proved to be the only way of reconciling the sharply conflicting interests of the London, Paris and Vienna houses. The agreement reached in 1843 with the Austrian government for the import of 12 million Havana cigars may be seen as a kind of Rothschild peace-offering, designed to reconcile Metternich to the continuation of such business with Spain and her colonies.