





“That Blasted Country”: America

The Rothschilds’ interest in Spain not only led them to establish new links with Cuba, the Philippines and Mexico. More by accident than design, it also led them to establish a permanent agency in the country which was to emerge as the dominant force on the other side of the Atlantic: the United States. Yet, despite its phenomenal economic potential and the furious pace of its development after 1820, America—it might as well be said at the outset—was a challenge to which the Rothschilds never quite rose.

The reason for this has not previously been explained. Of course, it was far away, and in many ways quite different in its business culture from Europe—“very sharp and peculiar” was the phrase once used at New Court, a view echoed and immortalised by Dickens in Martin Chuzzlewit. But the same might easily be said a fortiori of Brazil, with which the Rothschilds developed an enduring relationship. It has been suggested that the American market had been “sewn up” by the Barings before Rothschilds arrived on the scene, and later developed its own home-grown bankers, like J. P. Morgan, who would ultimately eclipse Rothschilds not only in the US but in the world. Yet this too will not quite do: the Rothschilds proved on numerous occasions in the nineteenth century that they had the financial muscle to oust even their most powerful rivals from business they coveted. That they did not do so in America requires a better explanation.

In fact, the answer may partly lie in the peculiarities of American democracy. The Rothschilds, as we have seen, always gave first place to public finance in their operations, and rarely conducted commercial business in a country without also lending to its government. However, this proved difficult in the US. The federal system meant that the financial needs of the central government were strictly limited, while some of the individual states proved to be among the least reliable creditors of the entire nineteenth century. A second and ultimately more serious obstacle was the American tradition of suspicion towards big banks. The Rothschilds generally liked to have a reliable local partner in their international operations, often a national or central bank in the mould of the Bank of England or the Banque de France. In Spain, that role was played by the Bank of San Fernando. In the United States, however, it proved politically impossible to establish such an institution on an enduring basis. The first Bank of the United States (BUS), set up by Alexander Hamilton in 1791, expired twenty years later when the Republican-dominated Congress refused to renew its charter on the ground that it was unconstitutional. The second BUS, established in 1816 with a capital of $25 million, became the focus of a powerful political campaign against the “money power” which was blamed for the deflationary pressures of the succeeding years. Though it survived a legal challenge by the state of Maryland, the Philadelphia-based bank fell victim to the populist President Andrew Jackson, who recognised the electoral advantages of an attack on the “monster,” identified as it was with his rival Henry Clay. When the BUS’s president, Nicholas Biddle, applied to have its charter renewed in 1832 (four years earlier than was necessary), Jackson vetoed it, vowing: “The Bank is trying to kill me, but I will kill it.” Despite Biddle’s effort to precipitate a financial panic in retaliation, “Old Hickory”—Jackson’s nickname—carried the day, and in 1836 the bank lost its public status, though it continued to exist as a state bank in Pennsylvania. As we shall see, the Rothschilds’ instinct was to do business with the BUS; but Jackson’s attack fatally undermined its position. It should be added that American suspicion of big banks was allied to a suspicion of foreign banks, and especially Jewish ones. No sooner had the Rothschilds appeared on the American scene than Governor McNutt of Missisippi was denouncing “Baron Rothschild” for having “the blood of Judas and Shylock flow[ing] in his veins, and . . . unit[ing] the qualities of both his countrymen.”