

The culmination of this feud came in 1839, when the Bank of England turned to the Banque de France for assistance in replenishing its reserve, now reduced by the American crisis to £3.7 million. When he heard that the Governor of the Banque, comte d’Argout, was offering assistance, James was initially wholly opposed: The French Bank has already been trying for a long time to reach an understanding with the English because, purely out of a sense of pride, they want to be able to claim that England is in debt to them, but where would things be if, God forbid, war were to break out? What would happen if France were to require money? Would the English Bank then open its coffers and come to the aid of the French? I read in the newspapers that the two Banks are trying to reach an understanding and that is why I am writing to you about this matter. Our own interests are very much against this scheme succeeding and we must therefore do everything we can to frustrate its success.



Despite the entreaties of the Banque’s Deputy Governor “that a House like ours which has rendered eminent service to the Bank of England ought to take part in the intended operation,” James and Anselm were unyielding. And to reinforce the resolve of his cousins in London, Anselm added an intimidating postscript: Do not take any rash step in a large operation. Your mother tells me that Herries told your good father in her presence to mind and not trust the Bank without any guarantees . . . as the Bank being involved in difficulties may stop suddenly. Mind, you are not your good father and do not have his influence, and he was capable of acting in other ways than prudence would direct you.



The point was echoed by Hannah herself a few days later: “I would not advance any thing to the Bank without having Exchequer Bills or any other Government security for it is absolutely necessary to be well prepared and to have a sufficient supply of available property. I do not forget a former event when Herries was very apprehensive of a stoppage of the Bank.”

Did the Rothschilds really believe that the Bank of England might be about to suspend payments? It seems unlikely. What was really at issue was whether the Banque and Bank between them could resolve a monetary crisis without recourse to Rothschilds. However, if James thought a Rothschild boycott would suffice to undermine the agreement reached between Curtis and d’Argout, he was badly mistaken. Realising that the deal was unstoppable and that the profits would be substantial, he was forced to execute an abrupt volte-face, now resolving “to go into the business with the Bank as far as I possibly can.” He had left it too late, and the business was entrusted to Barings and a consortium of Paris houses.5 This was the last straw for James: [In 1825] we arranged for such large quantities of gold to be brought in and thereby saved the Bank, and now it is Baring who is the recipient of everything. The Bank should at least share [the business] out . . . so that the business is properly distributed . . . You have no other defender at the Bank than that man Curtis who is a two-faced scoundrel . . . If gold should go out, and it is no different to Paris, then I will most certainly give preference to gold and [this time] I won’t say, “I don’t want to do it because of the Bank.” No! On the one hand I will make it clear that if we have an interest in the deal we will do everything to be of service to the Bank but on the other hand they will treat us with respect . . . Only if we engage in a lot of wheeling and dealing can we stay in the public eye and make ourselves an object of fear. Baring can’t say, “I won’t give Rothschild anything.”