

With hindsight, this programme of reforms was less coherent than it appeared to Peel at the time. Quite apart from its politically self-destructive quality (by no means unique in nineteenth-century British history), its economic consequences were far from comfortable, even by the standards of what has been called the “Age of Atonement.” Theoretically, lower import duties, by increasing the volume of trade, were supposed to generate additional income. But this was unlikely to happen under the depressed conditions of the 1840s, which the Bank Charter Act tended to aggravate by restricting domestic banknote circulation as the Bank of England’s gold reserve declined. As a result, the income tax—supposedly a temporary measure—soon began to look more like a permanent fact of life, even if Peel’s ideological heir, Gladstone, never quite gave up hope of doing away with it. Nor was Peel able to set the nation on the course of debt redemption which he had intended: it was not until 1844-5 that the government was able to eliminate the deficit, and it proved possible to run surpluses for just three consecutive years before the 1847-8 crisis put the government back in the red. Nevertheless, there was no denying the “soundness” of Peelite finance at the time: indeed, it set the benchmark of fiscal and monetary orthodoxy for the rest of the nineteenth century. The price of 3 per cent consols rose from 87 in October 1841 to 101 just over three years later, a clear indication of City approval.

It was still possible, on the other hand, for bankers to grumble about the medicine they were being given, even when they knew it was doing the nation’s finances good. It is significant in this context that, as early as 1830, Peel had conceived a revived income tax as a way of “reach[ing] such men as Baring, his [Peel’s] father, Rothschild, and others, as well as absentees [from] Ireland . . . to reconcile the lower with the higher classes and to diminish the burthen of taxation on the poor man.” The Rothschilds were less than pleased when they were duly “reached” in 1842. Of course, they had other reasons for feeling hostile to Peel’s government. Not only were the Tories opposed to Jewish emancipation, but the advent of a Tory ministry threatened to revive the possibility of an Anglo-Russian alliance against liberal France. Still, Rothschild opposition to Peel’s fiscal policy was pronounced from the outset, and the main reason seems to have been the income tax.

While Nat could see the advantages of balancing the budget, and rightly foresaw the rise in consols which would follow it, he disliked the means Peel had adopted. He anticipated practical difficulties in assessment, for example. “How will it be possible,” he mused shortly after Peel’s Chancellor Goulborn had unveiled his first budget, “for the tax collectors to ascertain the real incomes of merchants & bankers who by and large do not know themselves what they can term their income until their balances are made?” A year later he candidly asked his brothers whether, in preparing their tax return, “you value all the stock at the market price and add the increased price to your profit or whether you take unrealized stock at the valuation of last year & pay only upon realized profits & real income?”—a question which reveals some of the difficulties inherent in taxing men like the Rothschilds, whose approach to accounting had always been quite cavalier. “It is a most disagreeable business with yr stinking tax gentlemen,” he wrote in early 1844, “& particularly if you have to show yr books to the commissioners—let me know how yr balance is, I recommend your taking no profit in the account upon unsold stock.”