



This, however, was bluster. Although James talked of spoiling the market for the bills on London Baring would need to buy, he knew full well that, with the Bank of England as Baring’s client, “everyone will therefore lick his backside to get the business.” There was no realistic way of starting a “war with the Bank, at least not for the time being,” because, as he had to admit, “they are stronger than us.” All he could do was ruefully assess what had gone wrong and fantasise about revenge: As far as the Bank of England is concerned, when the time comes and it is in our power to do so then we can show them that it is a lot better to maintain friendly relations with us. I don’t know whether I should not perhaps write to Curtis that we would prefer not to renew the £5,000 next time round [possibly a reference to a private loan to Curtis]. This will need some very careful thought given to it for it will doubtless result in him bearing an enormous grudge against us. Indeed, over the recent past he has not shown himself to have been too great a friend of ours and had it not been for the English House I would not have cared the least for his friendship . . . [I]t would perhaps have been smarter if at the time we had given him a small share of the commission from the Bank and this would have been a lot better than everything else. The man is a businessman just like us and purely out of a sense of friendship people don’t always treat us preferentially.



Although there were half-hearted attempts to re-establish links towards the end of the year, the damage had been done. “I am not prepared to run after the Deputy Governor and lick his backside,” declared James as the negotiations over the BUS dragged on. In 1843, after a period of more or less frozen relations, Lionel closed the Rothschild account at the Bank of England.

In truth, the row had been allowed to grow out of all proportion: as Nat sensibly observed in its aftermath, “I think the only advantage of a [central] bank is in being able to get out money whenever you want it & that it is folly to care about what people say.” In his determination to get the better of Baring and to establish the Rothschilds in a pre-eminent position in the United States, James had lost sight of that. The net result of his enthusiasm for America—an enthusiasm his nephews had never wholly shared—had been a large amount of bad debts from the defunct Bank of the United States; and a comparable quantity of bad feeling at the Bank of England.





FOURTEEN

Between Retrenchment and Rearmament (1840)


Monsieur Rothschild knows Europe prince by prince and the bourse courtier by courtier. He carries all their bank balances in his head, those of the courtiers as well as those of the kings; he can tell them how they stand without consulting his books. He says to one such: “Your account will go into the red if you appoint that minister.” “

—MICHELET





In the troubled years immediately after the 1830 revolution, James and his brothers had constantly urged the great powers to avoid war. To say that they were successful in this would be, as we have seen, to exaggerate their influence over great power diplomacy; nevertheless, the fact remains that the Rothschilds got what they wanted: peace. Yet there was a fundamental paradox at the heart of Rothschild pacifism. For governments which heeded their advice and avoided international confrontation were in a position to curtail their military expenditures—and therefore to dispense with the need for new loans. This meant that in the years after 1833 all the major powers effectively ceased to be Rothschild clients. Peace seemed to be making the five houses redundant.