



This revealed a streak of ruthlessness of which, one suspects, his father would have approved. Moreover, as Nat pointed out, it had been James who had originally urged their involvement with the BUS: You appear to forget that it was the Paris house that accepted the 5,500,000 francs [from Jaudon] in direct opposition to our letters & wishes, you also forget that it was the Paris house and not us who encouraged Belmont to do business to such an extent and now after we try [moving] heaven & earth to get our money back by issuing a marketable security . . . you write to us as if by your issuing a similar lot of debentures you run the risk of losing your good name in the event of their not being reimbursed.



Nothing could better illustrate the conflict of interests and attitudes exposed by the American question—a conflict which continued throughout the next year.

Yet James’s pessimism was justified; for in October 1839 the BUS suspended payments and in 1841 finally collapsed. Its failure coincided with a rash of defaults by states, including a number whose bonds Jaudon had handed over as securities. In the wake of this fiasco, which saddled the London and Paris houses with a large quantity of thoroughly bad debts, the Rothschilds were content to hand back to Barings the position of bankers to the federal government: “You may tell your government,” James was reported as telling representatives of the US Treasury, “that you have seen the man who is at the head of the finances of Europe, and that he has told you that you cannot borrow a dollar, not a dollar.” The experience with the BUS had made James wish he had had “never become involved with [America].” In future, he concluded, unless the federal government were “prepared to guarantee all the States and make the payments with us” and to set up an officially backed central bank, he would keep his distance. This was a view which his nephews more than endorsed. In 1842 Anthony wrote to his brothers, urging them to sell “New Yorks & all the [American] stocks which pay an interest”: You may be certain it will be the same with all the states . . . none will pay any Interest & therefore follow my advice—let us get out of them that we can—with them that we cannot get out [of] we must make up our mind, but follow my advice & let us get rid of that blasted country—as much as we profitably can. It is the most blasted & the most stinking country in the world—& we must get rid of it, & that stinking Belmont in the Bargain.



Of course, such drastic disengagement did not occur: even as they were winding up the sorry remains of the BUS loan, the Rothschilds were resuming their dealings in American cotton and tobacco (hence the need to send Hanau to New Orleans). And the project of sending a Rothschild in person to the United States was revived, as we shall see, in 1848. Nevertheless, the scars left by the BUS affair are the best explanation we have for the lingering suspicion of the American economy which characterised subsequent Rothschild policy.