

This is not to suggest that the Rothschilds contemplated tax evasion: on the contrary, Nat advised his brothers “most strongly to give [the Commissioners of the Income Tax] an exact amount of the profits . . . a few hundred pounds more or less [in] charges is of little consequence, whilst it would be terribly disagreeable to be fined or even blamed by the gents in offices.” They were only too well aware that “the amount in question” would be one “of serious import to the Revenue.” Rather, their anxieties related to the possible unintended side-effects of the new tax. Their biggest concern was that, if earnings from foreign investments were taxed, bondholders would switch to domestic investments—a worrying prospect for a bank which specialised in capital export. “I think my dear Lionel,” Nat urged from Paris, “you ought to make strong representations to the government about charging the income tax upon all coupons of foreign bonds paid in London . . . it is a great pity & will in a good measure stop business.” At the very least, the fact that British (but not foreign) holders henceforth paid tax on their income from foreign bonds seemed likely to tempt some clients to do business through the Rothschilds under bogus foreign names. The advent of income tax—a model which James feared would soon be adopted in other countries—seemed to herald an end to the golden age when governments had borrowed from capitalists like the Rothschilds and their clients, rather than taxing them.

Even in Austria and France, where such an overhaul of the fiscal system was only a remote possibility, the years from 1834 to 1841 were relatively lean for the Rothschilds. In Austria, public spending remained more or less constant and there were no new loans. It was even possible to repay the “fortress money” which had been borrowed from the Rothschilds in the name of the German Confederation in 1831. The same was true in France: although the July Monarchy experimented with public works schemes, these were financed out of taxation before 1841. Indeed, total expenditure was slightly lower in 1839 than it had been in 1831 and the national debt was actually reduced by 169 million francs. The most Molé could offer was yet another conversion, an operation which James regarded with little enthusiasm in the light of past experience.

The financial position of Russia was altogether different, though the net effect was essentially the same from the Rothschilds’ point of view. Russian public spending continued to rise in nominal terms from 1833 until 1839, but this was to some extent a monetary phenomenon as recurrent deficits were financed by the printing of paper roubles. The resulting inflation was halted—albeit temporarily—by Kankrin’s reforms of the currency in 1839 and 1843, which replaced the paper rouble with a new “hard” rouble backed by a gold and silver reserve. This reform raised the possibility of a stabilisation loan to establish the new currency’s bullion reserve. James eagerly proposed floating such a loan simultaneously in London and Paris. “It should not be too difficult to impress upon the Russian Government the advantage of this,” he wrote revealingly, not only because it will enhance their credit but also because it is in their own best interest to ensure that all the wealthy people [in England and France] have a substantial investment in Russia and would suffer a financial loss if ever such an unfortunate idea as to march into Russia and wage war or to castigate the Russian state, were to be implemented . . . I am extremely keen for this deal to succeed and not because of the profit we stand to make but rather because I want our House to resume the relationship we had with Russia.