

As a result, the decisions which determined the nature of their representation in America for the rest of the century were taken by the man on the spot. Despite James’s repeated orders, Belmont did not go to Cuba. Instead, and to the intense but impotent irritation of his masters, he acquired an office at 78 Wall Street and announced the establishment of August Belmont & Co., with the plan of acting as the Rothschild agent there. “We received a letter from Belmont,” reported a furious James, “but I didn’t have the patience to read it”: He is a stupid young man . . . and we are not so desperate for new business and would rather sort the old business matters out so that there is no need for anyone to go to America. That is, and remains, our opinion as far as our dependence on a scoundrel such as Belmont is concerned. Instead of going to Philadelphia to collect the 300,000 francs from Cohen he says, “I shall remain in New York.” Such an ass needs to be kept on a short leash.



Nevertheless, James found he had little option but to reply, and a regular corre pondence commenced in September. When Belmont requested the right to discount bills (presumably in the Rothschild name), James was unable to refuse: “He writes every day that he wants to get the authority to discount which I well understand and the man is quite right. If one says ‘A’ then one must also say ‘B’ [a favourite James turn of phrase], though it is always dangerous to do so.” The following month it was agreed to increase his salary to £500, paid jointly by the London and Paris houses. By the 1840s he had a credit facility with the London house of £10,000. When Belmont wished to increase that limit, he threatened to start doing business for other houses.

The Rothschilds never quite forgave Belmont for taking such a profoundly important initiative, and never ceased to regard him as unreliable (feelings not alleviated by his involvement in a duel in 1841 and his conversion, evidently for the sake of social advancement, to Christianity). “We received letters today from Belmont,” wrote Anthony in August 1838, “which frighten us tremendously. How can the man be so mad as to think of doing the things that he is doing . . . I should not mind going out myself . . . if you think my presence there can be of use I will go for I then can write to Anselm to come here . . . I don’t think that any person is justified in doing what he has been without asking.” Two months later James accused Belmont of playing the London and Paris houses off against one another, giving his favour “today . . . to the English House and tomorrow to the Parisian House.” “I think Belmont is a great ass,” declared Nat in 1840. “He treats business so lightly that I do not like him at all as an agent.” He was “too great a cripple to leave New York & we have been so uniformly unlucky in everything he has had the management of.” James agreed: “I don’t have too much confidence in that man Belmont,” he commented, “because . . . he deals only for himself.” There were fitful efforts to replace him, or at least to control him better by sending an additional agent, as Anselm suggested (following reports that Belmont was evincing suicidal tendencies). In 1839 Lionel Davidson was despatched to New York, presumably for this purpose. “He seems a clever intelligent fellow,” commented Nat, implying a favourable comparison with Belmont, “and will do very well if you can manage to keep him down”—a phrase which tells us much about the Rothschilds’ attitude towards their agents. However, it made more sense to send him on to Mexico and the American West, while Hanau, who was sent in 1843, went to New Orleans. Belmont remained ensconced in New York, and was soon embarked on a political career which would take him to the commanding heights of the Democrat Party.