



For reasons which are unclear, this proposal was abandoned or rejected, possibly because of the opposition of Anthony’s mother. However, a month later—and a week and a half after Belmont had reached New York—James tried again. “Don’t you think,” he asked his nephews somewhat disingenuously, “that Belmont should go from America to Havana, for our interests in America are no longer so substantial? I don’t have anyone here and if you so want then I will go to America and Belmont can then go to Havana for the trip to America is no great deal. It is child’s play.” If this was intended to throw down the gauntlet to his nephews, it very nearly worked, to judge by James’s next letter: Well my dear Nat, you ask me what I meant when I said that had I been younger I would have gone to Havana and whether I was trying to give you a subtle hint. I must therefore tell you quite frankly what my thoughts regarding this matter are. I would most certainly have gone to Havana in person . . . For me personally this would have been a trip which I would gladly have undertaken. However, if one of my nephews wanted to go there I would then oppose such a plan with all my strength and my love and would not permit it for [Havana] is too far away and too dangerous because of the heat and, moreover, it is not important enough for our business to justify one’s exposure to such dangers.



This, of course, was mere soft soap. James now came to the point.

However, America is a different matter altogether, as the voyage there is no less safe than a voyage from Calais to Dover where one can calculate in advance how many days the trip will take. I would, however, like to put a question to you. Do we or don’t we want to get involved in the American government’s business schemes? If the answer is “no” then I too will say that there is no need for anyone to go there for we are unable to make good the losses suffered by Joseph and Phillips and no one there can do anything. If, however, [it is “yes”] in that case then I would say that it is necessary to take a close look at the place to see whether and how one can go about doing business there . . . [Q]uite frankly, why should Anthony not go there, and maybe he should be joined by Anselm if it is thought that such a trip would be useful and beneficial for us? If, God forbid, the good and upright Hannah does not approve, then we mustn’t even think of it, but to place our trust entirely in the hands of strangers is difficult . . . I am not at all opposed to the idea of establishing a company for the American business but can such a project be realised, that is, to set up a business house with associates who are in fact not responsible? Won’t the established Houses there be given preference and won’t those people who agree to join us perhaps simply skim the cream off for themselves although we could do the same and get the best morsels?

The Rothschilds never satisfactorily answered these questions. Despite James’s reassurances that they would only be expected to stay for “three to six months,” neither Nat, Anthony or Mayer went to New York; and, although James’s sons Alphonse and Salomon visited the US some years later, they did not stay. The fundamental problem was that while it was James who had the enthusiasm for America, his nephews conducted most of the family’s business with the US, because Britain was always a bigger customer for American cotton and tobacco than France. James therefore had to defer to his nephews’ greater familiarity with the American market, even when he felt that they were passing up a crucial opportunity. As he frequently admitted: “America is more suited to England than it is to France.” (This imbalance between the London and Paris houses also gave rise to persistent friction as to the distribution of profits—and losses.)