

The debate over the American agency thus exposed a fundamental conflict of interests between the London and Paris houses, and revealed the limits of James’s power over his nephews. There is little doubt as to who was right: in refusing to establish a Rothschild house in New York, the English Rothschilds made what must have been the single greatest strategic error in the bank’s history. On the other hand, it is easy to see why they hesitated. For even the limited involvement in the American market symbolised by Belmont’s grudgingly conceded role as agent very soon cost the Rothschilds dear. And it is doubtful whether Anthony or Nat, in Belmont’s place, would have been able to avoid the disaster which lay ahead.

Even before Belmont arrived in New York, an irresistibly tempting opportunity had arisen for the Rothschilds to step into another niche vacated by Alexander Baring. The Bank of the United States had employed Barings as its European agent; but the relationship broke down in 1836-7, and the Rothschilds hurried to offer their services. Biddle had ambitious-sounding plans, including “a business with a guarantee of two million pounds sterling to provide advances for goods and stocks,” and a scheme for a quasi-monopoly on cotton exports. It seemed to James like a financial marriage made in heaven: these were, he enthused, “the wealthiest people in America” and “no less solid” than the Banque de France. At once, he began to imagine “flooding the American market” with his Spanish mercury “so that in six months time we will be masters of the market.”

At first the partnership with the BUS went well. The Rothschilds found themselves on the receiving end of large quantities of American state bonds from not only New York but also newer states like Indiana, Alabama, Missouri and even Michigan, which had only just been admitted into the Union, as well as shares in a number of new banks and a canal company. However, by September 1839 James and his nephews were beginning to discern why Barings had parted company with BUS when they had. Without its charter and its government business, the BUS was vulnerable; when the American cotton crop proved poor, it began to look seriously over-extended, its capital tied up in all kinds of long-term ventures, its managers reliant on the sale of high-yield obligations, post notes (promissory notes due in six months time) and foreign drafts. In order to secure money from the Rothschilds, the BUS’s agent in Europe, Samuel Jaudon, warned that he might be unable to meet his acceptances. Uncomfortably aware that their advances to him now totalled some £300,000—“upon stock which it would be most difficult to dispose of”—James and his nephews had little option but to bail Jaudon out. Reluctantly, they agreed to take over BUS drafts on Hottinguer worth 5.5 million francs (£220,000), though it was hoped to pass the buck to other investors by selling BUS debentures. James raised objections to this, arguing that the Rothschilds’ reputation would suffer if the BUS were to collapse “You make yourselves uneasy about nothing at all,” Lionel assured him: Every person knows upon what security these Debentures are issued and if they are not paid, it is not our fault.—I think it the greatest madness in the world to give a sort of moral guarantee, that a stock which pays 10 to 20 per cent Int[erest] will be punctually paid, the purchaser must take his chance and must know that he is running some risk . . . [Even] if we take the very blackest side . . . I am still of the same opinion in thinking that we have got very well out of a nasty affair and that we ought to be delighted to get our money back so easily.