





Trouble in Threadneedle Street

The negative repercussions of the American crisis did not end there, however. For the financial crisis of 1836-9 also strained to breaking point relations between the Rothschilds and the Bank of England. This was, to say the least, a difficult time for the Bank of England. In Britain, the deflationary tendency which had been manifest since the 1825 crash continued more or less unabated: the Bank’s note circulation declined almost without interruption between 1825 and 1840, reflecting in part the restrictive effect of the bullionist system in the absence of major gold discoveries. At the same time, the American financial crisis played havoc with the international payments system, drawing both gold and silver across the Atlantic. The Rothschilds found themselves torn between the need to sustain their new American commitments and intense pressure from both the Bank of England and the Banque de France to maintain liquidity in Europe.

The trouble began at the time of the brothers’ fateful Frankfurt summit in 1836. From the outset of the American crisis, James and the ailing Nathan urged Nat “not to let the people drive you round the bend and convince you not to send any gold [just] because this might meet with the disapproval of the Governor. You should always take into consideration that whatever you don’t do, others will not hesitate to do. Was Baring too timid to take some gold out for America?” “Send Gold as long as it answers,” echoed Lionel, “and [do] not bother yourself with the Governor of the Bank but pay him off.” This was an allusion to the fact that the London house owed the Bank at least £300,000, money borrowed in December 1835 and not due for repayment until October, as well as a short-term advance of £120,000 negotiated on June 1 “in consequence of a pressure on the Money Market.” On returning to Paris, James promptly committed himself to supplying the Banque de France with silver, while expressing scathing criticism of the Governor in London for allowing his own gold reserve to sink so low. It was not until the end of November that he acted to send gold to London. Not long after that he was alarmed by a rumour to the effect that your Government wants to try to introduce a silver standard as is the case with gold. I would consider this a great misfortune for Europe . . . If England were to do the same [gold would flow] from here over there and this will bring about a crisis everywhere. I think we have to do everything in our power to prevent such a move.



What he meant, of course, was that it would be a great misfortune for France if England began to compete with her for silver as a reserve metal: when the Bank did start buying silver in the summer of 1837, James immediately threatened to stop sending gold to London. On the other hand, he, James, accused the Bank of indecision when his offers of gold (at a price) were not immediately accepted: the Governor, he complained, “changed his mind from day to day and tomorrow he may think differently again.” Worse, he seemed to be ignoring James’s advice “that under no circumstances should he allow any American House to collapse.” Timothy Curtis, the former Governor of the Bank, wrote an emollient letter, assuring James of his “sincere wish to co-operate with your nephews in everything relating to the foreign exchange” and “to act as nearly we can in union with your House,” but firmly insisting that “it is your interest as well as ours that the Bank should possess a good portion of silver.” The damage was done: by March the following year James was convinced that “your English Bank is out to destroy our business.” Nor was the fence mended by a loan by the Bank to the London house of £200,000 in silver dollars the following December.