

This was especially obvious in Prussia, where the need for new loans had more or less been eliminated. With revenues rising from the new Customs Union (Zollverein) founded in 1834, and expenditure static or falling, Prussia was able to halve the proportion of total expenditure which went on debt service from 22 per cent in 1821 to 11 per cent in 1850. Having been more than three times the size of total annual revenue, public debt was just twice as much by mid century. Thus, when negotiations resumed in 1844 to complete the process of converting the old 1818 sterling loan into lower-interest, thaler-denominated bonds, Rothschild hopes that this might pave the way to a new loan were unrealistic. Their old friend Rother no longer needed them.

In Britain too, the period before 1848 saw public borrowing dwindle to nothing. The 1835 loan to compensate the slave-owners in the West Indies was the last major loan issued by a British government before the Crimean War. This reflected above all the liberal reformation of British public finances associated with the career of Sir Robert Peel as Conservative leader. In the years after 1835, the Whig government came under scathing attack from Peel for running what were, in view of the economic circumstances of the mid-1830s, very trifling deficits. Altogether in the five years 1836 to 1841 the government’s net borrowing came to around £4 million. However, there was a hand-to-mouth quality to the way this was done which strengthened Peel’s case, as did the fact that much of the excess of expenditure over receipts could be blamed on a variety of overseas “adventures.” The 1839 funding operation involving £5 million of exchequer bills, which the London Rothschilds happily monopolised, was a case in point. Peel’s remedy on coming to power after his sweeping election victory in 1841 was the product of two decades of reflection on the fiscal and monetary implications of liberal doctrine, and had four aspects. Firstly, and most conventionally, he carried out a conversion operation, reducing the interest on £250 million of stock from 3.5 to 3.25 per cent. Secondly, and unprece dentedly, he secured the reintroduction of income tax (at a flat rate of 7d in the pound on incomes above £150), hitherto regarded as a wartime expedient. Thirdly, developing a conception of monetary policy which dated back to the 1819 committee he himself had chaired, he redrafted the Bank of England’s Charter in an effort to perfect the working of the bullionist system. Finally, following the practice initiated by Huskisson in the 1820s and in conformity with the classical economists’ principle of laissez-faire, he stepped up the pace of trade liberalisation, reducing the number of duties on imports. Altogether 605 import duties were repealed between 1842 and 1846 and a further 1,035 were reduced. The logical culmination of this process was the repeal of the Corn Laws, a step which the majority of Peel’s own backbenchers, with their pronounced agrarian interests, regarded as a betrayal of commitments made by them to their rural constituents during the 1841 election campaign.