





“Absolument le Maître des Finances de Ce Pays”: Belgium

Perhaps the best example of Rothschild strategy in the pre-1848 period is their involvement in the finances of the newly created Kingdom of Belgium. James and his brothers had moved swiftly to establish a financial foothold in Brussels in the wake of the Belgian secession from Dutch rule in 1830, providing the new government with a lifeline of credit in the first three stormy years of its existence. In the period of relative tranquillity between mid-1833 and 1838, James energetically sought to defend and develop the position of dominance he and the Société Générale had established in Brussels. A variety of transactions helped to sustain Rothschild interest—above all, state loans to finance Leopold I’s policy of economic development, the centrepiece of which was the building of a railway network.

In directly involving itself in railway (and canal) construction, the Belgian government was to some extent breaking with the established British practice whereby the financing of railways was at first left more or less entirely to the private sector. But it was a precedent which other powers would soon follow. What the Belgians had appreciated was the strategic significance of possessing a railway network—an insight which owed much to their strained relations with Holland and, in particular, the need to avoid dependence on the established network of canals and rivers in the Low Countries which the Dutch controlled. From the Rothschild point of view, there were obvious advantages to such a policy: it always struck them as less risky to issue state bonds than private railway shares. More importantly, the development of the Belgian railway system dovetailed neatly with plans for a railway link between Paris and Belgium in which James had already expressed an interest. On the other hand, the Belgian strategy of industrial development would have made little sense if it had not been accompanied by a parallel development of the country’s own banking system. Having created three new institutions in partnership with the Société Générale (the Société de Commerce de Bruxelles, the Société nationale pour entre-prises industrielles et commerciales and the Banque foncière), James had done his best to maintain his dominant position. But the Banque de Belgique (founded in 1835 with largely French capital) was a genuine rival and James had to decide whether to resist the challenge to his position or to join forces with it. In the boom years of the mid-1830s, the Paris house worked closely with the Société Générale in floating a succession of Belgian mining companies on the Paris bourse. But in the sphere of government finance, as the inconclusive negotiations over a conversion operation in 1837 revealed, even the Société Générale had to be regarded as a rival as much as an ally. Intimate though their relations were with King Leopold, the Rothschilds were never able to rest on their laurels as the financiers of independence, especially in view of the suspicion with which they were viewed by sections of the Belgian parliament and press. Moreover, the possibility could not be ruled out that the Belgian government might one day seek to make military use of its railway network, or indeed of the money it was borrowing to pay for it. The government spent roughly three times what it spent on railways during the 1830s on building up an army.