

In Italy, the Rothschilds pursued the same strategy of diversification. They continued to play a leading role in the finances of the Bourbon regime in the Two Sicilies, though James and his nephews worried that local bankers would sooner or later challenge Carl’s dominant position there. Here, as in Spain, there was a shift away from conventional bond issues in the 1830s. For example, the state-owned Sicilian sulphur mines were considered as a possible source of guaranteed revenue against which advances might be made to the government. Another possibility raised was that of a lottery loan, an idea which James disliked because such loans had been prohibited on the Paris bourse. It is evident from their private correspondence that the Rothschilds had a low opinion of the Neapolitan government (which was to be famously excoriated by Gladstone in 1850). On the other hand, they had no scruples about continuing to do business with “His Macaroni Majesty.” “Your Finance Minister is not a man you can reliably count on,” James told Carl after a visit to Naples in 1839. “He is a real blackguard. He is afraid to speak with the King and if one wants to accomplish anything at all in Naples, the only man who can do so is the King himself and [sic] the Minister of the Interior, who is a very smart fellow.”

Relations with the Papacy had a similar character: a fundamental contempt for the Roman government was no barrier to a profitable business relationship. As in the case of Naples, the mid-1830s saw attempts by rivals to break the monopolistic position over Papal finances which the Rothschilds had established after 1830. These were successfully seen off, and the management of the Papal debt remained firmly and profitably in the hands of their Roman partner Torlonia. This gave the Rothschilds a degree of leverage over the Papal government: on at least two occasions Salomon protested through Metternich against ill-treatment of the Jewish community of Rome, reinforcing the widespread belief that (in the words of Alfred de Vigny) “A Jew now reigns over the Pope and Christianity.” However, this aspect of the relationship should not be exaggerated: the primary concern was profit from, not reform of, the Papal regime.

It proved rather more difficult to establish financial relations with the state which was to pose the most successful challenge to Habsburg power in Italy: the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia. In 1834 the Paris house was invited by the government in Turin to bid for the management of a £1 million loan it was proposing to make. From the outset the competition for the business was fierce and Lionel was sent to Turin in an attempt to clinch the deal. The correspondence between him and his uncle James during this mission sheds light not only on Rothschild negotiating techniques but also on the difficulties of dealing with an essentially absolutist regime. Finding the Piedmontese Finance Minister impossibly obtuse, Lionel sought to strike a behind-the-scenes deal with his secretary, but was unable to overcome the King’s preconceptions about how the loan should be arranged. “If,” James advised, our competitors come to you (for in no case must you go to them yourself ), saying that they are disposed to understand with you [sic] for the Loan, we beg you will receive their overtures and to make a contract with them, conceding to them a fourth or the half of the affair, to be disposed of as they like . . . but in this case the business must be done by you in our sole name; for you were the first on the spot, and in no case can it suit us to be in the background or to join our name to another.