



However, if they did not accept such a proposal, Lionel should improve his offer, for “we are disposed to take the business if not at any price, at least at a price that will make them pay dear for it if they go beyond us . . . If the business be in the least feasible, do it, even if it should give no profit whatever, even if it were necessary to lose 2 or 3 hundred thousand francs to prove to those gent[leme]n. that we are not afraid of a sacrifice when we want to baffle them.” James carefully outlined how Lionel should deal with the government in order to outbid the competition: Your principal object [he wrote] must be to do well to captivate the minister, and so clearly to prove to him that it is [in] his interest to contract with us rather than with another, never giving him your last word, and to show yourself in such dispositions that he can conclude nothing with the others without having enabled you to cover their offers—and when you must come to the last word you must insist that it shall in fact be the last, and that your offer shall be accepted immediately and without reserve.

If however these gentlemen are clever enough to place themselves in an equal or better position than yours in this respect . . . your plan must be to make them pay as dear for it as possible, and to abandon the field to them only when you have sown so many difficulties & thorns in it that they can gather nothing but weeds. In such case we will be easily consoled . . . there are cases when victory costs more than a prudent retreat . . .





This gives an indication of the way James himself would have operated had he himself been in Turin; and perhaps he might have succeeded. But the inexperienced Lionel was ultimately outmanoeuvred—or rather outbid—by what he called the “Bande Noire” of French bankers led by Hagermann. It was not until 1843 that renewed attempts were made to do business with Turin and relations remained embryonic before 1848.

This expansion into new areas explains why, by the early 1840s, many observers had begun to see the Rothschilds as more than merely allies of the European states: they now appeared to have acquired a unique power of their own which was independent of the great powers and nearly universal. In his essay “Rothschild and the Finances of Europe” (1844), Alexandre Weill—one of many writers of Jewish origin who were fascinated by the Rothschild phenomenon—made the point succinctly: while “Rothschild” had needed the states to become “Rothschild,” he now no longer needed them. In 1842, the liberal historian Jules Michelet declared in his journal that James knew “Europe prince by prince, and the bourse courtier by courtier” (see the epigraph to this chapter). This was barely an exaggeration. Leaving aside the two outstanding Rothschild failures—Portugal and the United States—and the exceptional case of Spain, where control of the country’s mercury mines took precedence over the floating of loans, the list of states for which the Rothschilds raised money in the decade or so before 1848 is impressively long. Conservative states borrowed to avoid parliamentary influence over financial policy, often the necessary corollary of tax reforms. More progressive states borrowed to pay for public works, notably railways, when the private sector seemed unable or unwilling to fund investment. Few did not at least contemplate employing the Rothschilds as bankers and underwriters. The benefits of this widening of the financial net were obvious. The risks would only become apparent in 1848.