

The Rothschilds were nervous when Molé’s position finally crumbled following the elections of March 1839, fearing a ministry “composed of the Thiers party” and the doctrinaire liberals. “It is a very bad thing according to my opinion,” wrote Anthony uneasily, “and the King is obliged to give way & to do everything as Thiers wishes—I assure you that we become a little frightened.” As it turned out, Thiers’ insistence on a more aggressive foreign policy was still too much for Louis Philippe to accept and another moderate government was formed by Marshal Soult. But this proved short-lived, and on March 1, 1840, Thiers was at last back in office. His seemingly irresistible rise made James pessimistic: After a new Ministry has been formed no one gives this matter any further thought, especially so during the summer, but in the long run I am very sorry to say that France will only be able to extricate herself from her current predicament by means of war. As long as Louis Philippe, may God preserve him, remains [on the throne] I think that peace will be maintained but his son, I believe, will have no option but to wage war. Well, be that as it may my dear nephews, I intend to remain faithful to my previously voiced opinion slowly but surely to sell our 3 per cent rentes . . . It is a disgrace that no Ministry can be formed and whoever may eventually head the Ministry . . . we can expect to see the various Parties in the Chamber at each other’s throats, but if the securities suffer a fall then one can buy again because in France the people are just like in Spain, one day they fight each other and the next day they are good friends again.



With Thiers as premier, he warned his nephews, he was “not too happy with the fundamental situation, that is, with the internal state of affairs.” The regime was “losing those friends who were most dedicated to her.” Although James was soon talking—in his usual, adaptable way—of “build[ing] up a friendly relationship with [Thiers],” this proved to be unrealistic.

The issue which led to open war between the Rothschilds and Thiers is usually referred to as the “Eastern Question”: could the sprawling Ottoman Empire, which notionally encompassed most of North Africa, much of the Balkans and nearly all of the Middle East, be preserved intact? If not, what should take its place? Economically backward, religiously divided, administratively ramshackle and politically despotic—the Ottoman Empire was all of these things. So, of course, were the Romanov and Habsburg empires; but less so, and they were Christian states—hence the effective exclusion of Turkey from the “pentarchy” of European great powers in the modern period. At this time, four of the “big five” had interests in the areas where Ottoman rule appeared to be in decline. Austria and Russia, for obvious geographical reasons, had the longest history of territorial conflict with their southern neighbour; while Britain and France were becoming more and more interested in the region for a mixture of commercial, strategic and religious reasons.