



Salomon wholeheartedly agreed. A loan to Russia would, he argued, be “a very desirable . . . even a very brilliant deal”: “Quite apart from the pecuniary returns which it would bring, such a loan would be of great importance for us, in that a new, close relationship with Russia would bring us back on top with all the [great powers?] in Europe, and a loan with Russia is always good for the morale of our house.” Amschel echoed this sentiment. But not for the first time Rothschild efforts to supplant the traditional dominance of Hope & Co. in St Petersburg came to nothing. The younger Rothschilds—and particularly those in London—evidently had their doubts about the project, proposing terms which struck Salomon as excessively harsh: For Russian 3 per cent paper you offer 70, less commission of 2 per cent makes 68! Is that a reasonable price, when you consider that . . . Austrian 3 per cents [stand at] 81 and Belgian 3 per cents [at] 71? When the bonds of a state which has scarcely emerged from revolution are valued at [such] prices? We must fear with good reason that such a proposal, coming from the House of Rothschild, would make us a laughing stock. In addition to this all too low price, you propose to take [only] [£]1 million for yourselves and to take the rest only in commission and even this is not to be binding in the event of a war breaking out between any two of the great powers in Europe or America within six weeks [of the agreement being signed].



Even when the possibility of a 40 million rouble Russian loan resurfaced in the more tranquil conditions of 1841-2, the negotiations foundered. This time it was Salomon’s turn to sound the note of caution. Evidently having been briefed by Metternich, he argued that Kankrin’s stated intention of investing the money in railways was merely a cover for increased expenditure on the army. He also echoed Amschel’s argument that a Russian loan was unlike a loan to any of the other great powers: “In the case of a loan for England, France or Austria the money remains in circulation, and quickly returns from the government’s coffers to the public. With Russia, the money that flows in is buried, poured away into the colossal European and even Asian [domains?] of this empire.”

Once again, the Rothschilds pitched their terms too low to break the Hope monopoly, refusing to buy more than a small proportion of the proposed loan firm (“à forfait” in contemporary parlance) as opposed to selling it in commission (with the option to return any unsold bonds). Subsequent desultory talks with St Petersburg in 1844 and 1846 were no more conclusive. Once it had seemed that the Rothschilds no longer needed the great powers; now it began to seem that the powers no longer needed the Rothschilds.





Spreading the Net

As we shall see, one response to this diminution of government business—adopted most enthusiastically by James and Salomon—was to become involved in industrial finance, and especially in the formation of railway companies. The alternative was to drum up new business with smaller states. This was the strategy adopted by the Frankfurt house. To cite only the most important transactions of the period from Berghoeffer’s list, it issued bonds totalling 3.5 million gulden for the Duchy of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha between 1837 and 1842, and 9.9 million gulden for the Duchy of Nassau; a 6.7 million reichsthaler lottery loan for the family’s oldest such client, Hesse-Kassel, in 1845, as well as loans to its neighbour Hesse-Darmstadt; and a 14 million gulden loan to Baden in the same year. There was also a loan to Bavaria in 1835 which led to the appointment of Carl and Amschel as “court bankers” and various other honours (including the Bavarian consulship in Frankfurt for Anselm). In the mid-1840s loans were also floated for Württemberg and Frankfurt itself. Hanover too was approached but this deal fell through at the eleventh hour. Nor was it only in western Germany that the Rothschilds were active. There was an attempt in 1835 to revive the firm’s old connection with the Danish Kingdom by issuing a £3 million loan. None of this would have been possible had the other German states been as parsimonious as Prussia. But Prussia was the exception to a rule of rising indebtedness which applied to almost all other German states during the Vormärz period. In Hanover, Württemberg, Baden and Bavaria, the ratio of debt to revenue rose between 1825 and 1850; only in Prussia did it fall. (The difference is probably best explained by the growing involvement of the western German states in railway construction during this period, and the restriction on Prussian borrowing established by the 1819 State Debt Decree.)