

From the Rothschilds’ point of view, such loans to even the medium-sized German states were relatively minor transactions; yet they often took just as much time to arrange as loans to great powers (in some cases because of the growing pressures from representative bodies on previously more or less autonomous financial bureaucracies). On the other hand, the volume of business evidently compensated for the effort involved—witness the profitability of the Frankfurt house in this period. Amschel and the nephews who assisted him in Frankfurt were apparently indifferent to the political character of the German states they did business with: while Baden (for example) was a “model” constitutional monarchy, Hanover—after the abrogation of its constitution by King Ernst August in 1837—was among the most conservative regimes in all Germany.

From the point of view of the German states, it was becoming harder and harder to raise a loan without going to the Rothschilds, so dominant were they in the German capital market. This was especially true in south-west Germany. Not only in Frankfurt, but in other commercial centres like Cologne, the Rothschilds were able to exercise all the influence of a central bank: local people talked of “Rothschild shipments” of specie and “Rothschild money.” This dominance inevitably aroused comment, most of it hostile. As in the 1820s, the Rothschilds were seen by liberals as shoring up reactionary regimes. “Many of the smaller German Governments,” reported one Austrian diplomat, “have recourse exclusively to the House of Rothschild, and . . . refuse to be influenced by the dissatisfaction frequently expressed by their subjects.” This dissatisfaction was to come to a head in a matter of years. When the Hanoverian liberal Johann Stüve came to power in 1848, for example, he sought to avoid “dirty transactions with Rothschild,” which he associated with the era of Metternich.

Quite apart from floating bonds for medium-sized German states, the Frankfurt house also made good profits from loans to minor German princes such as Prince von Bentheim-Tecklenburg and Prince Viktor zu Isenburg (to name just two), as well as to major aristocratic landowners like Count Hugo Henckel von Donnersmarck. In many ways this represented a continuation of business dating back to the time of Mayer Amschel. What was novel in the 1840s was the extension of such business to the non-German parts of the Habsburg Empire. Between 1843 and 1845 loans to the value of 12.3 million gulden were issued by Salomon and his Vienna associates to a group of Austro-Hungarian noblemen notable for the size of their estates and the extent of their political influence, all but one of whom—the Habsburg Archduke Karl Ludwig—were Hungarian. Much the largest loan, to Prince Paul Esterházy, was, of course, far from being the first Rothschild loan to that powerful family. But the sudden spate of loans to other eminent Hungarians is striking. The likes of Count Móric Sándor, Count Joseph Hunyady and Count Lajos Széchényi, eldest brother of the multi-talented Magyar reformer Istvrán Széchényi, were at the apex of Hungarian society. In principle, these transactions were little different from the lending facilities provided by West End banks like Coutts & Co. to the English aristocracy. (Indeed, Esterházy had a close counterpart in the Duke of Buckingham, another land-rich but cash-poor grandee.) But this new involvement with the Magyar elite was to prove a source of political as well as financial embarrassment to the Rothschilds when, just a few years later, Hungary was plunged into a secessionist war with Austria.