

It would seem that James’s aggressive view prevailed. “The Belgian Finance Minister will not find it a very easy job to get rid of his loan by subscription,” Nat wrote some days later. “I think he will be obliged to have recourse to us after all which will very much delight us all—Try & make Belg[iu]m flat by selling a few 1840 or 1842 bonds for the J[oint] A[ccount], it will be a good thing if they write to Brussels from every where that the market is flat.” This was a classic Rothschild tactic—selling off bonds to embarrass a recalcitrant government. The aim was to force the Belgian government to return to Rothschilds, cap in hand. This appears to have had its effect; for, although the public sale of the Belgian 4.5 per cents went ahead, it was not long before the government once again had to turn to Rothschilds. Meanwhile, Anselm’s indefatigable negotiations in the Hague had won over the new Dutch Finance Minister to the view that Rothschilds should after all handle the sale of the £6 million Belgian 2.5 per cents he wished to realise. In 1845 the Belgian government returned contritely to the Rothschild fold and James was able to exact tough conditions for relatively modest advances in 1846 and 1847. Without Rothschild, reported the French ambassador in Brussels, the Belgian government had “realised that it would be impossible for it to find a penny on any bourse, domestic or foreign.” This was only a slight exaggeration. To all intents and purposes, the Rothschild monopoly on Belgian public finance was complete—though the abortive attempt to sell bonds directly to the public was an intimation of how that monopoly might be challenged in the future.





Roads to Damascus

In many ways the most important aspect of the Belgian crisis of 1838-9 had been its impact in France. Along with its alleged foreign policy failures in Spain and Switzerland, the Orléanist regime’s unwillingness to stand up for Belgian interests was widely criticised as appeasement of France’s old enemies, conservative Austria and perfidious England. Ever since the revolution of 1830, the Rothschilds had fretted about the possibility of a French return to the old combination of internal radicalism and external aggression which had set Europe ablaze in the 1790s. When yet another international crisis—this time in the Middle East—confronted France with diplomatic isolation, that possibility threatened to become a reality. This was the first of many “Eastern Crises” the Rothschilds would have to weather. Its outcome—the fall of the bellicose Thiers government and the diplomatic humiliation of France—marked one of the high points of their political power.

In fact, James had never really stopped worrying that international developments might lead to a change of government in Paris. “Rentes will fall because Thiers is in favour of a policy of intervention [in Spain],” he warned when it was rumoured that the latter might be about to return to government in April 1837, recalling his efforts to send troops across the Pyrenees the previous year. Indeed, the very thought of another Thiers ministry was enough to convince James of the need to “get out of the [French] funds, for the end will not be good.” “A good ministry,” according to James’s definition, was essentially one which would pursue pacific policies abroad and balance the budget at home: he liked the Molé ministry which ultimately emerged that April precisely because it was “weak.” When Molé survived the elections held the following November, James regarded them as having “gone well”; and he urged the government “to stay united and convince themselves that they are strong and powerful,” promising “firm and steadfast support” when Thiers mounted a new challenge in December 1838.