



This tirade overlooked the fact that, in one fundamental respect, the “King of Finance” was in a position to “meddle” in government policy. If Thiers was serious about making military preparations and ultimately even fighting a war, the question inevitably arose: how was this to be paid for? The only conceivable answer in view of the already stretched budget was by borrowing. Yet the government was in no position to borrow money with the price of rentes slumping. This was the way in which not only the Rothschilds but the financial markets as a whole exerted leverage over a government they disapproved of. The financial crisis effectively destroyed the credibility of Thiers’ foreign policy by depriving him of the possibility of borrowing money. In his reply to the article in the Constitutionnel, James made the point with subtle menace: I have never at any time encouraged opposition to the Government, for the simple reason that I have never wished to play a political role. I am, as you state, a financier. If I desire peace, I desire it honourably, not only for France, but for the whole of Europe. Financiers have the opportunity of rendering services to the country under any circumstances, and I think that in this respect I have never been slow to respond.



The point was that this time James’s services would not be forthcoming. Less than a week later, on October 20, “the little blackguard” resigned. Ten days later a new government was formed by Soult and Guizot in which, as Nat affirmed with satisfaction, “the bourse has the greatest confidence.”

Of course, it took long months of negotiation to arrange a lasting peace in the Middle East—during which time the symptoms of popular “war fever” persisted not only in France but in Germany too. For the Rothschilds, however, Thiers’ fall was the turning point in the crisis. As Heine reported in March 1841: Monsieur de Rothschild, who seemed somewhat indisposed for a time, is now quite restored and looks sound and well. The augurs of the Stock Exchange, who are experts at interpreting the great Baron’s physiognomy, assure us that the swallows of peace nestle in his smile, that every anxiety about the possibility of war has vanished from his countenance, that there are no electric sparks which forbode storms visible in his eyes, and that therefore the warlike stormy weather, the Kanonendonnerwetter which threatened the whole world, has been altogether dissipated. Even his sneezes, these augurs tell us, portend peace.



Walls of Jericho

The aftermath of the Eastern Crisis demonstrated how international tension could be beneficial to the Rothschilds—provided that increased defence expenditure did not lead to outright war. To be sure, the Rothschilds had consistently used their financial power to promote peace throughout the 1830s. But when the great powers had been completely restrained in their foreign policies, as we have seen, the stream of new loan business had begun to dry up. By contrast, when they embarked on policies of rearmament, as they did from 1840 onwards, this was not necessarily detrimental to Rothschild interests.