



At around the same time, a correspondent asked Nathan directly: “How is it that your people with so extensive an influence have made no efforts to re-acquire Palestine, the land of your forefathers, from the Porte, the Ruler of Egypt and the Powers of Europe?” As we have seen, this question was answered in mystical terms in the pamphlet The Hebrew Talisman in 1836; and one “proto-Zionist” Jewish writer formally proposed that Amschel purchase land in Palestine that same year. The early French socialist Charles Fourier was another who thought that “The restoration of the Hebrews would be a splendid coronation for the gentlemen of the House of Rothschild: like Esra and Serubabel, they can lead the Hebrews back to Jerusalem and erect once again the throne of David and Solomon, in order to call into being a Rothschild dynasty.” Almost exactly the same image was conjured up at the other end of the political spectrum by the Univers in October 1840.1 British Evangeli cals were also attracted to this idea. As Lady Palmerston commented in the wake of the Damascus affair, “the fanatical and religious elements . . . in this country . . . are absolutely determined that Jerusalem and the whole of Palestine shall be reserved for the Jews to return to; this is their only longing (to restore the Jews).” Though Stanley was surprised when Disraeli raised the subject eleven years later,2 it was scarcely an original thought. Indeed, it is possible to see such remarks as expressions of Christian millenarian hopes, with the Rothschilds supposedly hastening the Second Coming.3 But there is no evidence that the Rothschilds harboured any such intentions; the involvement of individual members of the family in what became known as Zionism was a much later development.

What is more, a number of members of the family had reservations even about the way the campaign for the release of the Damascus prisoners was conducted. It appears from Nat’s letters that Lionel was uneasy about the “rumpus” being made by Crémieux and some of the more vociferous British Jews. They had, he felt, shown “rather too much warmth of feeling.” Indeed, one reason for suggesting that Montefiore accompany Crémieux to Alexandria was “to moderate [the latter’s] zeal.” Nor, it seems, did Nat or Anselm expect the expedition to achieve its objectives. When it did succeed, Anselm was “decidedly against any public demonstration” and deplored the hero’s welcome which Crémieux was accorded in Frankfurt and elsewhere. The Damascus agitation galvanised Jews throughout Western Europe, and led to a variety of schemes for improving the condition of the Jews in the Holy Land, notably the plan for a Jewish hospital in Jerusalem devised by Philippson. At first the French Rothschilds seemed willing to follow the lead of Montefiore, who supported the scheme; but they made their contribution conditional on the founding of a secular school alongside the hospital. When the Jewish community in Palestine vetoed this, the Rothschilds withdrew, and it was not until 1853-4 that the hospital scheme was revived.4 The Rothschilds continued to try to use their influence to improve the condition of Jewish communities elsewhere (in Russian-controlled Poland for example), as they had in the past; but their efforts were always regarded with suspicion by more radical Jews who aimed at something more than economic amelioration.