

The fall of Thiers led almost at once to new business for James. The increased expenditure on armaments which was Thiers’ legacy—particularly on the costly new system of fortifications around Paris—obliged the new government of Marshal Soult to issue a major new loan in 1841. The Rothschilds had every reason to dislike the fortifications project: quite apart from fuelling the bellicose mood throughout Europe, it threatened to reduce the value of Salomon’s villa at Suresnes, which was close to the planned line of defences. Nevertheless, they did not hesitate to meet the government’s needs. Admittedly, James grumbled about the amount and issue-price proposed by the new Finance Minister, Théodore Humann—yet another former banker turned politician, and a man whom James privately regarded as a “rogue” and a “blackguard.” Indeed, the negotiations were characterised by brinkmanship which was extreme even by James’s standards. He bluntly refused to cut short a visit to see Salomon at Gastein and Vienna when Humann requested a meeting in Paris, and on more than one occasion intimated that he would leave the business to others if the terms were not improved. But in truth he had no intention of doing so: as he put it, “We want—indeed have—to make the loan”; and he was confident enough that Humann would not act without him to drive a hard bargain. The 150 million franc loan was duly issued in October more or less exactly on James’s terms.

To contemporaries, this merely confirmed James’s unrivalled dominance over French finances. However, the real significance of the loan may lie in the peculiar character of the “armed peace” (Guizot’s phrase) which made it necessary. The striking point is that now James and Nat were willing not only to justify but also to finance a policy of rearmament which they had opposed when Thiers had been in power. The new French government, they assured the London and Vienna houses, was arming merely to mollify public opinion. “No cabinet in the last ten years has pursued more peaceful policies than the one formed on Oct[ober] 9, but it has things to take into consideration, susceptibilities to overcome, ardent enemies to contend with.” Once the cost of the increased armaments made itself felt, the popular mood would become more pacific. On March 8 James was able to report “a triumph”: “The Commission dealing with the Budget refused to ratify the establishment of the 36 new Regiments and this is a slap in the face for Thiers who wanted to increase the size of the army and this will result in a saving of 40 million and a genuine disarmament and is proof that they seek to maintain peace. I bought rentes . . .”

The 1841 loan marked the resumption of “normal service” in Rothschild relations with the French Treasury. Further loans followed in 1842 and 1844 (for 200 million francs apiece), despite challenges to the Rothschilds’ dominant position from Hottinguer, Baring and Laffitte. International tension led to increased expenditure on armaments in the German states too. “As long as France continues arming,” reasoned Anselm, “Germany must follow.” Again, this meant new business for the Rothschilds. Thus, after seven uneventful years, 1841 saw a new Austrian government loan for 38.5 million gulden, shared as usual with Sina and Arnstein & Eskeles. Another loan for 40 million gulden was issued by the same banks two years later. Once the Rothschilds had regarded peace as the sine qua non of financial stability; but an armed peace was more profitable.