

It has usually been assumed that, in taking up the cause of the Damascus Jews, the Rothschilds were motivated by sincere outrage at the way their fellow Jews were being treated. Heine—one of the journalists James tipped off—contrasted James’s altruism with the indifference of other French Jews, and in particular his rival in the sphere of railway finance, Benoît Fould. James, Heine observed, had “shown a nobler spirit in his sympathies for the House of Israel than his learned antagonist.” There is no question that all the Rothschilds sincerely sympathised with their co-religionists. It was, said Nat, “an unpleasant business, but one must exert oneself to prevent such calumnies being spread against our religion & such horrid tortures being practised on our unfortunate brethren in the East.” The aim, he added a few days later, was “to show people generally that the day is gone by when any religious sect may be neglected with impunity.” The French government’s attempts to defend the conduct of Ratti-Menton enraged Nat: “[W]hen the Prime Minister of France declared in the Chamber that he thought the Jews committed murder for the sake of Christian blood to be used in a Hebrew religious ceremony . . . it strikes me that such a calumny upon all those who have any Jewish blood in their veins ought not only to be contradicted but proved to be false.” He and the rest of the family shared the widespread Jewish jubilation at the success of Montefiore’s mission in securing not only a solemn firman from Mehemet Ali himself denying the existence of ritual murder as a Jewish practice (August 28), but also the “honourable discharge” of the prisoners a week later. All this gave the lie to the charges which had been levelled at the Rothschilds in the 1830s of indifference to the fate of their fellow Jews. “Who can come forward,” the editor of the Allgemeine Zeitung des Judenthums Ludwig Philippson had demanded to know in 1839, “to say that these people have done anything substantial for Judaism, for its external or inner emancipation, for its civil or spiritual elevation?” Like the American writer who had claimed that James did not “care [about] the barren seacoast of Palestine,” Philippson had to eat his words after the Damascus affair—or, alternatively, conclude that they had been heeded.

On the other hand, the extent of the Rothschilds’ ambitions for the Jewish communities of the Middle East should not be exaggerated. Even before 1840 it was an idea frequently canvassed in the press and elsewhere that the Rothschilds had some sort of design to reclaim the Holy Land for the Jewish people. As early as 1830, an American journal (Niles Weekly Register) suggested that “the pecuniary distress of the sultan” might lead him to sell Jerusalem to the Rothschilds: They are wealthy beyond desire, perhaps even avarice; and so situated, it is quite reasonable to suppose that they may seek something else to gratify their ambition . . . If secured in the possession, which may be brought about by money, they might instantly, as it were, gather a large nation together, soon to become capable of defending itself, and having a wonderful influence over the commerce and condition of the east—rendering Judah again the place of deposit of a large portion of the wealth of the “ancient world.” To the sultan the country is of no great value; but, in the hands of the Jews, directed by such men as the Rothschilds, what might it not become, and in a short period of time?