

The Austrian consul-general in Paris and the author of the letter quoted above was, of course, James de Rothschild, and Laurin’s was only one of a number sent to him and to other members of the Rothschild family seeking support for the Damascus Jews, as well as those of Rhodes who were experiencing similar persecution. On March 15 letters on the subject had reached the Dutch Jewish leader Hirsch Lehren from a Beirut Jew who urged that they be passed on to the Rothschilds so that they might “speak to the kings and to their ministers.” Two days later another letter from an English businessman based in the Middle East prompted Lehren to write to James, arguing that only “the renowned Rothschild family . . . has the power to save the brethren suffering persecution.” On March 27 the Constantinople community had sent letters from Damascus and Rhodes to Salomon, Carl and Lionel, appealing to “the tie which so strongly binds together the whole Jewish community.”

James did as Laurin suggested. However, the French Foreign Ministry merely ordered that their vice-consul in Alexandria should investigate Ratti-Menton’s conduct, which, as James divined, was “only a temporising measure, since the vice-consul is under the consul, so that he has no authority to call the latter to account for his actions.” “In such circumstances,” he informed Salomon on April 7, the only means we have left is the all-powerful method here of calling in the newspapers to our assistance, and we have accordingly today had a detailed account, based on the reports of the Austrian consul [in Damascus], sent in to the [Journal des] Débats and other papers, and have also arranged that this account shall appear in similar detail in the Allgemeine Zeitung of Augsburg.



This decision to involve the press was partly a response to the widespread support for the ritual-murder theory in French newspapers like the Quotidienne and the Univers. Determined that this should be countered as effectively as possible, James turned to Adolphe Crémieux, vice-president of the Consistory of French Jews since 1834, whose forensic skills were as celebrated as his journalistic. Crémieux’s long letter on the subject appeared in the Gazette des Tribunaux and the Journal des Débats the next day. In the course of the subsequent press debate, James also authorised Crémieux to publish documents Laurin had sent him—much to the irritation of Metternich who, while sympathising, abhorred the involvement of the (by Austrian standards) uninhibited press.

This was only the beginning of the Rothschilds’ involvement in the campaign to secure the release of the Damascus prisoners. In London, Lionel was present when the Board of Deputies met to discuss the affair on April 21 (as was Crémieux), and he was also a member of the delegation which Palmerston received nine days later. Six weeks later it was Nat who suggested that Crémieux write an official letter addressed to Lionel and the British Board of Deputies, “& that will afford you an opportunity of addressing Lord Palmerston on the subject”; and it was Nat who suggested that Lionel “get up a good subscription to pay the expenses of sending Crémieux there [to the Middle East] fast.” This led directly to the idea of the highly publicised expedition to Alexandria by Crémieux and Sir Moses Montefiore, the purpose of which was to clear the prisoners’ names and secure their release. The Rothschilds contributed a substantial sum—at least £2,500—towards the costs of this venture, as well as acting as treasurers for the Damascus Jews’ fund. In Vienna, Salomon meanwhile persuaded Metternich to press the Vatican about rumours that Tommaso was in fact alive and hiding in a monastery (he was not). In Naples, Carl loaded Montefiore’s ship with provisions, gave him some negotiating tips and later helped him in his fruitless attempts to persuade the Catholic church to expunge the allegation of murder on Father Tommaso’s supposed gravestone. In Paris, Anselm received regular communications from Laurin, detailing the progress of Montefiore’s negotiations in Alexandria.