

On the face of it, their sole objective in the frenetic months of August and September 1840 was to promote peace through their tried and tested channels of diplomatic communication. Lionel reassured Lord Clarendon that France would not fight; James relayed to Metternich Louis Philippe’s repeated pleas for an Austrian deus ex machina; Lionel sought to involve the King of the Belgians; James visited the bellicose duc d’Orléans; Lionel relayed Nat’s warning to Palmerston not to push the French too far—and so on. But the financial subtext of this diplomatic activity was calculated to undermine Thiers’ position. The key was the impact of the crisis on the price of rentes. On August 3 there had been “a tremendous fall in the price of rentes” which sent Nat and James scurrying back to join Anselm in Paris. It was the beginning of a protracted slide. As the British naval expedition closed in on Ibrahim Pasha and Palmerston intransigently rejected Thiers’ bids for a face-saving compromise, so, inexorably, the price of rentes declined. Three per cents fell from a high of 87 in July to 79 in early August, touching a low of 73.5 in early October. It would, no doubt, be wrong to suggest that the Rothschilds were single-handedly responsible for this fall, which was the product of a generalised panic on the Paris bourse. On the other hand, they did nothing to check it. More importantly, they had no reason to do so. For, unlike comparable crises in the early 1830s, this was costing them nothing. The clue lies in Nat’s comment on August 2: “Thank God the house has scarcely any [rentes].” Quite simply, they had covered themselves in advance of the crisis by clearing out of French government bonds altogether. This was what Guizot, struggling as French ambassador in London, failed to realise. “Do you think he is praying to God for the safety of his money?” he asked the Princess Lieven after a visit from Lionel on September 9. Heine too was taken in by James’s furrowed brow: “The rente, which had opened down two per cent, tumbled by another two per cent. M. de Rothschild, it is said, had the toothache yesterday; others say he had a colic. What does this portend? The storm draws ever nearer. The beating of the Valkyries’ wings can be heard in the air.” In fact, James was play-acting for the benefit of Heine’s readers. Nat’s only regret was that he did not have more liquid funds available to speculate: “I could make a fortune,” he mused.

Thiers fought back. On October 12, the pro-government Constitutionnel fired a broadside at “M. de Rothschild and his manoeuvres”: [According to The Times] M. de Rothschild is a man of finance and does not want war. Nothing could be easier to understand. M. de Rothschild is an Austrian subject and the Austrian consul in Paris, and as such he has little concern for the honour and interests of France. This too is understandable. But what, pray, have you to do, M. de Rothschild, man of the Bourse, M. de Rothschild, agent of Metternich, with our Chamber of Deputies and our majority? By what right and by what authority does this King of Finance meddle in our affairs? Is he the judge of our honour, and should his pecuniary interests prevail over our national interests? We speak of pecuniary interests, but, surprisingly enough, if one can believe highly accredited reports, it is not just financial grievances that the Jewish banker would lodge against the cabinet . . . There also seems to be wounded vanity to satisfy. M. de Rothschild had promised his co-religionists to have our consul-general in Damascus dismissed for the position he took in the trial of the Jews being held in that city. Thanks to the steadfastness of the president of the council [Thiers], these insistent demands of the mighty banker have been resisted and M. Ratti-Menton upheld—hence, the irritation of the mighty banker and the fervour with which he throws himself into intrigues where he has no business.