

Small wonder, then, that Countess Nesselrode thought James “viceroy and even King” at this time. When he told her that he knew all the French ministers, saw them daily and complained directly to the King if the policies they adopted were “contrary to the interests of the government,” he was not exaggerating. “Comme il sait que j’ai beaucoup à perdre et que je ne désire que la tranquillité, il a toute confi- ance en moi, m’écoute et tient compte de tout ce que je lui dis”: in that sentence, with its subtle reminder of the regime’s financial reliance on the Rothschilds, lies the key to James’s power over the “bourgeois monarch.” When Heine called James a “weathercock,” he was thus underestimating the extent to which he could influence the direction of the wind. Throughout the period from 1840 to 1847, Rothschild financial support for Guizot was effectively conditional on his avoiding outright conflict with Britain—and devoting a rising share of the proceeds to constructing railways rather than fortifications. At times even Nat and his brothers were surprised by the extent of their uncle’s leverage in Paris. When an Anglo-French argument over the Pacific island of Tahiti blew up and then blew over in 1844, Nat remarked, “His Majesty was amazingly polite and almost kissed him so pleased was he,” crediting—erroneously—the Rothschilds with having restrained Peel in London.

Nevertheless, there were limits to James’s power, just as there had been limits to the Rothschilds’ power in the 1830s. A more serious Anglo-French dispute over Spain gave James a real scare in 1846-7, when it appeared that Louis Philippe’s determination to marry his son to the Spanish Queen’s sister might be seized on by Palmerston as a casus belli. James rushed back and forth, trying to get the French to agree to an Anglo-Spanish trade treaty as a kind of compensation for the Montpensier marriage, but Guizot on this occasion stood his ground. James’s letter to London of September 26 gives a good insight into his unease: We are extremely anxious . . . for, as I was told by the English Minister [Lord Normanby], he is very concerned that they may take very firm measures. I can’t imagine that they will immediately issue a declaration of war. The truth is that Montpensier is due to depart [for Spain] on Monday. Well, Guizot said to me that if England were to issue a declaration of war then the wedding will [still] take place . . . Well, my dear nephews, there is a lot of ill feeling. I did not imagine that it would be so bad and I tell you we must be careful because in the end, something or other will happen. The [English] Minister said to me, “We can’t sit by calmly and watch the situation unfold.” Whether he made this comment so that I should then repeat it only God knows . . . I tend to see the future as rather bleak.



James went so far as to propose to Guizot that Montpensier renounce any claim of his heirs to the Spanish throne. But, as Anthony reported nervously, “Guizot thinks that we have been intriguing against him and you have no idea how careful we must be . . . I assure you I am very anxious—the French do not want war and cannot go to war, but they make things quite as bad as one.” Indeed, Nat declined to relay to Louis Philippe a letter from Lionel which evidently contained some strong Palmerstonian meat: The arguments of our worthy uncle in favor of the alliance between England & France are quite conclusive but the suppositions of my Ld Palmerston in the event of the Queen of Spain being poisoned, of her not having any children & of its being the Queen dowager’s interest not to let her daughter breed[,] that the present King of Spain & the D[uc] of Mont[pensier] wd fight & the Ld knows what, wd have a bad effect on our statesmen & make them believe Ld P . . . had talked a lot of nonsense with you—I should be sorry to be the bearer of such a missive.