

Yet his brother had sat idly by throughout the pioneering phase of British railways. A year later Nathan’s wife Hannah wrote to her eldest son in a similar vein, as if he had yet to be persuaded of the utility of the new form of transport: The rail road travelling is so productive of good and general advantages to all classes of society [as] to make us grateful for this scientific invention—to this we are indebted for the earliest information[;] from our most distant friends we are favoured with the most constant and frequent communications, the loss of their society is lessened from the facility of obtaining this and affords great consolation and adds much to our enjoyment of life by this wonderful rapid communication.



Hannah was evangelical—indeed visionary—in her enthusiasm. In 1846 she returned to the subject with equal warmth in a letter to her eldest daughter Charlotte: There is some luxury in going in a carriage and [being] propelled by horses: but the many delays and other inconveniences one is subject to give us a decided preference [for] railroad travelling . . . and [although] it may be objected to by many and particularly by the refined, for my part I prefer the amusement of scenes and the bustle of changes one gains . . . by this mode of travelling.



The striking thing about these letters is that she felt the need to detail the advantages of railways, particularly to the younger generation who might have been expected to take these for granted. Clearly they did not. Indeed, Hannah had to conclude her effusion to Lionel with an apology: “I feel I am encroaching on your patience and you will say I am an enthusiast for rail roads.” We know for certain that his brother Nat was the reverse: in 1848 he declined to meet Lionel at Calais because “railway travelling makes my head ache so terribly that I really can not make up my mind to a 30 hours shaking.”

Why was Hannah the sole rail “enthusiast” among the English Rothschilds, as she appears to have been? Writing more than four decades after the banker’s death, Disraeli suggested that Nathan (in the guise of “Mr Neuchatel”) had anticipated the inevitable bust which brought the first railway boom to an abrupt end. But Nathan was scarcely risk-averse in this sense. It seems more plausible that he preferred to concentrate on the business he knew best, namely government and commercial finance. His advice to Thomas Fowell Buxton’s son on this point bears repeating: “If I were to listen to all the projects proposed to me, I should ruin myself very soon. Stick to one business, young man,” he said to Edward, “stick to your brewery, and you may be the great brewer of London. Be a brewer, and a banker, and a merchant, and a manufacturer, and you will soon be in the Gazette.”



It is possible, though it cannot be proven, that Nathan had in fact burnt his fingers in 1825, when mining companies like the one he contemplated came to grief in large numbers. It is also possible that he saw too late that he had missed a golden opportunity in steering clear of home railways; but it is unlikely. In fact, such specific explanations are probably unnecessary; for the English Rothschilds’ lack of interest in domestic industry was wholly unexceptional in the context of the mid-nineteenth-century City of London. To put it simply, the overwhelmingly commercial and overseas orientation of the major London banks—with the single exception of Glyn’s—disinclined them to involve themselves in railways. At the same time, the ease with which railway companies were able to sell their shares and scrip directly to the public—sometimes even before they had secured parliamentary incorporation—made banking intermediation more or less superfluous. We know from his reports as Austrian consul that Lionel paid attention to the development of the British railway system, as well as to the almost equally revolutionary impact of steam power in sea transport. But it is also evident from such communications that he and his brothers’ principal interest lay in exporting such innovations after they had been tried and tested in Britain. Where British industry did require banking facilities, it tended to turn to the provincial joint stock banks which proliferated in the 1830s and 1840s, rather than to the City banks.