

SOME. Help! Flames!

OTHERS. They’ve got the Devil into reins!

OTHERS. Nothing but murder and smoke!

VOICES off. Alas! The locomotive has run amok!

FIRST SERVANT. No, that really is impertinence, It’s hit the city battlements.

Immense crash, followed by a cloud of dust. As the dust clears, a toppled locomotive and wrecked carriages can be seen . . .





Quite apart from relishing the pyrotechnics involved in such a scene, a contemporary audience would have appreciated the potent image of a diabolical, renegade locomotive smashing down the walls of an ancient German town. For, by the time Eichendorff wrote Das Incognito, the railways’ political potential was already widely understood. To the nationalist economist Friedrich List, the railway was “a tonic for the national spirit” and “a tight belt around the loins of the German nation” which—in conjunction with the Prussian customs union established in 1834—would bring about the long-overdue “internal unification” of Germany. For this and other reasons, railways made conservatives like Metternich uneasy: the “transformation in political and social conditions” which he saw as their inevitable consequence did not seem likely to assist him in defending the Central European status quo.

That the Rothschilds came to play a leading role in the development of the European railway network might seem, at first sight, natural. It was, after all, Lionel who prevailed upon Rossini to take his first and only train ride, and Amschel who (allegedly) provided the inspiration for one of the principal characters in Das Incognito —the royal adviser, Paphnatius. By the late 1840s the Rothschilds had firmly established themselves as the pre-eminent private financiers of continental railway construction. Yet there was nothing inevitable about this. Indeed, the move from commercial and public finance into industrial finance was in many ways an unusual one, which relatively few established bankers even attempted, much less achieved.

The most obvious illustration of this point is Nathan’s almost complete lack of involvement in industrial finance in Britain. In many ways, he of all the Rothschilds ought to have been the most keen to participate in the burgeoning new industrial sectors of the early nineteenth century; after all, it was he who had spent nearly a decade as a cotton merchant and (for a time) manufacturer. Yet apart from an apparently abortive mining venture in North Wales in 1825, Nathan had virtually nothing to do with industrial finance once he had moved to London and established himself as a banker. In particular, he took no part whatever in the great railway “mania” which followed the opening of the first fully fledged passenger and freight line between Liverpool and Machester in 1830. When James visited the north of England in 1843, the traffic on this line profoundly impressed him: “What is happening here with the railways is quite amazing and had I come here earlier we would most certainly have built this railway. It must yield enormous sums. Never have I seen so many people as [are travelling] between Liverpool and Manchester.”