

For this reason, the Rothschilds’ interest in the development of railways must be understood primarily in financial rather than developmental terms. What excited Nathan’s brothers—to be precise, what excited Salomon and James—was not really the prospect of more rapid and more comfortable travel from Paris to Brussels, though they doubtless looked forward to this. It was plainly not the substantial “social savings” with which railways have retrospectively been credited by economic historians, though the Rothschilds appreciated that railways would not only boost the demand for coal, iron and steam engines but also integrate regional commodity markets and facilitate labour mobility. It was the short-run benefits of railway finance which initially attracted them; in particular, the profits to be made from issuing railway shares to the public.

In essence, the Rothschilds were inclined to see railway shares as surrogate state bonds at a time (the mid-1830s) when European governments were issuing fewer and fewer new bonds. And because—unlike in Britain—continental governments became indirectly or directly involved in railway construction from a relatively early stage, this was not an unreasonable notion. Indeed, in the case of Belgium as well as some of the South German states, the building of national railway systems was actually financed by the sale of state bonds and carried out by the public sector. The Rothschilds were perfectly willing to underwrite such loans: after all, a state bond was a state bond, a relatively secure asset, however the money raised was used. Of course, the case was slightly different in those countries (such as France) where the state did not act so directly, but contented itself with licensing and subsidising private companies. Nevertheless, the fact of state involvement meant that it was comparatively easy for the Rothschilds to apply their traditional underwriting techniques to the sale of railway shares. In essence, this was how the Vienna and Paris houses were drawn into the business of railway finance. However, the realities of railway construction made it hard for both Salomon and James to sustain the arm’s-length role they had initially envisaged. It took time to secure a railway concession; time to acquire the land required; time to build the line and stations—usually longer than expected. Even once a line had opened, it took time to build up a steady level of freight and passenger traffic, and it was very rare that this level matched original projections, which were largely a matter of guesswork. Investors in railway shares were therefore not like investors in bonds, who could count on a predictable and steady flow of interest from states, barring some unanticipated revolution or military disaster. Railway investors who bought shares were buying a stake in a concern which would only begin to pay unspecified dividends in the future. It was therefore practically impossible for the bankers who marketed such shares to be indifferent to the future profitability of the companies concerned. Just as the Rothschilds could not ignore the politics of the states whose bonds they marketed, they could not ignore the management of the railways whose shares they sold. The short-term attractions of railway finance thus tended to lead the brothers into longer-term commitments.