

And even if war never came between the powers, there was a second danger—one which the Rothschilds were inclined to overlook. For the tendency for so many European states to run deficits in the 1840s meant more than just good business for their bankers. It was also a symptom of a fundamental political malaise within those states. Military expenditure was not, in fact, the sole cause of the deficits of the mid- 1840s. Of similar importance, as we shall see, were state subsidies for railway construction, combined with stagnant or declining tax revenues—a little-regarded side effect of slackening economic growth. As the Rothschilds insatiably added one state after another to the list of their clients, they could congratulate themselves on the diplomatic influence this gave them. The crises over Belgium and Syria really did seem to suggest that war could be averted by discreet manipulation of the European states’ purse-strings. But financial power was not absolute. Above all, it depended on the internal stability of the European states. When that could no longer be maintained, the Rothschilds proved almost as vulnerable as the princes and ministers whose purse-strings they held. In the end, it was not a war which brought the defensive walls of the July Monarchy tumbling down but a revolution; and against that threat the fortifications round Paris offered no protection.





FIFTEEN

“Satan Harnessed”: Playing at Railways (1830-1846)


They’ve got the Devil into reins!

—EICHENDORFF, DAS INCOGNITO





I know just how these bankers think. What they are after is a chance of immediate profit, not an affair which they have to bury in their portfolios for eighteen months, no matter how good it may be.

—CASIMIR LECOMTE, DECEMBER 1841





In 1836 the composer Rossini travelled by train for the first time. He was on his way from Paris to Frankfurt, and took advantage of the recently built lines in Belgium to speed up his journey. He loathed the experience, refusing ever to travel by train again; but it inspired him nonetheless. In an ironical tribute to the new mode of transport, he composed a short piece for solo piano entitled “Un petit train de plaisir (Comico Imitatif ),” a humorous musical evocation of a railway journey which culminates in a derailment, the deaths of two passengers, and their journeys to Heaven and Hell. A sardonic coda evokes the celebrations of the wealthier victim’s heirs.

Disasters are, of course, perennially fascinating, and the nineteenth century had no shortage of both natural and man-made calamities to stir the contemporary imagination. The 1830s and 1840s, in particular, saw a succession of failed harvests, great fires and epidemics, providing encouragement to the various idealist and materialist millenarians who prophesied an impending apocalypse in the years before 1848. Railway accidents, however, were an entirely novel kind of disaster, and they provided a distinctive source of artistic inspiration. If the railways were talked up by the engineers and financiers who built them as the supreme achievements of the modern age, their susceptibility to derailments and other spectacular mishaps enthralled more sceptical observers; for the railway accident was in many ways the perfect symbol of that crisis of capitalism which malcontents on both the left and the right awaited. In his comic play Das Incognito, for example, the romantically inclined German playwright Joseph von Eichendorff brought the drama to a noisy climax with an on-stage railway disaster: The sentry sounds the fire alarm, fleeing peasants burst suddenly on to the stage.