



By October 1846 James was in deep gloom, expecting French and Austrian troops to be sent to Spain at any moment and fretting at news of British naval increases. When he went to see Guizot on the 29th, he was told firmly that France would not rule out a future claim by Montpensier’s heirs to the Spanish throne. The nadir came when James sought to defend Normanby’s decision not to attend a reception for Montpensier after his return from Spain. As Nat reported, Guizot was “very angry . . . [and] told him that situated as he was it would be just as well for him to keep his opinion to himself.” James drew the obvious conclusion: “I fear that all diplomatic communications between us here and England will be broken and the Government here is prepared for anything that may happen. Never before have I seen the Government so strong and stubborn. I think that even if this were to lead to an outbreak of war, God forbid, they would still not change their stand.” Even when he sought the assistance of his old friend the King of the Belgians his reception was “cold.”

Such open conflict between France and Britain inevitably placed a strain on cross-Channel relations within the Rothschild family. Alphonse obviously felt resentful of Palmerston’s aggressive style of foreign policy. When he heard Lionel argue the British case during a visit to Paris in early 1847, he sarcastically asked him if French policy should be “to kiss humbly the British lion’s claws.” Hannah was somewhat embarrassed to find both Anselm and Carl taking the French side when she visited Frankfurt at around the same time. “I now and then have rather a strong conversation with our friends,” she reported to Lionel, “particularly Anselm who is an enthusiast in favour of Guizot.” Anselm also took issue with James’s unhappy efforts to play the mediator, advising his uncle tersely “not to mix personally in the evolution of great historical events.”

As so often in the diplomacy of the 1830s and 1840s, the war which everyone feared failed to break out: by the end of February 1847 James was able to report that the Spanish affair was as good as settled: “Apponyi is here with me now and he says that it is now out of the question even to think of war any more. Normanby invited him and Guizot to visit him on Tuesday week. So peace will be made over a bottle of champagne and I and my dear wife will be present to witness it, God willing.” Yet the champagne cork was scarcely out the bottle when Palmerston seized on a new bone of contention: Greek arrears on British-held bonds. This was the cue for another Anglo-French war of words, with the Rothschilds once again acting as reluctant messengers. “Guizot told the Baron,” reported Nat wearily in April 1847, “that England would be alone in her proceedings against Greece . . . & if she (England) were to kick up a row about the stupid business . . . [Guizot] wd be able to return the compliment & get his country into such a state that it wd be very hot for every body—do not repeat this at all events in these terms or as coming from us.”