

In France, by contrast, the so-called haute banque in Paris was not as wary of industrial investment as the City. From the 1820s onwards, there were repeated efforts to organise new kinds of financial institution large enough and ambitious enough to undertake major infrastructural investments, notably the digging of canals. But the various projects like the one instigated by Laffitte in 1825 (the Société Commanditaire de l’Industrie) foundered because of government opposition. In particular, the Banque de France was extremely suspicious of attempts to create joint-stock banks—hence the need to use the word caisse. This suspicion was shared by James. When Laffitte revived his 1825 scheme twelve years on with a proposal for a caisse with a capital of up to 250 million francs to be raised by selling shares, he was sceptical, just as he would be when the Pereires attempted a similar (but better-timed) institutional challenge to the traditional Parisian banking structures in the 1850s. There was no indication before 1835 that James would be any more interested than Nathan in expanding the scope of his financial operations.

Yet a subtle shift in Rothschild policy can be detected in the mid-1830s. We have already seen how the need for improved securities for Spanish government loans led Nathan and James to acquire rights over the Almadén mercury mines. This did not mean that the Rothschilds themselves directly organised the business of mining, of course. All they were buying was a monopoly over the sale of Spanish mercury once it had been extracted. Nevertheless, the success of this venture encouraged the brothers—and Salomon in particular—to seek similar arrangements with other governments. It was, for example, the logical complement of the Almadén deal to secure a monoply over the mercury mines in Austrian-controlled Istria and Dalmatia. It also made sense to become more directly involved in the physical process of refining silver and gold and minting coins, though it was not until the 1840s (in France) and the 1850s (in England) that the Rothschilds formalised their involvement in this industry.

As bankers, the Rothschilds naturally had an interest in, and experience of, the process of manufacturing money. In the same way, it might be said, they had an interest in any technological innovation that accelerated communications within Europe, given their legendary enthusiasm for the rapid transmission of financial and political news. Railways undoubtedly represented a revolutionary breakthrough in communications; yet they were in some ways less exciting to the Rothschilds than might at first be assumed. From the vantage point of the 1830s, it would obviously be a very long time before enough railway track had been laid to reduce by much the time it took to relay a letter from Frankfurt to London. And because it was letters and financial documents which the Rothschilds were primarily interested in transporting, they stood to gain relatively less from the development of railways than merchants and industrialists who wished to transport bulky commodities like coal and grain, or regular travellers who latched on to the railways as an easy way to transport themselves. In any case, trains could not give the Rothschilds any advantage even when they did begin to transport mail; for what the Rothschilds could use their rivals could use too.