



As these remarks suggest, James’s influence over sections of the French press was an important weapon in his railway policy.

It was the question of the line to Belgium, however, which was to become the most notorious example of French governmental subservience to Rothschild financial power. Even before the various diplomatic storms of 1839 and 1840 had died away, James returned to the idea of a Northern railway more convinced than ever that it would be “a good piece of business.” The idea he now advanced to ministers was that the government should guarantee to pay the interest on railway bonds (4 per cent) for a specified period—a suggestion of Emile Pereire’s designed to appeal to the more cautious investors who regarded private sector shares as too risky. Now the government proved more receptive. The principle enunciated in Legrand’s law of 1842 was that the state would purchase the rights of way and construct the railways and buildings, leasing the lines to the railway companies, who would provide the rolling stock and run trains for specified periods. What this meant in practice, however, took years to resolve, especially in the case of the Belgian line.

In James’s eyes, the route north from Paris to Lille and Valenciennes promised to be the most profitable of all the main French lines because it would link the French market not only to Belgium but (via branch lines to Calais and Dunkirk) to England; the prospect of a government subsidy made it “a golden business opportunity.” But precisely for that reason there was bound to be political opposition to giving the Rothschilds the concession. “Well now, my dear Nat,” complained James when it seemed that the government was going to deny him, “the business with our railways is not working out at all. The whole world is against us. People say we are a monopoly and that we want all the railways for they can see that it would not be possible to build the Belgian [railway] without us.” James was right. Although the two sides failed to reach a final agreement until 1845, the government ultimately seemed to have no alternative but to deal with the Rothschilds. A crucial factor was the government’s own need to borrow precisely in order to finance the Legrand plan. James’s near-monopoly on issues of rentes gave him an invaluable lever in the negotiations leading to the award of the Nord concession. As he commented with satisfaction in December 1842: “If we get the loan then we are masters over the railways. The Finance Minister said to me today, ‘I won’t do anything without you and the whole Ministry shares my views. The railway from Belgium will be offered to you in preference to anyone else.’ ”

In two respects, it might be thought, James had to compromise in order to win. Firstly, the Pereires’ dream that the line would terminate at the Gare Saint-Lazare had to be jettisoned, despite the negative impact this had on Saint-Germain shares. Secondly, James’s rivals were allowed to participate in the consortium which founded the company: with the continuing reluctance of Méeus to commit the Société Générale to a major stake in the company, James had no alternative but to allot substantial shareholdings to Laffitte-Blount, Hottinguer and other lesser rivals. Yet in practice these were minor concessions. It would seem that James felt less strongly about having Saint-Lazare as the terminus than Pereire; as for his fellow investors, none of them could pretend that they were anything other than junior partners. Laffitte had hoped to revive his own long-standing ambitions by launching a single, grandiose loan to construct the entire network envisaged by Legrand; in becoming little more than a sleeping partner, he was effectively admitting defeat yet again.