

Geographical concentration was also taking place. In securing the biggest shareholding in the Nord line and a majority of the Creil-Saint-Quentin line’s capital (both in partnership with Hottinguer and Laffitte-Blount), James ensured that he controlled the two major rail links north to Belgium, to say nothing of two important routes within Paris—a total of 388 miles of line. This represented a formidable geographical base for the pan-European railway empire he was beginning to dream of.





The English Connection

The attitude of James’s English nephews towards all these projects was at first, to say the least, ambivalent. James delegated a good deal of the detailed work on railway finance to them—especially to Anthony, who consequently became more expert than his uncle. Yet he and his brothers never wholly lost the suspicion of industrial finance which they had acquired at New Court. “There is nothing new here—but Railroad Companies,” complained Anthony in May 1838, “and there are so many that one gets quite sick of them—there is such a Jealousy on the part . . . of the other Companies that [one?] is a little disquieted.” Nat admitted that the Paris house did “not think much of our poor London house in these [railway] matters”; but he himself never tired of pointing out the disadvantages of the Nord project. “We are continually bored with Pereire & Eichtahl [sic] [trying] to induce us to go largely into the railroad to Chartres,” he complained in the spring of 1842. “The stinking railroads engross all our attention & for my part I wish his . . . Majesty had them all, they only give us trouble & bother & no remuneration . . . I am by no means anxious that the house shd go largely into railroad concerns.” “We are up to our necks in steam,” he grumbled a few weeks later, “& get nothing for all the bother & trouble.” At times he denied that the railways would be profitable: “People are afraid of holding the shares and of travelling by the railroad.” At other times, it was the attendant risks he objected to: For my part I hope & trust we shall have nothing more to do with the Be[lgia]n railroad than to take a lot of shares which we will be able to sell when good opportunity offers—I am by no means desirous of going up to one’s neck in a stinking railroad & if the least thing happens one [soils?] one’s breeches, whilst others know all about it & when we wish to be acquainted with the occurrence we must address ourselves to Pereire—Besides the bother & trouble with the Govt . . .



But the criticism he most frequently expressed was that becoming involved in operating railways—as opposed to speculating in their shares—could tie up capital in a potentially dangerous way: I am against the [Belgian railway] affair because I am afraid of the anxiety, bother & trouble which it will surely occasion us—the moral responsibility of it will rest entirely on us, & I wd sooner leave to others the profit which the shares are likely to bring than engage in a concern of such magnitude without the possibility of attending to it properly—Such is my way of thinking & most sincerely do I trust the Baron will remain satisfied with purely financial affairs which we understand & which we can get out of when we think fit.