

Yet from 1841 onwards Salomon’s senior manager Goldschmidt began to detect an improvement on his weekly visits to monitor traffic at the main terminus. As with the British railways, it was the unexpectedly large amount of passenger traffic—especially families of day-trippers on Sundays—which helped to boost receipts. As early as 1841 up to 10,000 people were regularly using the initial stretch of line from Vienna to the suburb of Vienna-Neustadt.2 In 1843 the shares rose for the first time since their issue above par to 103; a year later they reached 129 and by 1845 they stood at no less than 228. This represented a huge if belated capital gain to the original investors—above all, to Salomon himself.

Yet it would be unjust to Salomon to suggest that he operated with the short-term speculative gains solely in mind. On the contrary, he genuinely does seem to have had an entrepreneurial vision of an integrated Austrian transport system. Not only did he envisage from the outset a railway which would link Galicia and Moravia to the imperial capital and southwards to Italy; he hoped also to extend his network into Hungary. A good illustration of the extraordinary—almost mes sianic—role Salomon saw himself playing in the Habsburg lands in this period is provided by the police report of his trip to Pressburg in June 1844 to attend a meeting of the Central Hungarian Railway Company. It was little short of a royal visit. The Danube steamer made an unscheduled stop at Königsplatz to allow him to disembark. The occupants of rooms at the Hotel zur Sonne were unceremoniously evicted from their rooms to make way for the Rothschild party, despite the fact that they planned to return to Vienna by coach that night. And when it was rumoured that the mercurial Hungarian reformer Istvàn Széchényi—who was already running his own Danube steamship company—intended to support a challenge by Sina to Salomon’s dominance of the Central Hungarian board, the venue of the meeting was hastily changed. To cap it all, Salomon responded to the flattering toasts proposed in his honour that evening by Carl Esterházy, Andrássy and other pro-Rothschild bigwigs with a pompous speech, concluding that he would follow the example of his schoolmaster who told his pupils: “I am going but I am leaving my cloak behind, and it will tell me what everybody has done, and how they have behaved in my absence.” Salomon’s self-importance can hardly have been diminished by the enthusiastic welcome he had received earlier in the day from the local Jewish community, a crowd of whom gathered on the river bank to greet him. “Count Esterházy,” the police observer reported, frustrated their intention of according the Baron a special welcome, as he would not allow the Jews to carry out their scheme of letting off forty rockets. They were restrained even from shouting their welcome which in view of the ill feeling between the citizens and the Jews here, might easily have led to a breach of the peace.



Esterházy might be willing to ingratiate himself with the Austrian railway king, but he had no desire to let Salomon’s poor co-religionists bask in his reflected glory.