

When the contract was finally awarded in September 1845, the Paris and London houses were the biggest shareholders—with a 25.7 per cent stake of the 200 million franc capital, compared with Hottinguer’s 20.15 per cent and Laffitte-Blount’s 19.5—and held the key executive positions. The only real compromises which had to be made related to the specific terms of the contract: the subsidy to be paid per mile of track constructed; the duration of the period during which the company would run it; the level of fares to be charged for the three classes of passenger; and the regularity of services. But these were political rather than commercial compromises, reflecting the need to overcome opposition within the Chamber of Deputies (where an influential group of deputies favoured complete public sector construction and control of railways). Similarly, James’s decision to withdraw altogether from the consortium bidding three months later for the Paris-Lyon concession was designed to ensure that he could make the most competitive bid for the Creil-Saint-Quentin line being auctioned simultaneously.

The winning of the Nord concession needs to be seen as part of a general carving-up of the primary French railway network—a process in which the Rothschilds played a leading role. Although the Nord was the line in which James most visibly interested himself, it was by no means the only one. As we have seen, he had contemplated taking a modest share in the Paris-Lyon line. He had also thought of involving himself in the line to Bordeaux, and in 1844 formed a consortium to bid for the concession. Although the line was awarded to another company, he was soon seeking some kind of partnership with it to finance the connection from Bordeaux to Cette. The Rothschilds also took a substantial shareholding in the company which had won the Paris-Strasbourg concession; and it had a small stake in the Lyon-Avignon concession too. Smaller players vied with one another to see who could win the backing of “the all powerful name of the House of Rothschild” for their companies. All this was part of an early move towards the concentration of ownership within the French railway industry which Saint-Simonians like Enfantin sought to encourage. In fact, though they lacked Enfantin’s grandiose vision, the bankers did not need much persuading. As early as 1844 Hottinguer, Blanc and d’Eichthal were proposing to James that “with respect to the grand affair of the railroad from Calais to Avignon . . . we should all write & endeavour to get the whole line of railroads so as to avoid competition, that we should interest all the different companies & then all of us put together.” By November 1845 the craze for “fusions”—that is, mergers between railway companies—was in full swing. “You have no idea what a quantity of people are in the Counting House for the fusion of Creil & St Quentin à Lyons,” reported Anselm, “which fusion creates such a confusion that our office is rather like an inn in Switzerland where all the tourists run in after a long excursion in the Mountains.” The time-consuming contest for concessions had begun to pall. Increasingly, collaboration seemed more rational than competition.