



Dairnvaell’s allegations unleashed an extraordinary and protracted pamphlet war. At least seven separate publications appeared in the succeeding months, some denouncing James in similar terms, others defending him, still others claiming to judge the two sides impartially. The so-called First Official Response of M. Baron James Rothschild claimed that Dairnvaell was little better than a blackmailer who had demanded 5,000 francs from James in return for not publishing his Edifying History, and had gone into print when James had offered him only a thousand francs.5 A similar attack on Dairnvaell appeared in the Response of Rothschild I, King of the Jews, to Satan the Last, King of the Impostors. In swift response came three further anti-Rothschild pamphlets: War on the Swindlers (by Dairnvaell himself ),6 Rothschild I, his Valets and his People and Ten Days in the Reign of Rothschild I, King of the Jews (both anonymous). Finally, there were attempts to adjudicate. The Letter to M. Baron de Rothschild rebutted Dairnvaell’s historical allegations, but concluded that “the Rothschild brothers have done nothing for the peoples [of the world], and consequently, nothing for humanity . . . M. de Rothschild . . . has a thirst for money, and that’s all there is to it.” More overtly hostile to James was the Grand Process between Rothschild I, King of the Jews, and Satan, last King of the Impostors, which described James as “King of the Jews, sometime bailiff of the courts of Europe, farmer general of public works of France, Germany, England etc. etc., and sovereign of discount, usury, pawn-broking, speculation etc.”

Of all these works of hackery, perhaps the most sophisticated was the anonymous Judgement Passed against Rothschild and Georges Dairnvaell, which rejected the charge of culpability for the Fampoux disaster, but argued that “the proletarian” had been right to attack “the millionaire” with his “pockets full of banknotes and shares.” Like Toussenel, the author of the Judgement essentially equated Judaism and capitalism: James was “the Jew Rothschild, king of the world, because today the whole world is Jewish.” The name Rothschild “stands for a whole race—it is a symbol of a power which extends its arms over the entirety of Europe.” Yet the Rothschilds were breaking no laws in “turning and returning” their capital and “exploiting all that is exploitable”: they were merely “the model of all the bourgeois and mercantile virtues.” It was the bourgeoisie as a whole which had “bent its knee before the Jewish golden calf ” and embraced the “Jews” hereditary doctrine of the unlimited exploitation of property.” Rothschild, in short, personified “a system which is responsible for the misery and desperation of millions of men.” In constructing his railways for industrial and commercial gain, rather than to promote “the fraternisation and amalgamation of the whole human race,” Rothschild was thus fulfilling “the development of the bourgeoisie.” This combination of anti-Semitism and socialism would prove the most dangerous of all threats to the Rothschilds’ position in the years which lay ahead.