

Those critics who had accused him of being interested only in a quick profit on railway issues now had to recant: like Salomon, James was building up a substantial portfolio of long-term industrial investments, at the core of which was his stake in the Nord. It was a profoundly important departure, not least because the London house chose not to do the same. This was the safer option in the short run, and undoubtedly reduced New Court’s exposure when the market for railway shares slumped in 1847-8; but in the long run it meant that only the Paris house would share in the immense capital gains realised by investors in industry during the second half of the century.





The Impact of Rail

The economic significance of railways can be quantified with some degree of precision. Between 1828 and 1848 around 1,250 miles of track were built in France, with peaks of investment in 1841, 1843 and 1846-7. In the first instance, the railways were financed by a multitude of small companies—between 1826 and 1838 around 500 sociétés en commandite were formed with nominal capital of 520 million francs. In 1845 alone, twenty-eight companies were set up with almost as much capital. The Rothschilds were without question the dominant force in this process. To be sure, their name figures in only four out of thirty-two concessions granted between 1835 and 1846. But of 225 million francs contributed by French banks to railway capital formation between 1835 and 1846, the Rothschilds accounted for 84.6 million—38 per cent of the total, and nearly a tenth of all capital subscribed.

This dominance was in many ways quite natural. Apart from the superior resources of de Rothschild Frères compared with its French rivals, James had the unique advantage of a direct familial link to the London market. This was crucial, for without British capital (and technology), the progress of French railway construction would without question have been slower. It has been roughly estimated that half the capital invested in French railways by 1847 was British, and only a quarter of French locomotives were domestically produced. The role of the state in the railway boom can also be quantified. From 1840, when the first state subsidies began to be paid out by the new Ministry of Public Works, until 1849, around 7.2 million francs were spent annually on railways by the state, between a fifth and a quarter of annual average gross investment. In aggregate terms, this would generally be considered by modern economic historians as money well spent. Problematic though it is to calculate exactly the “social savings” generated by railways (in the form not only of more efficient internal and external communications but also of “backward linkages” to the coal, iron and steel industries), France would unquestionably have been worse off without them.

Yet contemporaries did not tend to assess the Rothschilds’ role in railways in such arid, macroeconomic terms. In general, they were more concerned with the distribution of the benefits generated by the railway boom than with their developmental impact. They were also more concerned with the social costs of railways than modern economic historians. This helps to explain why the cultural and political responses to the railways were in such stark contrast to their macroeconomic impact.