

In some respects, Toussenel was in a tradition dating back to the 1820s of radical critics who laced their diatribes against political corruption with a strong dose of anti-Semitism. The thrust of his argument was directed against the financial terms under which the Nord concession had been granted (and could just as easily have been made without reference to James’s Jewishness). According to Toussenel, the government had effectively ceded all the profits from the line to the Rothschild-led company for forty years, while retaining all the expenses for itself—that is “for the nation.” The state would pay out an estimated 100 million francs for the land across which the railway would be built, while the company would merely advance the state the cost—around 60 million francs—of the rails and rolling stock, money which the state would reimburse when the concession expired. In effect, Toussenel argued, the company was lending the state 60 million francs in return for an income from the line of around 14 million francs a year, to say nothing of the speculative profits on the shares it issued to the public. Would it not have been more rational, he asked, for the state to have borrowed the money itself—which would have cost just 2.4 million francs a year in interest—and to have built and run the railways as a state enterprise? Why pay five times that much to acquire the line forty years in the future?

At one level, this was a not implausible argument for public sector control of the railway network on the Belgian model: similar economic nationalism was being advocated in Germany at around this time. And in its critique of the distributional consequences of government policy, Toussenel’s book evinced a debt to early socialist thinkers like Fourier. “The enormous profits” generated by the railways came partly from the “labour of the French worker and artisan”: “Who pays for the speculator’s premiums of hundred of millions? The worker, the people. Who suffers on account of the ignorance and cowardice of those in power? The people.”

However, Toussenel’s economic argument was inextricably linked to a visceral anti-Semitism. He angrily denounced the “traitors, hacks, deputies, ministers who would sell France to the Jews . . . in these times of irritation and political senility.” This identification of the railway companies with a single religious group required a considerable definitional elasticity, given the prominent role of manifestly non-Jewish investors from England and Switzerland. But Toussenel—setting an example which future generations of anti-Semites would readily follow—had no difficulty with this. Rattling off the names of the various railway companies and their principal shareholders, he portrayed them all as satellites of a single cosmopolitan, Jewish haute banque, personified by “Baron Rothschild, the King of Finance, a Jew ennobled by a very Christian King.” In the 1840s “Jew” ceased to be a purely religious category and became synonymous with the type of the exploitative capitalist.