



Yet already Heine sounded a characteristically ambivalent note of warning when he considered the political influence which the railways were conferring on those who built them. The “ruling aristocracy of money,” he suggested, exercised “more and more control every day over the rudder of state”: “Soon those people will constitute not only the supervisory board of the railway company, but also the supervisory board of our entire civil society.” For Heine, the most intriguing aspect of the railway boom was the way that aristocratic and military elites (even admirals) flocked to associate themselves with it. They lent their names as non-executive directors and invested their savings. They were even reduced to begging for share options in new companies like the Nord: [E]very share which members of this house [of Rothschild] grants to individuals is really a great favour—speaking plainly I should say that it is in fact a present of money which M. de Rothschild makes his friends. The shares ultimately issued . . . are from the beginning worth several hundred francs above par, and whoever asks Baron James de Rothschild for such shares at par, begs from him in the literal sense of the word. But then—the whole world is begging from him; he is inundated by begging letters, and where the greatest aristocrats have set such a noble example, begging can no longer be considered a disgrace.



Heine was not alone in portraying James’s mutation into a railway baron in an essentially light-hearted light. Rothschild railway jokes were another characteristic by-product of the era. Punning on the double meaning of the French action (a share) the writer Prosper Mérimée told Madame de Montijo a typical one in February 1846: The rabbi who teaches the children of M. de Rothschild asked one of them, a young lad of seven, if he knew the difference between a good action and a bad action. “Without a doubt,” replied the child. “A good action is an action of the Nord, a bad action is an action of the Rive Gauche.” Believe me, that boy will not lose his father’s millions.



Seven years later, Count Nesselrode told his cousin a “mot de Rothschild” which may even have been true as well as archetypal. “Count Tassilo Festeticz consulted him about the investment of a considerable sum. ‘M. le comte,’ Rothschild told him, ‘if you want your capital without interest, buy land. If you want your interest without capital, buy shares.’ ” “It happened in Paris,” added Nesselrode, “but it is universally true.” Such anecdotes are too easily dismissed as apocryphal. But the Rothschilds’ private correspondence confirms that at least one of them was not far from the truth. In November 1848 Betty told her son Alphonse how his four-year-old brother Edmond had “got into the habit of taking my prayer book for his devotions. And yesterday, in one of his pious outbursts, what if he doesn’t say, ‘I pray to our good Lord God for Papa [and] for the chemin de fer du Nord !’ ”

Yet not everyone was so amused. In the course of the 1840s, a growing number of journalists began to express hostility towards what they regarded as a dangerous and corrupting private monopoly. Above all, the Nord concession came to symbolise what more radical critics of the July Monarchy regarded as its fundamental rottenness. It began in newspapers like the Courrier Français, the Réforme, the Univers and the Quotidienne. But it took its most virulent form in cheaply produced polemical books and pamphlets like Alphonse Toussenel’s The Jews, Kings of the Epoch: A History of Financial Feudalism.