

To be sure, there was no shortage of writers who were ready and willing to “puff ” rail travel as the wonder of the age. The 1830s and 1840s saw a spate of odes and hymns to the railway, a classic example of which was composed by an obscure poetaster named Hugelmann to mark the inauguration of the Nord line on June 14, 1846. It was entitled simply: “To Rothschild”: A dragon hurtled through space,

Throwing fire down on the lanes;

A genius covered its face;

Put its powerful hands in chains;

And turning towards our world

He threw up the dust in a whirl

With the smoking beast in his thrall

He transported it with a firm hold;

Then showing this giant in chains

To the waiting millions of men,

He says: “I will make you some reins;

Be enslaved; here is my gold . . .”

He speaks and the mountain sides yield,

They fall and their clifftops descend;

The dragon traverses the fields,

The earth it shakes under its bonds;

Germans, united with Gaul,

For this power their defences let fall

Who is come back to life to recall

The forts that the emperors quit,

And whose urn, as it inclines

Disperses his seed divine

On the running board lined with ermine

And the labourers’ humble hamlet.



Even the usually acerbic Heine was—on occasion—moved to write in a similar, if rather less hyperbolic, vein. “All eyes are now turned to the House of Rothschild,” he reported when James’s intention to bid for the Nord concession was first made public, “which represents the society formed to construct the Northern French railway system in a way that is financially as sound as it is socially praiseworthy. The House of Rothschild, which in former times directed its talents and resources exclusively to the needs of governments, now places itself at the head of great national undertakings, devoting its enormous capital and its immeasurable credit to the advancement of industry and the prosperity of the people.” When the lines to Orléans and Rouen were opened in May 1843, Heine was positively lyrical in his enthusiasm. He detected in Paris a tremor, which is felt by everyone, unless he has been sent into solitary confinement. The whole population of Paris constitutes at this moment a chain, which communicates the electric shock from one person to another. While the great mass of people gapes astounded and dumb-struck at the outward manifestation of these great motive forces, the philosopher is seized by a strange horror, the way we always feel when the most monstrous, unheard of thing happens, the consequences of which are unforeseeable and incalculable. Let us just say that our entire existence is being ripped up and hurled on to new tracks; that new relationships, pleasures and torments await us, and the unknown exerts its ghastly fascination, irresistible, yet at the same time fearful. Our forefathers must have felt the same when America was discovered, when the invention of gunpowder announced itself with the first shots, when the printing press sent the first proof copies of the Word of God into the world. The railways are another such providential event . . .