



Enfantin was not wrong when he suggested that “playing at railways” had supplanted even playing politics in James’s affections: “Playing at gossip with Thiers, Guizot or Molé—a game which Louis Philippe plays so well—is child’s play for Rothschild, which he scarcely deigns to play; he profits from its ups and downs, but for his part he plays at railways . . . that was the great game for strong men.”

Yet James’s project ultimately depended on the London house, in that only the resources of the London capital market could satisfy the demands of the projected line, even with government subsidies. The Nord would, as Nat saw, only be “a capital concern if we can get some good people in London to go largely into it.” “[I]t is impossible for us to undertake so extensive a line unless backed by English capitalists,” he advised Lionel. In particular, he urged him to involve Glyn’s, the one City house which had interested itself seriously in railways, and George Stephenson, whose engineering expertise would be invaluable. Given the obvious importance of the branch lines from the Nord to the Channel coast, other English businessmen were not slow to become involved, though not all were welcome: the attempts of David Salomons to elbow his way into the business were a source of considerable irritation. The fact that there was so much English interest in the line may explain why Nat’s opposition to involvement diminished during 1843. If nothing else, he came to believe that the shares would jump to a “famous high price” and “go like hot rolls” on issue. Sure enough, French railway shares were a great success on the London market. As Mayer reported: The people here are quite determined upon entering every undertaking that is brought out in your good country, no matter whether it is a railroad or loan . . . [G]iven the fortune being made here by the share jobbers one has no doubt that, however immense the scheme may appear to be, a very strong party will be made.



Despite their reservations about the long-term profitability of French railways, the London brothers could not help taking pride in the superior capacity of the British market. “I hope that you have sold a good lot of the Northern Shares,” Anthony urged Lionel in September 1845. “Try my dear Rabbi to show that the English people can take off as many shares as the stinking French frogs.” His youngest brother expressed the same feeling the following year: “The more I see, I am convinced the more there is no place like our old New Court; where would all the rubbishy French shares be if we did not support them? I think we may give ourselves a few airs and be as great men as the others.” Such chauvinistic sentiments were another important aspect of the Rothschild generation gap.

The combination of James’s entrepreneurial vision and the London market’s capacity was a recipe for success. As the price of Nord shares soared from 500 francs to 760, his gamble on the line seemed amply justified. Even his London nephews had to acknowledge that its prospects seemed excellent: its daily takings exceeded 20,000 francs as soon as it opened, despite the fact that the line was far from complete and the company was short of capable engine-drivers. Although that was roughly half its projected income, it still promised a respectable return to the operators—and more, with a little fine-tuning. James was soon following his brother Salomon’s example, exploring the possibility of “vertical integration” in the form of further investment in Belgian coal mines. “Everyone thinks that coal is like gold,” he enthused, a view which even the cautious Anselm could not dispute. The 3 million franc investment which the Paris house made in coal mines (in conjunction with the Talabot brothers) would, he was confident, “become with a little time a most capital concern as the consumption of coal becomes stronger day to day owing to so many railroads on the continent and the progress of industry . . .” The Nord could get its coal at a competitive price; by the same token, the transportation of Belgian coal became a staple of the railway line’s revenue.