



Nat was delighted when the Nord concession appeared to fall through, and alarmed when it was finally granted. Although less hostile than his brother, Anthony could be almost as unenthusiastic. “As regards the Railroad,” he told Lionel in June 1842, “I think the best thing is . . . not to have anything to do with them.”

These attitudes reveal a fundamental difference of attitude, though how far this was a generational difference and how far a matter of milieu is hard to say: the fact that Anselm, who had spent most of his working life in Paris or Frankfurt, also opposed too much involvement in railways suggests a generation gap of some sort. In admitting that “in these times the conservative feeling has the ascendant over the acquiring sentiment—with me at least,” Nat spoke for all the younger Rothschilds. Like the Journal des Débats, they were inclined to fear that in bidding for the Nord concession James was bidding “for the privilege to ruin himself.” As Nat put it, contemplating the extent of their commitments, by hook & by crook we shall have lots of shares in the market & probably deeply engaged in them all—I have no doubt if things remain as they at present are all share concerns will turn out uncommmonly well, but God forbid if the least political or financial crisis were to take place what wd become of all the shares?



“The Baron,” however, was too embroiled in “wheeling and dealing” with the plethora of new scrip and shares coming on to the market seriously to contemplate such an eventuality.

In this context, Nat’s description of James’s contrasting mood is especially illuminating: [T]he Baron is in a sort of fever about it, he thinks it a good business, & is afraid of it, he fancies the rival company will get it & then regrets it doubly, on the other hand he trembles head & foot at the idea of having to direct a railroad company of such importance without being able to do without such a pair of jobbers as Eichthal & Pereire.



James knew the risks, in other words, but could not face losing the business to his rivals; his nephews were less furiously competitive. Nat’s view “with respect to the railroad [was] not to be too greedy & not to wish to jouer le grand rôle, we may take a share & a good large one & take our profit thereon but not assume more responsibility than others.” James, by contrast, could not resist playing “le grand rôle.” He had no illusions about the dangers and difficulties involved in “trying to do too much at once,” but nevertheless exhorted his nephews to “apply themselves seriously”: I urgently beg you to take on several new brokers so that we can do business on an equal footing with the others and try to put some life into the railway business. I feel that the world wants to find something new each year with which to busy itself. At the moment “industry” seems to be the fashionable thing. If that is the case and we decide to enter the fray then we have to apply ourselves seriously to the business and will have to engage in doing business even if there is nothing to be earned only so that we stay busy.