

As in the 1820s and 1830s, those who inveighed against the Rothschilds as capitalists could rarely resist making a connection with their Judaism. Typically, Karl Beck too could not resist alluding to “Rothschild’s . . . interest-calculating brethren,” “filling the insatiable money-bag for themselves and their kin alone!” Nor is it surprising that minor figures like Beck were doing this when the man who would ulti-mately prove the most influential of all the period’s revolutionaries had done exactly the same in February 1844 in an essay “On the Jewish Question” (though at the time, of course, there was little to distinguish Karl Marx from the numerous other radical hacks churning out anti-Rothschild abuse): What is the secular basis of Judaism? Practical need, self-interest. What is the worldly religion of the Jew? Huckstering. What is his worldly God? Money . . . We recognise in Judaism, therefore, a general anti-social element of the present time . . . In the final analysis, the emancipation of the Jews is the emancipation of mankind from Judaism.





16.ii: Anon., Anbetung der Könige (1848).

Marx was not one to name names, of course, when he could couch his argument in Hegelian abstractions. But that he had the Rothschilds in mind is evident from the passage he quoted from the pamphlet by Bruno Bauer he was (ostensibly) reviewing: “The Jew, who in Vienna, for example, is only tolerated, determines the fate of the whole Empire by his financial power. The Jew, who may have no rights in the smallest German states, decides the fate of Europe.” This is no isolated fact [continued Marx]. The Jew has emancipated himself in a Jewish manner, not only because he has acquired financial power, but also because . . . money has become a world power and the practical Jewish spirit has become the practical spirit of the Christian nations. The Jews have emancipated themselves insofar as the Christians have become Jews.



Only when society had “succeeded in abolishing the empirical essence of Judaism—huckstering and its preconditions” would “the Jew . . . become impossible.” In fact, the socialist argument could stand unsupported by racial prejudice, as Marx came to appreciate (after all, he himself had been born a Jew, as had Karl Beck); it would be other revolutionaries of 1848 like Richard Wagner who would later develop and refine this line of argument. Either way, the Rothschilds were extremely vulnerable to radical calls for redistribution of wealth and greater regulation of the capitalists/Jews who possessed it. This made the 1848 revolution much more dangerous to them than that of 1830.

Though politically close to Marx at the time of the 1848 revolution, Heine subsequently made fun of the early socialists’ motivations. In his last jottings, he wrote: The main army of Rothschild’s enemies is made up of have-nots; they all think: “What we don’t have, Rothschild has.” They are joined by the main force of those who have lost their fortune; instead of ascribing their loss to their own stupidity, they blame the wiles of those who managed to hold on to what they had. As soon as a man runs out of money, he becomes Rothschild’s enemy.