



In 1842 an accident on another line persuaded James to postpone further negotiations for the Nord concession: it was decided, Nat reported, “to wait to see what damages will be awarded to the wounded & to the families of the Killed before entering into new affairs of this sort, you know in Paris the juries are very severe with those who are the direct or even indirect causers of accidents.” When “a meeting of Engineers” was “silly enough to recommend all sorts of foolish plans to be adopted in order to prevent the recurrence of accidents,” James immediately “called upon several of the Ministers & told them he would send in his resignation as administrateur unless they acted in concert with the direction of the railroads which they have promised to do.” Similarly, the collapse of a viaduct on the line from Rouen to Le Havre interested James primarily because of its likely impact on the share price.

It would be wrong to suggest that the family’s response to the Fampoux accident was wholly lacking in compassion. “Poor people,” wrote Anthony when the news of the “stinking slip” first reached Paris. It was he added, “a thousand pities—as it will certainly do no good for the moment—it has certainly put me out a great deal.” James, it was reported, was “very much affected,” having used the line “only two days earlier” on his way to take the waters at Wildbad. But the true nature of their distress became evident in Anthony’s next bulletin to New Court: It is a thousand pities—as everything was going on so well. They took 27,000 fr[ancs] a day for the last four days & it is more every day. It has not stopped the working of the line & there are as many people as formerly. It will only require very great care. I cannot give you the reason of the Accident & you must have a little patience. In the meantime it is very unpleasant & it makes our head ache most famously . . . They talk of nothing else but of this accident, & you know what an impression it makes in Paris. The price of shares have [sic] fallen to 712 & I should not at all be astonished to see them lower . . . We have just received the accounts from Pereire who says that there were only 14 [killed] in all & that the accident is not so bad as reported.—In a day or two it will be forgotten but they will try to knock the shares down.



Salomon’s reaction is also revealing. It was, he remarked, a “stroke of luck no person of high rank was grieved by the disaster, as the alarm about it would have been even stronger.”

To be fair, the Rothschilds did not—as Dairnvaell alleged—act improperly. James protested that only days before the accident he had “left [the train] at every station and inspected the carriages and then let the train continue on its way,” a fact he was glad to see reported in the German press. An investigation into the cause of the accident was immediately undertaken and drivers were issued with instructions “to go as slow as possible over the places when there is the least danger.” Yet there is no escaping the fact that Anthony and his brothers’ primary concern was to limit the damage to the Nord share price by intervening on the Paris market, and resuming normal service on the line as quickly as possible. Anthony’s letter to Lionel of July gives an insight into his priorities in the wake of the disaster: There is a good deal of speculation going forward in the shares. The Baron has made so much money that they do everything that they can to make the shares fall. They spread all the lies, stories & God knows what else—The line is a most tremendously long one—it is quite new & of course as all new lines are it will require a good deal of time to get everything in to proper order—You cannot make a regiment of French frogs in a minute—They have that nationality that they think that they can do always everything better than others—I hope that they will listen to reason—& have a few people from England. They will write to you to night to engage 12 very first rate Engine Drivers . . . They have decided upon making the line wider in a great many places & put down more [sleepers?] and to support the rails & to have the line again looked at. This accident was a great misfortune—The shares would certainly have been 800 fr[ancs] . . . the receipts have fallen a great deal within the last few days—I do not much care about it as the whole affair will be able to be better organised & when once it is en train the receipts will very soon get up again.