

—ANSELM TO HIS LONDON COUSINS, APRIL 1848





“[T]here is no error so vulgar,” wrote Benjamin Disraeli in 1844, “as to believe that revolutions are occasioned by economical causes. They come in, doubtless, very often to precipitate a catastrophe; very rarely do they occasion one.” The succeeding four years were to prove him badly wrong.

Unheralded by economic crisis, the 1830 revolution had seemed to the Rothschilds like a bolt from the blue. By contrast, the 1848 revolution came after such a protracted period of economic depression that they almost grew weary of waiting for the storm to break—and perhaps even began to imagine that it never would. If they did ultimately fail to prepare themselves adequately for what was the greatest of all nineteenth-century Europe’s political crises, the reason perhaps lies in the timing of the revolution. The economic nadir of the 1840s in fact came in 1847; by the spring of 1848 the worst was over. With hindsight, historians can infer that it was precisely at this point that political instability was most likely to occur, as popular expectations rose; but to contemporary bankers that was far from apparent.

Another difference between 1830 and 1848 was the Rothschilds’ own position as targets of revolutionary action. In 1830 James had been sufficiently distanced from the regime of Charles X to allow a relatively easy switch to the Orléanist side. Eighteen years later he and his brothers had become much more closely identified with the established regimes not only in France, but throughout Europe. As bankers not only to the Austrian imperial government itself but also to numerous smaller states in Germany and Italy, they appeared—especially to the nationalist elements within the revolutionary movements—as the paymasters, if not the masters, of the Metternichian system. Eduard Kretschmer’s 1848 cartoon, Apotheosis and Adoration of the Idol of our Time, portrays “Rothschild” seated upon a throne of money, surrounded by kneeling potentates (see illustration 16.i)—a popular image of the period. At the same time, the Rothschilds’ financial commitments to these various states made it difficult for them to welcome the radical redrawing of Europe’s boundaries implied by the first principle of political nationalism—that political and ethnic or linguistic structures should be congruent. Writing in 1846, the poet Karl Beck lamented “Rothschild’s” refusal to use his financial power on the side of the “peoples”—and particularly the German people—instead of their detested princes.



16.i: Eduard Kretschmer (after Andreas Achenbach), Apotheose und Anbetung des Götzen unserer Zeit (1848).

Nor was it as easy for the Rothschilds to contemplate defecting to the side of the revolution when that now implied a republic rather than merely a dynastic change. And not only a republic: for the 1848 revolution was, unlike its predecessor, as much concerned with social as with constitutional issues. For the first time, socialist (as well as ultra-conservative) arguments against economic liberalism were voiced alongside—and sometimes in contradiction to—the older arguments for political liberalism and democracy. Not only were the revolutionaries concerned with rights (to free speech, free assembly and a free press) and with representation in constitutionally secured legislatures; some among them were also concerned to combat the widening material inequality of the early industrial era. In many ways the Rothschilds had come to personify that inequality. Nothing demonstrated that better than the explosion of anti-Rothschild sentiment in the wake of the accident on the Nord railway: while third-class passengers perished, the critics suggested, “Rothschild I” callously counted his state-subsidised profits. Another cartoon of 1848 which depicted Rothschild as the object of royal (and papal) veneration also featured, kneeling in the foreground, a ragged, starving family; and in the background a group of students marching under the banner of liberty (see illustration 16.ii). When the Russian revolutionary Alexander Herzen wished to define the bourgeoisie in 1847, he called it “a solid estate, the limits of which are the electoral property qualification below and Baron Rothschild above.” For Herzen liberalism was propagating a “malicious irony” when it claimed that “the destitute man enjoys the same civil rights as Rothschild,” or that “the sated is . . . the comrade of the hungry.”