



And he adapted a traditional Jewish story in order to provide James with a possible reply to the socialist threat: “The communist . . . wants Rothschild to share out his fortune of 300 million francs. Rothschild sends him his share, which comes to exactly 9 sous: ‘Now leave me alone!’ ” In practice, however, it did not prove quite so easy to see off the threat of expropriation. In his first surviving letter (dated 1843), a young radical named Wilhelm Marr had made exactly the argument satirised by Heine. “The time is ripe,” he told his father, “to share Rothschild’s property among 3,333,333.3 [sic] poor weavers, which will feed them during a whole year.” The roots of Marr’s later Anti-Semitic League lie in the 1840s.

A few voices, as we have seen, were raised to defend the Rothschilds. One ingenious writer in the Paris Globe pointed out in 1846 that “no one today better represents the triumph of equality and work in the nineteenth century than M. le Baron de Rothschild”: What is he, in fact? Was he born a Baron? No, he wasn’t even born a citizen; he was born a pariah. At the time of his birth, civil liberty, and even less political liberty, did not exist for Jews. To be a Jew was to be less than a lackey; it was to be less than a man; it was to be a dog that children chased in the street, hurling insults and stones. Thanks to the holy principle of equality, the Jew has become a man, the Jew has become a citizen; and once his intelligence [and] his activity . . . allowed, he could rise within the social hierarchy. What better or more incontrovertible evidence could there be that the principle of equality has prevailed? Yet it is democrats who close their minds and eyes to this spectacle! Nominal democrats, no doubt. Sincere democrats would have applauded this Jew who, beginning at the bottom of the social ladder, has arrived by virtue of equality at the highest rung. Was this Jew born a millionaire? No, he was born poor, and if only you knew what genius, patience, and hard work were required to construct that European edifice called the House of Rothschild, you would admire rather than insult it . . . You tactlessly cite Figaro, without understanding that Figaro was one of the privileged by comparison with M. de Rothschild, since Figaro had only to be born in order to see before him the vast and open battlefield of labour. At his birth, M. de Rothschild found this battlefield closed to him and yet he has, aided by freedom, climbed higher than you. To abuse M. de Rothschild is to blaspheme against equality.



Yet such reminders of the Rothschilds’ origins in the Judengasse were rare in the 1840s. Only in England, where the issue of the parliamentary representation of the Jews was to play such an important role throughout the revolutionary period, did it really seem relevant. The continental revolutionaries did not think of the Rothschilds languishing in the Judengasse, but imagined them luxuriating in châteaus like Suresnes and Grüneburg. In Joseph Eichendorff ’s allegorical comedy Liberty and her Liberators, for example, Amschel is once again satirised in the character of Pinkus, a self-made “cosmopolitan” (misheard by a page as Großhofpolyp) who acquires the title of baron and with it a castle and garden. Pinkus cannot abide Nature, preferring to impose strict uniformity (complete with steam engine) on the garden; whereas Libertas wishes to set the plants, birds and animals free. When she tries to do so, Pinkus has her arrested by his “armed forces”; but the spirits of the primeval forest come to her rescue, throwing Pinkus’s repressively ordered garden into chaos.