



With the share price falling towards the 650 mark and receipts down 40 per cent, the Rothschilds naturally sought a scapegoat. By July 21 Anthony was claiming “that the accident was done intentionally & that it was got up by some people for the fall of the shares,” on the ground that twenty or thirty of the clamps holding the rails to the sleepers appeared to have been tampered with. One suspects this was wishful thinking. “I wish we could find it out,” he told his brothers in London, “but the people who speculate for the fall are such a set of Blackguards in this part of the world that I almost think that they got [it] done . . . [I]f it was the case it would be the best thing in the world for the company.”

It did not prove necessary to develop this conspiracy theory any further. As the weeks passed, the traffic on the Nord line began to recover (beginning with the third class passengers), and with it the daily take. By the end of August the first freight trains had begun to run and—symbolically—the Nord timetable was published for the first time in Bradshaw, the rail traveller’s bible. Three months later confidence was sufficiently restored for Hannah to propose to her sons “a little Spec in [100] Northern shares”—a not unreasonable proposition when James could estimate gross profits for the line at 3.2 million francs. “It is a curious circumstance,” noted Mayer with heroic insouciance, “that on the Austrian line a dreadful accident occurred the very first day and now the shares are at 100 per cent premium which I am positive the French Northern will be.”

This was hubris; and, in the light of the stark economic rationality of their reaction to the Fampoux accident, it is difficult not to see the revolutionary storm which was to break over the Rothschilds’ heads less than two years later as a kind of terrible nemesis. (Perhaps a more fitting nemesis came eighteen years later, when Lionel’s son Natty and his sister Evelina narrowly escaped serious injury when an express taking them from Paris to Calais collided with a goods train.)7 To vary the dramatic image, in deciding not only to invest in but also to construct and manage railways, the Vienna and Paris Rothschilds had made a pact which contemporaries saw in Faustian terms: they had harnessed Satan, as Eichendorff put it. Yet “Satan”—in the person of Dairnvaell—now turned on Faust. The public prominence which the railways had given the Rothschilds made them obvious targets for the new social revolution which was already in preparation.





SIXTEEN

1848


Dans toute l’Europe il n’y a qu’un cris [sic]:

a [sic] bas l’infâme famille des Rothschild

NEMESIS

Le peuple se vengera!

Le peuple ne veut pas l’argent qu’il a perdu . . . mais le peuple

veut le [sic] peau de les [sic] infâmes juifs.

—ANONYMOUS LETTER TO NEW COURT, MARCH 1848





The only thing we must aim at, is to maintain our name in honour, & for that purpose, one house must support the other with all its means & power, for the dishonour of one reflects on the other.