

The contrast with the Paris house’s role is striking. The French food crisis was, of course, far from being as disastrous as the Irish: as Nat wrote in 1847, “They talk terribly of the misery of the poor devils in the provinces but I don’t believe it approaches that of Ireland—it cannot be compared to it.” Nevertheless, the 1846 wheat harvest was an exceptionally bad one: 15 per cent lower than the average of the previous ten years, it was the worst since 1831. James first began purchasing grain as early as January 1846 in anticipation of a bad harvest throughout Europe. A year later he was urging the French government to make purchases of Russian grain, and in the spring of 1847 he offered “to buy abroad 5 millions of francs worth of corn and flour for the consumption of Paris at our risks & peril and in the event of any loss accruing we s[houl]d bear it & the profit to be distributed in bread tickets to the poor.” Besides being philanthropic, James genuinely feared the social and political consequences of food shortages: as he told his nephews in November 1846, “[T]he situation with our grain, which really isn’t good, does scare me a lot.” For this reason, there is no doubt that he wished to be seen to be alleviating distress—Salomon wrote explicitly of “making our name popular” with “the masses” by providing cheap bread and salt.

Yet James had meant the grain purchases only to be non-profit-making; he had not intended to lose money outright. His assumption in early 1847, for example, was that prices would remain high; and when the improved harvest that year partly confounded that expectation he and Nat could not conceal their annoyance. “There never was anything so stupidly managed as this corn operation,” grumbled Nat: “to buy up all the corn in the world & to get it just as the harvest is coming on, we shall lose a great deal of money & in future we shall be more careful.” This may partly explain why James received little if any credit from ordinary consumers in Paris. As Nat had predicted, “I fancy the philanthropic feelings of our good Uncle will cost a little money. If people don’t attribute a wrong motive it will be all very well & charitable, but in Paris where nobody can imagine anything done disinterestedly I should not be surprised if it were said we do it for the sake of getting rid of what we have got at very high prices.” Violence of the sort which broke out in the faubourg Saint-Antoine in May 1847 was partly directed against grain merchants; James was widely perceived to have acted as little more. Indeed, it was rumoured that Rothschild bread was laced with ground glass and arsenic. Here perhaps was the origin of Heine’s imagined Rothschild nightmare: “He dreams he gives 100,000 francs to the poor and becomes ill as a result.”

What made the agrarian crisis doubly worrying for the Rothschilds was its impact on the European banking system. All countries which found themselves obliged to import grain from relatively remote markets like Russia and America experienced a drain of gold and silver which had a direct impact on their monetary systems. The most dramatic case was that of Britain. The effect of the shift to free trade was to increase immensely the import of corn to Britain, from 251,000 tonnes in 1843 to 1,749,000 tonnes in 1847. The success of Peel’s policy was thus not in reducing the price of bread, but in averting what would have been a very substantial price increase if the Corn Laws had remained in force. But the policy had an unexpected side-effect on one of Peel’s other great legislative achievements, for it forced the suspension of the Bank Charter Act of 1844. It did this because the act had reinforced the link between the Bank of England’s gold reserve and the British money supply. As corn imports flooded in and gold flooded out, so the reserve dwindled: from £15.8 million in 1844 to £9.8 million four years later. The Bank was obliged to increase its interest rates in steps from 2.5 per cent (March 1845) to a peak of 10 per cent (October 1847), thus causing a drastic monetary squeeze and finally forcing suspension. No other European economy permitted such a large outflow of specie; but Britain’s financial dominance of the continent at this period ensured that the contraction was felt everywhere. Only the grain exporters were spared, which partly accounts for the very different Russian experience in this period.