

The Rothschilds were far from oblivious to the animosity they were incurring. Indeed, it might be said that they took positive steps to counteract it by making generous—and ostentatious—charitable gestures. In the very dry summer of 1835, Salomon offered 25,000 gulden towards the construction of an aqueduct from the Danube to the Vienna suburbs. When Pesth and Ofen were badly flooded three years later, he hastened to offer financial assistance for the victims. He donated 40,000 gulden to found an institute for scientific research in Brünn. And when Hamburg was ravaged by fire in 1842 he and James made substantial donations to the fund which was set up to assist the victims. Before the 1830s the Rothschild brothers’ charity had been largely confined within the Jewish communities of Frankfurt, London and Paris. Now Salomon made a point of contributing to causes which were regarded as good by the Habsburg elite. Baron Kübeck recorded in his diary how the elite responded. At a dinner for Count Kolowrat in 1838, Salomon declared expansively that his guest’s presence had: “given me as much pleasure today as if I had been given a thousand gulden, or had given them to a poor man.” Thereupon Count Kolowrat replied, “Very well, give me the thousand gulden for a poor man who needs help, and has applied to me.” Rothschild promised to do so and after dinner Count Kolowrat was given the thousand gulden.



So frequently did Salomon act in this way that it was possible for a sentimental novella of the 1850s to portray him as a kind of Viennese Santa Claus, benignly siding with a carpenter’s daughter who wants to marry her rich father’s gifted but poor apprentice. The high point of this mawkish work is a description of the throng of Schnorrer in the antechamber of Salomon’s Renngasse residence: the man who claims to be God’s brother-in-law (he is sent packing); the man who wants Salomon to be the godfather to his child (he gets 50 gulden); and the woman whose five-year-old daughter can recite seventy-two poems from memory (whose reward is not recorded). That they are all drawn to the house of Rothschild is explained not just by his wealth, but by his universally acknowledged wisdom and generosity. At one point, genial old Rothschild even delivers a homily to a young Frankfurt banker on the need for those who are rich to be generous.

It may well be that this was the way Salomon wished to be regarded. But not everyone who came into contact with him would have endorsed this characterisation. Moritz Goldschmidt’s son Hermann—a boy in the 1840s—remembered him as an impetuous, impatient, despot: “a brutal egoist, a man without wisdom or education, who despised those around him and took the opportunity to treat them ruthlessly [just] because he was rich.” He ate and drank to excess. He was habitually rude to everyone from his barber to the Russian ambassador and surrounded himself with sycophants. He had a lecherous passion for “very young girls,” his “adventures” with whom had to be hushed up by the police. Above all, Salomon was extravagant. He habitually dressed in a blue suit with gold buttons and nankeen or white stockings and, when he needed a new suit or hat, bought twelve at a time for good measure. He drove around Vienna in a luxurious carriage with a liveried servant. In 1847—in the depths of the economic slump—he spent immense sums building a new residence and office in the Renngasse. To be sure, Goldschmidt was looking back in anger when he wrote; but his hostility towards Salomon was probably not so different from that felt by many of his more politically radical contemporaries.