



In effect, he and Sina had agreed to bail Eskeles out, just as Salomon had wanted to rescue Geymüller six years previously. This time, however, Salomon had acted without consulting his brothers (remembering perhaps their refusal to agree to the Geymüller rescue). Naturally, he hastened to reassure them that there was no risk involved and that Sina was “caution itself.” He urged Anselm to remain “calm”: “With God’s help we shall remain the Rothschilds.” If his brothers—and son—suspected that a grave mistake had been made, Salomon had no inkling. The full gravity of his error would become apparent within the month.

In Paris, the Banque de France faced a “crisis in the supply of money” (James) from as early as October 1846. On previous occasions (in 1825 and 1836-9), it had been the Banque which had come to the assistance of the Bank of England; now the Bank repaid the debt by selling its counterpart silver worth 25 million francs. As in the 1830s, Rothschild attempts to play a part in this transaction were abortive: although James made a personal visit to London in December, the business was finally arranged by Hottinguer, and James’s subsequent offer of an additional 5 million francs was rejected by the Banque Governor d’Argout. The bad blood between New Court and Threadneedle Street since Nathan’s death had yet to be purged.

Nor was Lionel successful in his attempts to mediate between St Petersburg—rich in bullion from Russian grain exports—and the Banque de France. Benjamin Davidson was packed off via Riga to the Russian capital with several carriages filled with gold, apparently with the intention of establishing a new agency. But his expedition was a failure. Having endured a gruelling journey on snow-covered Russian roads, Davidson found himself effectively unable to do business as a foreign Jew. When the Russian government came to the Banque de France’s rescue by buying 50 million francs of rentes from its securities reserve, the Rothschilds were mere onlookers. In fact, the 1846-8 crisis proved a remarkably good opportunity for the Banque to enhance its power over the French monetary system: it was not sorry to see the collapse of Laffitte’s ambitious Caisse Générale, nor that of the various regional banks of issue Laffitte had encouraged in his time as Banque Governor. Nat summed up Rothschild feelings towards the Banque at this time succinctly: “They are a set of shits & behave to us as badly as possible, but it is not [in] our interest to quarrel with them.”

The position was not very different in London. As James put it in April 1847, with Bank rate climbing inexorably upwards, “Your Bank is the Master and driver of the situation. It is in a position to press its will on the world and so gold will have to be sent back.” Yet the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Charles Wood, was less confident that the Bank would be able to master the crisis without breaching its legal gold reserve requirement. He and the Prime Minister were singularly unimpressed when they sought Lionel’s views on the matter. As Wood told his confidant, Samuel Jones Lloyd, “I saw at Lord John [Russell]’s, Lionel Rothschild & [Joshua] Bates [of Barings] this morning & (low be it spoken) I am utterly confounded at the ignorance they displayed, of facts & circumstances which I should have thought every merchant in the City must have known. They really had little or nothing to say for themselves, & admitted that things were proceeding rapidly.” If Nat’s views give any indication of what Lionel said, the Rothschild position perhaps struck Wood as politically naive. The Bank’s policy, he wrote, was “illiberal—I must say I can not understand their policy, they do all in their power to stop trade & the country will pay very dear indeed for their gold.” Wood knew that; what he wanted to know was how to suspend the 1844 rules without acquiring the reputation of a Vansittart. When he turned for advice (and whitewash) to the architect of the Bank Charter Act himself, Peel agreed that Lionel was not among “those who really understood the question of currency, whose prepossessions were in favour of the principles on which the Bank act was founded—and in favour of the Bank act itself.” It was, Peel told him, not “Rothschild, Masterman, Glyn and the leading men of the City—but . . . those with whom he had conferred in private [who] were the very persons . . . deserving of his confidence in the matter, Jones Lloyd, W. Cotton, Norman and the Governor of the Bank.” This bipartisan depreciation of Lionel’s expertise testifies to the Rothschilds’ loss of influence over monetary policy since Nathan’s death.