

First to suffer was Frankfurt. As early as April 1846 Anselm reported: “The volume of business in Frankfurt is more and more shrinking, without a downpour of gold from heaven, I do not know how this place can recover”—a verdict echoed by James when he visited in July. Soon came the inevitable casualties, this time uncomfortably close to home. In 1847 the house of Haber collapsed, threatening to take with it the Beyfus brothers’ bank. As two of Mayer Amschel’s daughters (Babette and Julie) had been married to the Beyfuses, it was felt necessary to bail them out—to the tune of 1.5 million gulden—though this was done with extremely bad grace. The younger generation in London and Paris had little time for “old Mad Beyfus.” “If we are to pay because they chose to swindle,” complained Nat, “the Lord knows to what interest they may draw upon our cash box . . . the only regret I experience is that our worthy relatives have thought it fit to come to their assistance.” In fact, it seems to have been James who insisted on rescuing “so near a relation,” despite the grumblings of Amschel, Salomon and Carl—a good illustration of his ultimate leadership on familial matters at this time. Yet the fall of the Habers—to whom the Beyfuses were also related by marriage—attracted much more attention than the survival of the Beyfuses. Once again, there were articles in the press “attributing to us the ruin of . . . German industry.” “These attacks were so violent,” wrote Anselm, “that we found ourselves compelled to answer these libels by a declaration signed by us and inserted in the principal papers of Germany.” In the Bade nese parliament, a liberal deputy denounced the Rothschilds in terms which, Anselm reported, “aimed at nothing less than mobilising the masses in a religious crusade against our House, representing it as a vile monetary power . . . sitting [on] . . . all the kings, all the peoples.” It was even alleged that Lionel had agreed to bankrupt South German industry in return for a promise from Palmerston of a seat in the House of Commons.

Banking crises have a domino effect: the problems of Haber served to exacerbate the difficulties of one of the major Vienna banks, Arnstein & Eskeles. Trouble had been brewing in the Vienna market since early 1847, prompting Metternich to request Salomon to return urgently from Paris “to contrive some plan which would ward off the crisis of the market.” By the end of September it seemed that he had succeeded in “averting” an “immeasurable calamity.” However, the failure of Haber proved to have potentially disastrous implications for Eskeles, whom he owed 1 million gulden. It may be that Salomon was already heavily committed to Eskeles, with whom he had acted in close partnership for many years in issuing Austrian government bonds. Alternatively, he felt morally bound to intercede on his behalf. At any event, he informed the Frankfurt house on December 23 that Eskeles had visited me a few hours ago and most frankly informed me that at present he does not need anything, however as soon as he does, he is in a position to transmit mortgages as a security to the full amount. I have in my portfolio 1,520,000 gulden drafts upon Eskeles of which 1,185,000 gulden are of Haber, the remaining with good endorsements.