

This pragmatism was to some extent shared by the four eldest sons, Anselm, Lionel, Mayer Carl and Alphonse, who already tended to take a similar, sober view of political developments. Unlike James, however, they all occasionally expressed sympathy with liberal reforms, though they distinguished these from the ideas of radical democrats, socialists and communists. Anselm’s commentaries on German developments suggest little sympathy with the various kings, princes and archdukes obliged to bow to “the will of the people,” as well as considerable impatience with the “old wig-heads” of the Frankfurt Senate. He was interested enough to attend the first debates of the German “pre-parliament” in Frankfurt before leaving for Vienna, though it was a detached kind of interest: unlike their London cousin Lionel, neither he nor Mayer Carl thought for a moment of standing for election. And Anselm warmly welcomed the Austrian constitution issued in March 1849, the terms of which were in fact moderately liberal. By contrast, the various younger brothers had more idiosyncratic responses. Adolph in Naples was simply terrified. Anthony, on the other hand, regarded the German princes as “a set of donkeys” and had “a very good opinion” of the Frankfurt parliament’s project for a united Germany which he thought “Right and reasonable.” As for the nineteen-year-old Gustave, he itched to get back to Paris to see the action for himself—only to be disappointed by the “tristesse” he encountered there, the extent of working class unrest and the poor calibre of the republican politicians.



16.iii: “W.V.,” Baron: “Noch niks zu handele, Härr Minister? ” (1848).

Nowhere is the ambivalence of the Rothschilds towards the revolution more apparent than in letters and diaries of female members of the family. James’s wife Betty was vehemently hostile to the revolution, applauding her four-year-old grandson James Edouar when he declared: “If I had money, I would buy a gun to shoot the republic and republicans.” She expected the French republican constitution “soon to go to join its sisters whom oblivion has long since buried in the mists of time” and dismissed the deputies in the National Assembly as “the wild beasts of our great Parisian menagerie.” She was equally contemptuous of the German revolution. The Frankfurt parliament was, she told her eldest son, “an agent of false doctrines and anarchy.” When Robert Blum was shot in Vienna, she was delighted that “his factious voice has been extinguished” and regretted only that the same had not been done in Paris. Bizarrely for one whose parents had been born in the Frankfurt ghetto, Betty even expressed nostalgia for the ancien régime of the eighteenth century, “that century when minds were so fertile, and when anyone knew how to bring honour to his rank with dignity without departing from it, and did not consider himself lowered by obedience to a higher authority.” The nineteenth century she thought “an evil age.”

Her cousin, Lionel’s wife Charlotte, took a very different view, however. She feared for the family’s financial future, of course; yet at the same time she derived a certain moralistic satisfaction from the crisis, seeing it as an opportunity for self-denial and self-improvement. Following political events on the continent in her relatives’ letters and in the newspapers gave her a sense of exhilaration, of historical acceleration. It was, she wrote in her diary, “in truth . . . the age of the railways, for the last six weeks have been almost as eventful as the six years which saw Louis XVI’s death, the great Terror, the Convention and Napoleon.” Above all, she was captivated by the possibilities of German unification raised at Frankfurt: As for Germany, there are hopes that she will soon become prosperous, powerful, united and free. In Prussia also the people have won a victory over the army and the king is forced to grant his subjects all the reforms and concessions they demand. The ministry has changed; the prince of Prussia has fled; the press is free; the proceedings of the law courts are public . . . and all confessions and religions have equal rights. Once more as a great and united empire, strong and happy, elevated and proud, Germany will trounce the Russian storms, the Cossack invasions and the warmongering of the French.