





“The Worst Revolution That Ever Happened”

To say that the 1848 revolutions began in Italy is perhaps not strictly true: civil wars in Galicia and in Switzerland were harbingers of the cataclysm, as were the abortive United Diet (Landtag) summoned—in conformity with the 1819 State Debt Decree—by Frederick William IV in Berlin in 1847, and the stirrings of liberal enthusiasm in South Germany. But, though they followed these events carefully, the Rothschilds were not worried by them. Indeed, the annexation of Cracow by Austria looked like just another Polish partition: as on previous occasions, “the poor Poles” were “very much to be pitied.” “I suppose lots of them will be shot,” remarked Nat dispassionately; his uncle Salomon’s sole concern was that foreign governments should not challenge the Austrian move. It was the outbreak of an artisans’ revolt in Sicily in January 1848 and the granting of a liberal constitution by Ferdinand II which made the Rothschilds for the first time afraid. It was, commented Nat, “stinking news” (which the Rothschilds were, as usual, the first to hear).

Yet he and the rest of the family continued to think primarily in diplomatic terms, wondering whether the Neapolitan crisis would harden the Austrian resolve to intervene (something Salomon anxiously denied). In his letters to Lionel and Alphonse, Anselm joked about Adolph’s hand shaking as he wrote his letters, suggesting that he shared his father’s nervous, not to say pusillanimous temper. But this was just banter. Carl’s initial reaction in fact suggests sang-froid: as early as February 19 he was once again discussing the possibility of a loan to the Bourbon regime. When Anselm commented on liberal attacks on Ludwig I’s government in Munich, he little realised how soon his diagnosis would apply to all Europe: “That is the way it is, alas: in the highest politics just as in the most lowly social relations, the people imposes its will and dictates the law to the higher power.” He could still hope that “the unrest there” would “soon pass”—and with it the slump in the price of the Rothschilds’ “low loans.”

As in 1830, it was the outbreak of revolution in France which turned disquiet into panic. Of course, the Rothschilds had never had unqualified confidence in the July Monarchy. The death of Louis Philippe’s eldest son in 1842 had reinforced their pessimism about the future: the King himself confided “that after his death . . . the Revolution of 1830 would begin again.” “I assure you it has given me the stomach ache,” commented Anthony uneasily. “I do not think that there is any danger as long as the present King lives—but what will take place after his death God knows & I hope to God that the good old gentleman will live for a mighty time and that everything will go on well—nevertheless we must be prudent.” This explains the Rothschilds’ fear of a successful assassination attempt against the King. When James himself received a death threat in 1846, he passed the letter on to the government, remarking: “The man who wants to shoot at me could just as well shoot at the King, or vice versa.” When Louis Philippe survived yet another attempt on his life the following April, Nat pronounced him “one of the most admirable men that ever existed.”