

French spending had also been rising steadily. By 1847 the budget was 55 per cent higher than it had been twelve years before, not least because of the various state subsidies to the railway companies. As early as the autumn of 1846 there was talk of a loan to fund the government’s deficit; by the summer of the following year the difficulty of placing treasury bills on the struggling money market made such a new issue of rentes imperative. Needless to say, the Rothschilds had no intention of leaving the business to others, despite the periodic anxieties of James’s nephews about French financial stability. As in Vienna, so in Paris: government loans had become a matter of course, regardless of economic conditions. True, James drove what seemed to be a hard bargain. The terms he secured looked generous: of the 350 million francs nominal to be raised, the Rothschilds took 250 million in the form of 3 per cent rentes priced at just 75.25, some two points below the market price. Indeed, his rivals could with justice have complained of double-dealing. It seems likely that the auction of the new rentes was rigged by the Finance Minister so that James’s bid was exactly equal to the Minister’s supposedly secret minimum. As Nat candidly told his brothers beforehand, Dumon had “let the cat out of the bag”: “[He] said he could not commmunicate his minimum as it was necessary for him to be able to state in the Chamber that his sealed letter had remained a secret for every body, but on pourrait se mettre à peu près d’accord.”

Yet Nat was fundamentally right to regard the loan as “a most dangerous & disagreeable concern.” James was less rash than Salomon, but he did not follow his bearish nephews’ chorus of advice to “get out of our loan famously.” Some of it was sold to investors ranging from the Tsar to Heinrich Heine. But not all of it. According to a number of accounts, he decided to sell only a third at once to the market, holding on to the remaining 170 million francs in the expectation that the price of 3 per cents would rise above 77. Meanwhile, of course, James had bound himself to pay the Treasury 250 million francs in instalments spread over two years. It was to prove another expensive miscalculation.

In England too there was an ill-judged loan on the eve of the storm. The £8 million so-called Irish Famine Loan of March 1847 was raised ostensibly to finance the cost of aid to Ireland, though it may reasonably be assumed that there were other reasons for the government’s deficit in this period. The combination of Britain’s unique credit-rating and the good cause supposedly being funded boded well, and Rothschilds and Barings—who shared the underwriting equally—had no difficulty in finding buyers. Indeed, James himself complained about being given only £250,000. Yet the price quickly fell from the issue price of 89.5 to 85, much to the consternation of the investing public and the embarrassment of the underwriters.

Even in Italy, where the revolution may be said to have begun, the Rothschilds toyed with the possibility of state loans in 1846-7. In Naples, Carl appears to have been keen to agree a loan to the government, and was saved from doing so only by the Bourbon regime’s own chronic indecisiveness. In Rome too there was talk of a loan. After the advances which had been made on the basis of Rothschild loans in the 1830s, the finances of the Papacy were once again in disarray: the deficit for 1847 was double that of the previous year and Roman 5 per cents dropped below par for the first time since 1834. Yet James had been intrigued by the election of Pius IX in 1846—“supposedly a liberal,” as he rather acutely put it—and he ordered a halt to sales of Roman bonds in the expectation of “some really positive changes.” This probably referred to the position of the Jewish community in Rome, whose case for better treatment Salomon once again took up. Only a stark warning from their new Italian agent Hecht “who represents the state of the Papal domains in the blackest colours & thinks that a revolution is at the eve to break out [sic]” deterred the Rothschilds from taking up Torlonia’s proposal of a new loan. When Adolph visited the Holy City in January 1848, he was unnerved by the combination of political debate and military preparation he encountered. For the same reason, the London house’s amazingly ill-timed suggestion of a loan to Piedmont—in January 1848!—was thrown out by Alphonse, who pointed out gently that this was “a country which can be considered as . . . already in full revolution.” The only other country whose request for a loan was turned down at this time was Belgium—ironically, one of the countries least affected by the revolutionary upheavals which were about to begin.