

The paradox was that even as they grew more and more disgruntled with the European governments’ economic policies, the Rothschilds continued—as if reflexively—to act as their lender of first resort. The transmission mechanism which linked the economic crisis of 1847 to the political crisis the following year was fiscal. All over Europe, the combination of rising expenditures (first on railways, then on social palliatives, finally on counter-revolutionary measures) and falling revenues (as earnings and consumption slumped) led inevitably to government deficits. Between 1842 and 1847, for example, the Austrian budget rose by 30 per cent. So deeply ingrained was his habit of lending to the government that, when he was approached for a new loan of 80 million gulden in February 1847, Salomon “thanked God” for “an extremely good business.” It was to prove anything but that. Along with Sina and the ailing Eskeles, he had taken on 2.5 and 5 per cent bonds worth 80 million gulden (nominal), in return for which the bankers had to pay the government 84 million in cash in instalments spread over five years. This would have been a good business only if five years of peace and prosperity had been at least probable.

Ostensibly, this loan was needed to finance new railways: that was what Salomon told Gasser when he tried to sell “a considerable sum” of the new bonds to the cash-rich Tsar. By November 1847, however, Austria was arming in preparation for intervention in Lombardy and Venetia, where insurrection seemed imminent. Salomon knew this because Metternich had told him, yet instead of being alarmed, he went so far as to offer more financial assistance. Incredibly, he agreed to lend a further 3.7 million gulden in return for 4 per cent bonds, which he furthermore pledged not to sell on the already stretched market: they would, he promised Kübeck, remain “in his own safe,” in return for interest of 4.6 per cent. With short-term rates in London at this time standing at 5.85 per cent and the price of 5 per cent metalliques already ten points lower than they had been three years before, this was an extraordinary (not to say suicidal) decision. Even as Salomon’s proposal was being discussed, Kübeck was warning that intervention in Italy would lead to “the complete breakdown of our finances.” “We are on the verge of an abyss,” he told Metternich presciently, “and the increasing demands on the Treasury arising out of the measures necessary to combat foreign revolutionary elements have led to increased disturbances within the country, as is indicated by the attitude of the provincial Estates, and by the literary outbursts in the Press of our neighbours.” Metternich was undaunted. When Salomon began to get cold feet in January, he angrily told him: “Politically, things are all right; the exchange is not. I do my duty but you do not do yours.”

As with his advance to Eskeles, Salomon’s undertakings to the government were made without reference to the other Rothschild houses. “We have very curious letters from Vienna,” Nat wrote to New Court at around the same time. “Our good Uncle is full of Austrian Metallics 2[.5]% & 5% & how he will get out on such markets the Lord knows—Prince Metternich takes our good Uncle in so that he may continue his financial operations, I fancy the F’furt house will find a little difference in their balance the next time they make it up.” This was to prove a serious understatement. When the first efforts were made to compute Salomon’s commitments in February 1848, the total approached 4.35 million gulden (around £610,000). That was more than double the capital of the Vienna house in 1844. Notionally, as Nat suggested, the Frankfurt house remained responsible for its Vienna branch; but it too had been accumulating the bonds of other German governments in the course of the 1840s, notably those of Württemberg and Hanover, and there was talk of a new loan to Prussia as late as March 1848! When Anselm finally arrived from Frankfurt to set the Vienna house in order, he was in no mood for filial generosity. His relationship with his father was to be one of the first Rothschild casualties of 1848.