

Deflationary monetary policies had direct effects on European industry. For the Rothschilds, it was their impact on the French railway companies which was most troublesome. It was not that railway investment and construction ceased: to the extent that these were pre-programmed by political and commercial decisions taken before the crisis, the problem was more that they were difficult to stop.1 The strain was therefore taken by the railway companies’ bankers and investors: as work proceeded, the banks found themselves being asked for loans to finance the inevitable cost overruns, while investors could only watch gloomily as the monetary squeeze drove down railway share prices. In truth, James had been over-optimistic, just as his English nephews had feared. On the very eve of the crisis, he and his son had confidently assured their relatives that, in addition to their economic benefits, the railways tended to make people politically “conservative and pro-government” too. “Every thing is calm in France,” Alphonse told Mayer Carl in January 1846, “there is a strong majority for the administration. Industrialism and the railroads absorb all thoughts and divert from politics. Please God that we may enjoy for many years to come the blissful peace.” Within a matter of months they were singing a different tune. “Well,” James confided in Anselm that August, “I must admit that when I think about the many commitments that the world has taken upon itself for the payments to be made everywhere for the railways, money which will not so quickly return into the hands of the business people, then I find myself trembling.” By October, he was having to reschedule payments due to the government for the Nord concession and to intervene to prop up the share price.

While Nat savoured his own vindication, James’s response to the crisis was to concentrate Rothschild attention on the Nord and extricate himself from the other lines in which he had a smaller interest. “If,” he told his nephews, “we can’t assume that when the railways draw monies from us we will then be able to get it back again, then I view the situation as being potentially very dangerous.” Accordingly, when “that blackguard fellow Talabot” requested additional funds for work on the Avi gnon-Marseille line, he was roundly rebuffed. Shares in other companies were also sold off. Nor did James commit more money of his own to the Nord: when the company required new funds for construction, he appealed directly to shareholders. Like so many malcontents in 1847, the Rothschilds themselves blamed the government for their problems. “The gov. must change their manners of doing business,” complained Anthony, “they have completely ruined their credit by the manner that they have behaved to the Railroad Companies. You can have no idea how every person cries out about losing their money & they all attribute it to the gov. & certainly they are very much to blame.” Of such grievances, multiplied a thousand-fold, are revolutions made.