



To be sure, her ideal of a united Germany was strictly monarchical: like Anselm, she repudiated republicanism. But in the French context Charlotte could find positive things to say even about republicans. Her view was that those at the helm of state wish to lay a foundation of prosperity and happiness for their country, even if they are mistaken in the means they adopt to achieve this . . . Ledru Rollin . . . has honest intentions for France and at this time of general turmoil, he alone, apparently, of all the members of the administration is capable of taking action as a leader.



Charlotte’s sister-in-law Louisa also saw positive aspects to “this wonderful Revolution.” Provided “our house can only weather the storm,” she felt able to bear “any losses, however severe.” “I cannot say,” she confessed, “that the effect it may have upon our fortunes disturbs me at all. This is not philosophy, but simple indifference, or, rather, dislike to grandeur and display . . .”

In short, there was scarcely a united family front against the revolution. This can also be seen in the way individual Rothschilds treated the toppled kings and ministers who found their way into exile in England. Betty was shocked to hear that Louis Philippe and his family were living on 100 francs a day in Richmond. But the most he seems to have got from the English Rothschilds was a case of good bordeaux. The revolution had also left Metternich powerless and poor, as Charlotte remarked: His castle at Johannisberg has been appropriated because he has not paid his taxes for the past nine years . . . The Prince has never owned a large fortune. In his past youth he lived extravagantly and later had to settle the debts of his son. Now he has a large family to provide for and educate. His financial affairs have only recently been put in order by Uncle Salomon.



She had little sympathy for his plight and shared the Frankfurt partners’ disinclination to give him further financial assistance. But Lionel felt a sense of familial obligation to “Uncle.” In June Metternich was given a 323,000 gulden advance, secured against his (heavily depreciated) railway shares. A further loan of 5,500 gulden to Princess Melanie appears in the Vienna house’s books for November 1848, and by the following year the combined debts of the Metternichs stood at 216,500 gulden. In addition, the repayments on the second half of the 1827 loan—which were supposed to be completed by 1859—were rescheduled, so that a substantial sum was still outstanding at the end of the 1870s.

In two lengthy letters to Salomon—one written as he passed incognito through Arnhem, the other from the safety of England—Metternich repaid his faithful bankers with a rambling apologia which shed intriguing light on their relationship: What disorder the world has fallen into! You always used to ask me whether war was in sight. You always heard me reassure you that this was not the case and as long as I had the reins in my hands I would be able to vouch for political peace. The danger of the day was not on the field of political war, but of social war. On this field too I have held the reins in my hands as long as was humanly possible. On the day when that possibility ceased, I stepped down from the driver’s seat, for being overthrown is against my nature. If I am asked whether that could have been avoided by what naive utopians call Reform, I reply with a categorical No—for the logical reason that the measures which today are called Reforms and which might, under some conditions, have had the merit of bringing improvements, could have had no more value, given the situation of society as it was, than a dance with torches on powder kegs . . . You, dear Salomon, have understood me for years. Many others have not.