

Yet there was a vast difference between these expenditures and the immense sums required by the Paris, Frankfurt and Vienna houses. Lionel’s hasty visit to Paris in late February seems to have convinced him that James’s position could be salvaged, but he was a good deal more hesitant about Salomon and Amschel. For all their sentimental appeals to their father’s memory, they were made to sweat—and pay—for their salvation. Indeed, Lionel’s first reaction to Salomon’s pleas for support (in the form of accepting some bills of Sina’s) was to refuse; and when he did respond to the appeals of the Frankfurt house to send silver (the first of which arrived on April 14), he made sure the London house turned a profit on the shipments. His uncles reproached him, but they were at his mercy and were made to feel it. Lionel’s tough line was reinforced by Anselm, who arrived in Vienna on April 10 to clear out his father’s Augean stables, a task which he performed with a marked lack of filial compassion. Faced with a request to render yet more assistance to Arnstein & Eskeles (as well as another Vienna house, Heinrich & Wertheimer), Anselm immediately informed my father in the clearest possible terms, that on the basis of all my powers as representative of the [five] houses I forbade any further financial sacrifice . . . no matter what the consequences might be for the commerce and the situation of this place, and added that I would leave immediately in protest if any attempt was made here to insist on this . . . It is, believe me dear Uncle, a fatal role which I am taking on here . . . they will curse me as my father’s evil angel . . . He is unfortunately in such a state of moral collapse and so bowed down by the situation, that for him to remain here any longer could only have a negative effect on his health . . . It would have been much better if he had left Vienna three months ago.



The recriminations between father and son over the financial morass into which the Vienna house had sunk in many ways marked the end of the dominance of the second generation. In a sense, this was the 1848 revolution within the house of Rothschild.

The reality was, however, that the London house was not the lender of last resort at all. For the ability of New Court to assist Paris and Vienna depended heavily on the ability of the Rothschilds’ agents in America to remit funds to New Court. The year 1848 was in many ways the decisive test of Belmont’s agency: had the system failed, the Rothschilds would have been seriously at risk. Beginning in the summer of 1847, they had nervously followed Belmont as he committed substantial resources to speculating in tobacco and to financing the American war against Mexico which had broken out in May the previous year. As late as February 1848 James sanctioned his decision to advance the US government a substantial sum against treasury bills to help pay the $15 million indemnity accorded to Mexico for the territory ceded by the US under the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. Typically, the Rothschilds had a man in Mexico at the same time—Lionel Davidson—who for several years had been importing Rothschild mercury from Spain to sell to Mexican silver mines; he too took a hand in the indemnity payment. Scharfenberg in Cuba and Hanau in New Orleans had also made large advances on tobacco and cotton respectively on the eve of the European crisis. These were big commitments: as James himself commented uncomfortably, “We are too much in the hands of these people.” Indeed, there is no better testimony to Belmont’s importance at this time than the frantic letters he was sent from London and Paris, berating him for his involvement with the Mexican indemnity and accusing him of having exceeded his powers. Finally, at the end of 1848, a Rothschild—Alphonse—was sent to New York in person, as if to bring the errant agent to heel.