

Salomon too stood his ground in Vienna though he rarely went out of doors. Despite regularly hearing the sound of “drumming in the streets” in the weeks after March 13, he did not quit the city until June, and then elected to settle with Amschel in less than tranquil Frankfurt. Anselm hung on until October 6-7, when armed revolutionaries took up positions on the roof of the Rothschild offices following the lynching of Count Latour outside the War Ministry and the storming of the Arsenal, “situated only one house from our own.” So dangerous had the city become by this stage that when Moritz Goldschmidt returned to rescue the bank’s papers, he had to disguise himself as a milkman; and Anselm felt obliged to remain in the country for a month.

Amschel never left Frankfurt, despite a number of alarming popular demonstrations. When a crowd gathered outside his house one night in March 1848, he “had gone to sleep a long time before and only learned about it the next day”; finally he hung nationalist flags out the window in the hope of being left in peace. Business continued in the Frankfurt office even when it was surrounded by barricades and hit by four bullets in September. A contemporary woodcut captured Amschel’s sang-froid when it depicted him remonstrating with two rifle-carrying revolutionaries. “What’s going on in my house?” demands “Baron von Rotschirm,” referring to the sign being nailed to his front door. The “barricade maker” replies: “Now it’s begun, Herr Baron, now things will be divided up equally, but private property is sacred.” At this, Amschel explodes: “What’s begun? Begone yourselves! Property sacred? Divided up? What d’you say? My property has always been sacred to me, I don’t need you to write that on my door. Divided up? When the Prussians come, you’ll all be divided up” (see illustration 16.iv).

The “nervousness” of Nat and of Carl and Adolph in Naples was the exception, and struck other family members as such.2 Although they often commented on the anti-Semitism which accompanied the revolution in parts of Central Europe, the other male Rothschilds never seem to have felt themselves threatened by it. Indeed, James was more worried that he might be arrested as a German spy in the event of a war breaking out, while his wife seems to have been as concerned for James’s dignity as for his life. Haughtily, she told Charlotte how the new French Minister of the Interior Louis Antoine Garnier-Pagès “always addresses our Uncle simply as ‘Rothschild’ without a prefix” (that is, the title “Baron” or “de”)—a mark of disrespect he was spared from older revolutionaries like Lamartine. Other members of the family found the revolution’s self-conscious (and often backward-looking) symbolism faintly comical. Marx was not the only one to suspect that history was repeating itself, but as farce rather than tragedy. The endless illuminations of Paris, the ritualised tree-planting, and above all the elaborate neo-classical rituals involving white-clad virgins seemed absurd, especially to the English Rothschilds.