



16.v: “Alexander,” Eine Sturmpetition: Das Steigen und Fallen auf der Börse (1848).

If anything, the position of the Vienna house was even worse. Not only was Salomon saddled with substantial amounts of metalliques; as we have seen, he had also assumed onerous commitments as a result of his rescue of Eskeles. Altogether, he estimated his payments due in the near future to third parties at around 3 million gulden. In fact, the position was much worse than this, as Anselm soon discovered; for the money to save Eskeles had been raised by depositing three-month finance bills worth 2.75 million gulden at the National Bank, the renewal of which had never been formally agreed before the revolution. This was in addition to bills worth a further 2 million gulden, most of which Salomon had issued to finance an advance to the Nordbahn. In all, his pending obligations were therefore closer to 8 million gulden. Salomon was in no position to pay such sums when they fell due as the greater part of his assets were industrial shares which the revolution had rendered unsaleable. The full extent of Salomon’s insolvency can be seen in the balance sheets which were subsequently drawn up by Anselm. Fully 27 per cent of his assets were accounted for by his stakes in the Witkowitz ironworks, the Nordbahn and the Austrian Lloyd, to say nothing of various smaller industrial properties he had acquired as securities for loans. None of this could easily be realised. Small wonder he “envied his blessed brother Nathan”; he was, as he told his brothers, “in the most painful situation that ever existed.” This was precisely the situation his English nephews had feared when they advised James against tying up money in railways.

The plight of the Vienna house in turn jeopardised the position of the Frankfurt house: new calculations in March suggested that Salomon owed the other Rothschild houses—principally Frankfurt—some £1.7 million (half his total liabilities). Salomon subsequently tried to justify this by arguing that the Frankfurt house had been milking the Vienna branch for years, but the most that can be said is that Amschel was as much to blame for allowing him to accumulate such an enormous debt. For the Frankfurt house had problems enough on its own account, notably the payments still owing to the state of Württemberg for its loan, money due to Hesse-Kassel, and the substantial sum deposited with it by the German Confederation (the so-called “fortress money”) which it was now feared would be withdrawn. Altogether, Anselm put its short-term liabilities at 8 million gulden, and felt sufficiently pressed to terminate support for the Beyfuses, writing off 1.3 million gulden already advanced to keep them afloat. Another source of anxiety was a substantial sum (1.2 million gulden) owed to the Frankfurt house by Prussia, the payment of which could no longer be relied upon. Ironically, it was Amschel who turned to Salomon for assistance in the first weeks of March—at the very time that James was desperately seeking assistance from Frankfurt, urging Anselm to sell securities “at any price!” Each house thought the other owed it money; none was in a position to pay. Salomon pledged all his houses and estates as securities for the money he owed the Frankfurt house; but, as none of these were realisable, the valuation he gave them (5 million gulden) was purely notional.