

Things in France are only just beginning. Never before has there been a greater, more deep-seated confusion.





Perhaps this was just a way of currying favour with those he hoped would finance his new “bourgeois life.” But this avowal of mutual understanding was a fitting epitaph for a partnership which, since they had first met at Aix thirty years before, had exercised a remarkable influence over Europe. It was left to the sceptical Anselm to note that these were “theories which can’t be of great help to the world now.”





The Threat to Property

It was not the danger the revolution posed to their own lives which most alarmed the Rothschilds. Although quick to pack their wives and younger children off to safety at moments of crisis, the male Rothschilds—most of whom ran at least some personal risk during the period—were singularly cool as the bullets and bricks began to fly. On February 24 James was seen by the young Feydeau (then serving in the National Guard) emerging arm in arm with an unidentified male companion from the rue de la Paix and walking towards the ransacked Tuileries, even as gunshots continued to emanate from its grounds. “Monsieur le Baron,” I said to him, “today does not seem to me a very fortunate choice of day for a walk. In my opinion, you would do better to return home, rather than expose yourself to the bullets which are whistling throughout this part of town.”

“My young friend,” he replied, “I tank you for your adfice. But tell me, vy are you here? To do your duty, isn’t it? Vell then, I too, Paron de Rothschild, haf come for the same ting. Your duty is to stand armed vatch, and assure the safety of goot citizens; mine is to go to the Minister off Finance, to see vether they may not need my experience and my counsel.”

And with that he left me.





As early as March 4 James was ready to let his wife and sons return to Paris—though in agreeing to Betty’s request he added some caveats: All I ask is that you obtain a passport under a different name for a round trip. If you bring Alphonse, he too should have a supplementary passport with another name, because I don’t want the newspapers to print a headline saying, “Madame de Rothschild has returned to London,” if you decide to go back there. That would give rise to idle gossip . . . Come and bring Alphonse, although I wonder whether we shouldn’t keep him out of politics. If they see him, he’ll be required to enlist in the National Guard. He may come if he lies low.



In May, at the time of the abortive coup by Barbès and his associates, amid talk of guillotines in the place de la Concorde, James was once again ready to send his sons abroad for safety, and indeed briefly visited London himself. Yet he himself contemplated fleeing Paris only for a brief moment at the beginning of the June days. The contrast with his anxiety-ridden nephew could not have been greater. Nat was even alarmed by the men sent to protect the rue Laffitte by the new prefect of police Marc Caussidière: “a most ferocious looking set of gents with red sashes and anything but agreeable to meet in a dark night alone & unarmed—They would eat you up alive.” Though he stayed in Paris during the revolution’s most turbulent months, he retreated to England with relief at the end of November. James was contemptuous of such pusillanimity. As Betty proudly told Alphonse, her husband was one of the few who had “valiantly resisted the terrible storms which have struck down the courage and mental strength of so many.”