



16.iv: Anon., Barrikaten-Scene am 18. September: “Was geht vor in mein Haus? ” (September 18, 1848).

It was in fact the threat to their property which worried the Rothschilds more than any threat to their persons. The marking of selected town houses and the ransacking of Salomon’s villa at Suresnes—along with Louis Philippe’s at Neuilly—were only the first visible expressions of this threat.3 There were also arson attacks on some railway stations and bridges belonging to the Nord company. The Easter elections to the Constituent Assembly reassured Nat that there was no longer any danger of “a sanguinary revolution,” but he still expected “our purses” to “bleed.” Rumours that the rue Laffitte would be plundered persisted into April; and the following month, on the eve of the decisive “June days,” Gustave described the appearance on walls in the city of “lists where to plunder and we are mentioned as having 600,000,000 francs.” In Frankfurt too—despite assurances from more moderate revolutionaries to the contrary—Rothschild properties were singled out for attacks. On three separate occasions, Amschel’s windows were smashed, and he took the precaution of sending “the greater part of our disposable effects” to Brussels and Amsterdam until he was more confident that “private property will be respected.” In Vienna, the Goldschmidts’ house was ransacked by workers building barricades outside it in May. Small wonder Anselm and Nat took the precaution of sending silverware and porcelain to London for safekeeping.

A second threat to Rothschild property was that of formal confiscation by revolutionary regimes, whether in the form of expropriation or heavy direct taxation. Reassurances of the sort relayed by their associate Bleichröder from Berlin on March 18—“there is absolutely no cause to fear for private property”—could hardly be taken seriously given the obvious danger that moderates like Camphausen and Hansemann might be displaced by more radical politicians. As James put it in April, “They won’t touch a hair on your head, but they’ll pose progressively until you have nothing left to eat.” In Vienna, attacks on the Rothschilds in the press seemed to imply confiscation of their factories if wages and conditions were not improved. In Venice, Salomon’s salt factory looked vulnerable to Manin’s republican regime.

The most serious proposals for formal expropriation, however, came in Paris, where plans for the nationalisation of the railway network—a radical demand which predated the revolution—began to be discussed as early as March. The railway companies, it was argued, had failed to honour their commitments under the plan of 1842: having underestimated the costs of railway construction and devoted their attention to crooked share speculations, they could not even make the payments due to the government for their concessions. Without a doubt, the financial position of the railway companies in the spring of 1848 was precarious. The Nord, for example, owed the government between 72 and 87 million francs which it was quite unable to pay; and these debts could easily have justified a government takeover. It must be said that nationalisation would not have been unwelcome to Nat, who had never been much enamoured of the railways. With the price of the company’s shares as low as 212 and the railway workers repeatedly defying the authority of their foremen and masters—even insisting on the planting of “trees of liberty” in front of main stations—he was eager to be rid of them. But James was altogether less ready to surrender the backbone of his nascent industrial empire. Unlike those companies whose lines were not yet completed, the Nord was already earning money from freight and passengers and the revolution did not much affect this.