

The most serious threat of all was posed to that part of the Rothschilds’ wealth held in the form of government securities, the price of which fell dramatically in the first weeks of the new republic. Table 16a shows the devastating effect of the revolution on some of the principal securities held by the five Rothschild houses. Although prices had been falling generally since the onset of the economic crisis in 1846, if not before, the period February to April 1848 saw a catastrophic collapse.

Table 16a: The financial crisis of 1846-1848.



Sources: Spectator; Heyn, “Private banking”; Felisini, Finanze pontificie.

As we have seen, James had held on to around 170 million francs of the new 3 per cent rentes issued the previous year. By April, the market value of these was less than half what he had paid for them. Yet he remained formally obliged to resume paying the cash instalments due to the French Treasury (which amounted to roughly 10 million francs a month over two years) in November. In addition to these heavy losses, there was also likely to be red ink on the bills account: as Nat put it, “We have 16 million francs [of] bills, but God knows how many will be paid.” With bankers as substantial as d’Eichthal in difficulties, the outlook was grim. At the same time, the Paris house owed around 10 million francs to railway companies, including the Nord, the Strasbourg line and the Grand-Combe. Too many of its assets were depreciating stocks, shares and bills; too many of its liabilities were now due in cash. One 1848 cartoon showed a hobgoblin-like Rothschild tilting the scales of the bourse to his own advantage while above him the students demonstrate with a banner calling for the abolition of everything “except students” (see illustration 16.v). In fact the Rothschilds lost heavily in the crash.

Under these circumstances, many observers expected James to declare himself insolvent and probably also to flee Paris along with his family. The Austrian ambassador Apponyi watched him closely throughout March and April, expecting the bank to close its doors at any moment. On February 27, for example, he found James and other bankers “in a deplorable state” because their rentes had been reduced to “slips of paper, representing nothing.” Caussidière certainly suspected James of planning to leave Paris: rumours circulated that he was smuggling gold out of Paris hidden in manure carts and (as much to keep an eye on him as to protect his house from looters) James was placed under police surveillance. Throughout March and into April, rumours that de Rothschild Frères would be the next bank to fail abounded. Apponyi felt James was hanging “by a thread”; his friend Léon Faucher described him as being “bled white.” It was not far from the truth: at one point in April James’s cash reserve was reduced to little more than a million francs. When a clerical error made it seem even less, he admitted to a moment of panic, and joked of “giving up business, going to the country and living off potatoes.”