

With three out of the five Rothschild houses on the verge of insolvency, the future of the family as a whole evidently began to look doubtful. In London, Charlotte encountered a new, disrespectful tone from diplomats like the Austrian ambassador Count Dietrichstein, who, as she recorded in her diary, paid me some compliments in poor taste, saying, “Looking at you it is obvious that you no longer enjoy such a high position in the world. Now you are grateful if someone calls you beautiful whereas in the past you would have laughed your head off at such irony.” I replied, “And why is it that I no longer enjoy such a high position? Is it because I no longer have a money-sack for my throne or my footstool? Or is it perhaps because I no longer am a money-sack?” “The money-sack is still there, but the revolution has half emptied it.” “The world will not trouble itself about that, your Excellency, provided we do not delay our payments and make no claims upon it.”



She suspected that even the Disraelis “believe in the destruction of our power,” though this too she defiantly rejected: “It does not lie in our wealth alone, and God the Almighty will not withdraw his protecting hand from us. Amen!” Privately, as she admitted, “the Rothschilds, whose wealth only two months ago exceeded the reserve of the Bank of England, have lost the greatest part of that wealth.”





Survival

How then did they survive? The obvious answer is that the revolutions themselves did not. The degree of popular support for liberal and republican constitutional innovations outside the major cities turned out to be limited, while within the cities there were deep divisions between different occupational groups over economic issues: liberalising bankers had little in common with disgruntled artisans who yearned to revitalise the guild system. Such divisions did much to dish the republicans in France and the liberals in Germany. Secondly, there was much less danger than there had been in 1830 of a war between the great powers—which in many ways remained the Rothschilds’ greatest nightmare, not least because of the remembered tendency of war to radicalise revolution. James said on more than one occasion that he would leave Paris in the event of a major war; but Lamartine’s France declined (once again) to play its historic role as the exporter of revolution, while Palmerston’s Britain could not decide whether to back the revolution or not, when aspects of it appeared contrary to British interests (notably the German claim to the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein).4 Prussia and Piedmont went to war, to be sure, but with strictly limited aims and even less resolve. Thirdly, the revolutionaries dissipated a good deal of their energies on national questions which implied a redrawing of state borders as well as constitutions; and here the contradictory rather than complementary nature of “the springtime of the peoples” became manifest.

As in 1830, the Poles fell victim to Russian intransigent opposition to their aspirations, despite a half-hearted Prussian flicker of support (it was all over in Posen as early as May). The minor Slav nationalities within the Habsburg Empire had everything to fear from successful Magyar secession, nothing to gain from the creation of a greater Germany and little in common among themselves, least of all language. The German project hatched in Frankfurt foundered ostensibly because the out-sized and loquacious parliament could not agree on a royal figurehead for their new liberally constituted federation; in reality because there was no way of reconciling Austrian and Prussian notions of how the German Confederation should be reformed. Beyond the “Kingdom of Upper Italy” formed by Piedmont, Milan and Lombardy in May 1848, the notion of Italian unity was really an afterthought to a multiplicity of quite diverse revolts up and down the peninsula. Thus competing nationalisms tended to cancel one another out. Finally, once the Habsburg armies had regrouped under the leadership of Windischgrätz, Jelacic and Radetzky, they made short work of the revolutionaries. Prague fell in June 1848. Charles Albert’s Piedmontese armies were defeated at Custozza the following month (July 25). Vienna itself capitulated in November.