

Yet none of this could have been predicted with any degree of certainty. In many ways the revolution was at its most radical in the period after October 1848, and its defeat in Italy, South Germany and Hungary was not conclusive until the summer of 1849. Under the circumstances of March 1848, James and Salomon could have been forgiven for following Louis Philippe, Guizot and Metternich into exile, so closely identified were they with the ousted kings and ministers. Instead, they stayed; and their survival is one of the most remarkable aspects of 1848—from a Marxist perspective, one of the classic symptoms of the revolution’s foredoomed failure.

The sine qua non of the Rothschilds’ survival was their own “concordia.” Mayer Amschel’s hallowed injunction to his male progeny to maintain familial unity never counted for more, for it was the ability of the London house (and to a lesser extent the Naples and Frankfurt houses) to bail out the stricken Paris and Vienna houses which proved decisive. It helped that the revolution which had been so successful in Sicily failed so comprehensively in Naples. The accounts of the Rothschild house there reveal 1848 as a poor but not a disastrous year: profits slumped to just 2,709 ducats in the first half of 1848, but bounced back to 58,229 ducats in the second half; for the year as a whole they were down just over 40 per cent on 1847. The balance sheets show the Naples house treading water, with no major changes in the composition of its assets between 1845 and 1850. It was therefore possible for Carl to send money to Frankfurt in early April.

It helped even more that (as Charlotte put it) “the stirring wind of revolution which destroys the old injustices [did] not blow in England”—thanks in no small measure to the repeal of the Corn Laws and the suspension of the Bank Charter Act in 1847. The Chartist demonstration on Kennington Common on April 10 made the family nervous, but proved a damp squib; and Nat’s warning to Lionel that “you will find yourselves in the same position with regard to P.A. [Prince Albert] as we are with L.P. [Louis Philippe]” proved excessively pessimistic.5 In Ireland too the harvest proved less disastrous than had been feared. This meant that, having suffered its worst-ever year in the year of monetary crisis, 1847—with losses amounting to a staggering £660,702, or 30 per cent of capital—the London house was able to rebuild its position with some measure of success in 1848 and 1849, pushing its profits back up to £132,058 and £334,524. It was true then, as Charlotte had to admit to Dietrichstein, that the Rothschilds as a family were less rich than they had been; but their “money-sack” was far from half-empty, to judge by the limited domestic economies she had to make. “We had three nursemaids and sent away two of them,” she declared, “keeping one to do the dirtier and heavier chores. We shall dress the children ourselves. Our hands shall certainly lose some of their whiteness and beauty in the process, but they will still be of use to us, we hope.” Piano tutors for her daughter Leonora had to be content with 10 shillings an hour; when Chopin told her grandmother that he “cost” 20 guineas per performance, she “replied that of course I could play very beautifully, but that she advised me to take less, as one had to show greater ‘moderayshon’ this season. I gather from this that they are not so open-handed and that money is tight everywhere.”