

This was not just because he wished to see Austria get her indemnity. As he assured a young and ambitious financier named Camillo di Cavour, he was “very anxious to have dealings with this country; he has repeatedly told me that he regards Piedmont as established on a much sounder basis than Austria.” For his part, Cavour was shocked by the way James had “bamboozled” the Piedmontese Finance Minister Nigra. Convinced that Piedmont should not allow herself to become dependent on “this cunning old rascal Rothschild,” Cavour would prove a formidable obstacle to Rothschild ambitions in Italy in the future.6 But, for the time being, James appeared to have established an important foothold, with the possibility—as he put it—that this would lead to a financial “marriage” with Italy as a whole. In a similar way, the Frankfurt house made approaches at around the same time to German states like Württemberg and Hanover (where a liberal ministry under Johann Stüve remained in power until November 1850), though these were rebuffed.

James’s success in Turin brought to an end over a year of immobility induced by the revolution. Even Lionel and his brothers were now ready to contemplate new business, although they were still more interested in revolutionless Spain and America than in Central Europe. Mercury, cotton, gold, tobacco—even Nicaraguan canals and African groundnuts—seemed safer fare than loans to politically volatile states.

In Paris itself there was also a slight relaxation in Rothschild attitudes. The main barometer of financial opinion—the price of rentes—points to a growing (though not unqualified) confidence in the presidential regime in the course of 1849: in the year after December 1848, 5 per cents rose from 74 to 93, and with them Nat’s spirits. This was in part a reflection of Napoleon’s restrained foreign policy. As Nat remarked when the expedition to Rome was first bruited, “In general when troops begin to move bondholders are frightened; in this case as it is for the re-establishment of order, perhaps & I trust it will produce a good effect.” The return of financial confidence also reflected a growing awareness that Louis Napoleon was far from being the ally of the radical left. Although he still thought the President “a little ugly fellow,” Nat was favourably impressed by the evidence of social restoration he witnessed one evening at the President’s palace: “The ladies were beautifully draped in jewellery and when the carriages were called the titles were not omitted.” “If we remain quiet,” he added hopefully, “there will be no difference between the republic and the monarchy.” This was over-optimistic: in strictly financial terms, rentes never recovered to pre-war revolutionary levels under the Republic, suggesting continued doubt about the stability of the regime—witness Anthony’s alternate warnings that Louis Napoleon would go the way of Louis Philippe or that the republicans would succumb to a Bonapartist coup. Yet there was confidence enough for the Rothschilds to raise the inevitable subject of a new loan to France herself.