



When Radetzky “gave a good licking” to the Piedmontese armies at Custozza, Anselm and his cousins were delighted, but poorly informed about Austrian diplomatic intentions, assuming that Austria would still relinquish most of her Italian territory. Although James came to realise that Bastide, the new French Foreign Minister, was unenthusiastic about Northern Italian unification, and that therefore Palmerston’s efforts in that direction were unlikely to succeed, his nephews remained convinced for some time that Lombardy and Venetia would be able to buy their independence: it was, wrote Anthony, “only an affair of money.” Their sources of information in Germany were not much better. Mayer Carl, for example, seems to have expected Frederick William IV to accept the German crown when it was offered by the Frankfurt parliament in March, and—even more improbably—that this would help Austria and Prussia “pull together.” (In fact, he contemptuously spurned what he called a “diadem moulded out of the dirt and dregs of revolution, disloyalty and treason.”) It was not until late February 1849 that Anselm began to receive the kind of inside information about Austrian diplomacy which his father had for so long taken for granted. He was soon following in Salomon’s footsteps by siding enthusiastically with Schwarzenberg in the second war with Piedmont—a tendency which his father’s return in April may have reinforced.

In practice, of course, the Rothschilds could not hope to exercise political influence as long as they themselves were financially weak. The traditional leverage exerted by the Rothschilds had, after all, been based primarily on the granting of loans. But throughout 1848 the British Rothschilds used their new predominance over the continental houses to veto numerous suggestions of loans to the post-revolutionary regimes in Austria, Hungary, Rome, Lombardy, Prussia, Baden and elsewhere. (Incredibly, Salomon seems to have suggested lending money to allow the Hungarians to buy guns in England—this even as he was lamenting the collapse of the Habsburg Empire!) It was not until late September that anything resembling “business as usual” was contemplated, though talk of a loan to Austria proved premature. The trouble was that the revolution refused to lie down and die. No sooner had “red republicanism” been defeated in Paris, Vienna and Berlin than it burst forth again in Italy. No sooner had it been defeated in Italy than it had a last lease of life in South Germany.

As long as political uncertainty remained, the Rothschilds held back. When the Austrian government approached Anselm with a 60 million gulden loan proposal in March, he was cautious, dismissing it as “a great nonsense” and “a stupid project.” The following month, when James was asked by the city of Paris to make a 25 million franc loan, he “refused it & said it three times, he did not wish to do any business.” This hesitation reflected above all the difficulty of deciding what was to be done with the Vienna house which, even after Anselm’s skilful salvage operation, still owed the Frankfurt house the immense sum of £1.7 million, as well as a smaller sum to the Paris house. It was not until the summer, after a succession of meetings between the principal partners (including a full “congress” at Frankfurt in the spring), that the decision was taken to preserve the Vienna house by writing most of this money off. The extent to which the London partners wished to restrain their uncles is obvious from Alphonse’s comment that the “true goal” of the “congress” would be: to modify the bases of our house, and, with respect to the London house, to free them reciprocally from a solidarity incompatible with the political activities and the ardent business spirit of the first generation. Our good uncle [Amschel] cannot bear the reduction of our fortune, and, in his desire to re-establish it on its old basis, would not hesitate to plunge us into hazardous enterprises.