

James responded to these demands with a mixture of threats and blandishments, as Charlotte recorded in her diary: The failure of the House of Rothschild would be a terrible disaster for France. It would be to kill the goose that lays the golden egg with a single blow and to abandon forever the chance of [its performing] any public or private services. The government could not auction off the family’s golden houses: Ferrières could not be sold; the hôtel Florentin stands empty and could not be let under the present circumstances. If, however, they spare our uncle’s life—by which I mean only his financial life—then he could be of service not only to the state, but to individual members of the government . . . In England, they say, no one is grateful for favours received. We certainly do not expect that, but I think one can count on recognition for favours still to be granted. Our uncle has just granted favours to M. de Lamartine, M. Caussidière and Crémieux.



At the same time, if the immediate repayment of the money owed by the Nord was demanded, “thirty or forty thousand workers would be deprived of the employment the government had guaranteed them and the expenditures of the national Treasury on unemployment would increase considerably.”

Not everyone was convinced by James’s protestations that his “financial life” was at stake. In a good illustration of the way “socialism” made itself felt even in the financial sector, the clerks at de Rothschild Frères protested when James justified cutting their salaries on the grounds that “my business has been reduced.” “Yes, you have lost nothing,” declared one of them. “You are richer than anyone and we won’t [accept a pay cut].” But, if nothing else, James had bought himself valuable time. By the time the government’s commission had decided in favour of the state’s repurchasing the concessions from the companies, it was the third week of May. Just over a month later, the political position in Paris was transformed by the brutal suppression of the “June days” (22-28 June)—an apparently spontaneous eruption of working class rioting—by troops under the command of General Eugène Cavaignac.

Marx’s bitter diagnosis of the “June days” and their aftermath was that the “bourgeoisie” as a whole had thrown in its lot with authoritarianism and militarism in order to crush the proletarian revolution. In contrast with the revolution of 1830, however, the Rothschilds did little, if anything, to promote the restoration of “order” (just as they did little to promote resolutions of the various diplomatic conflicts of the revolution). They did no more than welcome—cautiously—the arrival of Cavaignac. Indeed, they positively avoided making a direct contribution to his efforts: James packed Alphonse off to Frankfurt to ensure that he did not take part in the fighting, which he would have done had he stayed. The military restoration of “order” thus had the aspect of a deus ex machina. It was the same story in Naples, where Ferdinand dispensed with parliament and successfully reclaimed Sicily in August; and in Vienna, where Windischgrätz bombarded the revolutionaries into surrender in early November.