

There were also the first signs of a revival of the railway mania of the 1840s (Léon Faucher’s appointment as Minister for Public Works was especially encouraging). In February 1849 the Pereires revealed their most ambitious scheme to date: a railway to link Paris, Lyon and Avignon, which would then fuse with the line from Avignon to Marseille (the forerunner of the Paris-Lyon-Marseille line). The aim was to revive the system on which the Nord had been based, with the state investing 147 million francs in the initial construction of line between Paris and Lyon and guaranteeing the company a 5 per cent return, while the company put up 240 million francs to operate the concession for ninety-nine years. In fact, it would seem that the Pereires were now seeking to emancipate themselves from the Rothschilds. To raise the money for the new company, they had initially approached Delessert and through him Barings—a first hint of the breach which lay ahead. James was well aware of what was going on and in May fired his first shot back by forcing Isaac Pereire off the board of the Nord. No one should think “that the Pereires are [the same as] Rothschild,” he told Anthony. “You have no idea what scoundrels these little fellows are. They are always trying to exploit our name.” But “when these people don’t need you, they give you a kick in the arse.”

In a symbolic reassertion of his position as railway king, James had made a point of appearing alongside Napoleon and Changarnier when a new stretch of the Nord line was opened in July. In November he sought to force his way into the Paris-Lyon-Avignon concession negotiations, buttonholing Louis Napoleon on the subject over dinner and haggling tenaciously with the new Finance Minister Achille Fould thereafter. From the Pereires’ point of view, however, this may have been an unwelcome reminder of their association with “Rothschild Ier.” There was fierce opposition to their plan, which one critic warned would lead to “a vast consortium Pereire-Rothschild dominating the country from Marseille to Dunkirk and from Paris to Nantes, controlling the coasts of the Mediterranean, those of the Channel and almost all those of the Atlantic, master of the French isthmus.” By comparison, the more modest rival proposal put forward by Talabot and Bartholony to link Paris and Lyon seemed less monopolistic. There was similar opposition to the Pereire plan for a line linking Paris and Rennes in the west, which they hoped to link to their Rive Droite terminus. Still, the very notion that he was striving for such a “railway hegemony” testified to the extent of Rothschild recovery. As James put it in a letter to Anthony: “Above all, it is good that people realise that nothing gets off the ground without us and when we demand something, then it is a case of giving Rothschild all he wants.”

Nothing could better express how far things had come full circle than this renewed self-confidence—except perhaps the deeply paradoxical friendship which James formed in 1849 with Alexander Herzen. As one of the founding fathers of Russian socialism—the man who coined the phrase “Land and Freedom”—Herzen had left Russia for Paris in January 1847 and, after a brief trip to Italy, returned there at the height of the revolution in May 1848. He had already suffered internal exile as a young man for his liberal inclinations, but by the time he reached Paris his views had moved closer to those of revolutionary socialists like Michael Bakunin and Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (author of another famous aphorism of the period, la propriété, c’est la vol ). Indeed, Herzen personally financed Proudhon’s short-lived journal the Voix du Peuple to the tune of 24,000 francs while the latter was in prison. A less likely person to become a favoured Rothschild client would be hard to imagine. The fact that he did sheds light on James’s political outlook, and perhaps substantiates Heine’s earlier assertion that he was at heart more a revolutionary than a reactionary.