

His wife felt an even deeper dislike, partly based on a lingering loyalty to the deposed Orléanist royal family. Disraeli recalled Betty inveighing against Napoleon “whom she hated” to Macaulay, who sought vainly to persuade her that he might be Augustus to his uncle’s Julius Caesar. She was unimpressed: France was “floundering between a nobody and a head garotted by a subversive, useless minority.” If Cavaignac won it would be “a disaster” as he had shown “neither candour nor capacity in power.” But if Louis Napoleon won it would be “a humiliation” as he was “that ridiculous flag from a wonderful past existence, a political nothing who has no other value than as a negative power, a polished socialist hiding roughness beneath the pretence of pleasant politesse.” France’s “love affair” with him, she predicted, “could be just like a happy love affair at the beginning of a novel; lovers in this case always end up hating each other, or by being violently separated.” His victory was a “distress signal around which diverse and opposing opinions rally to protest against the country’s upper crust.” From the outset she assumed that “a parody of the Empire” would be restored. Until April 1849 she stayed away from the President’s receptions.

What concerned the Rothschilds much more, however, was the possibility that, like his uncle before him, Louis Napoleon would pursue an expansionist foreign policy which might plunge Europe once again into a general war. From the moment that Bonaparte’s star began to wax in mid-1848, when he was elected to the Chamber of Deputies, it was this which coloured the Rothschilds’ judgement. Identifying him as the ally of the “friends of disorder and unrest,” they assumed that his popularity presaged war. As James put it, Louis Napoleon would spend a nice bit of money to ensure that they have him as President and in my opinion—I who have never believed in war—the situation looks blacker now, because the people now have to . . . make war. At the bourse everyone was horribly black, because they say that the working class will supposedly back him, because he is a socialist and draws his support from the most common people . . . I am trying to liquidate.



Although they came to revise this assessment in the succeeding months, as the likelihood of his victory in the presidential election grew, they were far from delighted at this prospect, regarding Cavaignac as “decidedly better.” Both camps directly approached James to ask for support, but he told them that “not being French he was withholding all influence in this serious matter and would not support either of the two candidates, that he was waiting for the country to make its decision and would not oppose to whichever president was preferred by the majority.” Privately, he expected Louis Napoleon to defeat Cavaignac. But he found the new President “dull and with no charisma whatever,” despite his flattering request that James should “visit him often and eat with him in the morning.” In the immediate aftermath of Bonaparte’s victory in December, he and Betty nervously anticipated a return to the “June days,” and even the outbreak of war between France and Prussia.