

Still, the Rothschilds knew how to swim with the turning political tide. For the reconstruction of the republican regime under Cavaignac provided the perfect opportunity not only to bury the railway nationalisation project but to reschedule the Nord’s debts to the state and to resolve the question of the 1847 loan. It was later alleged that the Paris house had been “refloated” by the government at this juncture—to the great ire of James’s grandchildren, who took pains to deny that their bank had ever relied on state intervention. The word “refloated” is misleading but—like the related accusations levelled at the government of excessive generosity—not without an element of truth. In essence, James had adopted the stance which Balzac had years before anticipated: that of the indispensable debtor who owes his creditors so much that they dare not let him fail. Fearing that he might otherwise be unable to resume his payments to the Treasury, the government felt obliged to renegotiate the terms of the 1847 loan. The decision was understandable: in threatening them with the death of the “golden goose,” James was implicitly threatening the collapse of the French financial system. As Mérimée suggested at the time, the government’s financial position was “diabolical”; the collapse of de Rothschild Frères would have made matters worse still.

The easier alternative was to work in partnership with “the Baron.” Thus, when Lionel visited Paris in July, he found James closeted—as of old—with the Finance Minister. He was “now a great favourite and as there is no other Banker or person with money or disposition to come forward, he is naturally very much looked up to.” Yet the expedient adopted by the new Finance Minister Goudchaux—to convert the 3 per cent bonds of 1847 into 5 per cents—was probably over-generous, in that it effectively turned a loss of 25 million francs into a profit of 11 million. The fact that Goudchaux was a Jew (like another moderate republican linked to James, Crémieux) merely added to the radical suspicion of a conspiracy to prop up Rothschild. In truth, James had probably exaggerated the danger of his own financial collapse in order to minimise his losses on the 1847 loan. Far from being in cahoots with Goudchaux, the Rothschilds regarded him as “not a practical man by any means” who knew “no more about the bourse than the man of [sic] the moon.”

The Rothschilds’ position had in fact been stabilising for at least a month before the “June days.” As early as the last week of May, it was possible for Charlotte to affirm her belief in “in a bright, European and Rothschildian future.” When Nat went to Frankfurt in June, he found Amschel still furious with Lionel, but financially quite secure, with a balance of at least 26 million gulden and a bullion reserve of £400,000. Indeed, the English Rothschilds were surprised to find Amschel selling on to the Vienna house silver he had received from the London house only weeks before. Another sign of normalisation was the resumption in earnest of negotiations for a new mercury contract in Spain (where Baring was mounting a serious challenge). This coincided with excited reports from Davidson about new discoveries of silver in Chile and Peru which were likely to boost the mercury market. By August matters were sufficiently far advanced for James, Lionel and Anselm—now the family’s dominant triumvirate—to meet at Dunkirk to take stock of the combined accounts. It was not until some time later, however, that it was apparent to those outside the family that the Rothschilds had survived. When the radical Tocsin des Travailleurs devoted a leader to the subject in August, its tone was ironical; yet a genuine undertone of admiration is unmistakable in its appeal to James to lend his miraculous financial powers to the cause of the republic.