

Such fears were only increased by the assumption—which can be detected as early as January 1849—that Louis Napoleon would “not rest till he has made himself Emperor, & that the votes of the Army and Peasantry combined will be enough to secure his success.” James had no doubt that this would be “a great mistake.” Throughout the first months of 1849 he watched with anxiety for signs of a “forward” French foreign policy which might reinforce such pretensions. In particular, the continuing instability of the situation in Italy seemed to invite some kind of French intervention. In James’s words, “This question is the one which interests us the most: whether [or not] we will have peace.” Every flicker of unrest in Paris seemed to increase the likelihood of a gamble on war by the new government. “It will end with war,” predicted James on June 9. “We are in the hands of God. We have [not only] Asiatic cholera [but also] political and financial cholera . . . I do not believe rentes will go up.”

The realisation that Napoleon intended to intervene in Italian affairs on the side of the Pope—who had been forced to flee Rome in November—rather than the Roman republic therefore came as a welcome relief, even if Anthony could not at first see “how they can enter & put the Pope on the throne if they have a Republic here.” In fact, prolonged debates on the subject meant that this ended up being the last of the foreign interventions against republicanism which finally brought the revolutionary period to an end. The first blow was dealt in March by the second, decisive Austrian victory over Piedmont, which was followed by the occupation of republican Tuscany in May. In April it was the turn once again of the Frankfurt Rothschilds to pack up their valuables as a last wave of popular unrest swept through South Germany, only to be crushed by joint action between Prussia, Saxony and Hanover. As before, the Rothschilds could do little more than stand on the sidelines cheering. Anselm enthusiastically welcomed the Russian intervention in Hungary, conscious that Windischgrätz alone could not win.

Only when the military defeat of the various enclaves of revolution was sure did the Rothschilds seriously think about resuming their traditional loans business. On July 4, Anselm began to talk more positively about the Austrian loan, as well as urging the Paris house to provide the Russian army in Hungary with financial assistance via the Paris house. He also began to involve himself in the efforts to stabilise the Austrian exchange rate, which war and the suspension of silver convertibility had seriously weakened. By mid September, a small Austrian loan had been arranged in the form of a 71 million gulden issue of treasury bills; although most of these were absorbed by the Vienna market, around 22 million were taken up and sold by Amschel in Frankfurt.

Naturally, these transactions implied an explicit commitment to the forces of monarchical reaction, something which caused a degree of disquiet to members of the family in France and London, where support for Hungary was widespread. Betty can hardly have been indifferent to the bitter sentiments expressed in Heine’s pro-Magyar poem, “Germany in October 1849,” a copy of which he sent her. But Anselm had no time whatever for his English cousins’ “uneasy” expressions of pro-Hungarian feeling, advising “your good English folks [to] stick to Ireland & its Potato crop, & keep their arguments for their objects.” Carl’s suggestion of a loan to the Pope could also be seen as lending sustenance to the counter-revolution. To the disappointed revolutionaries of 1848—not least Marx—the moral was plain: “Thus we find that every tyrant is backed by a Jew, as is every Pope by a Jesuit. In truth, the cravings of the oppressors would be hopeless and the practicability of war out of the question, if there were not an army of Jesuits to smother thought and a handful of Jews to ransack pockets.”