



It was symptomatic of the mistrust engendered by the crisis of 1848 that the London partners began to distinguish between letters they would allow their uncles to see and those they kept to themselves. Considering that the circulated private letters had up until this point been the very life blood of the partnership this was a revolutionary suggestion—though it is impossible to be sure how far the London partners went in this direction since so much of their correspondence has been lost or destroyed.

Two additional factors tended to diminish Rothschild political influence. Firstly, their relations with Palmerston remained as tenuous as ever. Charlotte denounced Palmerston’s policy in 1848 as “laughable,” and it seems reasonable to assume that Lionel shared his wife’s view; there was evidently little communication between the Rothschilds and Palmerston at this time. In Nat’s view, “any change in the Foreign Affairs will be an improvement on Ld. P[almerston],” a view “heartily” endorsed by his uncle James. To Betty, Palmerston was “the bad genie, breathing fire everywhere and sheltering behind political puppets whom he knows how to station at the front door.” Indeed, the Rothschilds seem to have based their assessments of British policy more on defence estimates than on first-hand ministerial intelligence—a reflection perhaps of Lionel’s preoccupation at this time with the question of Jewish representation in Parliament. Secondly, they miscalculated the political future in France. James overestimated the durability of “respectable, moderate” republicanism. Assuming that Cavaignac and his fellow general Nicolas Changarnier (who combined command of the National Guard with the military governorship of Paris) would remain the key figures of the new regime, he set to work to ingratiate himself with them. Meetings with Cavaignac and other ministers to discuss French foreign policy became frequent. “Our little friend” Changarnier was invited to hunt at Ferrières and was a frequent Rothschild dinner guest. So close did relations become that the Austrian ambassador in Paris was able to report gossip about Changarnier’s “sentiment de coeur” for Betty. As it turned out, James was backing a loser, though his reason for doing so is understandable. For the alternative to the generals was Louis Napoleon Bonaparte, the nephew of the former Emperor.

Throughout the nineteenth century, no figure of political importance was viewed by the Rothschilds with more suspicion, not to say contempt, than Louis Napoleon. This was partly because of his disreputable past—the escapades at Boulogne in 1836 and Strasbourg in 1840, the idiosyncratic books, the English mistress—and the louche lifestyle which he never wholly abandoned. In April 1849, for example, Anthony reported that his aunt and uncle were “disgusted with L. N. They say he gets drunk every night & God knows what else he does.” His relationship with Mrs Howard was also a subject for sardonic comment: in Anthony’s words, all Louis Napoleon wanted was “plenty [of money] so that he can roger comfortably & get drunk when he likes.” James regarded him as “a stupid ass” but, pragmatic as ever, was prepared to put his personal aversion to one side and sup with him as early as January 16—just eighteen days after he had been sworn in as President of the Republic. “I could not refuse his invitation,” he explained to his nephews apologetically. Indeed, he seems to have taken the precaution of lending Louis Napoleon 20,000 francs shortly before his election. Nevertheless, this was to be no repeat of the regime change of 1830, when James and Louis Philippe had translated a private, financial relationship into a public, political one almost overnight. As soon as Louis Napoleon had access to public funds, James cut off his credit, ordering Anthony “to give Napoleon no more money, he has no credit with us . . . I promised him 20,000 francs before his budget was passed but now he is getting money from the government, so I don’t want to throw away our money and so I won’t give him a penny more.”