

It was misleading, however, to portray the Rothschilds as the financiers of reaction, as they had so often been portrayed in the past. For one thing, as Lionel reported from Wildbad in August, the revolution had made erstwhile liberals more conservative: “The Liberal party in Germany is very different from the liberals in England. All persons of property or who are in business are for the old state of things.” James’s paramount concern was to resume normal business activity—as he reminded his nephews in London, he was “a friend of business” and wanted to “keep the wheels turning.” Provided international stability could be relied upon, he was relatively uninterested in the political complexion of the regimes he lent to. Before it was confirmed that the Pope would be restored with French support, for example, James was perfectly willing to do business with the Roman Republic. Indeed, when the Republic’s representative approached him with a small deposit in March 1849 to ask whether he “would do their business,” he accepted it “as I am [now] a Republican”—an ironic aside from a man who at other times referred to it as the “accursed republic.” And when the position of the Papacy was restored at the end of June, James informed Carl that he had no desire to “run after” the Vatican for business. Adolph too showed little respect for the Pope—“His old Pious-ness with all his nonsense.” Any loan, insisted his French cousins, was to be conditional on the granting of civil rights to the Roman Jews. For, as Anselm said, the Pope who was once so liberal and who brought Italy such misfortune through his overhasty reforms, is now not just wholly reactionary but, following the example of the Popes of the dark Middle Ages, intolerant in the highest degree, I am tempted even to say inhuman. If the Pope could do business with any other house, he would certainly break with us, and so compliments to the holy gentlemen are not in order.



Nor were James and Lionel willing to allow the Vienna house to resume its traditional role as a more or less unquestioning supporter of the Habsburg regime. In December, both expressed strong objections to Salomon’s efforts to support the Austrian currency when their rivals were profiting from speculating against it.

This political neutrality was most obvious in the case of Piedmont, which had been among the principal troublemakers of 1848. As Anselm pointed out, the Piedmontese indemnity to Austria promised to generate “a beautiful and safe piece of business” in the form of a loan to Piedmont as well as the transfer of part of its proceeds to Vienna. Nat was initially sceptical—as Charlotte observed, the “more sensible” members of the family had not forgotten the “fearful period” of the previous year—but even he could see the appeal of such a transaction. As for James, his interest in Piedmont was so great that Anselm feared he might give the Turin government the impression of “excessive keenness.” This underestimated James’s skill as a negotiator. He had begun by sounding out the government in advance of the peace agreement with Austria, though without committing himself. Then he hinted at a deal with the Italian bankers who hoped to float the bonds themselves in order to shut out rivals from Paris and Vienna. In September he went in person to Vienna and Milan to offer an advance of 15 million francs on the Piedmontese indemnity due to the Austrian government. Finally, in Turin, he succeeded in securing control of more than half the 76 million franc Piedmontese loan, leaving just 8 million to the Italian bankers and the rest to public subscription.