

3 For the sake of clarity, I refer to Mayer Amschel and his wife as the first generation, their sons (and daughters) as the second and so on. A family tree is provided at the end of the book.

4 It was James’s son Alphonse who opposed the idea of preserving the documents in the Baron Carl von Rothschild library in Frankfurt. He also insisted on the destruction of documents relating to the payment of French reparations in 1815, fearful that they might one day be used to impugn the patriotism of his father.

5 The French papers have now been returned to the family and are housed in the Rothschild Archive in London. It is hoped that the Austrian material will also be returned in due course.





ONE “Our Blessed Father”: Origins


1 Frankfurt was one of fifty-one self-governing towns within the Holy Roman Empire (which also comprised 94 kings and princes, 103 counts and 41 church prelates).

2 The rule was relaxed slightly in 1790, though access was granted only to a single promenade.

3 A word needs to be said about the spelling of Mayer Amschel’s name. On his own gravestone, he is described in Hebrew characters as “Mosche Meir, Sohn Anschels, genannt Meyer Amschel Rothschild” and his three biographers have used the spelling “Meyer.” However, in the course of his life, he clearly came to prefer the spelling “Mayer.” His descendants named after him have also tended to prefer this spelling. For the sake of simplicity I have therefore used “Mayer” throughout.

4 By 1785, the Prince’s collection was sufficiently large to need a twelve-volume catalogue, compiled by his librarian Wegener. We may discount the apocryphal story that Mayer Amschel was actually introduced to William at this early stage by a general named von Estorff, as well as the fiction that Mayer Amschel impressed the Prince with his skill at chess (William is supposed to have told von Estorff: “You did not recommend a fool to me”): Hessen, “ ‘You did not recommend a fool’.”

5 Mayer Amschel did not have to pay the difference between his share of the Hinterpfann and the price of the house at the green shield all at once. He bought the house in two halves, in Dec. 1783 and Nov. 1785. In each case, as was customary, a third was paid up front, the rest in six or eight half-yearly sums.

6 The house was preserved more or less as Mayer Amschel had known it until 1944. After his widow’s death, it had gradually fallen into disrepair and was saved from the fate of the rest of the Judengasse—compulsory purchase and demolition—only by the family’s decision in the 1880s to preserve it as a historic monument. Along with its neighbour “at the golden arch” (with which it shared a roof as well as a cellar) it was completely restored and opened to the public. It also housed the offices of two Rothschild charities.

7 In the generation after Mayer Amschel, Rothschild first names underwent a confusing process of transformation according to the national milieu in which his sons found themselves. Amschel was sometimes known as Anselm, Salomon was often Salamon or even Solomon, Kalman was almost always Carl after around 1812; and Jakob became James when he moved to Paris. In much of the family’s private correspondence, their sisters and wives tended to be referred to by their Judendeutsch names, usually in a diminutive form, though Jettchen became “Aunt Henrietta” after her English marriage. For the sake of simplicity, I employ the most frequently used forms throughout: Amschel, Salomon, Nathan, Carl and James.