

5 The bulletins Nathan received have not been preserved, though a letter confirming the news from a Dutch source based just six miles from the battlefield survives.

6 Characteristically, Nathan, who had intended to float as much as £3 million of these bills, blamed Carl for the Amsterdam market’s lack of interest.

7 Nathan was incensed to hear that James had suffered a riding accident; in his view, to be riding at all was a sign of dilettantism.





FOUR “A Court Always Leads to Something” (1816-1825)


1 Punctuation varies: this is the text in the 1986 Oxford edition. The 1930 Oxford edition has “Jew Rothschild, and his fellow-Christian, Baring” but this seems nonsensical. Byron clearly intended to suggest that the two bankers were on a par, despite their different religions.

2 Of the 700 million francs, some 138 million was to be spent on reconstructing strategic fortresses around France’s borders. Each of the great powers was to receive between 100 and 139 million to compensate them for the costs of the Hundred Days; smaller sums went to the other states in the anti-French coalition. In addition, France had to pay substantial sums to private claimants; after prolonged wrangles, these amounted to 240 million francs. The peace also returned French borders to those of 1790, as opposed to those of 1792 which the 1814 treaty had set. It should be noted that France had previously imposed indemnities on the Netherlands, Austria, Prussia and Portugal, but the sums involved had been smaller.

3 James arranged to invest £20,000 for Dalberg in British stocks at around this time. A short time later he and Salomon joined Dalberg in a small speculation in French rentes.

4 The Amsterdam bank of Hope & Co. had been founded by the Boston-born Henry Hope and the Cor nishman John Williams in the 1760s. Laid low by the French occupation of Holland, it had effectively been taken over by Baring Brothers. Labouchère was a Hope employee who married a Baring and later became a Hope partner.

5 Adolphe d’Eichthal was the grandson of the Bavarian court banker Aron Elias Seligmann; he changed his religion and name and moved to Paris with his son Louis.

6 It was at this time that the Kassel Jewish community took Amschel to court for alleged non-payment of residence dues.

7 Baring had already agreed to advance 165 million francs to the Allies in return for 246 million of rentes at 67; the problem was the decision by the Allies at Aix to accept a final payment of 100 million in the form of 132 million of rentes which Baring rashly agreed to buy at the higher price of 74.

8 The price of gold was £4 0s 6d in 1819 compared with the bullionists” pre-war target of £3 17s 101/2 d.

9 The final terms were that 5 per cent bonds totalling £5 million would be sold in three successive tranches with the price rising from 70 (£2.5 million) to 72.5 (£1.25 million) and then to 75 (£1.25 million). £1 million of the first tranche was taken by the Prussian government itself at Rother’s suggestion. Repayment was to take place over twenty-five years. Officially, as Ehrenberg says, there was no additional commission; in fact, Nathan got his 4 per cent, though this was “kept secret” to defuse criticism in Berlin. In addition, the Rothschilds kept at least £1.5 million for themselves, netting a large profit when the price rose to a peak of 83 in September. This explains why the brothers wrote in such affectionate terms to Rother after the contract was concluded: Salomon assured him that he and Nathan were his “heartfelt, eternal and faithful good friends”; it is unlikely that he would have expressed such sentiments if he had been forced to forgo a commission.