

Though born illegitimate, Herzen had inherited a substantial fortune from his aristocratic father, so it is not wholly strange that the Rothschilds obliged him with minor banking services while he was in Italy and helped him invest some 10,000 roubles when he began to sell off his Russian property. Herzen later recalled how he made the acquaintance of Rothschild, and proposed that he should change for me two Moscow Savings Bank bonds. Business then was not flourishing, of course, and the exchange was very bad; his terms were not good, but I accepted them at once, and had the satisfaction of seeing a faint smile of compassion on Rothschild’s lips—he took me for one of the innumerable princes russes who had run into debt in Paris and so fell to calling me Monsieur le Comte . . . By Rothschild’s advice I bought myself some American shares, a few French ones and a small house in the rue Amsterdam which was let to the Havre Hotel.



However, when the Russian government sought to prevent Herzen raising more cash by mortgaging his mother’s estate at Komostra, less orthodox financial assistance was called for. According to Herzen’s own account, James agreed to accept a bill drawn to the value of the anticipated mortgage and, when the Russian authorities refused to authorise the mortgage, “grew angry, and walked about the room saying: ‘No, I shan’t allow myself to be trifled with; I shall bring an action against the bank; I shall demand a categorical reply from the Minister of Finance!’ ” Despite receiving warnings about his new client from the Russian ambassador Count Kiselev, James now took up the cudgels on Herzen’s behalf, drafting a stiff letter to Gasser in St Petersburg which threatened the Russian government with legal action and exposure in the press.

Why did he do this? He can have had no illusions about Herzen’s politics because he had been given “a very unfavourable opinion” of him by Kiselev. As Herzen put it, he now “surmise[d] that I was not a prince russe.” The answer seems to be that this was James’s idea of a joke. Herzen was bemused by the fact that James “now took to addressing me as Baron,” and even more bemused when he refused to send his letter to Gasser until Herzen increased his commission on the transaction from half a per cent to 5. This “Mephistophelean irony” was intended to test Herzen, who refused to concede more than another half per cent: When half an hour later I was mounting the staircase of the Winter Palace of Finance in the Rue Laffitte, the rival of [Tsar] Nicholas was coming down it.

. . . His Majesty, smiling graciously, and majestically holding out his own august hand [said,] “the letter has been signed and sent off. You’ll see how they will come round. I’ll teach them to trifle with me.”

“Only not for half of one per cent,” I thought, and I felt inclined to drop on my knees, and to offer an oath of allegiance together with my gratitude, but I confined myself to saying: “If you feel perfectly certain of it, allow me to open an account, if only for half of the whole sum.”