

10 The Rothschilds had no difficulty in placing the greater part of the loan with the major Paris and Frankfurt banks, though they were less generous to their rivals in Berlin. The bonds rose initially to 83 in Sept. 1818, then slipped back to 73.5 until late 1819, before rising steadily again. Rumours of a new loan in 1820 seem to have prompted the Rothschilds to sell their own holdings, but these proved unfounded. In fact, the bonds reached par (i.e. 100) in 1824.

11 Isaac Arnstein and Bernhard Eskeles were descendants of Samson Wertheimer, court banker of Charles VI. Arnstein’s son Nathan married Fanny Itzig, famed for her Vienna salon.

12 Ultimately only around 300,000 ducats were repaid.

13 The problem was that neither her son by Napoleon, the Duke of Reichstadt, nor her two children by her second husband, Count von Neipperg, stood to inherit her Italian duchies, which were to pass to the Duke of Lucca after her death.

14 Salomon initially offered to underwrite a loan of 42.8 million gulden at an effective price of just 67. When this was refused he proposed a smaller loan of just 12 million gulden, offering to pay “1.5 per cent more for the amount decided than is offered by any other firm.” The same tactic was repeated when the loan was put out to tender; now Salomon simply offered to pay 0.5 per cent more than the highest bidder. The Austrian government wisely waited, and in April 1823 was able to secure significantly improved terms from a Rothschild-led consortium: a loan of 36 million gulden was issued at an underwriting price of 82.

15 Metternich suspected that this initiative had the backing of the French government, or at least that part of it which was against intervention, but British observers believed that the Rothschilds were “pacific” for reasons of their own.

16 As Finance Minister and then premier, Villèle had succeeded in establishing a modicum of order in the French financial system, but was disliked by the less “circumspect” Ultras, especially Chateaubriand.

17 Significantly, no Rothschild was sent to Madrid and the negotiations there were entrusted to agents, first Belin and then Renevier.

18 In 1807 the Portuguese Crown Prince Joao had gone to Brazil at the time of the French invasion. In 1812, when the French were driven out, he refused to leave Brazil and elevated it “to the dignity, prominence and denomination of a Kingdom” equal with Portugal following his mother’s death in 1816. Six years later, when Joao VI returned to Portugal, his son Pedro became Emperor and he remained as such when Brazil’s independence was recognised in August 1825. When João died the following year, Pedro in turn passed the Portuguese throne to his daughter Maria, though this arrangement was subsequently challenged by Pedro’s brother Miguel.

19 Put simply, the plan drawn up by Nathan was that the Rothschilds, Barings and Laffitte together would undertake the conversion in return for the first year’s saving which resulted from it (28 million francs). To make the conversion attractive, Nathan insisted that the Banque de France must set its discount rate at 3 per cent.