

“With pleasure,” answered His Majesty the Emperor, and went his way into the Rue Laffitte.

I made my obeisance . . .





Six weeks later the money was paid. “From that time forth,” Herzen recalled, “I was on the best of terms with Rothschild. He liked in me the field of battle on which he had beaten Nicholas; I was for him something like Marengo or Austerlitz, and he several times recited the details of the action in my presence, smiling faintly, but magnanimously sparing his vanquished opponent.” After Herzen’s expulsion from Paris by the Bonapartist regime, James continued to look after his investments in American and other bonds (he appears in the 1851 balance sheet owing the Paris house 50,000 francs) and secured him permits on the occasions when he wished to visit Paris. He also recommended him to the London house, which took over his account during his long English exile.

Herzen’s transformation from insurgent into investor, from Rothschild critic into Rothschild client, was in many ways emblematic of a Europeanwide change of mood—as was James’s willingness to play this game with a notorious revolutionary. Did he know that the money he was putting in Herzen’s hands was being used to finance the Voix du Peuple ? If he did, it did not worry him. By the end of 1849 the revolution was over and the more rapid and sustained pace of economic development henceforth would make another 1848 much less likely. For his part, Herzen saw the Rothschilds as personifying this shift away from revolutionary politics: A Rothschild . . . must be in his office in the morning, to begin the cap italisation of his hundredth million; in Brazil there is plague, and war in Italy, America is falling to pieces—everything is going splendidly: and, if someone talks to him then of man’s exemption from responsibility and of a different distribution of wealth, of course he does not listen.



Of course, for a new era lay ahead: of conflicts within capitalism rather than against it, and between states rather than classes.





APPENDIX 1

Prices and Purchasing Power

It goes without saying that the pound sterling was worth considerably more in the nineteenth century than it is now, mainly because of the inflation which has been a perennial feature of economic life since the 1950s. To be precise, in 1800 the pound was worth around 25 times what it is worth today. Because prices tended to fall during the nineteenth century, it was actually worth rather more in 1900: close to fifty times as much. To put it another way, the purchasing power of the pound has fallen in the past century by around 98 per cent: in 1900 terms, a pound today is worth just two (decimal) pennies.

To try to make historic prices intelligible to modern readers, historians often use price indices to calculate what a sum of money in the nineteenth century “means” in today’s pounds. This is easily enough done. Let us take as an example Nathan Mayer Rothschild’s total wealth at the time of his death in 1836, which I estimate at around £3.5 million (see chapter 11). Following the conventional system, in order to “convert” that figure into 1995 pounds to allow for inflation in the past 160 years, all that the reader need do is multiply by 35.5, giving £124.25 million.