

Were the Rothschilds the richest family in the nineteenth century? Rubinstein’s figures for British millionaires do not give precise figures for fortunes in excess of £1 million before 1858; but it seems unlikely that any of the eleven other individuals listed for the period 1810-56 left his heirs as much as Nathan. The nearest was the banker William J. Denison, who left £2.3 million (including real estate worth £600,000) in 1849. It was not until 1857 that someone left more than Nathan to his heirs—the textile warehouseman and Anglo-American banker James Morrison, who left between £4 million and £6 million at his death. Nathan not only died richer than the ironmaster Richard Crawshay and the cotton manufacturers Robert Peel and Richard Arkwright; he also left more than the Duke of Queensberry, the Duke of Sutherland and the Duke of Cleveland. Taking the period 1860-99 as a whole, only twenty-three individuals left estates worth £1,800,000 or more: four of them were Rothschilds (Nathan’s sons Lionel, Anthony, Nat and Mayer). Although individually they were not the richest men of their time—Rubinstein cites two individual estates greater than £3 million—no other family could match their collective wealth. Altogether the brothers left £8.4 million: if Nathan, like all aristocratic millionaires, had left his fortune to a sole heir, Lionel would unquestionably have been the richest man in Britain. In reality, the richest man in the world was probably his uncle James who, at his death in 1868, was reported to have left his heirs around 1,100 million francs (£44 million), though a more realistic figure is probably around 193 million francs (£7.7 million) (see volume II).

From 1900 onwards, the English Rothschilds ceased to be exceptional as millionaires. Natty was the richest of his generation of English Rothschilds (leaving £2.5 million); but at least forty-six British millionaires in the period 1900-39 left as much as or more than him. It should be noted once again, however, that the partners in the French and Austrian houses were significantly richer than their English cousins. In 1905 Edouard, Gustave and Edmond each had personal shares in the combined Rothschild partnership worth £5.8 million. Albert, the head of the Vienna house, had a total share of £5.9 million. This excludes very substantial assets outside the partnership. Only seven of Rubinstein’s pre-1940 millionaires could match this; nine if the South African “Randlords” are included. Taken together at its peak in December 1899, the combined capital of the Rothschild houses was £41.4 million, divided between ten partners. Again, this takes no account of private wealth, much of it held in the form of expensive art collections and prime real estate. It is almost inconceivable that any other family could match this.

Nearly a hundred years on, do the Rothschilds have a modern equivalent? The answer is no. Not even the Saudi royal family has a comparable share of the world’s resources in its possession today. Nor can even the richest businessman in the world claim without qualification to be as rich in relative terms as Nathan Rothschild was when he died at the height of his fortune. At the time of writing, Bill Gates (the founder of the computer software company Microsoft) has an estimated personal fortune of $36.4 billion (£21.7 billion) and has a good claim to be the richest man in the world. If we relate that to current US GDP ($7,487.6 billion), we find that Mr Gates’s wealth is equivalent to 0.49 per cent of US GDP. This figure is less than Nathan’s equivalent figure of 0.62 per cent of UK GDP in 1836, though Mr Gates is gaining fast. Only if we relate the Gates fortune to American GDP per head ($27,730) does he have the advantage over Nathan: Gates’s wealth is 1.3 million times greater than American per capita GDP, whereas Nathan’s was only 160,000 times greater than British per capita GDP. The difference, however, mainly reflects the enormous growth in population since the early nineteenth century, which has restrained the growth of American per-capita income.