

4 The Rive Droite cost 16.8 million francs to build compared with a projected cost of 11 million, though it was significantly cheaper than the Rive Gauche.

5 Although it seems unlikely that this pamphlet was authorised, Anselm later stated that the “vulgar abuse” directed at James had “emanated principally from a despicable person, to whom our Paris House had quite rightly refused a loan.”

6 This was essentially a development of his allegations that James had bribed politicians and the press to secure the Nord concession, and a more general attack on the financing of the railways.

7 Naturally, their mother interpreted their survival as “providential.” According to one account, however, Evelina and her unborn son died as a result of another railway crash two years later.





SIXTEEN 1848


1 Figures for length of line constructed and investment show that it was not until 1851 that the trough was reached, four years after the financial crisis: there was, to use an apposite metaphor, a “runaway train” effect.

2 When Nat saw Adolph after the revolution, he found him “quite an altered man, he has become the steadiest fellow ever seen, he neither smokes nor shags nor dances.”

3 According to the republican leader Garnier-Pagès, the attack on Suresnes was instigated by a local poultry merchant, Louis Frazier. The crowd pillaged the pheasant pens and the stables, stole horses and “with hatchets, iron bars and clubs they laid waste furniture, mirrors, and pictures.” Those convicted were sentenced to between five and twenty years in prison.

4 Both Schleswig and Holstein were formally under Danish suzerainty, the former guaranteed by Britain, Russia and France under a treaty of 1720. However, the Salic law of succession applied in the duchies but not in Denmark, so that the failure of the Danish male line appeared to call the future of the duchies into question. The German claim was primarily an ethnic one. Holstein was already part of the German Confederation; the southern part of Schleswig was linguistically German. The Danes forced the issue by incorporating Schleswig into Denmark on March 21. The Confederation Diet in Frankfurt, encouraged by the nationalist pre-parliament, responded by sending a Prussian army to Schleswig. To the dismay of the nationalists in Frankfurt, on August 26 the Prussians bowed to British and Russian pressure and accepted an armistice which established a joint Danish—Prussian administration in the duchies.

5 The political anxieties of Albert’s uncle, King Leopold of the Belgians, were such that he deposited 5 million francs with the Rothschilds as a contingency fund in the event of his losing his throne.

6 James attempted to mollify Cavour by sending his agent Landauer to offer him “as many Rentes au prix courant as I wanted.” Cavour refused, “but it gave me some idea of the way business is done in most of the European Cabinets.”





INDEX





“A-albionic Research Weekly” (Daugherty)

Abbot Scaglia Adoring the Virgin and Child, The (Van Dyck)