

7 According to Lionel, Hottinguer said: “Our credit is no more so good, and this last six months we have lost much in the public opinion; we shall not find so many more followers when we wish to make any loans.”

8 The Times, Aug. 4, 1836: “This contract was more detrimental in proportion to his subscribers than to himself, as the greater part was distributed among them, and it was at the time a matter of severe reproach against him that he did on this occasion leave his friends completely in the lurch. But this was answered by the remark that he had always been in the practice of dealing liberally with his subscribers in sharing his contracts among them, and that the revolution which followed and made this so ruinous an operation was one that could not possibly have been foreseen by him.”

9 Frederick William had made a morganatic marriage to Gertrud Falkenstein, the divorced wife of a Prussian lieutenant. In 1831 he elevated her to the rank of Countess von Schaumburg, and later Princess of Hanau. When he was in Frankfurt, the couple and their five children regularly “took their midday meal quite en famille with their good business friend.”

10 On July 17, 1832, Thomas Raikes recorded in his journal that a Dutch broker had asked “Rothschild yesterday . . . if he would advance money on stock; the old Jew refused him, saying, ‘In these times I shall not advance money to any one by Got; who knows what may happen? you may be dead tomorrow. ’ It so happened that the poor man was seized with the cholera that very evening, and the next morning he was dead.”





NINE The Chains of Peace


1 The existing links between the House of Saxe-Coburg and the Rothschilds explain why the marriage of “your little Queen” to Albert prompted a message of congratulation from Salomon’s son Anselm to his London cousins.

2 Of crucial importance was the French government’s unequivocal commitment to the two protocols of January 1831, and its refusal to accept the Belgian offer of the crown to Louis Philippe’s son the duc de Nemours, or to support Belgian resistance against the territorial provisions of the protocols. Needless to say, it was good news from a Rothschild standpoint that Leopold of Saxe-Coburg emerged as the successful candidate for the Belgian throne.

3 James opposed the use of the brusque phrases “evacuez immédiatement Bologne” and “evacuez promptement Bologne.” “I shall ensure,” he told his brothers, “that the offending phrase is omitted.” James’s hope that the Austrians would refer the matter to an international conference in Rome was fulfilled, but it was not until July that their troops were withdrawn. The fact that Périer did not make withdrawal a casus belli was therefore significant.

4 Salomon assured the Prussian government that “he had the honour of his House particularly in view, as he attached the greatest value to demonstrating to the Royal Government of Prussia that the consolidation of its public credit, and the fulfilment of the assurances which his House had given in this matter, were of more importance in his eyes than any considerations of private profit.” This proved all too true, despite Nathan’s decision to send Anselm to Berlin to secure modifications to the deal. In essence, the £3,809,400 of 5 per cent bonds still outstanding from the 1818 loan were to be exchanged for 4 per cents issued to the same amount at 98 in the course of two and a half years from March 1830 until September 1832. As James realised even before the agreement was concluded, the issue price was certainly too high given the growing political uncertainty in France and the commission of 1.5 per cent too low. Interestingly, however, he seems to have regarded it as preferable that the Rothschilds undertake the risk, the extent of which he quite accurately gauged: “The worst, the very worst is that we stand to lose 15 per cent, God forbid, which amounts to £200,000 which is quite liable to ruin someone [else].”