





SIX Amschel’s Garden


1 Of eight German-Jewish merchants in Manchester in 1806, Nathan was the only one who maintained his religious affiliation.

2 In 1844 Nat was obliged to eat “a kosher lunch and [felt] very sick in consequence. I shall smoke a 14 sou Havana to relieve my stomach.”

3 Wilhelm attended the synagogue twice daily and studied the Talmud in the evening. On the Orthodox revival in Frankfurt.

4 The most common Schnorrer joke has Rothschild complaining about the Schnorrer’s tactics only to be asked, “Are you trying to teach me schnorring?” Another favourite has the Schnorrer regarding his relative’s regular hand-out as inheritable property. Sometimes the Schnorrer is caught out: he claims to play the bassoon, but Rothschild has one in a cupboard and asks him to play; or he sees Rothschild’s daughters playing a duet and decides not to bother schnorring: the Baron has clearly fallen on hard times if they have to share a piano.

5 “So young—and already a Rothschild,” says one Schnorrer to another as a child is wheeled past in a sumptuous perambulator or carriage. Contemplating a lavish Rothschild gravestone, the Schnorrer can only marvel: “They sure know how to live.” There are numerous jokes in this vein.

6 An important element in the Jewish case, stressed by the Rothschilds, was that a payment had been made by the Jewish community for their rights, to finance which bonds had been issued. To revoke the 1811 agreement would therefore require this money to be refunded.

7 The economic restrictions extended the duration of Jewish apprenticeships and prohibited Jews from the trading in food and firewood.

8 Montefiore had retired from business to concentrate on philanthropy and Jewish communal matters.

9 Caroline’s few surviving letters to Salomon suggest above all an impatience with his over-eagerness to please Nathan and others. Their son Anselm became the main focus for her affections; that may explain the relatively cool relationship he had with his father.

10 Hannah was supposed to be there in attendance at the birth of her first grandchild; but she was irresistibly attracted by the wild fluctuations of the bourse caused by the revolution. Despite a number of “specs,” however, she had to confess to her husband: “You will see me back without having made a great deal of money.” Three years later her son wrote expressing the hope that she had been “a great Bull” during the “enormous rise in all the funds.”





SEVEN Barons


1 In 1836, Betty told a guest who admired her house: “If you had seen the hotel of M. Solomon Rothschild (which is next door), you would think our house was only the stables attached to it.”

2 Interestingly, the Rothschild passion for horses appears to have begun with the brothers’ wives. With the exception of James, the brothers regarded horses exclusively as a means of getting from A to B, and were baffled when James began riding for pleasure.

3 On the coat of arms Salomon initially requested the following arms: “First quarter, or, an eagle sable surcharged in dexter by a field gules; second quarter, gules, a leopard passant proper; third quarter, a lion rampant; fourth quarter, azure, an arm bearing five arrows. In the centre of the coat a shield gules. Right hand supporter, a greyhound, a symbol of loyalty; left supporter, a stork, a symbol of piety and content.” This was to be surmounted by a seven-point crown and a lion rampant. This design was substantially modified by the Vienna heralds: the final version featured only the eagle and the hand grasping four arrows; there were no supporters, and the shield was surmounted by a helmet, a three-pointed crown and another eagle. The version registered by Nathan in 1818 was slightly different: the arms consisted of “Azure a lion passant guardant erminois grasping with the dexter forepaw five arrows the pheons downwards or; And for the crest on a wreath of the colours out of a crown vallery gules a demi lion erminois holding between the paws five arrows as in the arms.” The motto, “Concordia, integritas, industria,” was incorporated later.