

4 In “The Baths of Lucca,” a ball at Salomon’s house is described: “Such stars and orders! The Order of the Falcon, the Order of the Golden Fleece, the Order of the Lion, the Order of the Eagle—and there was even a child, I assure you, a tiny tot, that wore the Order of the Elephant.” When Macaulay dined with “the Jew” (i.e. Nathan) he “did not see one Peer, or one star, except a foreign order or two, which I generally consider as an intimation to look to my pockets.”

5 It is worth noting that Nathan’s grandson dropped the “de” on receiving a British peerage, a usage followed by his descendants—hence the fact that there are “Rothschilds” as well as “de Rothschilds” today.

6 Other paintings in Nathan’s possession were gifts from government clients, like the portraits of Francis I of Austria, Frederick William III of Prussia, William I of Holland, John VI of Portugal and the Empress Alexandra of Russia seen by Prince Pückler.

7 The Family of W. N. [sic] Rothschild, Consul General of his Austrian Majesty at the British Court was commissioned to mark Nathan’s appointment as Austrian consul general. Hobday was paid £1,000 for the work, which was shown at the Royal Academy in 1821 and then hung for a time at Austrian Consulate, before being moved to Gunnersbury. It can now be seen in the main hall of N. M. Rothschild & Sons at New Court.

8 Hannah also found the atmosphere less tolerant when she went there in 1841: “[T]he Place is too orthodox to be an agreeable residence for any other sect beside Protestant. Bibles and other religious Books are placed in the different apartments of the Hotel we are in but the Inhabitants are civil and attentive.”





EIGHT Sudden Revolutions (1830-1833)


1 The utopian socialist Owen had known the Rothschilds since at least 1818.

2 “Above all fill his purse, O king, With ample funds for travelling,

And give him a letter of credit to greet

The Rothschild brothers in Rue Lafitte.

“Yes a letter of credit for a million or two

Of golden ducats should seen him through;

And Baron de Rothschild will say of him, then,

“This elephant’s surely the best of men!” ’



3 As James later noted, “regarding Polignac, I had been forewarned on several occasions as far back as six months before. However, I did not want to believe it. I had a gut feeling.”

4 Greville, Memoirs, vol. I, p. 279: “Went to Esterhazy’s ball; talked to old Rothschild who was there with his wife and a dandy little Jew son. He . . . offered to give me a letter by his brother, who would give me any information I wanted, squeezed my hand, and looked like what he is.”

5 Stendhal, Lucien Leuwen. Leuwen also has no objection to his son leaving the family firm to pursue a military or political career, something James would never have countenanced.

6 Hannah, Paris, to Nathan, London, Aug. 24, 1830: “You must look at it coolly, dear Rothschild. It will blow over. Salomon and James do not like the fall, you may easily suppose, but they are very cool and not frightened. Our attention is so engrossed with the funds that I can dwell upon nothing else.”