

20 See e.g. James, Paris, to Nathan, London, Jan. 28, 1825: “The Minister said to me today, ‘Mr Rothschild, you have the reputation of a man who has been selling large numbers of rentes.’ I must therefore be careful not to antagonise the Government. However, I think that on Monday or Tuesday when the King is due to make his speech I will be able to sell [rentes] at a better rate than today and I will profit from the situation because I don’t foresee any sizeable rise.”

21 In fact, Nathan intervened to support the rente after the rejection of the conversion bill, which unleashed a wave of selling in Paris and London.

22 Of twenty-six foreign government loans totalling £52.4 million which had been made between 1823 and 1826, sixteen were in default within a few years.





FIVE “Hue and Cry” (1826-1829)


1 It is surprising that the Rothschilds could still fear that bills endorsed by them might not be accepted.

2 See illustration 10.vii below. The title is a pun: “Exemplary Knight” literally, but also “Knight with Samples.”

3 See illustration 7.i below.

4 The origin of the word “Hep” is variously explained: as an acronym of “Hierosolyma est perdita,” or as the sound of bleating goats, alluding to the Jews’ traditional beards. There was a similar backlash against emancipation in many German towns.

5 His “Political Georgics,” a pastiche of Dryden’s Georgics, appeared in The Times, March 18, 1828: Macaulay later repeated the lines in a letter to his sister: “ . . . Oh mysterious two,

Lords of our fate, the Doctor and the Jew,

If by your care preferred th’aspiring clerk [Herries]

Quits the close alley for the breezy park,

. . . And you, great pair, through Windsor’s shades who rove,

The Faun and Dryad of the conscious grove,

All, all, inspire me;—for of all I sing

Doctor and Jew and Marchioness and King . . .

But the black stream beneath runs on the same

Still bawls in Wetherell’s key, still stinks like Herries[’] name.”



6 The loan was intended solely to enable Brazil to maintain interest payments on her existing debt. James “admit[ted] quite frankly that in two years” time these people will not pay anything”; but in the short run it boosted the price of Brazilian bonds.

7 The loan was apparently never repaid, so Nathan kept the jewels.

8 In fact, Amschel provided a sumptuous lunch, to which a number of leading figures in the Frankfurt diplomatic corps were also invited. The Augsburger Zeitung reported that “the stairs leading to the ban quetting room were laid out with red carpet, and decorated with garlands of flowers and plants . . . Several of the most distinguished emissaries to the German Diet, as well as foreign ministers present here, enjoyed this guest luncheon prepared with no expense spared.”

9 The Courrier Français also reported the dinner, humorously explaining the absence of the British ambassador as follows: “An Englishman was asked how it could be that the ambassador of his nation had not been present at this diplomatic feast. ‘Because,’ he replied, ‘England has no need of money.’ ”