

2 Powers of attorney had to be sent to allow senior clerks to act in the absence of family members—a rare if not unprecedented circumstance at this time.

3 “I looked about me. Every minute a small door opened and one Bourse agent after another came in, uttering a number in a loud voice; Rothschild going on reading, muttered without raising his eyes: “Yes—no—good—perhaps—enough—” and the number walked out. There were various gentlemen in the room, rank-and-file capitalists, members of the National Assembly, two or three exhausted tourists with youthful moustaches and elderly cheeks, those everlasting figures who drink—wine—at watering-places and are presented at courts, the feeble, lymphatic suckers that drain the sap from the aristocratic families, and shove their way from the gaming table to the Bourse. They were all talking together in undertones. The Jewish autocrat sat calmly at his table, looking through papers and writing something on them, probably millions, or at least hundreds of thousands.”





TWELVE Love and Debt


1 The house was demolished on Mayer Carl’s death in 1886 and the grounds given to the City of Frankfurt.

2 There appears to have been some sort of financial constraint imposed on Anselm by his father, who perhaps wished his son to reserve his energies for the Austrian estates he would one day inherit. When Anselm spotted an attractive property at Emmerich near Frankfurt in 1843, he had to ask James to put up the money and sought to justify it as a speculative investment. Revealingly, Amschel was to act as “paymaster” for the new house at Grüneburg.

3 Despite his confessed “bad opinion” of Jews in general, Thackeray became friendly with Anthony’s wife Louisa and Lionel’s wife Charlotte after a chance meeting in 1848.

4 In late 1849 Heine sent her a copy of his post-revolutionary poem which contains a passionate denunciation of the powers which had crushed the Hungarian rising. The Rothschilds’ support for the Russian-sponsored reaction was well known.

5 James may have attended the second, disastrous performance.





THIRTEEN Quicksilver and Hickory (1834-1839)


1 The Rothschilds had lent the Portuguese government £88,688 for four months to pay the interest due on its 3 per cent bonds. As a security, the government handed over “Regency bonds” to the nominal value of £600,000. When the government failed to repay the £88,688, the London house sold these bonds, but the Portuguese government claimed that it had unnecessarily delayed this sale in order to collect more interest. The final judgement went in favour of the Portuguese government on a technicality.

2 Interestingly, Metternich made it clear that he had no objection to the Rothschilds covertly participating in Spanish business in partnership with other firms. His concern was that the name “Rothschild,” if publicly associated with the Regency of Maria Christina, would strengthen its position. The warnings of Broglie to James are not easy to reconcile with his talk on March 8 of a French-backed loan to integrate Spain “dans l’ensemble des finances de l’Europe, lesquelles forment en ce moment une sorte de République, une sorte de fédération, qui sont jusqu’à un certain point solidaires les unes des autres et se soutiennent mutuellement dans une certaine mesure.” When asked to define the nature of the French backing, he changed his tune.