

5 The outstanding £850,000 of 5 per cents were finally redeemed in 1834.

6 The money was earmarked for the construction of fortresses on the Franco-German border; that was evidently not Metternich’s purpose in borrowing it.

7 The 5 per cent loan was initially issued at 94. Altogether 11 million francs were earmarked for the payment of compensation to Turkey; the parallel with the Belgian-Dutch separation is striking.





TEN The World’s Bankers


1 The cartoon is usually dated 1848 or 1849 but the political allusions are to the political events of 1840.

2 The Royal Exchange (not to be confused with the Stock Exchange at Capel Court) was essentially a market for commercial bills and foreign exchange, though in Nathan’s time bonds began to be traded there too. On the ground floor, the south-east corner was formally allocated to Jewish traders, behind the Spanish and Portuguese.

3 Among other things, the brothers resolved to withdraw their deposits at New Court and to sell their holdings of the 1818 Prussian loan. They also agreed to ensure that they had between them sufficient liquid funds to make available the 9 million gulden of French reparations deposited with them by the German Confederation, and to circulate monthly balance sheets for this purpose. It is not clear whether the agreement was acted upon or whether it was simply intended as a shot across Nathan’s bows.

4 Anselm immediately became entitled to a fifteenth of the profits, though he did not formally acquire a share of the capital until 1828, when a million gulden was invested in his name in the Paris house. His grandmother Gutle’s inheritance from Mayer Amschel was invested in the Frankfurt house, but she had no status as a partner and her share was not included in the total capital for accounting purposes.

5 A clause was added, however, which stated that if the profits of the Paris, Frankfurt, Naples and Vienna houses exceeded those of the London house to the point that 22.5 per cent of their total profits exceeded 60 per cent of the London house’s, then the division of the profits would revert to the old system of equal shares of the whole.

6 There was a threat to give Warburgs priority in 1848, but this seems not to have been carried out.

7 Another apocryphal anecdote has the roles reversed, with a wily stockbroker bursting into Nathan’s house, feigning drunkenness, overhearing sensitive information and rushing back to the exchange to make a killing.

8 In the 1840s the Railway Times referred to the “notorious fact that in all loan transactions of the late Mr Rothschild, The Times invariably, aye systematically, came in for a share of the pickings.” Alsager’s career ended disastrously: he left the paper after a large “inconsistency” was discovered in the accounts, and committed suicide shortly afterwards.





ELEVEN “Il est Mort” (1836)


1 The marriage was apparently unconsummated, for reasons which can easily be inferred. “It appears,” commented James crudely, “that the red King would not permit him to spit roast the bird despite the fact that he had caught it in his net.” Lionel was more delicate: “Till now there is not much to relate as you well know that the fright has generally such an effect upon the young ladies that they are immediately troubled with some thing that pays them very often a visit. I can only say that she is a most beautiful person in every respect.” The different language illustrates nicely the difference between the generations; at the same time, the fact that both men saw fit to allude to the subject shows how few secrets there were between members of the family.