

3 According to Villiers, Mendizábal hoped for a “stroke of generosity” from “the Leviathan” (meaning Nathan). The diplomatic correspondence shows how little contact there was between the Rothschilds and Palmerston at this time.

4 Lionel to Anthony and Nat, July 22. “Every person here laughs at their want of decision and at their not knowing which cause they ought to take up. Why do they not interfere regularly and send 50,000 men; they would finish the war in three months, or why do not they propose to send some French Generals?” wrote Lionel angrily. “It is disgusting to see two powers like England and France so afraid of the despotic Government”—meaning Metternich. James, Paris, to his nephews, London, Sept. 11; same to same, Dec. 25. Palmerston made a similar point in arguing against a guaranteed loan of the sort urged by Villiers: “Men would say that if money was the chief want of the Queenites a loan might set them on their legs, but that the Rothschilds will not contract to supply military skill and willingness to fight and honesty of purpose, and common sense, and without all these things the loans would only enrich a few more generals.

5 Because the Banque could not directly lend money, the operation had to be done indirectly: Baring drew three-month bills to the value of 48 million francs on a syndicate composed of Hottinguer, Delessert, d’Eichthal and Périer and d’Argout, then discounted the bills; Baring then made the cash available to the Bank.





FOURTEEN Between Retrenchment and Rearmament (1840)


1 “On David’s throne, once it is restored, there will sit that financial dynasty which all European recognises and to which all Europe submits. . . .”

2 “He talked to me with great apparent earnestness on the subject of restoring the Jews to their own land . . . The country, he said, had ample natural capabilities: all it wanted was labour, and protection for the labourer: the ownership of the soil might be bought from Turkey: money would be forthcoming: the Rothschilds and leading Hebrew capitalists would all help: the Turkish empire was falling into ruin: the Turkish Govt would do anything for money.”

3 I am grateful to Professor David Landes for this point.

4 Significantly, the Mayer de Rothschild hospital set up then was wholly controlled by the Rothschilds, and had been established under the supervision of James’s son Gustave.





FIFTEEN “Satan Harnessed”: Playing at Railways (1830-1846)


1 Pseudo-scientific racial definitions of Jewishness were of course primarily devised by anti-Semites in order to get at apostates or the issue of “mixed marriages.” Because the Rothschilds remained Jewish in the religious sense, they could be attacked in traditional terms too.

2 The Austrian government’s inertia is well illustrated by the failure of a scheme to raze the city walls to ease the development of traffic between the centre and the suburbs.

3 As in England, the first French railways strictly speaking were built to transport coal in mining areas: the Saint-Etienne line built in the early 1830s was the analogue of the Stockton—Darlington line built a decade previously. But the development of the railway network proper—in the sense of a service for both freight and passengers, and reliant on steam locomotives rather than horses—should be dated from the construction of the Paris-Saint-Germain line.