38 P. E, TETLOCK AND A,

justify our political biases and predilections? There appear to be large
‘classes of questions in the study of global conflict and cooperation for which
experimental control is out of the question and statistical control is of limited
usefulness (assuming we can find a reasonable set of comparison cases and
can reliably operationalize the theoretical constructs). These questions are
too important to ignore, but apparently too difficult to answer in a fashion
that commands transideological consensus.

“Too ofien, the response to the dilemma is to embrace extreme solutions
(Strassfeld 1992): either to reject categorically all counterfactual arguments
as fanciful suppositions, mere conjecture, and frivolous figments (counter-
factual dread) or to assume confidently that we know exactly what would
have happened if we had gone down another path, sometimes going so far as
to project several steps deep into hypothetical causal sequences (counterfac-
tual bravado). The former response leads to futile efforts to exorcize coun-
terfactuals from historical inquiry (Fisher 1970); the latter response leads at
best to error (we ignore the compounding of probabilities at our peril) and at
worst to the full-scale politicization of counterfactual argument (as advocates
claim carte blanche to write hypothetical histories that advance their favorite
‘causes). This book tries to articulate a principled compromise between these
extremes. On the one hand, we acknowledge that thought experiments inev-
itably play key roles in the causal arguments of any historical discipline. On
the other hand, we acknowledge that thought experiments are often suffused
‘with error and bias. But, that said, we do not conclude that things are hope~
Jess—that it is impossible to draw causal lessons from history. Rather, we
‘conclude that disciplined use of counterfactuals—grounded in explicit stan-
dards of evidence and proof—can be enlightening in specific historical, the-
retical, and policy settings. And that, we suspect, is the most important
lesson of this book.

2

Causes and Counterfactuals in Social Science

EXPLORING AN ANALOGY BETWEEN CELLULAR AUTOMATA
AND HISTORICAL PROCESSES

JAMES D. FEARON

For A VARIETY of purposes, social scientists and historians take the discov-
ery of causes of events in the human world as a goal—perhaps the principal
goal—of their work.' Some research communities are shy of the word
“causes,” preferring words like “influences,” “determinants,” “sources,”
“origins,” “roots,” “correlates,” “factors that shape or give rise to,” and so
fon. But these are all forms of language that is basically causal?

When trying to argue or assess whether some factor A caused event B,
social scientists frequently use counterfactuals.’ That is, they either ask
whether or claim that “if A had not occurred, B would not have occurred.”
Most often, such claims are little more than unelaborated rhetorical de-
vices—throwaway lines—deployed as part of a larger rhetorical strategy to
convince the reader that A caused B. Less frequently, researchers actually
develop and explore the counterfactual scenario as a means of testing the
causal hypothesis.