Preface




This work is an attempt to write the history of Egypt from 1805 to 1848,
when the country was ruled by Muhammad Ali. There have been
countless works written throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centu-
ries on that period, but no major work has appeared since 1961. In the
light of recent developments in scholarship in the last ten years, I have
undertaken this work as a means of opening research once again into
that period of history, for, while many books deal with the period, few of
them deal with it properly or even adequately. Many of them were
written either by supporters of the Egyptian royal family (indeed many
were commissioned by Egyptian rulers) or by detractors, so that we do
not possess an unbiassed record of the age; neither is there much on the
economic and social aspects of that period of Egyptian history. That is
why I call my work 'an attempt', for we need a generation or more of
researchers producing various monographs on different aspects before
we can claim to know the period. If one may level a major point of
criticism against most of the works of the past on the Muhammad Ali
period, it is that they were written without consulting the Egyptian
archives, except for the pioneering work of a handful of scholars, among
whom are M. Sabry, M. Fahmi, A. A. al-Giritly and A. Rustum. I have
tried to remedy that defect in a minor fashion, for the Egyptian archives
are an untapped gold-mine of information. There are 36,000 dossiers
dealing with the period, only one of which has been catalogued, and
there are several more sijillat dealing with land tenure and finances,
whose accounts and figures have not been deciphered or, when they
were deciphered, their conclusions were rejected in favour of material
deriving from some foreign source that was judged more reliable, when
in fact it was not. Even more, we need to learn about eighteenth-century
Egypt before we can come to valid conclusions about the situation in
early nineteenth-century Egypt. Andre Raymond has shown the way
with his magnificent two-volume study of Cairo, but we need more such
research before we can handle the mamluk period adequately.
   When all the background work is done perhaps some of my claims

                                                                       vii
