Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

   Apart from their need to find funds to finance an expansion of military
and naval capabilities, the mamluks did not have the same relationship
with the artisans that the ojakat had developed. The tempered exploita-
tion of the urban iqtaat by the ojakat was then replaced by severe
financial exploitation by the mamluks.7 One direct consequence of that
repression was a decline in the production and quality of export cloth. It
may well be that the tujjar who stood to make more money from the
importation of foreign cloth than from the exportation of local cloth had
encouraged that trade, which, since it benefited their financial partners,
the mamluks, was condoned by them. In 1790 the French government
placed an embargo on cloth export, as a result of which the same
merchants tried to encourage a textile revival in Egypt for export, by
imposing lower excise taxes on cloth at Bulaq and Damietta.
   The process of exploiting the iqtaat was also aimed at weakening the
janissaries and the ojakat by divesting them of their main sources of
income, including the 10 per cent fee on successions of defunct tujjar
and artisans that had been a janissary prerogative and a main source of
wealth. Similar conflicts took place in other parts of the Ottoman
empire: in Damascus there were outbreaks of violence between the
Yerliyya and the imperial janissaries and, in Aleppo, conflict between
the janissaries and the Ashraf. It would seem that a new stratum of
affluent men was being created at the time in each of these areas. That
new stratum was composed of high ulama, of tujjar, and of landholders,
who combined forces with the military elite. They had common
interests: in the first place they wished to redirect trade from an internal
to an export-oriented market from which they stood to benefit. Such
redirection implied a greater degree of exploitation of the rural and
urban workers in order to cream off commodities for export. Finally, the
establishment of law and order became a necessary adjunct to allow for
exploitation without fear of uprising or civil disturbance, and to permit
commodities to reach their markets safely. It was necessary for the tujjar
to become allies of the mamluks, who kept order, and of the ulama, who
kept the population quiescent, to succeed in that enterprise.
   The rise of these new elements may be related to the reorientation of
trade patterns that was taking place. The tujjar, engaged in large-scale
export of raw materials (e.g. cotton and rice) to offset the loss in coffee
and textile exports, caused a subsequent decline in small traders, local
artisans and producers by raising the price of raw materials through
export, and by importing finished goods that competed with local
production. The rank and file of the ojakat, whether in Egypt, Aleppo or
Damascus, who had blended with the local population, had intermarried
with it and identified itself with the artisanal classes, sought to resist the
