Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

all other trade showed a deficit. In brief, Egyptian trade was by then
consistently indebted to the European and Red Sea merchants by
59,641,746 paras, more or less, depending on the year.
   As a symptom of this trade deficit we notice that late in the century
Egyptian imports from Europe consisted of medium-quality cloth,
constituting some 50 per cent of all imports in general, but covering 60
per cent of France's exports to Egypt, the rest being dye, paper, metal
(iron, tin, lead, pewter), glass, amber, coral, spices and, by the second
half of the century, weapons. Primary articles consisted of 19.9 per cent
and luxury items came to 10.2 per cent of the total. In return Egypt
exported raw and semi-raw materials: rice, flax, wool, cotton thread,
leather, senna, saffron, salammoniac - equalling 60.4 per cent of
exports. Articles re-exported from the Red Sea and the Sudan trade
comprised 26 per cent of the total, and a small quantity of locally
manufactured products, like cloth, came to 10 per cent of the total after
having constituted some 50 per cent of the whole.5 Wheat, rice and
coffee were on the list of items that were often put under embargo by
Istanbul, but they were continually exported in clandestine fashion.
Trade with the Ottoman empire was mostly in coffee, which covered
one-fifth of the total trade; in rice, which came a close second, since
Egypt was a major supplier of rice for the empire and exported over
20,000 ardabs a year, that is, 13.8 per cent of exports; in cotton, raw or
as thread, and in textiles and linen. Egyptian textiles sold in Albania,
Salonica, Smyrna, Chios, Syria, etc. In return Egypt imported wood,
tobacco, soap from Palestine, cotton, silk and dried fruits from Syria.
Syria supplied much of the raw material for the Egyptian textile weavers
who worked in cotton, silk and alaja, a mixture of both.
   From this picture we can see that Egyptian textiles had fallen in the
European import market, while French textiles had risen in the Egypt-
ian import market, a clear indication that French textiles were displac-
ing local production. Such displacement may have been the result of
French technological superiority, but that was only one variable, and
the major technological gap does not happen until the nineteenth
century. Other variables, such as the cost of labour and materials,
changes in market and in marketing techniques should be taken into
account. The price of raw cotton had increased 100 per cent over the
century, while the price of finished cotton and yarn had remained
relatively constant.6 The local spinners and weavers were thus caught
up in declining profits and rising costs, which may well have accounted
for the decline in production. The importation of French medium-
priced cloth was a symptom of competition with local products and their
displacement, rather than a symptom of an expanding market within
