                                                                   Preface

my colleagues who have: amongst others, Professors al-Hitta, Barakat
and Abd al-Rahim. Because of a fire in 1822 in the building that housed
the archives, we have little material prior to that time, which explains
why researchers have had to rely on secondary sources such as Jabarti,
Turc, the Description de VEgypte and the archives of European govern-
ments.
   I am grateful to the Academic Senate of the University of California,
Los Angeles, for several senate grants; to the Social Science Research
Council and to the American Research Center in Egypt whose generous
grants allowed me to pursue my research in Egypt, England and France.
I am also grateful to the American University in Cairo which contrib-
uted to my support for six months while in Cairo by naming me a
Distinguished Visiting Professor. In Cairo I owe a debt of gratitude to
His Excellency Dr Sheniti, the former Under-Secretary of Cultural
Affairs, for his permission to use the materials. I am also indebted to the
then Director of the Archives, Jubran Jubran, and to the employees of
the Dar, especially to Sawsan Abd al-Ghani and Ibrahim Fathallah
Ahmad for their kindness and assistance. My thanks also go to the
Public Record Office in London and to the Quai d'Orsay in Paris for
permission to use their materials.
   I am deeply grateful to my friends and colleagues Dr Rifaat Abul
Hajj, Albert Hourani and Roger Owen for their generosity in reading
and commenting on my manuscript, and to my student Kenneth Cuno
for his criticisms and insight; their comments have immeasurably
improved the final draft. I am indebted to Julia Clancy Smith who
laboured with notes, glossary and indexing.
  As to my family who suffered through the years while the book was
written, I can only offer my love and deep gratitude for their forbear-
ance and for their unflagging support.




                                                                         IX
