Preface

will be contradicted, and perhaps they will be further substantiated, for
we each owe a debt to the work of our predecessors, even when we
criticize them. We all stand on each other's shoulders, an uncomfortable
position at best.
   I have not touched on the administration of the country in great
detail, as this has been mentioned in a number of works, notable among
which is Deny's monumental work; neither have I gone into any detail
on the educational system and the foreign missions sent abroad, for
which information the reader can go to Heyworth-Dunne and Ahmad
Izzat Abd al-Karim; nor with the system of land tenure, save in so far as
it concerns major political trends, for that has been admirably covered
by al-Hitta and Barakat. What I have done is to analyse the history of
Egypt during the Muhammad Ali period, to account for the cause and
effect of events and trace them back to an earlier period and to an
economic and financial base in order to understand why certain steps
were taken.
   The research for this work was carried out in the archives of Egypt,
England and France. In Egypt my work took me to Dar al-Wathaiq al-
Misriyya. I consulted a few of the sijillat but barely scratched the
surface, for it would need several generations of researchers to go
through the material in an exhaustive fashion. The rest of my material
came from a variety of boxes containing loose sheets, letters, orders and
communications of various kinds, translations of parts of sijillat which
had been used by previous researchers and left together as one lot. For
instance, the material used by Professor Asad Rustum for his corpus of
materials dealing with the Syrian campaign are kept in their entirety as
one unit, as is much of the material dealing with the campaigns in the
Sudan, the Hijaz and the Morea. Some of the boxes contain letters from
Muhammad Ali to various members of his family and from them to him.
Delving into these boxes and sijillat is both a delight and a source of
frustration: a delight because so much new material comes to light, and a
frustration because too much material needs to be catalogued and
indexed before it can be used. Some of the material is in Turkish,
although all Turkish items were translated into Arabic and recorded
before they were despatched. The dossiers bear different headings
depending on the administration they derived from, thus Bahr Barra
dealt with foreign affairs, Maiyya Turki and Maiyya Arabi dealt with
the pasha's entourage and acted as the executive branch of the bureau-
cracy, Fabrikat dealt with the industries, and so on. While the dossiers
are written in various legible scripts, those dealing with land tenure are
written in qirma, which is more troublesome to read. I have not
personally consulted the land records, but have relied on the works of

viii
