                                               Egypt under the mamluks

political changes that militated against their common interests in favour
of the other, rising stratum. On the other hand, the heads of the ojakat,
who had allied themselves with the mamluks and were themselves
recruiting mamluk households, identified and merged with the new
stratum and helped establish its ascendancy.
   The mamluk beys in the past had derived 'heir main source of income
from the rural iltizamat. These tax farms had acquired a quasi-
hereditary status and could be bought and sold. Some of the land was
rendered further immune from confiscation by becoming alienated in
the form of mortmain (waqf).* The tax farmer, or multazim, collected
the taxes due to the government on the land, and remitted them to the
treasury. As his fee for collecting the taxes he was granted a piece of
land, usya land, on which he paid the land tax (miri) only, and which
was cultivated by corvee labour.9 The multazim also imposed several
illegal and extraordinary taxes on the fallahin, which in the course of
time became inscribed in the registers as customary taxes, even though
they were illegal. Some historians believed usya land to form 10 per cent
of the acreage, or zimam, of a village, which may have been true at some
time, but was not true by the eighteenth century. By then the proportion
of usya land to land worked by the fallahin, ard al-fallah, differed in
different villages.10 The multazim collected the taxes from the fallahin
with an army of assistants, all of whom had to be paid fees by the
peasantry and all of whom extorted from the fallah as much as they
could. The advent of the tax collector and his procession struck terror
into the heart of every village.
   Land taxes fell into two categories. The first was a tax on land that
was surveyed (mamsuha) and athariyya, which together comprised ard
al-fallah, and which had definite boundaries; taxes there were on an
individual basis assigned on the faddan of land. The same fallah tilled
the same land and passed that right on to his heirs, so long as they
continued to pay the taxes. Such land was found mostly in Lower
Egypt. The second category of land tax fell on land that varied from year
to year depending on the level of the flood waters. Such lands were
redistributed among the fallahin every year by the village head, the
shaikh or umda, and the tax was assigned (kilald) on a collective basis on
the whole village.11 Should one fallah default on his taxes the difference
was made up by the collectivity under the supervision of the shaikh.
   The fallahin had no property rights over the land, and neither had the
tax farmers. Land was crown domain. The fallahin simply enjoyed
usufructuary rights (hiyaza) or use (tasarruf) over the land. The fallah
who worked a plot of athariyya land was tied to the soil, and, if he tried
to escape paying his taxes by running away, the multazim could bring
