Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Alt

needed the raw materials that Egypt and the rest of the Middle East
produced and, exerting a lively attraction to divert these commodities to
western markets, offered greater financial incentives than did the
Ottoman market. At the same time Europe needed markets for its
finished goods, and these were most conveniently to be obtained in the
Ottoman empire. On the other hand the mamluks, involved in struggles
amongst each other for control of Egypt, bought arms from Europe and,
in order to pay for them, diverted some of the trade towards Europe.
The rise of a Syrian Christian mercantile elite in Egypt was a symptom
of that gradual change of trading partners. Trade with Europe became
deficitory, a trend that accelerated as the century progressed. For a
while such deficit was compensated for by profits from trade with the
Ottoman empire, but trade with Europe imperceptibly increased with
the import of finished products and the export of raw materials until the
Muhammad Ali period, when it rapidly increased at the expense of trade
with other parts of the Ottoman empire. By the 1840s Egypt's major
trading partner had become Europe and Egypt became part of the
European world system, that is, it became subject to European trade
pressures and economic directives rather than responding to local
conditions. The reorientation of trade patterns from internal-imperial
to external-European was a phenomenon not limited to Egypt alone but
a consequence of a general reorientation of trade for the entire region.
   Long-distance trade in Egypt followed a variety of routes, the most
important of which was the route to the Ottoman empire and Syria,
followed in importance by trade with the Red Sea areas, then, in
descending order, trade with Europe, North Africa and the Sudan.
Egyptian trade involved three categories of products: items of a transit
nature, raw materials and finished products. A large portion of trade was
of a transit nature and re-exported. Two-thirds of trade from the Red
Sea route was re-exported to Turkey and to Europe.2 One-fifth of the
Syrian exports to Egypt were trans-shipped to Europe, North Africa
and the Sudan, and one-sixth of all European imports were sent to the
Red Sea and the Sudan.
   Coffee was the main source of wealth for the long-distance merchants,
the tujjar, and was the single item that had given them the fabulous
prosperity that approximated the wealth of the karimi, the spice
merchants of the middle ages. Every year 200 million paras worth of
coffee was re-exported to the Ottoman empire and to Europe. The
Egyptian merchants had a monopoly of the coffee trade in the Red Sea
and made a 75 per cent profit on it. The hegemony of the coffee tujjar
was challenged during the first quarter of the century when coffee from
the Antilles began to displace coffee from the Yemen. A concession to
