Chapter i


Egypt under the mamluks




Much that was written about the history of Egypt in the nineteenth
century arose from a premise that the reign of Muhammad Ali ushered
in a new form of government and a new economic system, both of which
turned Egypt into a modern nation state. Muhammad Ali was credited
with being an innovator, 'The Founder of Modern Egypt' to paraphrase
the title of a book, and was supposed to herald a total break with the
mamluk past. While there is some truth in such a belief, it is nonetheless
my contention that Muhammad Ali did not introduce a wholly new
economic system into Egypt, but rather refined and expanded the
existing system, and that his new form of government arose out of the
exigencies of that economic system. While Muhammad Ali certainly
helped to turn Egypt into a modern state, he did not start with a tabula
rasa, but had precedents that showed him the path to take.
   In one sense Egypt's strategic location and her membership within
the family of the Ottoman empire determined her line of development
regardless of who the rulers of the country were. Egypt's local produc-
tion and her agricultural strength also were determinants that drew the
general lines of the economic system along which the country was to
develop. That development could be halted or accelerated by different
circumstances but could never be altered radically. This is not to
espouse a determinist view of history, but to spell out the fact that 'a
society that could be completely moulded by its immediately preceding
period would have to have a structure so malleable as to be virtually
invertebrate.'1 Egypt had a definite structure upon which Muhammad
Ali drew variations.
   During the eighteenth century Egypt was dominated by a mamluk-
merchant (tujjar) alliance, whose main source of income, other than
land, was derived from long-distance trade within the confines of
Ottoman territories. Such trade can be described as forming part of an
Ottoman world market, which responded to internal fluctuations and
currents, and was only peripherally responsive to influences and trade
outside the Ottoman empire. By the middle of the century Europe
