                                               Egypt under the mamluks

Egypt. There was therefore a decline in certain trades, like those
connected with the production of cotton cloth, although other trades
like silk were doing well. That change and decline in trade was tied to
the changing political system of the day.
   According to Raymond and others, the Egyptian political and eco-
nomic system changed profoundly between 1760 and 1770. In the past
the dominant system of economic exploitation in the urban milieu lay in
a symbiotic relationship between the janissaries and the artisans, which
reached its peak around 1670-1700. The janissaries 'protected' the
artisans, and exploited them by becoming their 'partners', but at the
same time they assured their security and tempered the exactions levied
on them by the authorities. In time the janissaries were no longer
imported from the empire but were recruited locally and became
'Egyptianized'. The ascendancy of the ojakat, or regiments, ensured the
well-being of the Egyptian artisans, and the ordered and reasonable
exploitation of the urban tax farms, the iqtaat. Around 1750 the
janissaries began to lose their influence to the mamluk beys and the
picture changed. When the mamluk beys, whose main source of income
had been the rural tax farms, the iltizamat, displaced the janissaries,
they seized the urban iqtaat and thoroughly exploited them. Primarily
they needed the extra money to finance the civil wars that pitted them
against other mamluks and the ojakat for domination over the resources
of the country. They obtained their funds by squeezing extraordinary
taxes from the population - a move that was copied later by Muhammad
Ali. The pressures on the population resulted in periodic uprisings
which necessitated further coercive measures, a greater expansion of
armed men and a need for further funds, with which to pay them. That
vicious circle was a good reason for increasing extortion in tax-raising
on the part of the mamluks. Furthermore, the elite among the military
oligarchy were involved in mercantile activities in cooperation with the
tujjar and become interested in acquiring naval capacity to protect their
shipping from attacks. Such expansion in the naval field was motivated
both by a desire to protect and to expand control of trade. That trend
was not unique to the Egyptian mamluks but was followed by Jazzar
Ahmad in Acre, by the Ottomans themselves, who embarked on a naval
programme, and even by Dhahir al-Umar in Galilee. At the same time
as the mamluks were building up a mercenary army, the phenomenon
was being duplicated in other parts of the empire, among the Azms of
Damascus, Dhahir and Jazzar, for example, as well as among Balkan
potentates. The reason for such an arms race still needs to be deter-
mined, but it is obvious that there was an expansion in the fighting
power and capabilities of the rulers in the area.
