                                                Egypt under the mamluks

import .coffee was granted in 1723 to the French Compagnie des Indes
which was able to import coffee directly from the Yemen and bypass the
Egyptian merchants. Antillean coffee, though not as good as the Yemeni
variety, was much cheaper and was less subject to the caprice of the
Egyptian rulers, who slapped high taxes on it or put it under embargo
when ordered to do so by the Ottoman authorities, even though the
same rulers were not averse to breaking that embargo clandestinely for a
higher price from the exporters. As more than half the exports to France
had been coffee, Antillean coffee caused a major financial loss to the
tujjar, albeit not a catastrophic one, as French trade was only a small
percentage of the whole, and the Ottomans continued to import large
quantities of coffee. By the middle of the century the Ottomans began to
import Antillean coffee, which further displaced Yemeni coffee, so that,
though the trade continued to be profitable, it was in much smaller
proportions than before. The decline in the coffee trade was a symptom
of the general decline in export trade that was to follow, a decline that
arose from both internal and external factors, and necessitated a change
in items exported and imported.
   Among the exported products from Egypt, cloth loomed large.
Textiles such as dimity from Damietta, or the cloth woven in Mahalla,
Rosetta, Asiut, Manfalut, Abu Tig, etc. had up to 1731 constituted 45.1
per cent of Egyptian exports. Textiles were exported to France and then
re-exported to Holland and to Spain. In 1740 a 'baisse spectaculaire'
occurred in the French import of Egyptian cloth. Raymond claims3 that
this decrease was in part due to the diminishing quality of the cloth
exported. Another reason was a restriction imposed by the Marseille
chamber of commerce on the width of cloth imported. That restriction
was the outcome of new French looms which turned out cloth of a
broader cut than that produced by the narrow Egyptian looms, the
strictures on importing narrow cloth being imposed to protect French
textiles.
   The decline in trade of coffee and cloth were two good external
reasons for the decline in Egyptian trade. The more drastic reasons were
those of an internal nature, and showed a shift in trade patterns that left
Egypt deficitory by the end of the century. By 1783, with imports of
834,451,205 paras and exports of 774,809,459 paras, that deficiency is
clear. Of that trade 45 per cent was with the Ottoman empire, involving
some 737,066,994 paras of export and import products, 35 per cent was
with the Red Sea and involved 573,750,000 paras, while trade with
Europe comprised 14 per cent of the total trade and 235,598,053 paras.4
Where trade with the Ottoman empire and North Africa showed a
margin of profit of 125,483,256 paras and 19,434,383 paras respectively,
