                                                Egypt under the mamluks

   One can conclude either that the beys had a precarious hold on the
rural iltizamat, and were not able to extort more from them because they
had to contend with other elements sharing with them in the rural
wealth: tujjar, ulama, women and umad or shaikhs; or, because they
were absentee owners, they could be bilked of their funds; or that the
decimated population had led to a general decline in agriculture. On the
other hand, the city of Cairo was the mamluk stronghold; there they
could extort funds with impunity even though the population
periodically rose against them. Measures taken in Cairo were more
drastic than in the countryside, where the entire population of a village
could temporarily escape the tax collector by hiding in caves or in the
hills. In Cairo, the beys could break and enter any home with absolute
cynicism. When one bey was scolded by his colleagues Murad and
Ibrahim for doing just that he simply retorted, 'We all plunder, you
plunder and I plunder.'47
   The decline in trade resulted in a drying up of capital invested in
artisan production, and the extortions did the rest. Productivity fell to
an all-time low, for any activity on the part of the artisan was countered
by an increased tax.
   Such changes as operated arose from upheavals of a profound internal
nature as well. Egyptian trade and commerce was coming into conflict
with European technology and was lagging behind, but artisan produc-
tion was also falling off for purely indigenous reasons as well. The loss
of janissary protection, the increased extortions resulting from the rise
of the mamluks and their need for new weaponry and mercenaries, the
decline in agricultural production through plagues and famines, all
produced a situation in which there were no funds for improvement or
for capital expansion, and accounted for the sorry state of affairs upon
which the French savants in 1798 had commented. The decline of
artisan production developed the growth of wage-labour, when some
15,000 men, or roughly 10-15 P e r c e n t of the male population of Cairo,
became day labourers, showing the beginnings of a slow but inevitable
proletarianization of the artisans. Raymond explains that in spite of its
modernism the term 'proletariat' aptly described a population divested
of economic tools and supporting themselves rather miserably, from
vague activities.48
   He credits that decline in trade and in artisan production to 'the first
effects of its progressive integration into the world market, which was in
the making'.49 Elsewhere he elaborates, 'The very structure of that
commerce took on a quasi-colonial character.'50
   Concurrent with these negative changes for the poorer classes of the
population, we note a change in the condition of the richer echelons of

                                                                        17
