Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

1790 the French government placed an embargo on the export of
French goods and the transmission of French currency abroad. French
merchants in Egypt thus could not pay for the goods they bought, either
in cash or in kind. Yet France had a growing urban population and was
in constant need of importing grain. The need was so acute over the
years that an ancient statute in the city of Marseille allowed for the
seizure of grain ships lying in the harbour, if the need arose. The need
did arise, and in 1723 when Marseille was allowed to import grain she
became the granary of all the southern provinces.44 Before the embargo,
Marseille had imported yearly some 800,000 ardabs of grain from Egypt
via the Greek archipelago.43 In 1792 the embargo was temporarily
broken and the city of Paris saved from famine by importing grain from
Egypt. The mamluks, beginning with Ali Bey, controlled the wheat
trade and often cornered the market in Egypt in order to drive up the
price. The French embargo meant a substantial loss of money to the
beys; it also accounted for the extortion of money from the French
merchants by the beys, probably because the merchants could not pay
their bills, and they left Egypt, where they could no longer buy or sell.
   During the last half of the eighteenth century Europe had been
undergoing a technological revolution that was to culminate in the
industrial revolution. Techniques of production were improving, espe-
cially in the field of textile production. The French, for example, were
importing vast amounts of cotton from Egypt; later on they turned to silk
production, importing the raw material from Palestine, Syria and
Lebanon. Their mills rivalled, and surpassed, anything produced in the
Middle East, not only for luxury items but also for medium-priced cloth,
so that an increase in the importation of French cloth was noticeable in
that period. The French consul attributed that increase to the affluence of
the middle classes, which was sorely belied by the economic situation of
the country. We can only conclude that the medium-priced French cloth
was cheaper than the equivalent Egyptian product, so that French
production was not only destroying the Egyptian textile export market
but was also undermining the local internal trade in textiles.
   At a time when trade was in decline, and Egyptian artisan production
was equally in decline, the ruling group needed more funds, and to
offset their losses they turned to the urban tax farms and drained them
dry. Raymond has shown that the urban centres were then made to
produce more funds than the rural iltizamat, which had always been the
main source of income in the country. He shows that charges on the
population of Cairo by the end of the century came to 4 or 5 hundred
million paras, or 10 to 12 million pts., a sum which approximated the
taxes derived from the entire rural iltizamat of the land.46

16
