Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

him back by force.12 He was abused and tyrannized by the multazim
and, in the words of Jabarti, himself a multazim, he was 'more degraded
than the slaves'.13 Yet the fallah was not entirely powerless even though
he had little access to the formal structures of power. Fallahin do not
live in isolation; they play a positive role in the transformation of society
even when they are the most vulnerable members of that society. The
fallah had means for resisting his exploitation when it reached a certain
level. He and his entire village could escape into the hills in Middle and
Upper Egypt and so avoid paying the taxes once in a while, though
clearly they could not afford to do that constantly. Fallahin could and
did rise in armed revolts, they could set fire to the crops, they could
cheat on the size of their land and expand it at the expense of someone
else, especially absentee landlords. With the connivance of the shaikh al-
balad the fallah could defraud the multazim, grow crops on waqf land
that was unsupervised, claim the land was unwatered and avoid paying
its taxes, when in fact it was watered and thrived. Fallahin throughout
the ages have invented thousands of tricks to mitigate the rigours of
their exploitation. Sometimes the tricks met with success; at other times
they failed. Though exploited unmercifully, the fallah was, in the final
analysis, an important member of his society. Without his efforts, the
elite could not survive. If the fallah were squeezed too rudely he could
always run away from the land, when the multazim would be hard put to
find someone else to till the soil in a country that was underpopulated
and where more land than fallahin was the norm for most of the
nineteenth century. Such methods of protest allowed the fallah to
survive and were a gauge to measure how far exploitation could go
before becoming counter-productive.
   The fallah did have certain rights, minimal though they were. He
could mortgage his land (gharuqa) and regain it once he had paid off the
debt. He could alienate the land to someone else with the multazim's
approval.14 He decided what to grow and how to grow it, what to sell
and to whom to market the produce. He made the decisions that affected
his well-being: to produce more or less, to carry out cottage industries or
not, to breed livestock or poultry.
   Usya land which went to the multazim as payment for his tax-
collecting services was frequently turned into waqf, when it became, to
all intents and purposes, private property and was inheritable. Waqf
lands, or rizqa lands, were lands endowed for charitable purposes. By
the end of the eighteenth century some 600,000 faddans, or one-fifth of
the total land area, was constituted as waqf by legal or illegal means.
Rizqa lands paid less tax than others and the land was said to be
generally superior." Such land was exempted from extra-legal taxation.

8
