Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

Abu-1 Dhahab was one, against the rich fallahin who borrowed money to
grow the rice crop, and the tujjar who exported the rice to the Ottoman
empire. The French at the time were trying to divert the rice crop to
France with little success, for the Egyptians rioted when they heard that
the rice was being shipped there. The Syrians, who in all likelihood had
become the money-lenders of the region, tried to divert the rice trade
into their hands to be able to sell it to the French at a higher price than
the indigenous merchants were selling it to the Ottomans.
   The apparently religious conflict in the area, which was in fact conflict
over a means of livelihood, continued over the rest of the century, but the
Syrian foothold grew stronger when Abu-1 Dhahab took their side and
sold his rice to them. The Syrians shipped their rice to France, although
the Egyptians rioted, and continued to riot periodically, showing that the
battle over the rice trade was to continue for a long time.
   By 1780 some of the Syrian Christians were becoming beratli.31 Some
had links with Italy, others with France, while many intermarried with
Europeans. Their links with Europe strengthened as their trade with
France increased and, soon, 'The Europeans, and the minorities who
share a common interest with them, consolidate their monopoly of
Mediterranean commerce, and divert to themselves a considerable part
of the profits from Egypt's oriental commerce.'36
   One by-product of the entry of the Syrian merchants into the
Egyptian scene was the impoverishment of the Muslim tujjar, by their
displacement and the beginning of the transfer of their control over the
Egyptian trade to a Christian minority. This is not to imply that there
were no indigenous merchants with enormous fortunes left, but it
certainly indicates that the bulk of trade in Egypt was no longer in
indigenous hands but in alien and beratli hands, that is, Egypt was
becoming integrated into the European market.
   The French merchants, who initially complained bitterly about the
Syrian Christians who had ousted them from the cloth trade, soon
joined hands with them. Their ventures became so profitable that Abu-1
Dhahab Bey could demand, and get, from the French merchants a gold
carriage worth 72,000 livres before shipping.37
   Once the strong hand of Ali Bey had been replaced by that of his weak
successors, the period of centralization came to an end as each bey
scrambled for his share of the booty. The strong hand of an Ali Bey or of
a Shaikh Hummam, which had given some measure of internal security
and stability to the country, was once again replaced by the loose
authority of the mamluk beys, who set at each other's throats in an
attempt to wrest more money from the country. The result was the
'anarchy' that writers of the Description de 1'Egypte and their contem-

14
