Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Alt

whole villages.21 The merchants, or the richest among them, were
enormously wealthy. When Qasim al-Sharaibi died in 1735, he left a
sum of 12,642,372 paras and a fleet of ships, not to speak of buildings -
houses, shops, tenements, etc. Haifa century later Mahmud Muharram
could leave 15,742,498 paras valued at 5,667,299 constant paras because
of 177 per cent inflation, compared to Sharaibi's 8,849,600 constant
paras.23 These figures show that the wealthy tujjar who traded in coffee
and spices, as did these two, continued to be affluent in times of crisis,
such as that at the end of the century. Tujjar and ulama became
multazimun along with mamluk beys. One merchant in 1673 had an
iltizam of three entire villages.23 Muhammad Dada al-Sharaibi left
iltizamat yielding a faiz, or profit, of one million paras, out of a
succession that was valued at 37 million paras.24
   The entrance of new groups into the rural milieu as multazimun - and
by and large as absentee multazimun, unlike the old mamluk beys many
of whom had resided on the land - further enabled new groups to share
in the landed wealth. The shaikh al-balad as the representative of the
multazim was authority in situ. He probably planted the usya of the
multazim in cash crops, and no doubt cheated the absent multazim out of
much of his profit. When shaikhs cultivated any athariyya land in
Upper Egypt it was treated like usya land in terms of taxation, though in
Lower Egypt only a portion of the land was so exempted,25 but,
whichever way it was, they profited from their position in the village.
The shaikhs also extorted surplus from the fallah at the local level.26
Funds which should have gone to the multazim or to the treasury were
diverted into the shaikh's pocket. He could advance cash for cash crops
and share in their profits; he could lend the fallahin money when they
needed to borrow to pay their taxes; he could become a petty capitalist
in the village. Shaikhs or umad were no doubt the ones who planted the
cash crops such as rice and sugar-cane in the Delta and the Said, along
with rich mamluks who had entire villages growing these crops.
   The fact that the beys had to share their rural wealth with other
elements of society at a time of inflation and declining trade was one
variable among the others we have mentioned that caused a radical
change in the economic circumstances of the country and brought beys
and ojakat to fighting a series of bloody battles.
   A modified political system came into being, one dominated by the
mamluk beys who ousted the ojakat from their former positions of
authority. That system aimed at establishing a centralized form of
government in place of the collegial system that had operated previ-
ously. Ali Bey al-Kabir, the chief exponent of the new system, in 1768
changed the structure of the army, set aside the Ottoman regiments as

10
