                                               Egypt under the mamluks

his main fighting arm and in their place hired an army of mercenaries.
Jabarti recounted that he recruited men 'from all nations, Dalat, Druze,
Matawila, Syrians'.27 At the same time Ali Bey massacred his opponents
and 'exiled his notables, dispersed them in the villages and had them
followed, strangled and killed; he exterminated them root and branch and
exiled the rest... he exterminated the leaders among his early household
companions (khushdashinahu) and his tribe, and ... destroyed the old
houses, he destroyed the weighty laws and the established customs.'28
   The new army was armed with firearms and cannon, which necessi-
tated an almost inexhaustible fund of money to pay the soldiers' salaries
and buy the imported weaponry. Cash could be procured either by
extorting more from the population, or by displacing those who
controlled funds. In the process Ali Bey also established law and order,
which helped trade. Jabarti recounted that under his rule the roads had
become safe for travellers even when they were carrying sums of money.
To control the resources of Egypt, Ali Bey had to rule absolutely.
Adversaries, actual or potential, were eliminated. Shaikh Hummam,
head of the Hawwara tribe who controlled most of Upper Egypt, from
Girga to Farshut, was an example. Hummam controlled the grain trade
of the Said. Jabarti said that his grain storage areas were so vast that
people thought they were gazing at fields of grain.29 He had 12,000
bullocks working on his sugar-cane fields, another export item. He even
controlled the port of Qusayr.30 Such riches could not escape Ali Bey
and he soon made an end of Hummam and his tribe. Their grain was
exported to pay for the new artillery.
   The next step was to extort more in terms of taxes. This he did by
dismissing the Jewish customs officials and replacing them by Syrian
Christians who showed him new ways of extorting money, and by
shifting trade from finished products to exports of foodstuffs and raw
materials in response to the market. Lastly, he set his sights on the Red
Sea trade and sought to control it by conquering the Hijaz. When he
went into Syria with the same intentions he got his deserts for the
Ottomans bribed his supporters, who rose against him.
   Ali Bey set an example which was emulated decades later, but with a
greater degree of success: an example of controlling the resources of the
country, instituting a centralized government which established law and
order to encourage trade and commerce, expanding frontiers beyond the
borders of Egypt in order to control the trade routes and their resources.
   Ali Bey and the mamluks not only displaced the janissaries, with
consequent troubles to the urban iqtaat which they ruthlessly exploited
and impoverished, they also displaced the Muslim tujjar by encouraging
the Syrian Christian merchants at the expense of the Muslim merchants.

                                                                      11
