                                                 Egypt under the mamluks

While some rizqa lands were in the possession of their legal owners,
others were simply taken over by the shaikhs of the region, or by
individuals who paid the legal owners a modest sum of money and kept
the rest of the profits. Jabarti gives an example of a waqf covering over
i ,000 faddans which paid the beneficiaries fifty purses, while making
several times that amount in profit. He also claimed that most of the
revenues of the village notables came from the illegal possession of rizqa
lands.
   A further category of land was exempted from taxation; that was land
known as masmuh al-mashayikh, and masmuh al-urban.16 The former
was land granted to the ulama and to some village shaikhs. The second
category went to buy the goodwill of bedouin leaders. A further
category, masmuh al-masatib, was granted to defray the expenses of
hospitality to wayfarers and government officials.
   We can clearly see that only a small proportion of the revenues from
land reached the central treasury, and that the larger share went to the
various intermediaries who inserted themselves between the fallah and
the treasury as middlemen, whether legally as multazimun, or illegally.
   Early in the eighteenth century the iltizamat ceased to be sufficient for
the wants of the mamluks, who became involved with the ojakat in a
series of bloody battles over mastery of the land and its resources. The
beys were frequently in arrears of taxation and sought to alienate their
land to those groups in society who were possessed of ready cash. Such
groups were the tujjar, and the high ulama who derived much of their
income from salaries and wages.17 By 1728 so many iltizamat had been
alienated that a special register was set up, sijill isqat al-qura1* showing
which iltizam had been alienated and to whom, a process which clearly
demonstrated that land was becoming treated as a commodity. Such
alienations of land could be either of a permanent or of a temporary
nature, and revealed a need for cash among the elite. The trend towards
the alienation of land was accelerated in periods of inflation such as in
 1720-6 and 1770 onwards when Egypt entered a period of currency
debasement when the para lost 50 per cent of its value.19
    In the past when the rulers of Egypt had needed money they had
found it through extortion, the imposition of forced loans or in
commercial ventures. From the seventeenth century the rulers had
invested in the coffee trade along with the tujjar, and close links grew
between both groups. The elite also invested in export crops like rice
and sugar-cane. Abdal Rahman Katkhoda al-Qazdughli, for example,
had three rice-growing villages in the region of Damietta.*0 Throughout
the inflationary periods, those with ready cash were the tujjar and the
ulama. The ulama possessed lands free of taxation, frequently covering
