                                                 Egypt under the mamluks

poraries talk about. That anarchy, expressed in uprisings and revolts,
was an expression of indigenous resistance to extortion, and meant not
'chaos' but a loss of central control over the countryside. In Cairo
similar uprisings on the part of the artisans were equally a means of
resistance to an unbearable situation. People even looked back to the
days of Ali Bey with nostalgia in comparison with their present
condition. Examples of mamluk extortion were manifold. Abu-1 Dha-
hab extorted money from the Turkish merchants of the Red Sea trade.
When he died, the Ottoman government demanded some six million
paras as duty on his succession. His successors refused to pay the money
out of their share and parcelled it out among the city of Cairo and the
neighbouring villages. Murad Bey extorted 9 million paras from the
Syrian Christian merchants of Cairo.38 During the duumvirate of
Murad and Ibrahim a general uprising broke out against them and they
were driven out of Cairo, but unfortunately not for long.
   Jabarti's chronicles after the death of Ali Bey are a litany of the loans
and avania imposed on the population, interspersed with accounts of
sporadic uprisings in protest.39 The situation became so bad that Jabarti
does not bother to list events during the last few years of their reign, but
contents himself with a general statement regarding the extortions and
tyranny of the mamluks. A state of quasi-permanent civil war character-
ized the country, leading to a severe financial crisis from 1780. The para
declined to 54 per cent of its value in 1782. The price of wheat rose from
92 constant paras in 1741-50 to 715 constant paras in 1784 and to 745
constant paras in 1792, which meant that the ardab had attained 1,300
paras of the day in 1784, and an unprecedented high of 1,620 paras in
1792.40 These last economic crises were also due to a series of epidemics
and famines that plagued the land. During the famine of 1784, Jabarti
says, the fallahin left their villages because they could not pay their
taxes, nor pay the exactions imposed by the beys. They came to the
towns crying famine; they ate everything that was thrown into the
streets, and their hunger was so terrible that they ate the raw corpses of
horses, donkeys and camels.41 That year of famine was succeeded by an
outbreak of plague in 1785 when approximately one-sixth of the
population was killed. Plague returned in 1791, followed by a worse
famine in 1792 when people allegedly resorted to anthropophagy.42 The
population was decimated and impoverished, and a sizeable proportion
of lands remained uncultivated through lack of fallahin to till the soil.
The French consul estimated these fallow lands to comprise three-
quarters of the total acreage,43 which seems a gross exaggeration.
   The outcome of these political changes and natural catastrophes was
the imposition of a greater burden than before on the urban guilds. In

                                                                         15
