Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

  During the first quarter of the century, c. 1730, there was an influx of
Syrians of the Melkite rite into Egypt. Some historians believed that the
Syrians came to Egypt fleeing the persecution of their sect in Syria by
the Greek Orthodox Church. Whether they came to Egypt as the
outcome of such persecution or whether they came because they had
established trading links in Egypt is uncertain. Most of these immi-
grants were merchants and had been involved in the Syrian trade with
Egypt. Consequently they landed in the ports of the eastern trade,
Damietta and Rosetta, where they settled. The ascendancy of the Syrian
merchants was quite spectacular in speed, for they came to rival and
displace the Muslim merchants. The Muslims formed the majority of
merchants in the country, even when they were not Egyptians but were
Maghribi, Syrian or Turkish established in Egypt. At first the Syrian
Christians stepped into the shoes of the European merchants and,
becoming involved in the export market, they took over the sale of
French cloth in Egypt, much to the disgust of the French, who wrote,
'Ever since the advent of these Christians, full of ruse and ill faith, into
the country, commerce in general has been led towards its ruin.'31
   How immigrants who had been in the country for such a short period
were able to control the commerce of the land-and wrest it from the
hands of the indigenous merchants is a question that quickly comes to
mind. Raymond shows that by the end of the century more than half the
successions of rich merchants belonged to the Syrian Christians.32 One
answer lies in the fact that the Syrians were able to show the beys new
ways of extorting money from the population. Ali Bey appointed
Syrians to the customs to levy new taxes, perhaps because he distrusted
the Jewish customs officials' close links with the janissaries. An alliance
between Ali Bey and the Syrians was forged, aimed at dispossessing
Muslim tujjar. The bey believed that the Christians, being minorities,
were more easily dominated and used by him to permit him a greater
degree of commercial and financial control of the country's resources.
   Once in control over the customs, the Syrians were able to gain
control of the trade. The head of the customs could fine tujjar, he
could turn a blind eye to favour others, he could divert and con-
trol trade and thus make or break a merchant. The Syrians, with
their knowledge of the Syrian trade, their control of the customs of
Damietta, followed by the rest of the customs tax farms, were able to
boost their co-religionaries and grab the lion's share of trade for
themselves. In due course they controlled the Red Sea trade, the last
enclave of the indigenous merchants. They were able to do so only
with the connivance of the beys, who placed them in such advantage-
ous positions in return for their assistance in milking the country

12
