                                                 Egypt under the mamluks

further, and for allowing themselves to be milked by the beys when the
need arose.
   The Syrians in Damietta were also to take over the rice trade in the
region. Rice was a cash crop, a prime export commodity. The fallahin of
the region grew the rice themselves as a protocapitalist enterprise. They
could borrow money from the money lenders at 10 per cent interest to
grow the rice, which was then sold to the merchants for export to the
Ottoman empire. Money lending had introduced itself into the Delta in
the eighteenth century as one aspect of a change to a cash-crop economy.
It was also a consequence of the fact that the fallahin were expected to pay
their taxes in cash in Lower Egypt, and in cash or in kind in Upper
Egypt.33 On the other hand, rice was not a subsistence crop; it was a
luxury item grown purely for export, and made up 13.8 per cent of the
total exports. The merchants quite probably were also multazimun of the
region. A power struggle between the indigenous merchants and the
Syrian Christians soon developed over the control of the rice trade.
   We get hints of that power struggle in an account given by Jabarti. In
that account he described the case in 1768 of a merchant from Damietta,
Haj Umar al-Tarabulsi, who was a Syrian Muslim long settled in the
area. It seemed that Haj Umar had allegedly been insulted by a Syrian
Christian merchant in Damietta, and had reported the incident to the
rector of al-Azhar University, the most prestigious centre of learning in
Egypt, Shaikh Hifni, a friend of his, and to Shaikh Hasan al-Jabarti, the
author's father. The latter issued afatzva, which quoted an older fatwa
that decreed that in the case of damnation (Ian), the Christian was to be
burned to death. The Christian, fearing for his life, went to Cairo, 'for in
those days the authority of the Muslims was great', ('wa kana idh dhaka
shawkat al-Islam qawiyya'), wrote Jabarti, and sought the aid of his co-
religionaries. With their assistance, and generous bribes, an entirely
different interpretation of the case was given. Jabarti hinted that they
bribed the rector of al-Azhar. A few days later Ali Bey had come to power,
and 'in his time the position of Christians became great through Muallim
Rizq and Muallim Ibrahim al-Gawhari, his two secretaries', and they
conspired to send Haj Umar into exile in chains, and pillaged his shops
and stores in Damietta. When Ali Bey died, Haj Umar sought to return to
Egypt, but his return was blocked by Muhammad Abu-1 Dhahab's
Christian secretaries, Muallim Ibrahim al-Jammal and Muallim Yusif al-
Bitar.34
   That conflict between a Muslim merchant and a Syrian Christian
merchant was more than a mere quarrel between religious groups; it
may have centred on the control of the rice trade in Damietta. It hinted
at a dispute that pitted rice multazimun, of whom Muhammad Bey

                                                                         13
