                                                Muhammad Ali the man

rate the centennial of his ancestor. It seemed that even the royal family
was not quite sure about the birth date since there were discrepancies
between all the given dates. Finally the archivists agreed that the correct
date was that of 1770 or 1184 A.H.
   Muhammad AH came from lowly stock. He was the son of Ibrahim
Agha, the son of Uthman Agha, the son of Ibrahim Agha, showing a
military background for three generations. Beyond that, little is known
about the family, or their origins. While historians have described them
as being of Albanian origin, a family tradition believes that they might
have been of Kurdish stock, and come from a village, Ilic, in eastern
Anatolia where they were horse traders.1 At one time the family had
moved from some unknown original village to Umar Bekir and from
there Uthman Agha and his father Ibrahim had moved, first to Konia
and then to Kavala.2 The last move was a consequence of their
involvement in a blood feud. We know little about the incident; the
archives~simply refer to a blood incident (hadith dam), when the family
had to leave in a hurry for fear of reprisals.
   In Kavala Ibrahim Agha married into the family of the governor
(Chorbashi) of Kavaia; his bride was named Khadra. He was eventually
appointed commander of a body of irregulars (yol aghasi). Muhammad
Ali grew up in his father's house, although he always claimed in later
years to have been orphaned early and raised by his father's brother,
Tussun. That was pure myth. Ibrahim Agha died when his son was
twenty years old, a full-grown and married man. The date on Ibrahim
Agha's tombstone reads 1205/1790-1. Why Muhammad Ali invented
such a story can be explained in a number of ways. He may have been on
bad terms with his father and have chosen to live with his uncle Tussun.
That was a common occurrence among extended families, especially if
the uncle had no sons of his own. However, if Muhammad Ali had been
on bad terms with his father he would not have named his first-born
Ibrahim and his second-born Tussun, but reversed the names to honour
his uncle first. Alternatively, and the most likely explanation, he
invented his orphaned status to enhance himself as a self-made man who
rose to fame against insuperable odds, including that disadvantage early
in life. Behind such a fabrication there may have been an unconscious
desire to cut all links with his past, to deny his past in a sense, and to
invent a new one more befitting his new life and social position. The
same factors had caused him to fabricate his birthday, to share a date
with men he admired; as far as he was concerned, one birthday was as
good as another. It may have derived from hidden animosity towards his
father and a desire to identify with his uncle. Lastly, it may have been
invented for the sake of his children, to contrast their circumstances as

                                                                       25
