                                                Egypt under the mamluks

was commercial as much as political. He devoted all his attention to the
means for developing the commerce and agriculture of that rich
country.'51 Buonaparte was well aware of the potential riches of Egypt
in terms of grain to feed southern France and in terms of raw materials.
France had been the most powerful naval power in the Mediterranean,
her ships having made long-distance trade a quasi-monopoly for French
merchantmen, which were guarded from corsairs by the French navy.
Once the French set out to conquer Egypt, the British stepped into the
picture with an offer to assist the Ottomans in ousting the French from
the occupation of a vital area of the Ottoman heartland. This British
offer was a means of checking further French advance into the region
which might jeopardize the safety of the overland routes to India, for
there was a belief that the French were planning to follow in the
footsteps of Alexander and march to India by land. There was the added
reason that England did not relish French domination over such a
strategic area as the Mediterranean, a domination that would threaten
future British interests in the Ottoman empire. The British fleet under
Lord Nelson managed to sink the French fleet in the Bay of Abuqir and
to leave the French army stranded in Egypt.
   When he first occupied Egypt, Napoleon planned to reform the land
taxes and overhaul the entire tax structure. The Egyptians and Jabarti
interpreted these tax changes as a means of confiscating the wealth of the
country, akhdh at-atmoal.52 The small diwan set up by the French drew
up a series of rules which stipulated that property holders should
provide the deeds of ownership, which deeds would be authenticated in
the dossiers (sijillat) for a fee, after which the property would be
evaluated and a tax of 2 per cent paid on it. If the property were not
inscribed in the register it would be confiscated. Registering the
property by showing deeds of ownership was an impossibility, added
Jabarti ('wa hadha shay muta adhir3), because some of the deeds were
too ancient, others had never been registered or had been inherited and
the deed was made out in the name of an ancient ancestor. Jabarti added
that the French also established duties on successions and on deaths.
Successions were to be established within twenty-four hours of the
death, or the property would accrue to the state. In brief, all property
was to be registered and taxed. The entire procedure in fact came to
nought because in October of that year, 1798, the Cairo insurrection
broke out and shelved all plans for the time being. Further changes were
in the offing. Shaw stated that in 1799 all tax farms were abolished,53
which achieved little since the French controlled the Delta only, and the
rest of the country remained under mamluk domination. The grain
resources of Egypt were firmly held by the beys, and Kleber, who

                                                                       19
