Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

trade of the Red Sea to the west. Trade with Europe then formed only a
small part of Egypt's total trade, so that one could talk of Egypt forming
part of a world market centred on the Ottoman empire, with Europe
being a peripheral element of the whole. The trend of increased trade
with the west continued under Muhammad Ali and turned Egypt into a
peripheral element of the European world market, weaning it from trade
with the Ottoman empire. Simultaneously, the Ottoman empire itself was
opened up to the European world market and entirely dominated by it.
   The indigenous artisans had also become impoverished through the
decline in trade, lack of capital investment, the rapacity of the rulers,
their loss of protectors and the competition of western technology.
Many of them had been reduced to the status of day labourers. That
process was accelerated under the French occupation when trade was at
a standstill because of the British blockade, and raw materials could no
longer be imported, thus limiting production to local raw materials.
Artisans turned to becoming donkey boys, itinerant sellers of foodstuffs
or day labourers. These last were very likely the labour force that
Muhammad Ali was to use in his factories when he industrialized the
country. By then local artisan production had been left far behind in the
race for markets and with the advent of the new western technology,
especially in the field of textiles.
   The exploitation of the land by both mamluk beys and French
occupiers and the devastation that followed the Ottoman occupation,
added to years of civil war, epidemics and famines, depopulated the
countryside and caused much of the land to lie idle for lack of working
hands. It also created a class of affluent fallahin, the village shaikhs and
umad, who had acted as intermediaries between the fallahin and the
multazimun. It revealed a process of private landownership with waqf
lands being created out of usya, and with the iltizamat becoming
inherited. Beginning with Muhammad Ali, that process was in time to
alienate the fallah from his rights to the land, limited enough though
these were, and to turn him for the larger part into a wage labourer by
the end of the century.
   To extract a greater degree of surplus, the umad and the multazimun
turned the land to producing export crops for cash, and away from the
usual subsistence crops which provided little surplus and which the
fallah tended to grow when left on his own. Such a change took place in
the coastal areas and in Middle Egypt with the growth of rice and sugar
cane. The rapacity of the rulers and the demands of the west for raw
materials were to accelerate that process, which could be carried out
only at the expense of the fallah who was dragged from subsistence
labour and made to work for cash profit in return for wages.

22
