Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

the native elite, notably the increasing presence of the tujjar and the
ulama in the ranks of the landed; that step hinted at a change in the
existing system of landownership when land was becoming a commod-
ity to be bought and sold. The next step was a development in the
direction of private ownership of land, in a de facto fashion, although it
was to become de jure only under Muhammad Ali. Simultaneously, or
perhaps consequently, we see the development of what resembles an
agro-capitalist production of export crops like sugar and rice, both of
which demanded an initial outlay of capital, and which were cash crops
grown by the affluent fallahin or multazimun. Cash transactions were
becoming more commonplace and the mamluks were demanding their
taxes in cash in some areas and in kind in others. The need for cash
brought in a need for money-lenders, some of whom were alien, but
many of whom were also the local shaikhs. The new group of
landowners, or of people who regarded land as a commodity and who
were diverting some of the surplus into their own pockets, would come
into their own at the time of Muhammad Ali, and indeed were his early
supporters.
   The lost relationship between artisans and janissaries and the in-
creased exploitation from the beys gave the revolts that broke out and
wracked the country a protonationalist flavour, of indigenous inhabi-
tants against an alien ruling class. But a total break between rulers and
ruled was not yet to come. It needed a French occupation and the
apparent failure of the beys to do their duty and protect the country
from invasion, their sole raison d'etre after all, to set the last nail in their
coffin. It is this one single event that explains why the population and
their native leaders turned to an unknown factor, like Muhammad Ali,
rather than accept the rule of the beys once again. Change in the
relationship between rulers and ruled was imminent by the end of the
century as those with vested interests realized how deeply their interests
were threatened by the anarchic rule of the beys. The French occupa-
tion of 1798 put a temporary stop to further internal disturbances
against the beys, for the disturbances were now united and aimed
against the French invaders. It suspended the day of reckoning with the
beys for a period of three years, followed by four years of struggle for
survival, and for hegemony over Egypt among a variety of contenders,
which finally ended in the victory of one contender, Muhammad Ali.
   Some historians would have us believe that the French occupation of
Egypt was motivated by purely political reasons, by Franco-British
rivalry, even by Napoleon's desire to reach India and wrest it from
England. Julliany, a canny merchant, put his finger on the crux of the
matter when he wrote, 'The object of Buonaparte's expedition to Egypt

18
