                                                Muhammad Ali the man

have arisen out of someone's fertile imagination rather than been based
on factual evidence. On the other hand it may have been an Ottoman
custom to use young men on naval patrol from time to time, especially
when there was a lack of naval personnel.
   What we do know as fact is that Muhammad Ali followed his father in
becoming a soldier, and that he was involved in a number of skirmishes
in which his guile and skill brought him to the attention of his superiors
who may have recommended him for a higher command.
   At about that time Muhammad Ali married a relatively affluent
woman, Amina, who was a relative of the Chorbashi. Amina had earlier
been legally married to another man, although the marriage had not
been consummated in that the marriage contract had been signed but
the husband had died before the pair had cohabited. The young widow
was left something of a minor heiress when she married the future ruler
of Egypt. That early marriage gave rise to a later fiction that Ibrahim
was not Muhammad Ali's eldest son but the son of his wife by her
former husband. The story seems to have spread around 1846, and is
reported by Hekekyan in his diaries. He wrote, 'It appears to be pretty
certain that Ibrahim is at most but adopted ... offspring of Muhammad
Ali's illegal and premature embraces'4 yet on p. 215 of the same volume
he writes that he heard Muhammad Ali speak of Ibrahim as his son.
Such a tale was probably invented by the opposition to Ibrahim, a
faction that had gathered round Abbas, Ibrahim's nephew and the next
in line to the succession, with the intention of ousting Ibrahim in favour
of Abbas. The tale was patently untrue, for Muhammad Ali in writing to
the sultan asserted on several occasions that Ibrahim was his own first-
born son.5
   Amina bore Muhammad Ali three sons. Ibrahim was born in
1204/1789-90 in Nasratli in Drama where the family had fled from a
plague epidemic that was ravaging Kavala. Ahmad Tussun was born in
1208/1793, and Ismail Kamil was born in 1210/1795. She also gave him
two daughters, Tevhide, born in 1212/1797, and Nazli born in
1214/1799. The husband left for Egypt shortly after and the couple were
separated for nearly a decade. Amina was the only legal wife that
Muhammad Ali had during his lifetime, although he took on some eight
to ten concubines and fathered a total of seventeen sons and thirteen
daughters. His last two children were born when he was past his 63rd
year, in 1833. One imaginative author credited Muhammad Ali with
fathering ninety-five children; one would have assumed that thirty
children were ample enough without tripling the number.
   Among his sons, only Said, Abdal-Halim and Muhammad Ali the
Younger outlived him, and among his daughters only his second oldest

                                                                       27
