Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Alt

succeeded Napoleon as commander-in-chief in Egypt, had to negotiate
with Murad Bey for grain to feed the French army in Cairo.
  After Kleber's assassination in 1800, Abdallah Menou, a French
convert to Islam, became governor. Menou was the laughing-stock of
his colleagues because he could not sit a horse properly, had converted
to Islam, and married the daughter of a bath-house keeper in Rosetta in
the mistaken notion that he was marrying Egyptian aristocracy because
her father was a member of the ashraf. He was also a source of
amusement to the Egyptians because he treated his wife like a French
lady, and picked up her handkerchief when it fell to the floor. Menou,
however, was an able administrator, who had plans for turning Egypt
into a French colony or departement.
   Menou's programme was to abolish all the existing taxes on land and
to replace them by a single tax. Land was divided into three categories,
depending on its strength, and taxed on a descending scale. Fallahin
were expected to pay their taxes on an individual basis. The taxes were
not to change but in bad flood years they could be decreased in the
traditional manner. The land tax was divided into 24 parts; half of the
tax was to go to the treasury, ^ was to go to the village shaikhs, who
were to supervise tax collection that was carried out by the Copts, with
an extra share to indemnify them for the cost of clearing the canals and
for the upkeep of the roads. Canals were no longer to be cleared by
corvee labour, and the fallahin were to be paid out of J4 of the taxes
set aside for that purpose. The multazimun could accept full rights to
their usya land and pay a tax accordingly, or they could be indemnified
with jf of the tax in lieu of their faiz. The land of the fallah was to
become his property.
   To put this land reform into action a cadastral survey was first to be
carried out. However, none of these plans were implemented, save that
the French had stopped collecting taxes a year in advance, as was the
mamluk custom, and would not be able to collect taxes for 1800 because
in 1801 the Anglo-Ottoman invasion was to drive them from Egypt.
   The French occupation was of too short a duration to leave any
permanent traces in Egypt. It certainly did not transform Egypt
economically, politically or intellectually, although claims that it did so
have frequently been made. It was an interlude in Egyptian history that
was important for other reasons. It broke the last links between mamluk
beys and the indigenous population when the former showed that they
were incapable of saving Egypt from invasion. It also brought French
technocrats to the country, many of whom were St Simonians, and
inspired them to offer their services to Muhammad Ali after 1815. The
fact that by then the French army had been disbanded and most of its

20
