                                                Egypt under the mamluks

men were out of jobs was an added incentive. The ancient monuments
that they had seen in Egypt inspired them to return to that land and try
to put their theories of technology into practice. Lastly, it brought the
British into the Mediterranean, and with the destruction of the French
its fleet was to be the most powerful in the sea. This last factor was to
have more enduring effects on Egypt than anything else.
   From this brief survey we can conclude that many of the 'innovations'
later attributed to Muhammad AH were in fact carried over from
previous regimes.
   The concept of a centralized government and the establishment of law
and order, with consequent public security and internal stability, had
been attempted by Ali Bey al-Kabir. He had derived that concept from
reading about the golden age of the mamluks in Egypt prior to the
Ottoman conquest, and sought to emulate Baibars and Qalawun, as
Jabarti recounts. The outward expansion into Syria and the Hijaz had
also been copied from the earlier mamluks by Ali Bey, although not with
their success. The creation of a mercenary army primed with firearms
and artillery can equally be attributed to Ali Bey, although Muhammad
Ali, who copied these steps, did so with greater success. Credit might go
to the French for initiating reforms in the field of land tenure and of
taxation, although these reforms were nothing more than blueprints, for
the French had a tenuous hold on the land at best. Perhaps, as Rivlin
suggested, Muhammad Ali had seen a blueprint of Menou's reforms or,
perhaps equally plausibly, these reforms were obvious and therefore
inevitable.54
   The genius of Muhammad Ali lay in that he learned from the
mistakes of his predecessors, and packaged their ideas into what
developed into a coherent programme that continued the transformation
of the socio-economic basis of local society, a transformation that had
begun long before his arrival. In this he was an innovator as well as a
follower, the perfect link with the mamluk past, for the first decade of
his rule bore all the imprints of a mamluk system, as we shall see, and
one could easily have called him 'the Last of the Mamluks'. At the same
time he showed the way to the future by destroying the mamluk system,
by his plans for industrialization, increased irrigation, the continued and
extensive production of export crops, and lastly by Egyptianizing the
bureaucracy. In brief, he drew the outline of a nation-state.
   The French occupation and the disruption it wrought in Egyptian
society made the penetration of that country by European trade a much
easier task. We have seen that under the mamluks trade moved out of
indigenous hands and into the hands of beratli minorities, who collabo-
rated with the European merchants in diverting some of the oriental

                                                                        21
