Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

children of a famous and glorious father, to his, an orphan with no one
to give him any help in life, yet who rose to fame and glory through his
own efforts. His children, having the advantage of a famous father,
could rise higher in life, were they to put their minds to it. Muhammad
Ali may have felt that his younger children, who had been bred to ease
and fortune, would not develop the backbone his eldest son had, and
would not be fighters, so he constantly contrasted the giddy heights to
which he had risen with the lowly depths of his modest family
background and early separation from his father as encouragement to
them to learn their lessons and become great men too.
   Ibrahim Agha traded in tobacco as a side-line, and also chartered
ships. By the age of ten, Muhammad Ali had been initiated into the
tobacco business by his father. In time he replaced his father at the head
of the irregulars as well as in the tobacco business. Through his dealings
in tobacco he came to meet a certain M. Leon of Marseille, who was the
French consul in Kavala and who became a friend and maybe an
associate. A story arose later on that Muhammad Ali had invited him to
settle in Egypt but that Leon had died on the very day he was to embark
for Egypt. That story is most likely apocryphal since it is too similar to a
story invented about an Armenian - Karakehia - to ring true. It may
have been invented to show the early links that Muhammad Ali had
with the French, and adduced as a reason for inviting so many French
technocrats to Egypt. It may simply have been a fabrication of one of his
biographers, who invented numerous tales about him, that he may have
encouraged as adding to his mystique.
   At the age of seventeen, around 1787, Muhammad Ali, who had
distinguished himself in a few skirmishes against recalcitrant peasants
who had refused to pay their taxes, was summoned to Istanbul and
given the command of a corvette to chase pirates in the Aegean Sea.3 Or
at least that is the account given by one of his descendants. Why the son
of a commander of irregulars should be handed the command of a
corvette is never made clear. That too may have been invented to show
that the man had, early in life, acquired naval experience. It would also
help explain his desire to create a navy and a merchant marine, though
one need hardly become a naval officer in order to appreciate the
importance of a navy to a state. The Aegean experience was said to
impress upon him the naval skill and ability of the Greek sailors who
manned the pirate ships. Yet anyone who lived in the Mediterranean
was well aware of the naval prowess of the Greeks — most of the
Ottoman navy was manned by Greeks. One need hardly chase pirates in
order to learn about the talents of the Greeks; it was quite sufficient to
live in Kavala to acquire such information. Once again that story may

26
