                                                 Muhammad Ali the man

   The government of Egypt in those days could be described as the
outcome of a struggle between two unequal forces. While the ruler
passed down orders to the population, or at least the ruler and his
bureaucrats together imposed them from above, the population was
pushing from below. The interaction of these two forces gave the
country the historic shape it took. The image of Egyptian government
that has been presented by historians is that of an absolute autocracy,
with a centralized authority at the helm imposing its dictates on a
downtrodden and helpless population. Occasionally we are told that that
autocratic government had to deal with uprisings and revolts which
arose in consequence of its brutal acts against the population. We are
rarely, if ever, given any insight into the relationship of that population
with the ruling elite, a relationship which on some occasions led it to
break out in violent resistance but which at others led it to accept that
rule as offering an acceptable alternative to the past forms of govern-
ment. We shall attempt to remedy this deficiency in later chapters, but
as a point of departure we must take it for granted that populations react
to their governments, and that their reactions, weak or strong as the case
may be, are effective and carry with them counter-reactions from the
elite. Peaceful changes or violent reactions arise in consequence, but the
elite does respond to pressure from the masses. An elite that is more
perceptive to that pressure produces a government that is acceptable, so
that the degree of its response is a measure of the successful rule of a
government. We have seen that the last decades of mamluk rule aroused
responses which caused violent upheavals in society, and which eventu-
ally led to a rejection of mamluk rule for Egypt.
   The dysfunction in mamluk society must be clearly seen as a two-fold
one, one aspect arising from mamluk abuse of authority, and one arising
as a consequence of world pressures on Egyptian economy in general.
The same pressures were to operate on Muhammad Ali. How these
were dealt with is the history of the next few decades. The remarkable
tour de force that pushed a country from a state of near economic
collapse into a rich and thriving land has been credited to Muhammad
Ali's genius and foresight. We must also remind ourselves that it could
only have been accomplished with the cooperation of the Egyptian
population and its intrepid stance in the face of ordeals, as well as its
capacity for recuperation from past wounds, for Egypt made Muham-
mad Ali just as he helped Egypt to recover from its desperate state in the
eighteenth century.




                                                                        35
