                                                 Muhammad Ali the man

towards them and his hesitation to make any radical break with the
Ottoman system of government. Finally, it also explains his attempt to
revive Ottoman culture in Egypt, publishing the classics of the golden
age, the sixteenth century, in the Bulaq press so that his supporters could
continue a polished cultural tradition and not feel divorced from their
roots - their Ottoman roots. Muhammad Ali could have identified with
the 'speakers of Arabic', the inhabitants of Egypt, as did his son Ibrahim,
but, as a member of one minority group, it was too much of a step for him
to join another and he preferred to cling to his Ottoman identity. Much
later in his reign he decided to break with the Ottomans, in political
terms; but by then he had little choice left.
   Within his family circle Muhammad Ali was an affectionate and
caring father. He may have treated his children with little overt warmth,
but he did give them a great deal of attention especially in matters of
education. At the same time, because he had such a suspicious nature,
he set spies in their households to report to him their every action.
Bo wring claimed that he had told him at one time, 'I doubted the
aptitude of my own children - even of Ibrahim Pasha - but I have now
learned that he is to be relied on and fully trusted.'12 It was not their
aptitude that he mistrusted, but their loyalty to himself, as we shall see
later. Because of his keen judgement of character his suspicions did not
leave room for paranoia to develop, as in the case of Sultan Abd al-
Hamid for instance, but they did make him careful in his relationships
with people, even members of his own family. He told Bowring, 'I am
often deceived and know I am deceived - whereas many are deceived
but do not know it.' In an artless fashion he added, 'I am sometimes
deceived by others and I sometimes deceive myself, but the deceit does
not last long.'
   Muhammad Ali was a fox - crafty, clever and cautious, but he was
also a charming man with 'high breeding and winning manners', as the
British consul described him to Lord Palmerston.13 Being a pragmatist
he could be counted upon to make the best of bad situations. Another
British consul, Salt, was to write about him, 'The Pasha's greatest
resources rest on his own superior talents - fertile in means and
singularly skilled in the art of leading men, he has always hitherto been
seen to rise greater for the obstacles he has had to encounter.'
   The last trait can best be described as tenacity, of hanging on through
the toughest times until the tide turned or he had turned adversity to his
advantage. He believed that he was destined to greatness, not because a
fortune-teller had so predicted, as one of his biographers claimed, but
because he believed in his own gifts and trusted his ability to succeed - a
belief that was fully justified by events. For as Consul Murray said,

                                                                        33
