                                                Muhammad Ali the man

attire, in deliberate contrast to the highly ornamented dress of his sons
and the members of his court.
   All those who met Muhammad AH, whether natives or aliens,
commented on his great charm, and above all on his exquisite polite-
ness, the hallmark of a true Ottoman gentleman. One must keep in mind
that Ottoman society did have a degree of social mobility, and high
officials of state were not necessarily from affluent families. Court
manners and rules of etiquette were the characteristic of people in
authority, but Muhammad Ali seemed to his viewers to surpass the
normal courtesy, which may well have been the case. His correspon-
dence, on the other hand, revealed another side that was biting, sarcastic
and extremely outspoken, if not downright rude. But then that corre-
spondence was usually addressed to subordinates who had erred, for
when they performed their duties he praised them. Most of the men in
his administration at one time or another earned the epithet of donkey
(eshek), his favourite expression. This alternated with 'pig son of a pig'
(Jkhanzir ibn khanzir), if addressed to an Egyptian, whom he considered
inferior to Turks and therefore entitled to a more insulting epithet. All
bureaucrats were threatened frequently with being hurled into the sea
or river, buried alive, beheaded, impaled, whipped, or having the hairs
of their beards plucked out one by one. None of these threats were
carried out save in the rarest of instances, but they kept his men alert,
for they never knew if or when the axe would fall. It must have been an
effective technique because his men went in constant fear of him.
   In contrast to Ibrahim's loud guffaw, Muhammad Ali had a short dry
chuckle. He moved so softly and quietly that he frequently startled the
palace servants by appearing suddenly when he was least expected, and
so built up his reputation for omniscience. Ibrahim, on the other hand,
could be heard coming a long distance away with his heavy martial
tramping. One Frenchman given to bons mots had, in contrasting the two
men, called them the fox and the lion. If the father had some of the
qualities of the fox - guile, adroitness at avoiding dangerous situations,
agility of mind - he also had some of the qualities of the lion as well. He
had courage, magnanimity, and loomed larger than life in the eyes of his
supporters and opponents. He also was possessed of a degree of
humaneness that Ibrahim did not have.
   In his youth in Kavala, his service with the irregulars merited a
military reputation. When the town of Kavala was ordered by the
Ottoman authorities to provide 300 men to join the Albanian contingent
that was forming part of the Ottoman expedition to Egypt against the
French, Muhammad Ali was appointed second-in-command to Ali
Agha, the son of the local governor.

                                                                       29
