                                             A country without a master

mamluks were more amenable to commercial pressures and easier to
manipulate. They even claimed that the mamluks were superior in
honour to the Turks. One of the French emigres in the service of the
British said, 'What superiority the Mamluks had compared to the
Turks: frank, loyal, generous and brave, everything was in their favour.
We looked upon them as one of us so to speak.'3 Such misguided beliefs
led to an error of judgement, but they explain why the British saved the
mamluks from extermination by the Turks,4 then gave them arms and
ammunition on condition they withdrew to Upper Egypt, which they
did.5 The British forces evacuated Egypt and took Alfi Bey with them to
England, where he spent a year ostensibly as the representative of the
mamluk beys, who were only too pleased to get rid of him.
   Initial Ottoman support for the mamluks may only have been a ruse
on their part from the very beginning. Sebastiani, who returned to
Egypt in 1802, reported that the Ottoman governor, Khusrev Pasha,
had given battle to the mamluks five times. When Sebastiani tried to
intervene in favour of the mamluks, Khusrev informed him that he had
'the most positive orders from the court to carry out a war of
extermination against the beys, to thrust aside ruthlessly any anempts to
come to an understanding with them'. Sebastiani was shown two
imperial orders. In one of them the Sultan ordered his governor 'to kill
all the mamluks who could be found in Egypt', and in the other he
saw instructions to the governor to 'humiliate the leading shaikhs, to
divest them of their wealth, and to strike in particular shaikhs al-Bakri
and al-Sadat'.6 If Sebastiani knew of these instructions there is little
reason to suppose that the ulama did not, which accounts for their
animosity towards the Ottomans and their rapprochement with Mu-
hammad Ali.
   The year 1802-3 was a particularly bad year for the Egyptians, whose
hopes for peace and security once the French had been ousted were
dashed by the new brigands they had at first welcomed as liberators.
The Ottoman soldiery speculated in foodstuffs, cheated the merchants,
threw people out of their houses in order to move in themselves, and if
the owners objected they beat them up. The soldiers used the doors and
windows of houses for firewood. When they had entirely gutted the
house, they would move out into new quarters and start all over again.
Whole areas of the city were thus destroyed, first through cannon and
the normal devastation of war, then through the actions of the soldiers.
These molested women in the streets and the baths, grabbed the mounts
of the passers-by, took all the donkeys from the guild of water sellers,
who perforce had to carry the water-skins on their backs and so charged
more, and kidnapped people whom they held for ransom. None dared

                                                                      37
