Chapter 3


A country without a master




The Anglo-Ottoman forces landed in Egypt on 8 March 1801. Three
months later, on 27 June, Cairo fell and the French forces evacuated the
city a week later. The minute the Ottoman forces entered Cairo the
soldiers rushed to the aswaq and placed their arms and colours on
coffee-houses, shops and bath houses. Such actions did not reassure the
owners of these establishments, who realized that the soldiers meant to
share in their profits. Next the Turks and the Albanians took to trading.
They went outside the city to meet the fallahin bringing in their supplies
for sale, bought all the produce at a low price, which the fallahin were
too scared to refuse, and then brought it into the city and resold it to the
city merchants at a great profit.1
   By then the Ottoman forces were clearly split into two factions,
Albanians and Turks, neither of which obeyed its superior officers.
Likewise the mamluks were split into two factions, one under Alfi Bey,
the enfant terrible, and the other nominally led by Ibrahim Bey who,
with age, had turned over the command to Uthman Bey Bardissi. At
first the mamluks cooperated with the Ottoman forces and were led to
believe that they would be restored to their former functions and
positions of influence within the land. Alfi Bey was sent off to collect the
taxes of Upper Egypt, where he quickly became a byword for rapacity.
According to Jabarti, the inhabitants of Upper Egypt fled to Cairo as a
means of avoiding Alfi's despotism and his imposition of all kinds of
vexatious taxes. He allegedly dispossessed people of their rightful
property and confiscated the property of all those who were deceased,
leaving the heirs destitute.2 His faction and that of Uthman Bardissi
were at loggerheads and reached the point of trying to assassinate each
other. The internecine differences between the mamluks were so
obviously grave that the Ottomans had little illusions left about them,
and in their turn tried to exterminate both factions.
   The only group left with some illusions about the mamluks were the
British forces. They preferred to believe that the mamluks had a greater
right to Egypt than had the Turks. More importantly, they knew the

36
