Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

   Family legend has it that Muhammad AH was reluctant to leave
Kavala for Egypt until he met a local mystic who encouraged him to go,
claiming to see victory written on his brow. Once again mythology
clouded the bare fact that the man probably was reluctant to depart
because he did not have the necessary funds with which to outfit
himself. Though a merchant, he was not a wealthy one and did not have
the ready cash to equip himself for a campaign. Eventually he found an
Armenian merchant named Aghiazar Amira who lent him a sufficient
sum of money, even though he was a bad risk, going as he was to distant
shores to fight a war whose outcome was unknown. Muhammad AH
sailed away accompanied by 'his brother Ahmad'8 to meet fame and
fortune. (The first mention we have of a brother occurs in Jabarti's
chronicles when he mentions that 'Ahmad Bey, brother' of Muhammad
AH headed towards Khan al-Khalili.) When Muhammad AH had made
his mark he repaid Aghiazar Amira for his faith in him by making him
sarraf, or business manager, in Istanbul.
   From scattered references concerning Muhammad Ali's life outside
Egypt we can deduce only a smattering of details. Perhaps there was this
lack of information about his early years simply because he was illiterate
until his middle age and not given to writing things down. On the other
hand he may have wished his past to remain shrouded in mystery, and
deliberately refrained from giving the curious any details other than the
bare minimum.
   What we do know of him is that he did not forget favours, and repaid
them whenever he was able to do so and at the earliest occasion. We can
also infer his liking for foreigners, and minorities, whom he regarded as
trustworthy men of business. He admired Greek, Armenian and French
businessmen, with whom he may have had working relationships in the
course of his tobacco-trading career. When he ruled Egypt he invited a
number of Greek businessmen to settle in Egypt and gave them his
patronage; he even turned a blind eye when he knew that they were
gathering funds in Egypt to sustain the Greek war of independence
against their common suzerain, the sultan. He surrounded himself with
Armenian secretaries and translators, and, later on, with French techno-
crats, British experts and merchants and Italian physicians. In this he
was different from the mass of the Ottomans who preferred to deal with
their own nationals. While this may have been a deliberate attempt to
imitate the early sultans who gathered to their courts talent of whatever
origin and whatever nationality, we must also realize that there was a
good reason for him tofillhis court with foreigners. Muhammad AH was
a pragmatist who made use of whatever talent was available; also he had
no racial or religious prejudice. Being a clear-sighted man he realized

30
