Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

leader of the Ottoman soldiers ('Amir al-asakir al-UthmaniyyaJ), while
Nicolas Turc called him by his proper title of Albanian Major ('Bin-
bashi Arnaut').10 Muhammad AH very rapidly gained further recogni-
tion as an able and efficient commander, and rose rapidly in the ranks
until he became second-in-command of the entire Albanian contingent,
not only of that from Kavala.
   All the Albanians in the Ottoman forces in Egypt formed a bloc
within the army that was distinct and separate from the rest of the men,
and they were under the command of an officer named Tahir. The
Albanians were 'mercenaries' of the Ottomans from at least the second
half of the seventeenth century, and were on occasion used to balance
the unreliable janissaries and other ojakat. Because they were irregulars,
they tended to retain their tribal structure, as indeed did the Maghribi
irregulars who served in mamluk armies and later under Muhammad
Ali, and the bedouin irregulars. The Albanians spoke little Turkish and
disliked the Ottoman janissaries, who in turn despised the Albanians as
lawless rabble and 'treated them like servants'. According to Jabarti, the
Albanians were more uncouth and unruly than the Ottomans. 'Most of
them do not fast the month of Ramadan', he wrote in disgust, 'and no
one can tell what belief they adhere to or what sect or what order. The
easiest thing for them to do is to kill, to seize the property of others and
to disobey their superiors and generals ... May God eradicate them all',
he ended viciously."
   Because of the tribal character of the Albanian troops and the demise
of their superior officers, none but an Albanian could lead these troops,
and this, as well as his qualities and charisma, accounts for Muhammad
Ali's swift rise in rank. His promotion within such a short span of time
was indeed remarkable and bespoke the talents of the man, although one
must also acknowledge the role of chance.
   The fact that Muhammad Ali was an Albanian, a member of a
linguistic and ethnic minority group within the Ottoman family, is
significant. The Albanians spoke a different language from Turkish, yet
they were Muslims, and were not members of the despised Arab
fallahin. Much like the Cherkess, who formed much of the Ottoman
fighting elite, they were mountain people, fierce, undisciplined, aggres-
sive and valorous. They had no cultural identity other than the Ottoman
one. That last factor may help us to understand why Muhammad Ali
patterned himself on an Ottoman gentleman, acquired the manners and
exquisite politeness of a man brought up in court, and clung to his
Ottoman identity even when he despised, or claimed to despise, the
Ottomans. He obviously had a love-hate relationship, with the Otto-
mans and feared a loss of identity, which would explain his ambivalence

32
