Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

'without any of the advantages of birth, or fortune, he carved his way to
power and fame by his own indomitable courage, perseverance and
sagacity'.14 To these one can add native intelligence, farsightedness and
vision. His vision for the future of Egypt was remarkably avant-garde
for his time, and is the mark that distinguished him from those who
came before him and those who came after him, and set him apart as one
of the most remarkable rulers that country has ever had.
   One man does not rule a country by himself, but one man's vision,
when he rules a country, can give it shape and direction, and can
coordinate the various ideas and currents which he is fed by his
entourage and by the circumstances of the land. How he chose that
entourage and how it chose him determined the manner in which the
country was to be run and the directions it would take in economic and
political terms. But throughout it all one must keep in mind that Egypt
was one element in a sea of conflicting political and economic currents
and, when all is said and done, the province was not such a free agent to
carve destiny as she willed. No country is. The history of any country is
determined by the internal dynamics of that country and also by the
external influences that mould and batter it depending on international
requirements and forces. Without an understanding of these two forces,
the centripetal and centrifugal, it would be difficult to understand the
unfolding of events.
   Muhammad Ali was a military man; it was normal for him to destroy
his enemies by military means, as he did the mamluks. But Muhammad
AH was also an astute and clever politician who first tried to buy or
defuse his enemies and only used force as a last resort. In general he was
uneasy about the use of force, for he believed that it left a bad aftertaste,
whereas persuasion was ever the • better alternative. Even his direst
enemies, the mamluks, were eventually coopted into his service. That
flexible approach to problem solving went a long way to making his
regime popular among the elite and acceptable to the masses. What it
did not succeed in doing, however, was making itself palatable to some
of the powers, and this point will be dealt with later.
   The rule of the elite in Egypt over the past ages, as we have tried to
show in the brief introduction, had been tempered by collaboration
between them and certain classes in society, such as the tujjar or, in the
case of the janissaries, the artisans. No rule could survive that did not
take into account the inner currents within the country. Muhammad Ali
learned that lesson well, as we shall see, during his early days of struggle
for survival, and he kept himself informed of the mood of the masses
throughout his rule, so that rumours of discontent reached him and he
could allay it or brutally dominate it.

34
