Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

daughter, Nazli, who was married to Muhammad Bey al-Defterdar. He
was survived by several of his concubines. Amina must have been a
formidable woman, for her husband had a fondness for her and treated
her with respect. Her portrait, which used to hang in the Jawhara palace
in the citadel before the palace burnt down, showed a handsome woman
but something of a tyrant with beetling dark brows, darkened by kohl,
meeting above her eyes in the fashion of the day, and a generally
forbidding expression. That may have been the artist's vision of her, or
her own awed expression at being painted. Their children were all
handsome, as indeed were the rest of Muhammad Ali's progeny, with
the exception of Abbas, who was marred by his permanently glowering
expression, and Said by his corpulence.
   Muhammad Ali was a short, stocky man with distinctive short
forearms, a trait which his eldest son Ibrahim inherited from him. He
had blond hair, deep-set hazel-grey eyes, a small mouth and beautiful
hands. People immediately noticed his eyes, which were constantly
animated. A. A. Paton, who met him when he was long past his prime,
remarked '... if ever a man had an eye that denoted genius, Mohamed
Ali was that person. Never dead nor quiescent, it was fascinating like
that of a gazelle; or, in the hour of storm, fierce as an eagle's.'6 At around
the same time, Cobden also visited Muhammad Ali and described his
restless eyes. Cobden saw no genius in them, simply the eyes of a
shopkeeper watching out for petty pilfering in his shop; to him there
was nothing striking or handsome about the countenance of Muham-
mad Ali, and his eyes revealed neither moral nor intellectual grandeur.
Even the man's heavy white beard did not please Cobden who claimed
to have seen richer tufts on the chins of many among his subjects —
which if true must have meant that many Egyptians were suffering from
advanced hirsutism. Cobden, who was an adept in phrenology, tried to
analyse the bumps on the ruler's head, presumably by looking through
the man's wide turban, concluding that his cranium 'accords with the
extraordinary force of character displayed by this successful soldier
while a broad and massive forehead harmonizes with the powerful
intellect he has displayed in his schemes of personal aggrandizement.'7
Cobden may be pardoned his comments when we know that he had an
axe to grind with the ruler; despite his attitude, the picture of Muham-
mad Ali that emerges from both descriptions and from the portraits that
are available is one of a handsome man with intense eyes that immedi-
ately attracted attention.
   Muhammad Ali was impeccably clean; as Nubar and others have
recounted, he shaved his head every day and spent a long time every
morning bathing. Throughout his life he eschewed any but the simplest

28
