                                                Muhammad Ali the man

that the collaborators he needed could not be found among his own
people and so he set out to educate his people, but in the meantime he
made use of the abilities of the Greeks and Armenians who were co-
nationals in the empire. The French had always traded in the
Mediterranean so their activity was necessary, and after 1815 military
and technical experts from France were readily available. His liking for
French talent may also have stemmed from the tremendous admiration
he had for Napoleon.
   We can deduce that, although Muhammad AH had been a merchant,
he had not been an affluent one: he would otherwise have paid someone
else to go and fight the war in Egypt in his place, or he would have had
the money to equip himself. That he was involved in trade would lead us
to assume some knowledge of commerce and trading practices, for
tobacco was an important commodity and, while Kavala was not a major
port, it was nonetheless on the major trade route and in the heart of the
tobacco country where a great deal of buying and selling went on. In
brief, Muhammad Ali's background included both military and perhaps
naval experience, a mercantile experience - albeit of a minor nature, and
one that may not have been too successful - and an acquaintance with
ethnic minorities of several kinds.
   The contingent from Kavala joined the Ottoman forces to sail to
Egypt where they landed on 8 March 1801. Family history claimed that
the sea was so rough that the forces could not land for a week. The sea in
the Bay of Abuqir is generally rough and if a meltemi wind was blowing it
would have been impossible for the forces to land without
sustaining severe casualties. Family history recounts that the first
casualty was Ali Agha, the leader of the contingent from Kavala, who
became violently sea-sick and decided to go home on the next ship,
leaving Muhammad Ali to head the contingent. While one can readily
believe that bad weather conditions delayed landing the troops, it is
hardly credible that a man who had spent his life in a port town and who
presumably must have done a lot of sailing would be subject to sea-
sickness. Even if we were to assume that, like Lord Nelson, he indeed
suffered from such an ailment, it is highly unlikely that, having reached
land after a nasty experience on sea, he would venture straight back to
sea again to go home. What is more likely is that Muhammad Ali's
talents soon manoeuvred him to the top position of command in his
contingent. His personable presence and his undoubted ability in a
skirmish against the French forces soon brought him to the attention of
the Ottoman Capitan Pasha, Mehmet Khusrev, who in 1801 appointed
him serchesme, or commander of a thousand, that is, a major, in common
parlance.9 Jabarti in his first mention of Muhammad Ali refers to him as
