Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

contribution on al-Mahruqi and Girgis al-Gawhari, both friends, of
Muhammad Ali and prominent merchants. Rumours spread that the
governor was going to tax the entire country as the French had done.
   Drovetti commented that the Ottoman governor had to 'struggle
against the wiles of a man as ambitious as he was enterprising who,
skilful in the art of intrigue, has for him the force of public opinion and
arms. This astute man [Muhammad Ali] ... wishes to spread discontent
and cut a path to the throne without seeming to want to do so.'21
Drovetti believed that Muhammad Ali controlled public opinion
through his friendship with the local leaders and that he could easily
seize power, but being Machiavellian he wished to seem chosen 'by the
voice of the people'. He wished to gain the position he coveted, the
approval of the notables for all his projects and also make himself
indispensable to the Ottoman government by restoring authority to the
country. Writing to Mengin, the French agent in Cairo, Drovetti in
Alexandria said he believed Muhammad Ali coveted the pashalik of
Egypt, but wanted it without firing a shot and without incurring the
displeasure of the Porte. He wished to seize power through the goodwill
of the ulama and the people and force the Porte to bow to the inevitable.
Drovetti stated that, in this, Muhammad Ali was possessed of more
good sense than Turks normally had. He then ordered Mengin to have a
meeting with Muhammad Ali and try to find out what his plans were,
but without compromising himself.
   Drovetti was generally correct. Muhammad Ali did want the position
of governor of Egypt and he wanted it by popular acclaim and the
support of the native elite as a means of forcing the Porte to accept the
unpalatable, but also because he knew that he had a hard time ahead of
him and he needed the cooperation of the notables every step of the way.
He had little reason to sow dissent and discontent for the Turks were
doing it by themselves. He was simply benefiting from their mistakes.
   The governor's ineptitude, his inability to bring order and security,
his rampaging soldiers and continuous demands for funds had forced
the city notables into drastic action. They delivered an ultimatum which
they knew he would not accept and could not put into effect. The
ultimatum demanded that he eject his soldiery from Cairo, forbid any
new levies on the population, and re-establish communications with
Upper Egypt, i.e. the mamluks. To quote Drovetti once again, 'The
qadi, the ulama, the ojakat, the people at last united to depose Khurshid
Pasha and proclaim the new pasha, Muhammad Ali, governor of Egypt.
This revolution took place during the day of 22 Floreal [12 May 1805/13
Safar] without a single shot being fired.'22
   The Porte had played into Muhammad Ali's hand when they had

46
