Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

   Whatever else Muhammad Ali may have been trying to do in Egypt it
seems perfectly clear that he was not trying to re-establish Ottoman
authority but was seeking to modify the old order and to establish the
authority of one man, himself. Given his cautious nature, and the
general precariousness of his condition, he had to go one step at a time,
and hide his motives until he had made a clean sweep of all opposition
and was left in sole command of the country. This was not to happen
until 1811. Until then he pretended to be an obedient servant of the
Porte, while seeking to consolidate his own position as ruler in Egypt.
   Once the Delhis arrived in Cairo, rather than fly to assist Muhammad
Ali who had besieged the city of Minia in Upper Egypt, they remained
in Cairo until their pay had been issued them, and spread the rumour
that they had come in order to evict the Albanians. One more incubus
was added to the rest who were sucking Egypt to death.
   Muhammad Ali captured Minia and returned to Cairo since his men
also were clamouring for pay. Cairo was teeming with some eight to nine
thousand soldiers all loudly demanding payment. Tension was rising.
The population closed their shops and cowered in their homes expect-
ing an outburst. Drovetti, the French consul in Egypt, writing home to
Paris expressed his unease about the political situation. He pointed out
that Muhammad Ali 'has always had designs on the pashalik of Cairo,
and all his actions, which seemed to be directed in favour of the Porte,
bear the imprint of his ambition to attain greater power'.20 The relations
between Muhammad Ali and the governor were strained when the
former demanded an accounting for all the funds received into the
treasury.
   Meanwhile, the local notables were busy consulting with Muhammad
Ali, against the express orders of the governor. The notables, ulama,
and merchants, led by Sayyid Umar Makram, were making common
cause with Muhammad Ali against what they perceived to be their
common danger: the breakdown in public security, the prevalent chaos
in government, the dissolution of trade after four years of civil war and
three years of an alien occupation. The notables were all men of vested
interests. The ulama were also landowners, or muhazimun, and were
involved with the tujjar in trade. Extortions and forced loans had placed
a heavy burden on them as well as on the population, and they saw their
property disintegrating before their very eyes, for they could neither
collect rents as multazimun nor acquire income from trade. The
mamluks had recently demonstrated their inability to govern, being too
taken up with their own internecine squabbles to unite and rule the
land. The governor and his men were rapacious and, worse, ineffective;
and the latter were uncontrollable. The only man who appeared capable,

44
