                                             A country without a master

mad Ali as part of his power play against the pasha. Muhammad Ali had
certainly not created the grievances that had led up to the mutiny, but
he may have encouraged the soldiers to mutiny because 'he had behind
him all of the army'.10
   The local population for some time had sensed trouble brewing and
had armed themselves for an impending uprising. The governor unsuc-
cessfully tried to coopt the local population against the soldiers, but
meanwhile Tahir Pasha, the head of the Albanian forces, captured the
citadel and trained cannon on the governor's house. Reports claimed
that Khusrev was so overcome with shock that he fainted. Both factions
fought in the streets for dominion over the city. A day later Khusrev
gathered his goods and his women and secretly left the city for
Damietta, after a rule of 15 months and 21 days. Tahir Pasha was
elected qaim-maqam, or temporary governor, until an imperial firman
arrived naming him the new governor.
   According to Nicolas Turc, Tahir had originally been a brigand, and
loved to kill. The man must have been particularly ghastly because three
weeks later he was murdered by two janissaries. Before his death,
however, he had sought and obtained an alliance with the Ibrahim/Bar-
dissi faction of mamluks. That he had effected that rapprochement on
his own cognizance is doubtful. One suspects that it was Muhammad
Ali's own idea to create a coalition between Albanians and mamluks
against Turks. When a new governor was appointed after Tahir's
assassination, the mamluks surrounded the city and gave the governor a
24-hour ultimatum to get out of town. The victorious Albanian/mamluk
faction entered the city and had criers exhort the population to stay calm
and return to their tasks, 'in the name of Ibrahim Bey and Muhammad
Ali'." The latter by then had become commander-in-chief of the
Albanian troops. From then Muhammad Ali was to become involved in
a series of temporary alliances and factional struggles which were
eventually to raise him to the ranks of contender for the governorship of
Egypt.
   A force led by Bardissi and Muhammad Ali headed for Damietta to
capture Khusrev Pasha. Khusrev held out, in consequence of which
resistance the city of Damietta was utterly devastated before he could be
captured and brought back to Cairo. A firman arrived from Istanbul
deposing Khusrev and naming Jazairli Ali Pasha wait, or governor.
   Jazairli Ali Pasha arrived in Alexandria armed with orders to banish
the Albanians from Egypt. However, Ibrahim Bey informed him that
according to time-honoured mamluk custom he would be allowed into
Cairo with an escort of only 200 men. Quite understandably Jazairli Ali
hesitated to abandon the security of Alexandria, and Ibrahim was left

                                                                       39
