Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

walk the streets after sunset.7 The citizens openly regretted the French
occupation, so bitter had they become towards the new occupants.
   The lawlessness of the ten thousand Ottoman soldiery was in part
based on the fact that they had not been paid their salaries and had to
resort to looting to satisfy their wants. Beyond that they came to look
upon Egypt as a country without a master and ripe for plunder.
   The mamluks, whose numbers had been greatly depleted through war
and plague, and who were reduced to 1,200 mamluks and some 5,000
bedouin irregulars, were unable either to dominate or expel the Otto-
mans. In the first place the Ottomans had placed an embargo on the
export of mamluks to Egypt in 1802, and in the second place the
mamluks had no funds with which to pay any mercenaries. Yet there
were enough mamluks and they remained sufficiently strong to resist
being expelled or exterminated by the Turks.
   Money had become scarce in the land. Trade and commerce had been
at a standstill for some time, and the population, forced to pay so many
taxes to so many different military denominations - French, beys,
Turks, Albanians - was bled dry. While the Ottomans looked on Egypt
as a prey, the mamluks also had plundered it, but in the past they had
been the sole, responsible rulers; now that responsibility was curtailed
and in jeopardy. Caught as they were between the devil and the deep
blue sea, the Egyptians found little to look forward to, either in an
Ottoman occupation or in a return to mamluk rule. The time seemed
ripe for radical change. These circumstances catapulted Muhammad Ali
from a position of relative obscurity into a position of power, while his
own native talents allowed him to do the rest, and to rise to the rank of
contender for sole authority.
   The new governor of Egypt, Khusrev Pasha, was a bloodthirsty,
rapacious man. Worse still, he was a bad administrator who imposed
arbitrary and unreasonable taxes on a population that was on its last
legs.8 Among other taxes he imposed a house tax equal to three years'
rent on private dwellings. At the same time he committed the cardinal
sin of not paying the soldiers for five months, and especially the
Albanians. These last were led by Muhammad Ali in a demonstration to
demand their back pay. The governor merely countered with a remark
that the Albanians were worthless and should be sent back to their
country or he would have them all killed.9 The Albanians, 6,000 men
who formed the bulk of the Ottoman army, were not given satisfaction,
and rioted. The governor retaliated and trained cannon from the citadel
on them.
   This incident was recounted by two eye-witnesses, Jabarti and
Nicolas Turc, who both claimed that it had been fomented by Muham-

38
