Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

master of Cairo. Cairo was in bad straits and threatened with famine
because the mamluks had cornered the grain market and stockpiled
supplies. Bardissi objected to these actions and ordered Muhammad AH
to break into the grain stores and distribute grain to the population.
Muhammad Ali took the credit for this move and the population came
to look upon him as their hero. Muhammad Ali next convinced Bardissi
to pay arrears of salary to the soldiers. He may have known that in order
to do that the beys would have to levy a heavy tax on the population,
who would resist such a measure. By then he and Bardissi were in
control of Cairo, and if he could get rid of Bardissi that would leave him
master of the capital. A heavy tax coming then was at the worst possible
time. The Nile was obviously going to be a low one that year, which
implied a possible famine. Conditions were so bad that, according to
Turk, 'there was cause to turn white the hair of a new born babe'.12
   The mamluks reaped the largest share of the city's odium, which was
being heaped indiscriminately on all warring factions. When Ibrahim
Bey gathered the ulama and asked them to pray for succour and a way
out of their difficulties, Shaikh al-Arusi bluntly retorted,
God will not answer your prayers nor those of your subjects, for tyranny,
injustice and debauchery reign over the entire country. Our rulers are not true
Muslims. Had they been sincere believers, I mean men impassioned, cherishing
justice and integrity, they would abolish indirect taxes and irregular contribu-
tions and suppress arbitrary taxation, [they would] reassure the population ...
and instil confidence in the inhabitants ... [instead] under their government
unrest and exactions spread, vice appears openly ... theft is committed in public
and no one intervenes ... How do you expect God to receive our supplications
and prayers when the mamluks and soldiers day and night pillage, ravage, hit,
kill, without fearing chief or notable?13
The ulama, those proponents of law and order, the natural leaders of the
people, had reached the end of their tether. More calamity was to be
heaped upon them before they were moved to action instead of standing
aside as observers.
  On 27 February 1804 a military revolt once again broke out among
the soldiers, who demanded their wages which had fallen in arrears. An
extraordinary tax was imposed on the population, who this time rioted.
They took to the streets shouting slogans against Bardissi saying,
'Bardissi what will you extract from us who are bankrupt?' (cish ta'kudh
min taflissi ya Bardissi3), and cursed mamluks and soldiers singly and
collectively in public. Muhammad Ali sent his men to the various
quarters of the city to prevent the soldiers from looting, and decreed
that any soldier found molesting a civilian was to be arrested. From then
on, wrote Turc, his star shone brightly,14 especially when he had

40
