                                              A country without a master

Bardissi abolish the tax. Jabarti presented a more jaundiced account of
events. He claimed that the unrest was due to Muhammad Ali's
machinations and intrigues, that Muhammad Ali had roused the
soldiers against Khusrev and undermined him through Tahir Pasha and
the Albanians. He destroyed Tahir Pasha by manipulating the janissar-
ies, and destroyed Tahir's successors with the assistance of the mamluk
beys. Jabarti added that Bardissi and Muhammad Ali had signed a
blood pact, that Bardissi had been seduced by Muhammad Ali and
obeyed him implicitly, doing his work while Muhammad Ali remained
in the background and only stepped out to oppose the levy of a new tax
and appear a hero in the eyes of a duped populace.15
   Jabarti's account, if true, and one assumes that there is a strong
element of truth in it, shows how cleverly Muhammad Ali had
manipulated his rivals, set them at each other's throats, himself to
emerge unscathed and something of a popular figure. Perhaps his native
associates from among the ulama and the tujjar had given him guidelines
for behaviour which followed the early pattern of an alliance between
the military, the tujjar and the ulama, for that would more clearly
explain his next move.
   Bardissi, outraged at the revolt of the masses, swore revenge against
them and gathered the ulama to scold them for allowing it to occur. At
the meeting, Muhammad Ali, who felt that Bardissi had outlived his
usefulness, and who may indeed have manipulated the tax as a means of
ridding himself of Bardissi, took the side of the ulama and the masses
and rebuked Bardissi for his actions. 'Our pay should come from the
state, and not from the population', he said. 'Pay the troops out of your
funds and do not pressure your subjects ... We will not allow you to
force these people to contribute',16 he said insidiously, and stalked out of
the meeting. By so doing he demonstrated to the ulama that he was not
afraid to show solidarity with the people, and that he was basically
hostile to the mamluks.
   The struggles in Egypt between the various factions were clearly a
struggle for supremacy but they were also motivated by economic
wants. Coming on the heels of a prolonged financial and agricultural
crisis, Egypt could not support both mamluk and Ottoman forces
together. One of the warring factions needed to go to make room for one
ruling elite. To the native elite it was becoming increasingly obvious
that the mamluks had outlived their usefulness. They were becoming a
liability and would have to go. The alternative lay in the direction of a
strong man, a second Ali Bey al-Kabir, who had troops to back him, and
who presented a viable alternative to the chaos of the past five years.
That man was clearly Muhammad Ali.
