                                             A country without a master

to events in a deadly game of survival, but by 1806 it was perfectly clear
that he had a definite goal in mind - to become independent. The details
of how to achieve his ends were filled in later when it became clear to
him that he would have to dominate the mamluks and rid the country of
local Ottoman opposition in order to substitute himself as sole ruler in
the land. He also intended to defy the Ottomans and force their
acquiescence, all of which may have been in keeping with the politics of
the notables, but was also what one might expect of a man intent on
becoming the independent ruler of a state he believed he had won by the
sword, an act that had precedents in the Ottoman empire, e.g. Ali Pasha
Tepelen.
   As far as the Egyptian population was concerned, it seems inconceiva-
ble that they would risk so much, as they did in supporting Muhammad
Ali, to restore a form of government that had existed in the past and
which few of them could even remember, or that they would do so in
order to bring back the mamluk form of rule. The mamluks had plagued
them for past decades and their misrule had brought about a foreign
occupation, followed by a Turkish conquest that was much worse. The
population of Cairo was trying to break the yoke of the past, not tie the
noose tighter round their necks again. Their support for Muhammad
Ali was the last act in a conflict against the mamluks which had started
prior to the French occupation. They were not so much supporting
Muhammad Ali as trying to be rid of the mamluks through him. That
explains why the unemployed masses, created prior to the French
occupation and as a consequence of that occupation - when artisans
were thrown out of work for lack of imported raw materials - and the
working artisans, who were bilked by the Ottoman soldiery skimming
off their hard-earned livelihood, all united behind Muhammad Ali
against the 'haves', even though some of the native elite also joined in
for fear of losing what they had.
   The tujjar and the ulama, the native elite, supported Muhammad Ali
for different reasons. They saw him as the exponent of law and order, an
Ali Bey, who would bring stability to the country and restore the
military-mercantile alliance of the past. Maybe the artisans and the
masses saw in Muhammad Ali the possibility of a return to an earlier
artisan-military alliance, although they had rejected the alliance with
the newly arrived Ottoman ojakat, which offered them bitter exploita-
tion and no protection. Muhammad Ali defended the population from
such exploitation, or at least he seemed to defend the populace, who
rallied round him. Those who supported Muhammad Ali therefore did
so for different reasons: the elites for their own vested interests, the
people because he promised a new departure for them.

                                                                       43
