                                              A country without a master

energetic and, above all, reasonable was Muhammad Ali. Even more in
his favour was his definite affinity with the merchants - witness his
friendship with the head of the merchants' guild, al-Mahruqi and with
al-Muwailhi, a Red Sea merchant - and his deference towards the men
of religion. Sayyid Umar Makram had always been an active politician
and an efficient organizer of the masses. As naqib al-ashrqf he had put
his influence to good use in 1798 when he organized the artisans of Cairo
into a militia to defend the city when the mamluks deserted it. In 1800
he had galvanized popular resistance against the French in an uprising.
Anyone who needed the power of the mob had to win Umar Makram to
his cause, or to win Shaikh al-Sadat. Shaikh al-Sadat was head of the
sufi orders in Egypt and could rouse every able-bodied male in the city
to action. Both he and Shaikh al-Bakri headed influential sufi fraterni-
ties and were considered the two most powerful men in the city, which
explains why the Ottomans gave orders that they were to be humiliated
and dispossessed. Their friendship was actively sought by Muhammad
Ali, while they, being at the end of their financial resources, were
looking for an alternative to the present chaos. It was inevitable that the
ambitious general, the activist leader and the notables should pool their
resources against a common enemy.
   Early in May the Delhis ran amok. They kidnapped, raped, killed and
looted at will. The inhabitants of Old Cairo, where the Delhis were
quartered, appealed to the ulama to save them. In high indignation the
ulama appealed to the governor to stop the Delhis, but the Delhis paid
no attention to him. The ulama ordered the gates of al-Azhar mosque
closed, a signal of distress, and criers went round the aswaq calling
'distress'. All the shops were closed and the population prepared itself
for a confrontation. The governor descended from the citadel to placate
the ulama and was showered with stones by the mob. Panic swept the
city while the ulama deliberated.
   In the midst of this tense situation a messenger arrived from Istanbul
bearing a firman appointing Muhammad Ali governor of Jidda - a
means of getting rid of him by kicking him upstairs to fight the
Wahhabis in the Hijaz. By then Ottoman administration in Istanbul had
realized the danger of the general's continued presence in Egypt. They
granted him the title of pasha and tried to get him out of the country
with a promotion as governor. By so doing the Ottomans played right
into his hand. During his official ceremony of investiture the soldiers
rioted and demanded their pay from him. He calmly answered 'Here is
your governor. Ask him for your money', and left, distributing coins to
the populace who proclaimed him governor of Egypt. The soldiers
attacked the governor, who managed to escape and imposed a forced

                                                                        45
