Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

   After the incident between Bardissi and Muhammad AH, the Alban-
ian troops attacked the mamluks who fled the city, much to the delight
of the population which sacked their houses and gave Muhammad AH
credit for having got rid of them and for having opposed the levy of an
exorbitant tax. Muhammad AH turned to the ulama and the civic leaders
and sought to ingratiate himself further with them. Especially did he
seek the friendship of Sayyid Umar Makram, the marshal of the
notables (naqib al-ashraf) and a powerful figure in Cairo.17 Makram
was the only one among the ulama who had strong leadership qualities
and who was not afraid to shoulder responsibility.
   Within three years of landing in Egypt as junior officer in the
Ottoman army, Muhammad Ali had become commander of these very
forces, and had won the gratitude and recognition of the Cairene
population and their natural leaders. He emerged from his power ploy
with the reputation of an adroit politician, an efficient soldier, a
reasonable man, and a dangerous opponent.
   Once Muhammad Ali had sided with the Egyptian population,
fighting between his forces and the mamluk beys who controlled the
grain of Upper Egypt, and could starve Cairo, broke out. The bedouin
allies of the mamluks pillaged the trading caravans, so merchants were
unable to bring their goods into the capital. Worse was yet to come.
   The Porte appointed a new governor in Egypt, Khurshid Pasha, who,
finding his authority minimal because he had no forces at his command,
tried importing a military bloc of his own. He called in around 5,000
troops from Syria, the redoubtable Delhis or 'madmen', who were
notorious for their high astrakhan bonnets and their ferocity. Kurdish,
Druze and Matawilla in origin,18 they were dreaded by the local
population and by the Albanian troops as well. The head of the Delhis
was the brother of the man who, having assassinated Tahir, had been
assassinated by the revengeful Albanians, who now expected retaliation
for their action.
   It has been suggested that by his actions Muhammad Ali may have
been attempting to restore the old order, and replace chaos and civil
strife with a peaceful return to the status quo ante, that he was, in fact,
not attempting to impose change or revolution, but was practising the
'politics of the notables' as was being practised in other Ottoman cities
like Damascus, Aleppo and Acre.19 If such a view is correct, then one
must believe that Muhammad Ali in 1805 came to power through a
desire to restore the old modes of authority, modes that had radically
changed over the past fifty years. While this may be the case, it would
seem to me that he planned more than to restore the power of the sultan
and Porte and become their man in Egypt. At first he may have reacted

42
