                                             A country without a master

made him a pasha and named him governor of Jidda, for by so doing
they had raised him to the rank of contender for the governorship of
Egypt. While he may still have been acting out his power-play by the
rules of the system, the population, on the other hand, were involved in
a genuine revolution for a new form of government, even when they
were being manipulated by the new pasha. There is little doubt that
Muhammad AH had manipulated the ulama into supporting him, and
even into drawing up an ultimatum. There is equally little doubt that
the ulama were willing to act once they could see an alternative to their
situation. Throughout the eighteenth century the ulama of Cairo had
led uprisings against the mamluks and against the French. They had
emerged as the popular leaders of the country, and, if the high ulama
were more likely to side with the voice of authority against the populace,
the low ulama were equally ready to do the opposite. Leaders like Umar
Makram, who had a populist base, had always gone to the masses for
support. This specific incident, though apparently similar to many other
uprisings against mamluk depredations, was dissimilar, or so it seemed
to the populace. They were going to depose a governor and put a new
one in his place. The elite, on the other hand, looked upon the incident
differently. This is how Jabarti interpreted events.
   Jabarti recorded that the ulama, after sending their ultimatum to
Khurshid, were told that he was planning to assassinate them all for
daring to send an ultimatum. They went to Muhammad AH in despera-
tion and said, 'We do not wish the rule of this man. He must be
deposed.' Muhammad AH asked, 'And whom do you desire as gover-
nor?' They answered, 'We will have none but you. You will become wali
over us, and [abide] by our conditions, because of what we have seen of
you of justice and goodness.' At first he demurred, then accepted the
offer. Later in his chronicles Jabarti claimed that, while Umar Makram
had been posing as Alfi Bey's friend, he was befriending Muhammad
AH, who flattered him and visited him secretly in the middle of the
night. Jabarti implied that the two men were plotting together, that
Muhammad AH had falsely sworn to Makram that if he were named
governor of Egypt he would rule with justice, would respect the law and
see that it was obeyed, take no action without consulting the ulama, ('wa
la yafal amran ilia bi-mashuratihi wa mashurati-1-ulama3)23 and, were he
to break his word, the ulama could depose him. This last term was
sworn in public to the ulama. The rector of al-Azhar, Shaikh al-
Sharqawi, clothed Muhammad AH in a qaftan as an official act of
investiture, and the news was broadcast all over the city and communi-
cated to the wali entrenched in the citadel. The governor retorted, 'I was
invested by the sultan. I will not be" deposed by fallahin.' Simultane-

                                                                      47
