                                                A country without a master

internal disorder. The ulama had built their wealth during periods of
internal chaos by remaining apart from the fray. They were now not
willing to jeopardize their material interests by permitting the rabble
greater authority. As far as they were concerned, Muhammad Ali was
there to bring law and order out of chaos, and to govern with the advice
and consent of the men of property, and not with the support of the
masses. They used the masses to cow the opposition, but they were not
going to allow the masses any other role than that of rank and file at their
command.
   The high ulama were by and large the protectors of tradition, the
guardians of the establishment and of the socio-economic order, which
they justified, in normal times. They stepped out of character only in
times of crisis, and in order to restore law and order. It is true that in the
past some of the ulama had led uprisings against the mamluks and
against the French, but these uprisings did not threaten the established
system; on the contrary they were aimed at those who threatened to
destroy it. In that incident with Muhammad Ali they were stepping out
into the fray, a move that could threaten their lives and the entire
system, especially if the masses were allowed to take an active role in
directing the affairs of state. As far as the ulama were concerned, they
now had a ruler, Muhammad Ali, who could settle any dispute arising
between himself and his rivals or contenders for power. As for civil
disputes, these could be handled by Umar Makram. The ulama had
been manipulated or driven by events into accepting the blandishments
of Makram and Muhammad Ali and supporting the latter against the
wait, but they were not willing to go any further than that. They could
pose as an eminence grise for a limited duration, but would not actively
participate in events, and would not condone the active participation of
the masses in such events. That reluctance to become involved in
confrontation may have given Muhammad Ali his clue as to how to
handle the ulama later. It was to teach him that they lacked staying
power, that they preferred to hand over authority to some other group
than themselves, in brief, that they were not dangerous as opponents.
  The populace differed from the ulama. They had not been consulted
by the ulama, who had reached their decision on their own, and they
disapproved of the ulama's action. They had participated in what they
believed was a popular revolt against the oppression of the military.
They had fought the soldiers, they had beaten them, and brought to
power a leader who, if he was not a popular leader, was at least the man
approved by them. French consular reports confirm that when they
report, 'They say that Muhammad Ali adds to the suffrage of his troops
the support of the inhabitants of Cairo and, what is extraordinary, the
