                                                  A country without a master

   One of Khurshid's men met Makram and reasoned with him asking
how he could morally justify laying siege to the citadel: 'How can you
depose a man invested by the sultan?', he asked. 'Do not the Holy
Scriptures say "Obey God, obey the Prophet, and those set in authority
over you?"' Umar Makram answered, 'Those set in authority are the
ulama, and those who uphold the sharia and the righteous sultan. This
man [Khurshid] is a tyrannical man, and it is the tradition from time
immemorial that citizens depose a wali if he be unjust.' 'How can you
stop food and supplies from reaching him? ... are we heretics to be so
treated?', asked the messenger. 'Yes', was the answer, 'the ulama and
qadi have decreed that it is righteous to fight you. You are rebellious
(usah).' 'The qadi is a heretic', replied the messenger angrily. 'If your
qadi be a heretic', retorted Makram, 'what about the rest of you?', and
they parted on that sour note.26
   While the population of Cairo manned the barricades, Muhammad
Ali's soldiers demanded their wages, and would not fight until they had
been paid, deserting their positions. The populace took their positions
and fighting broke out between the citizenry and the soldiery. Chaos
reigned; no one could distinguish friend from foe, wrote Jabarti. At
times the people and the soldiers would fight each other and at other
times they would join and fight those in the citadel, who egged the
Ottomans and Albanians to fight the 'fallahin'. From time to time
Khurshid would order a general bombardment of the city, with
consequent panic. Mengin wrote,

the people raise barricades ... The women, the children, armed with stones
stand on the roofs ... The number of armed men is said to reach 40,000, who all
blindly obey the order of Shaikh Sayyid Umar, their general, who is regarded as
head of the city ... everyone contributes, and the shaikh pays the artisan who has
no resources other than his work, and who has been obliged by circumstances to
remain under arms day and night.27

  Outside the capital the picture was just as grim. Upper Egypt was
under mamluk control, while Alfi Bey and his men were roaming the
Delta marauding. The Delhis, who had not joined any faction, contin-
ued to loot, pillage and rape in the Qaliub area, under the guise of giving
chase to Alfi Bey. Drovetti was gloomy in his prognostication, but he
believed Muhammad Ali to have character and to be friendly towards
France, so he opined that the Albanian might yet master the situation
and regulate Egypt's destiny.
  On Friday 29 June 1805 word came that a courier from the Porte had
disembarked. Ten days later he reached Cairo amid great rejoicings on
the part of the multitude. The people lined the streets and received his

                                                                              49
