Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

cortege with fifes, drums, gunfire, screams of delight that lasted for
three hours. People came from all the quarters, men like Hajjaj al-
Khudari, the head of the guild of greengrocers and the chief of the
Habbala quarter of town, and Ibn Shama, the head of the guild of
butchers, all of whom had manned the barricades, and were popular
heroes. While the people were screaming for joy, Khurshid was raining
cannon balls on the city, but these in no way deterred the celebrants.
The cortege headed towards Muhammad Ali's house in Ezbekieh,
where the official firman investing him as governor of Egypt was read
out aloud to the audience. The Porte ratified the ulama's choice of
governor as from 20 Rabi Awal/18 June 1805, and declared Khurshid
relieved of his position.28
   In spite of the advent of the firman, fighting between soldiers and
citizens continued all over the city. Khurshid refused to budge until he
had seen the original firman. News that the mamluks had reached the
outskirts of Cairo agitated the population. In the midst of this brouhaha
the ulama, who feared the power of the masses even more than they
feared the soldiers, held a meeting and decided that in view of the utter
uselessness of their intervention in battles of any kind - to which activity
they remained foreign - from henceforth they would eschew all political
activity, preach peace, calm the inhabitants and exhort them to return to
normal life. They themselves would reopen the Azhar and return to
their teaching. They trooped to Muhammad AH and announced that, as
he had become master of the country, the citizens no longer had a
political part to play and it was up to him to implement the sultan's
orders.
   This seemingly cowardly abdication of authority by the ulama into
the hands of Muhammad Ali was not unexpected. The ulama were
unused to wielding direct power, save on an interim basis, and were
uncomfortable in the position of preaching potential sedition, especially
if it were to result in their involvement in armed conflict. Many of the
ulama had close ties with the mamluks and they did not wish to come
into conflict with them, or at least not into armed conflict. A dispute
with a decidedly military character they believed should be fought by
the military, and the citizens should have no hand in it. No doubt
behind the ulama's rejection of the active military role of the citizenry
lay a basic fear of mass movements. The high ulama were men of wealth
who feared and despised the masses even when they manipulated and
used them. Jabarti refers to the common people in unflattering terms as
rabble (rua), riff-raff (al-ghawgha), etc. The ulama hoped Muhammad
Ali would become another Ali Bey who would protect their vested
interests and wealth and check the rabble and other potential sources of

50
