Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

them to leave die city at once, which they prudently did. The second
group of beys reached Bab Zuwaila to the south where they were met by
gunfire from Maghribi troops. Disconcerted by the unfriendly recep-
tion, they sought refuge in a nearby mosque where they were captured
and killed. Jabarti believed the incident to have been set up by
Muhammad Ali as a trap for the beys, but adduced little evidence for his
belief. That abortive attack made the beys head for Upper Egypt, except
for Am Bey, always a loner, who headed for the province of Fayyum.
   The old beys were by now dying out and their ranks were being filled
by young sancak beys who were unknown, untried and had little
authority with which to back their claims for supremacy in the land.
The beys, though reduced in numbers, had, with Greek, Arab and
Turkish mercenaries, enough fighting power to permit them to occupy
Upper Egypt and harass the new governor for a few more years,
especially when they controlled all grain shipments from Upper Egypt.
   Money was always scarce in Egypt, particularly at that time, and new
contributions were perforce levied by the new ruler on all those with
funds: tujjar, Copts, other Christians. When these funds did not suffice,
illegal means were tried. The pilgrimage caravan was seized and the
merchants and officials of the caravan released only after they had paid
substantial sums of money. In spite of these methods pay was constantly
in arrears. Finally, Muhammad Ali called in the ulama and explained his
situation to them. 'I have no means of finding money', he said. 'Help me
and give me counsel.' He reassured them that once the soldiers were
paid they would return home and evacuate Egypt. The ulama deliber-
ated and finally opted to demand one third of the faiz from the
multazimun. These last were outraged, fearing that it would set a
precedent, but the pasha placated them and offered to sign a firman
stating that this was a once only, extraordinary levy that was never to be
repeated: 'May the curse of God fall on him who would repeat it.'33
That promise was shortly to be broken.
   Alfi Bey soon entered into negotiations with Muhammad Ali, who
appeared willing to listen to his terms. Alfi demanded the areas of
Fayyum, Bani Suif, Giza and Buhaira and the iltizam of 200 villages
in return for submitting to Muhammad Ali, a totally unreasonable
demand. The other beys set forth equally extravagant claims to all the
territory south of Minia, and demanded that he reduce his army to 4,000
men and expel the rest from Egypt. Two expeditions were then set up,
one against Alfi Bey and one against the mamluks in the south.
   Yet at the time Muhammad Ali might have settled for reasonable
terms with his enemies. He offered the mamluks the lands south of
Girga and offered Alfi the province of Giza. Whether these were terms

54
