Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Alt

ously the ulama wrote to the Porte humbly requesting that Muhammad
AH be appointed wali of Egypt, according to the 'will of the people'.
   The difference between that deposition of an unpopular governor and
previous others was that it was the ulama and the people who had
carried it out, not the mamluks or the soldiers. The ulama expected the
new governor to rule in consultation with them, and to be deposed if he
departed from their path. By that precondition they were setting
themselves up as an authority that was superior to that of the govern-
ment, as the moral guardians of the public weal, the wielders of the
sharia. They were returning to early Islamic practice in theory, but in
fact they were trying to limit the authority of a new ruler. That they
couched their request to the Porte in the words 'the will of the people'
was a clear indication that they would not bargain over terms, but meant
what they said. Vox populi supported by vox ulama was vox Dei, and
there was little the Ottomans could do about it.
   The populace, expecting imminent confrontation with the deposed
governor's soldiers, armed themselves. It was even said that the poor sold
their clothing so as to buy weapons. Makram once again galvanized the
artisans and organized them into fighting units. Most of Khurshid's men
defected, leaving him isolated in the citadel with a small contingent of
Albanians who opted to stand by him. His garrison was composed of
around 500 soldiers and 800 non-combatants, and they had little or no
supplies. Umar Makram ordered the population to lay siege to the citadel.
   Mengin, the agent in Cairo, recounted the events with gusto. Unlike
Jabarti who wrote his chronicles at a later period when his animosity
towards Muhammad AH had firmly established itself, Mengin wrote
daily reports to his superiors. 'One sees reigning the same enthusiasm as
in France during the first moments of the Revolution. Everybody is
buying arms... It is Shaikh Umar Makram who manages everything; he
has more audacity and character and consequently more influence than
the other shaikhs ... Muhammad AH continues to make common cause
with the people which is his main strength.'24 Today we can visualize
much more readily than past historians could how an alim could lead
people to revolt, for popular movements are more clearly understood,
and their potential more palpably felt. Where historians in the past
could see only the Machiavellian manipulation of one man in all these
events, Mengin more clearly saw that this was a genuine popular
movement, carrying Muhammad AH on its crest. Without that force
behind him Muhammad AH may not have achieved his goals. A week
later Drovetti commented, 'the imposing situation in which the ulama
find themselves obviously proves that at this moment they control the
destiny of the government of Cairo'.25

48
