                                              A country without a master

citadel with whom they were in correspondence. On Sunday, 8 July,
three rounds of cannon were fired from the citadel as a signal and the
beys attacked the city. Unfortunately for the mamluks, their correspon-
dence with the deposed governor had been intercepted and the Albanian
troops were lying in wait for them and repelled them. Only then did the
former wali agree to leave the country a week later, on condition that he
and his men be paid their arrears. Umar Makram undertook to raise the
funds, and Muhammad Ali, seeking his first loan from the Christians
and the tujjar, established a tax on the inhabitants of the country and the
major cities, {al-bilad wa-l banadir).31
   The departure of the deposed wali was greeted with relief on the part
of the citizenry although they had to pay a tax to get rid of him.
Skirmishes between the citizens and the undisciplined soldiers contin-
ued in spite of edicts launched by the new governor that any soldier
molesting citizens would be summarily executed. Outside the capital the
situation was much worse, with marauding beys and Delhis troops
extorting taxes, mostly imaginary, from the population. The Delhis,
who had been brought to Egypt to help the governor establish order,
instead sacked and looted the country, obeyed none but their own
leaders and wreaked worse havoc than any of the other armed bands that
roamed the countryside. The Delhis had sacked and pillaged the town of
Sammanud in the Delta under the pretext of chasing mamluks. Next
they attacked Mahalla al-Kubra, a town renowned as a textile centre,
which they sacked and set on fire. In Damanhur they repeated their
bloody acts and roamed over the provinces of Gharbiyya, Minufiyya,
Sharqiyya and Daqahliyya sowing havoc and destruction. Once the
Delhis had entered a town or a village, they left it in ruins. When they
had gone, the bedouin followed in their footsteps and carted away
whatever the Delhis had overlooked. Finally, the regular soldiers,
supposedly in hot pursuit of the Delhis, would 'liberate' the village and
surpass their predecessors in savagery. It was reported that they even
divested the women of their clothing. By the time the Delhis had
returned to Syria with their loot, which included kidnapped women and
children and some 4,000 camels laden with booty, the Delta was a
shambles.32
   Khurshid Pasha's departure from Cairo had encouraged the mamluk
beys in the belief that they could win over the ulama and regain
supremacy over Egypt. On Sunday 18 August, six beys and 400
mamluks infiltrated Cairo from the north and split into two groups, one
going to Umar Makram's house, where he refused to meet them, and
then on to Shaikh al-Sharqawi's house, where Makram met them. The
beys asked the ulama for their support. The ulama refused and ordered

                                                                        53
