Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

esteem and confidence of the fallahin, or cultivators.'29 Having flexed
their muscles against the hated Osmanli, the people were not pleased at
the thought of giving up the battle at this juncture. 'We shall become a
prey for the military in the day time, and the guards at night', they said.
'We will not surrender our arms nor obey such dictates.' These people
were not fighting for ideals or for principles. They had organized a
popular revolt to resist exploitation and ruin, encouraged to revolt by
their natural leaders, the ulama, the men who in the past had urged
them to revolt against the mamluks, which they had periodically done.
When in the past the ulama had ordered them to lay down their arms,
they had obeyed because there was no alternative, and no fear of
reprisals. Now the ulama were telling them to lay down their arms when
the political situation was still fluid, and when reprisals were lurking
round the corner, for the Ottoman and Albanian soldiers were still
roaming the streets at will. They were not willing to take the risk of
having fought one battle to lose the next. The popular leaders protested
the dictates of the ulama to Umar Makram, whom they looked upon as
their leader. He disowned the decision reached by the ulama, and
admitted that it ran counter to his own feelings. Both the masses and
Umar Makram were overruled. The ulama speaking out of their own
temerity refused to listen. It may well be that Muhammad Ali also had
insisted that the people surrender their arms. The populace, discour-
aged by such opposition, laid down their arms and obeyed the ulama,
even when they reviled and insulted them in public.
   The fears of the people were fully justified, for the soldiers, finding
them unarmed, abused them all over again. Not all the popular leaders
laid down their arms. In Bulaq fighting broke out between the popula-
tion and the Delhis troops, who tried to evict people from their houses
and shops in order to stable their horses, and the military were defeated
by the masses. Fighting continued in other parts of the city, and pockets
of resistance to military depredations continued in spite of the injunc-
tions of the ulama. In Rumaila, Hajjaj al-Khudari built a wall and a gate
to keep out the soldiers.30 All pockets of resistance werefinallysquashed
by Muhammad Ali, who later on had two popular leaders, Hajjaj al-
Khudari and Ibn Shama, hanged. These were the very men who had
laid siege to the citadel and had helped his cause when it seemed in
jeopardy, but the two leaders were dangerous men to the new governor
because they were capable of rousing the masses and galvanizing
resistance at a time when the establishment of law and order was of
paramount importance.
   The mamluks, camped just outside the city walls, girded themselves
for action and tried to break into the city to reach Khurshid Pasha in the

52
