Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

    Muhammad Ali seemed too busy preparing for war to pay attention to
 the Capitan Pasha. He claimed that he was mounting an attack against
Alfi Bey, which was partly true, but he was seen going back and forth
 between Bulaq and Old Cairo wrapped in a white burnouse like a
 Maghribi on some mysterious business that occupied him day and
 night. Whether these activities were attempts to bribe the Capitan Pasha
 or were part of some other ploy, they were successful. The Capitan
 Pasha, reversing his decision, decided that support of the beys was
 useless and opted to support Muhammad Ali instead. He advised him to
 write a new petition to the sultan, countersigned by the ulama and the
 heads of the ojakat, offering to pay a vast sum of money, and to send the
 petition to Istanbul with his eldest son Ibrahim, who would be a hostage
 until the money had been paid within a fixed period of time. This was
 done and Ibrahim was to stay in Istanbul for an entire year until the
promised sum was finally paid off.
    Three weeks later the Capitan Pasha read out a letter maintaining
Muhammad Ali as zvali of Egypt - for the ulama and the notables had
attested to the satisfaction of the population with his government - on
 condition that he continue to abide by the traditional dues and customs
of the land. A new condition was added, that the towns of Damietta,
Rosetta and Alexandria, the three Mediterranean ports, be detached
from the wali's authority, and the customs revenues of the three port
 cities be remitted to the imperial treasury. Furthermore, the pasha was
to make his peace with the beys and grant them territories. This last
clause was not meant to be taken either literally or even seriously. The
 Capitan Pasha sailed away taking with him Musa Pasha and Ibrahim,
the wall's eldest son.
    A few months later a firman arrived confirming the wait in his
functions and bestowing upon him a pelisse and a sword. A second
firman ordered him to send 6,000 ardabs of grain to feed the Ottoman
army gathered in Syria in preparation for a campaign against the
Wahhabis in Arabia. He was also ordered to stop harassing the beys, for
the sultan had pardoned them. The zoali paid not the slightest attention
to these orders and continued his campaigns to bring the beys under his
control.
    In October of that year, 1806, Uthman Bey al-Bardissi died, and
people attributed his death to a slow poison administered to him by Alfi
 Bey. Three months later Alfi was dead, after vomiting blood, presum-
ably having contracted cholera. When Muhammad Ali heard of Alfi's
 death he allegedly gloated, 'At last Egypt is mine, the rest do not count'
Ctabat li misr wa ma udtu ahsibu li ghairihi hisaba').37
    Alfi Bey was a legend in his own time. His soubriquet, al-Alfi, was

56
