                                             A country without a master

said to be the price of a thousand ardabs of wheat which Murad Bey had
paid for him. A handsome, blond man, he was unruly, foul-tempered
and energetic. He was also ruthless and capable of great cruelty but also
of a certain rough-and-ready justice. He was the only bey who could put
the fear of God into the bedouin and stop them from abusing the
fallahin, while he despoiled and abused the bedouin himself. He was
said to read widely in the occult sciences as well as in geometry, science
and history, and had a large collection of books. His riches were so vast
that he could lend money to slave traders, whose best customer he was
with an army reputedly of 11,000 mamluks. Alfi was sufficiently
farsighted to realize that once the Ottomans occupied Egypt in 1801
they would try to get rid of the beys and rule the country directly; he
therefore effected the rapprochement with the British to foil the
Ottomans. The rest of the beys did not believe Alfi and dissent grew
between them. It was Alfi who had manipulated the Capitan Pasha's
visit initially by promising the Porte 1,500 purses to oust Muhammad
Ali. Bardissi, however, hated and feared Alfi, so they failed to present a
united front to the Capitan Pasha and were out-manoeuvred by
Muhammad Ali, who promised to pay the same sum of money to the
Porte and seemed to have a better control of the situation.
   Just before he died, Alfi was supposed to have said, 'It is all over.
Egypt belongs to Muhammad Ali because no one will dare to contest
it.'38 Muhammad Ali had once compared himself to Alfi saying that they
were both walking a tightrope, save that Alfi wore clogs. Clogs or no,
Alfi was a remarkable mamluk, the only one among them to have united
the bedouin tribes behind his banner. He had married from among them
and was said to understand them as well as if he had been raised among
them, so they gave him their allegiance. On his death the bedouin tribes
separated and could never unite again.
   Had Alfi managed to defeat Muhammad Ali he might well have been
able to rule Egypt in the old mamluk style once again. His men had,
however, been given a more modern formation. They were organized
along French battle lines, in square formation, and did not fight in the
chaotic fashion of the other mamluks, a fact which had amazed the wait
when he had first encountered it. It may have inspired him with a desire
to emulate it, for Alfi had defeated his Albanians on various occasions,
and had never been beaten by any other force.
   The death of Alfi ruled out the only viable military obstacle to
Muhammad Ali's centralized rule over Egypt. The other mamluk beys
were no match for the Albanian. The last of the old mamluks, Ibrahim
Bey, was worn out. Nonetheless, another five years of fighting and of
mopping up mamluk strongholds were to continue before Egypt settled

                                                                       57
