                                              A country without a master

or gambits to gain time is questionable. Alfi besieged the town of
Damanhur, but the town had been supplied with arms and food by
Umar Makram, and was able to repel the attack.
   In the midst of these events word arrived that the Capitan Pasha with
nizam-i-jedid troops, the newly formed Ottoman regiments, had arrived
and that he had with him Musa Pasha, who allegedly was to replace
Muhammad Ali as wait of Egypt. On receiving the news, Muhammad
Ali at once stockpiled the citadel with arms, ammunition, wood for gun-
carriages and wheels and prepared to resist his ouster by force if
necessary. He called a meeting of his supporters and Makram read out
the imperialfirmanwhich said that the emirs, having begged the sultan's
pardon, were to be integrated in their old functions; the soldiers, who
had ravaged and corrupted Egypt, to be expelled. The beys had
promised to serve the empire and the Holy Cities and to remit cereals to
them, to pay the tribute, and to pacify the land. The request of the beys
to be returned to their former functions was to be granted by the Porte
on condition the shaikhs and ulama stood guarantee for the good
behaviour of the beys and the execution of these promises.
   The French consul and the ministry in France were most alarmed at
these developments, which were believed to be inspired by British
intrigues in support of their proteges, the beys.34 Drovetti ordered his
agent to seek out Muhammad Ali, who bluntly informed the agent that
he had won Egypt by the sword and would give it up only by the
sword.35 He said that he feared neither Alfi nor the Turks, whom he
could easily bribe, but he feared British assistance to Alfi.
   The ulama were not too happy at the idea of a return of the beys to
power. In the first place they had become fairly wealthy in the absence of
the latter by owning villages formerly under the domination of the beys.
Were they to return to power the ulama would be dispossessed. Secondly,
they feared the retaliation of the beys for supporting their opponent and
helping to put him in power. For these reasons Umar Makram, himself a
rich multazim, along with the other ulama, also multazimun, spent a busy
two days with Muhammad Ali planning what answer to give to the
Capitan Pasha's message. They drew up a document in which they
respectfully declined to stand as guarantors for the beys. They had no
power over the mamluks, they said, and described them as corrupt,
tyrannical and rebellious men. Thc> claimed that Muhammad Ali's taxes
arose out of a genuine need to pay the numerous troops who were putting
down the rebellious beys in conformity with the previous orders issued
by the Porte.36 In spite of the ulama's declining to accept his firman, the
Capitan Pasha made it public and gave orders to supply Muhammad Ali
with necessary ships to hasten his departure.

                                                                        55
