Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

down to a normal life. These four years continued to be critical for the
wait for external reasons, but within Egypt itself the tide had turned in
his favour and the mamluks were definitely on the run.
  As for the local population, they were supportive of Muhammad Ali
because he promised to restore normal life to the land, and the natural
leaders of the people were behind him and inspired the population with
confidence in the new governor. After all, they had no other alternative.
   Up to then Muhammad Ali's problems were: (i) his opposition - the
mamluks - and how to defuse it; (2) the Ottomans, and how to continue
to win their acquiescence to his rule in Egypt; (3)financesand where to
find the funds to pay his soldiers, without whom he could not hope to
retain control of the territory, for he was still threatened by mamluks, by
Ottomans and perhaps by a European power that might be inspired to
seize an undefended Egypt. A new problem was to be added to the first
three and which justified his reliance on a ready army, and that was a
British invasion, followed by the active opposition of the British
government. While his first three problems were eventually solved and
he repelled the British invasion, his relationship with the Ottomans and
British opposition were to cause his ultimate defeat; but that was to
come several decades later.
   The nextfiveyears were particularly trying for Egypt and for her new
ruler. The history of the world is filled with stories of upstarts who
found success as rulers of countries they had seized by the sword.
Muhammad Ali could easily be compared with half-a-dozen adventur-
ers who had reached the top of the ladder during the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries. What distinguished him from the others was the
vision, political and economic, that he had for the country. Muhammad
Ali was an illiterate, a highly unusual feature for a member of the
Ottoman elite. He had in his favour cunning, native intelligence, a quick
grasp of facts and the ability to think in broader terms than the
immediate issue at hand. Once he set foot in Egypt his manoeuvres
revealed a political awareness that was highly developed. The men with
whom he allied himself were sometimes used by him as pawns, but
pawns from whom he learned the inner workings of the country. From
the Coptic scribes and the chief tujjar of the day he learned about the
country's financial resources and its potential. From the ulama and
Umar Makram he learned about the land and the indigenous popula-
tion. From all these men he was able step by step to create an alliance
that helped him to control the country. Chance was on his side, and
allowed him to bet on those options that won, and if not chance, then his
own good sense.
   No man rules a country by himself, but he does rule with the help of

58
