                                                 Master in his own house

justified his inability to respond by pleading that Egypt had had a low
Nile, that the lands were unwatered {sharaqi) and the crop poor. He had
debts left over from the previous wali, new ones incurred by the British
adventure and no funds to mount a campaign. Upper Egypt was
devastated by the mamluks and he had no grain for his forces. For all
these reasons, he reckoned, he was in the throes of an acute financial
crisis and could not send an army abroad. Moreover, he said, as the
Ottomans were at war with the Powers, were he to send his army outside
Egypt, then one of the Powers might seize Egypt all over again.6 The
memory of a British landing was too recent for him, as he hoped the
French occupation was recent in the memory of the Ottomans. That
letter may have bought him time for that year, but the order to attack
the Hijaz was reiterated every year until his forces finally did go, in his
own time.
   Muhammad Ali knew that, with the weakness of the Ottoman
government and its preoccupation with the succession, it would not try to
depose him yet, and that he did not have much to fear in that direction for
the moment. To the contrary the new sultan needed Muhammad Ali's
support if not neutrality, and he and his mother, Asma Sultan, were most
conciliatory. In 1807 Asma Sultan sent a letter to Muhammad Ali in
answer to one he had sent her begging her to use her influence to retain
him as governor of Egypt, a letter that was accompanied by a large
douceur. In her answer she wrote that her son, the sultan, would retain
Muhammad Ali because he was 'his man' and she quoted her son as
saying that Muhammad Ali was 'especially dear {Aziz) to me'. She added
that she would continue to look after Muhammad Ali's interests and to
maintain him in his position as wali of Egypt, 'for life (Mada-l hayat), as
was his desire'.7 From later correspondence, we learn that the wali had
sent her presents, looked after her iltizam in Crete, and generally
rewarded her good will towards him with monetary advantages, so that a
firm bond was forged between her and him.
   The year 1808-9 was marked by occasional expeditions against the
mamluks in Upper Egypt. By then many of the mamluks had joined up
with Muhammad Ali and grain was coming in from the southern
provinces. This allowed the pasha to take further steps in his plan to
gain ultimate control of the financial resources of the state. Financial
difficulties continued to plague his administration and he needed the
control of such funds to run his administration smoothly. His actions
therefore were motivated by sheer necessity and polity. He had to find
funds to pay his army and was forced to get them at the source, to
eliminate the position of dependence on the native elite in which he
constantly found himself.

                                                                       65
