Chapter 4


Master in his own house




From the early days of his arrival in Egypt, Muhammad AH had been
struck by the potential riches of Egypt. A country that had been
devastated by terrible plagues, by famine when people resorted to
anthropophagy, by bad harvests, by seven years of warfare should by
rights have been utterly destitute and devoid of all resources. The past
disasters and the exploitation of two conquering armies notwith-
standing, Egypt continued to provide grain, and to show flashes of
potential affluence. Above all the country showed the signs of a
continuous and cyclical revitalization with its usually lush harvests, its
rich brown earth and its hard-working, uncomplaining peasantry.
Trade and commerce were two things that Muhammad AH understood
well. Egypt had the potential for trade and sat astride a network of
commercial routes that functioned in spite of all opposition to the
orderly pursuit of commerce and all disruptions. Coming from the
harsher soil of Kavala, where every square inch of land was lovingly
tended and nurtured to eke out a living, the young officer was entranced
by the soil of Egypt where everything grew in abundance and with ease.
In his mind's eye the future ruler of Egypt had possibilities of a lush
future for the country, a future based on agriculture and commerce.
   Before he had a free hand in governing the country, the new wait first
had to face a number of challenges, both within the country and
without. These challenges and their consequences were to modify the
structures of the local elites and consequently to modify the bureaucracy
and give it a new direction. Finally, a change in Muhammad Ali's early
allies was to take place. The first allies the wali acquired in Egypt as a
young officer were men connected with trade and economy. Among
these were al-Mahruqi, the scion of a wealthy trading family and the
head of the guild of merchants; Ibrahim al-Muwailhi, another long-
distance merchant with strong connections in the Hijaz; and the Coptic
chief of finances, Muallim Girgis al-Gawhari, who knew the country's
economy inside out. When squeezed by the Ottoman officials these men
could still yield money after seven years of war and numerous forced

60
