Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

   Both Muhammad Ali and his allies among the ulama and the tujjar
were losing money because of the insecurity of trade routes. The Red
 Sea trade in the hands of the Wahhabis had been closed off to them,
which presented a good reason for eventually acquiescing to the sultan's
request to mount a campaign in the Hijaz. Upper Egypt, the link to the
 Sudan market and the overland route to the Red Sea, was, for the
moment, still in mamluk hands, making it necessary to mount a
campaign to put down the mamluks and regain the area and so re-
establish the trade route. The tujjar were keen on that campaign, not
only because of the trade route, but because they needed the market of
Upper Egypt for their commodities. Other than the obvious political
motive of dominating the entire country that moved Muhammad Ali,
there was the added motive of land revenues. The central administration
in the past had made much of its money out of land revenue. These
revenues had been lost as far as the Said was concerned, in part because
of mamluk control of the area, but in part because the multazimun had
been unable to extract any surplus from the fallahin, who, using the
precarious conditions of the times as the excuse, would neither pay fees
nor taxes for as long as they could, claiming they were despoiled by the
mamluk beys. The multazimun, whether ulama or tujjar, were keen on
the move into the Said which allowed them to re-establish their
authority over their lands. The interests of the new ruler and of his
native supporters coincided in putting down the mamluks in Upper
Egypt and bringing the region once more under the control of the
central authority.
   Land revenue in general was unsatisfactory, for large portions of
revenue had become lost to the state through one device or another. The
increase in waqf lands had alienated one fifth of the arable land from the
purview of the tax collector, while the iltizam system in general diverted
the surplus from the land into the pockets of the various intermediaries
rather than into the pocket of either administration or even multazim. In
brief, the land tenure system needed an overhaul, one that would either
allow the multazim the possibility of obtaining more surplus from the
fallah - which is what the multazimun hoped for and expected to obtain
from their new leader - or which would allow the central authority to
divert more of the surplus into their own coffers, displacing the
multazim by a more efficient tax-collecting agency, and by expanding
the land acreage with a series of public works. None of these steps were
new to Egypt. They were the traditional and normal ways of increasing
the revenues of any strong central government. Before such steps could
be effected, Muhammad Ali was to come into conflict with his erstwhile
supporters, the ulama and the multazimun, who saw the danger to their

66
