                                                 Master in his own house

loans imposed on them by various governments. That one fact hinted at
the amounts of money that could be made through commerce. Before
Muhammad AH could develop either trade or commerce, before he set
about harvesting Egypt's actual or potential wealth, he needed to
acquire control of the territory, and like his predecessor, Ali Bey al-
Kabir, to destroy all foci of opposition. That aim led him into seeking a
series of shifting alliances which eventually allowed him to attain a
permanent and solid position of power.
   That Muhammad Ali had been nominated wali of Egypt in 1805,
though undoubtedly a great victory for an unknown and unsupported
officer, was nevertheless a precarious victory. He had no money, and no
army with any permanent bonds of loyalty towards him. For the time
being he had the support of the native elites, both ulama and tujjar, who
could raise money for him on an ad hoc basis, but for how long would
they accept to do that before turning against him? The native elites
could not make him a permanent ruler, and they could not fight for him
against the mamluks and the Ottomans. The new wali faced a difficult
political situation and a rough terrain that demanded all his considerable
skills until 1811. Those years were touch and go, when any turn of the
card might well have proved to be his last. At the same time, that period
laid the groundwork for his vision of the future, and sketched out the
alliances and alignments that ruled Egypt for the next four decades.
   One factor that Muhammad Ali had not fully taken into consideration
was Britain. The British government, which had supported and be-
friended Alfi Bey and the mamluks, was afraid of a second French
invasion of Egypt. Quite wrongly as it turned out, it had assumed the
mamluks would be an effective bulwark against that contingency. When
it was proved wrong and when it became clear that the Ottomans were
not going to turn Egypt back to the mamluks, a British force landed in
Alexandria in March 1807. The British agent in Egypt, Colonel Missett,
tried to get the Alfi mamluk faction to ally with the British forces and
overthrow the wali. Muhammad Ali was in Upper Egypt battling the
mamluks and had just defeated them in Asiut when he got word of the
British landing. Caught between two fires, British and mamluk, the wali
hurriedly sent messages to the mamluks with offers of peace and a
promise to give them back the whole of Egypt on condition they help
him rid Egypt of the British forces. Once this was done he promised
they could all meet and determine the future government of the land.
Alfi's faction turned down the British offer to join forces and said they
would not use Christians to fight Muslims.1 The other mamluks waited
to see the outcome of the new conflict. Muhammad Ali hurried back to
Cairo to find Umar Makram, in preparation for any possible British

                                                                       61
