                                                  Master in his own house

strength to come from the Albanian forces, who were mercenaries liable
to rouse revolts and render the land unstable. He believed it was
necessary 'that both Muhamed AH and the Albanians should be
compelled to evacuate this country and that the Mameluk government
should be re-established'. The beys in gratitude would presumably offer
the British government all the advantages it sought. Missett ended his
report by saying, 'shall the world be permitted to entertain an opinion of
the superiority of Turkish over British troops?'4 Such arrogance after a
military defeat was uncalled for.
   Muhammad Ali's terms were turned down by the British authorities,
but in September Alexandria was evacuated by the British forces. No
arrangements were made with the wait, except for an offer to buy his
grain, which offer he took up in 1808.
   That incident set the groundwork for future trends. To begin with it
bred in Muhammad Ali a permanent suspicion of British intentions
towards Egypt. It also instilled in him the realization that through its
naval strength Britain could become an invaluable ally, an ally he wooed
unsuccessfully for the rest of his days. Concomitantly, the incident
reinforced his belief in the importance of a navy for any independent
state such as he hoped to set up, a navy that would be strong enough to
defend the coastal cities and to defy any naval embargo imposed by
enemy forces, and this led to his early creation of an Egyptian navy and
merchant marine. The mamluks before him had also come to the same
conclusions and had hired Greek ship-builders and cannon founders to
that end. Lastly, it revealed the means whereby a profitable financial
venture could be entertained, notably the sale of grain to the British
forces in Malta and the Iberian Peninsula.
   The British occupation, which had lasted a mere six months, made
patent to the wait the weakness of his position within Egypt. With the
mamluks at his rear he had been caught in a pincer movement that had
forced him to promise the mamluks anything - with the firm intention
of reneging on his promise once the danger was over. The precarious-
ness of his situation was apparent more than ever, and the need to rid
himself of internal danger loomed large.
   The mamluks were not the sole threat he had to face within Egypt.
Muhammad Ali's men constituted an equally hazardous party. In mid-
October, just after the British evacuation of Alexandria, a group of
Ottoman and Albanian soldiers took pot-shots at the wait. A few days
later they surrounded his house clamouring for their back pay. Muham-
mad Ali managed to escape from his house late at night and sought
refuge in the citadel. The soldiers, frustrated by his absence, pillaged his
house. Drovetti, who recounted the incident, claimed that had it not

                                                                         63
