Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

invasion of Cairo, had already galvanized the population and had
ordered all able-bodied men under arms, even the students of al-Azhar.
He had also sent arms and supplies to the town of Rosetta. When the
British forces advanced towards Rosetta the population was able to put
up a tremendous resistance, utterly routed the British, and captured a
number of officers.2
   Muhammad AH, seeing the military preparations undertaken by
Umar Makram in Cairo, felt his nose put out of joint. Like the ulama he
too feared popular movements that he could not control and remarked
sourly that war was not the business of the populace but that of soldiers.
The function of the people is to supply arms and funds, he told
Makram, and asked him to raise a thousand purses to pay the troops
who were preparing to lay siege to the city of Alexandria where the
British forces were entrenched.
   Muhammad Ali was aware of the inherent danger that lay in coming
to blows with the British. He thus tried other means and sought
negotiations with General Fraser for the evacuation of Alexandria.
Since the British navy controlled the Mediterranean, it was the better
part of valour to placate them as far as possible, and allow food to enter
the city rather than try to starve the garrison which could have been
revictualled by sea. At the time the British were fighting against
Napoleon's forces in the Iberian Peninsula and desperately needed grain
to feed their army. They had hoped to acquire that grain from the
mamluks in Egypt, which explains their constant support of the
mamluks. Once again Egypt was to become affected by external
determinants - the Napoleonic wars. Muhammad Ali, knowing the
British needed grain in Malta, offered to sell it to them. He also offered
them trading facilities and security of communications with India, in
return for which he sought promises of British assistance and a
recognition of his independent position in Egypt.3 Missett had written
to secretary of state Canning on 13 June 1807 with an account of events
and assured him that he had succeeded in sowing in Muhammad Ali's
mind suspicions towards the French and their intentions in Egypt. He
was so convinced the wait was won over to his side that he asserted he
'never had again reason to complain of this partiality for the French
nation'. This was stretching the truth on Missett's part, as later events
were to show a continued partiality to the French. Missett went on to
add, ' - it is true he [Muhammad Ali] has long wished to become
independent of the Porte; and were we to assist him powerfully in the
attainment of that object of his ambition, he might, perhaps, be induced
to break off all connection with France'. Missett, however, was not in
favour of such support because he believed Muhammad Ali's main

62
