                                                  Master in his own house

own vested interests in his actions and who tried unsuccessfully to block
his moves. By then the alliance of elites was heavily weighted in terms of
a tujjar-elite alliance and the multazimun-cum-ulama were gradually
being squeezed out of the alliance, unless they accepted the redivision of
land resources. Some ulama accepted their secondary role, while others
like Makram sought to block it and in so doing lost more than their land.
   By that time, 1809, the sale of raw materials for export was once more
taking place. Men like Boghos, later to become minister for Foreign
Affairs, who had been a customs official in past days and who had traded
in grain, could not help in his capacity as chief translator but have
explained to Muhammad AH the advantages of exporting raw materials
and expanding that trade. Not only England needed grain in Malta, but
the southern Mediterranean in general was a market for Egyptian
materials. The first grain sale of 1808 merely confirmed the importance
of such an export item. To control the trade in raw materials and expand
it necessitated a reworking of the land-tenure system, one which would
allow a greater control over the produce of the land on the part of the
central government. It would seem as though the early alliance of native
elites - ulama/ tujjar, multazimun, bureaucrats - was showing signs of
stress with different interests pulling in different directions. Muham-
mad AH had the final say in what direction to take, for he spoke with the
voice of the army at his command. As a mercantilist his interest
coincided with those of the tujjar — which meant the decline in power of
the mu/tazimun/ulama. In the first place, the ulama had revealed their
basic weakness early on and he knew that they could be cowed easily. At
the same time he knew the potential in trade along the entire
Mediterranean basin as well as along the traditional trade routes, so he
strengthened his alliance with the tujjar at the expense of his other allies.
A showdown was soon to take place and the lines of conflicting interests
were drawn. That showdown demonstrated to the ulama their weakness
in face of central authority, especially a central authority that was united
and cohesive.
   In Jamad Awal/June 1809 Muhammad Ali ordered that waqf lands,
which in the past had been exempted from taxation, now be taxed along
with usya lands. That order was to bring the wait and his main native
supporter, Umar Makram, representing the faction of ulama/mw/razi-
tnun, into conflict - a conflict from which the wait emerged victorious.
The ulama, many of whom controlled waqf lands, were understandably
disturbed by that order and, led by Umar Makram, they met together to
take action. The diwan effendi was sent by the pasha to consult with
them and he suggested that the ulama go and talk to the pasha, but
added a veiled threat, the first of its kind. He said they should be careful

                                                                         67
