Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

been for the fact that Makram had armed the populace and that a few of
Muhammad Ali's officers had stood neutral, the affair would have met
with a sorry ending.
   As usual the pasha managed to turn the tables on the insurgents. The
next morning they all met in a public diwan, and he cleverly put the
blame for the dearth of funds on the officers. He claimed having given
the officers vast sums of money to transmit to their men, and demanded
a precise accounting before he would disburse further funds. He added
that he had allowed the army in the past to despoil the inhabitants to
satisfy the avarice of a few individuals, but that this would cease from
now on. Military reforms would be instituted, or they could find
themselves another military leader, he threatened. He ended by de-
manding that the rebel leaders be expelled, and said he would pay only
three months' salary for the whole year, but sweetened the pill by
promising a bonus once he became master of Upper Egypt.5
   These words took the wind out of the sails of both officers and men
and forced them to agree to the wait's terms and even to restore the
objects pillaged from his house. The event was to force Muhammad Ali
to find an alternative fighting force to the Albanians, one that was more
disciplined and more amenable to authority.
   The recent actions of Umar Makram in arming the Cairenes both
against the British and against the Albanians highlighted the capabilities
of the man. He had saved the wait's skin on a number of occasions, but
he could, in consequence, become a dangerous element. in society
because of his very resourcefulness, his effectiveness and because of his
populist links should he choose to cross swords with the wait.
   While these events were unrolling in Egypt, dramatic events were
taking place in Istanbul in May. Sultan Selim III was deposed by a coup
d'etat and replaced by his cousin Mustafa through a revolt of the
janissaries over the nizam-i-jedid. Mustafa was not to last long as a
sultan, and having caused Selim's death he was in turn assassinated and
succeeded by Sultan Mahmud. By the time Mahmud had built up his
power base, a decade had passed and Muhammad Ali had had the
necessary respite from Ottoman pressure that he needed to become
master of Egypt, and of an empire as well. With the fall of Selim and the
turmoil in the Ottoman government one element in the opposition to his
presence in Egypt had been defused. Rather than try to remove
Muhammad Ali from his post, the Ottomans contented themselves with
trying to get him to send his army to the Hijaz to fight the Wahhabis.
The Wahhabis, a fundamentalist sect, had overrun the Holy Cities in
the Hijaz, kept out the pilgrimage caravan and threatened the prestige of
the sultan as guardian of the Holy Cities. In 1807 Muhammad Ali

64
