                                                 Master in his own house

support their interests, unlike the other high ulama who were more
likely to bend to pressures. That populist trait in Makram, among his
other characteristics, was the one which the high ulama distrusted and
feared. Makram was a man whose talents shone in time of crisis, when
he could galvanize the masses. At other times he was feared precisely for
that very ability which threatened the status quo and its accompanying
vested interests. For, while a member of the wealthy group, a multazim
and a tajir in his own right, he was not obviously part of the long-
distance tujjar cabal, but represented the landowning, local-industries
groups. At the same time, Muhammad Ali had come to see Makram as a
potential rival for authority in the country, the only man with courage to
challenge him and with mass support.
   With Makram defused, the rest of the ulama became pliant and
subservient. Most of them were too scared to oppose the wali, and those
who were not scared had been won by the blandishments of the Mahdi
cabal. Makram was ousted from his position as marshal of the notables,
and exiled to Damietta, while Shaikh al-Sadat was named naqib al-
ashraf in his place. Jabarti, who recounted these events, commented that
Sayyid Umar Makram only got what he deserved, 'for God always
punishes those who give their support to a tyrant, and He is never
unjust to any of His creatures.' This bitter remark reflected al-Jabarti's
animosity towards the wali for Jabarti was a wealthy landowner himself,
but it also reflected his awareness of the political situation and that the
downfall of Umar Makram spelt the downfall of the ulama generally and
the end of their influence over Muhammad Ali. He knew that the ulama
had intrigued against Makram to get rid of him because they 'hated and
were jealous of him [Makram], and he was to them and to the
inhabitants of the town a bulwark and a defence. The proof is that after
his departure their [the ulama's] influence continued to diminish."
   That power struggle left a weakened group of ulama who had lost
their only real leader, and who were now at the mercy of the wali. For a
long time to come the populace continued to believe the ulama were
powerful and appealed to them to redress any wrongs but, as Jabarti
sadly remarked, 'they [the people] did not know that they [the ulama]
had given in to the master who dominated them'.10
   With the exile of Umar Makram, the last vestige of local opposition to
Muhammad Ali, other than that of the mamluks, disappeared and the
ulama became too cowed or too sold out to attempt any further action.
That is not to assume that their influence died out completely, but their
force as a major source of opposition within the country waned for the
time being. They had had a brief golden age, which could have spelt the
beginning of a new era of government, in consultation with the ulama,

                                                                       69
