Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

(bi mashurat al-ulama), but they failed to rise to the occasion. Muham-
mad Ali had outwitted and outmanoeuvred them from the very begin-
ning. He had made use of them, and when their usefulness came to an
end and seemed likely to threaten him, he promptly defused them. He
and his Albanians, in alliance with the leading tujjar in the country,
were now in the seats of power. Having rid himself of the ulama as an
obstacle to raising taxes and controlling the wealth of the state, the way
to more radical internal changes in land tenure and administration, and
in trade lay wide open. Externally he planned equally radical changes
for, according to the British agent in Alexandria, the wali intended to
conquer Jidda, Yanbu (as ordered by the sultan) and Yemen and attack
the mamluks in Upper Egypt. The agent further surmised that the wali
'flattered himself that his Britannic Majesty will furnish him with the
means for putting his projects in execution ... Muhammad AH courts an
alliance with Britain in order to procure to his shipping an uninter-
rupted passage at sea as well as the deliverance of his ports from
blockage.' 11
   Talks of peace between Muhammad Ali and the mamluks made the
latter decide to meet him in Cairo in 1810, when they camped at Giza
and met his messenger. By then many of the mamluk beys had defected
to the wait's side, won by promises of wealth and support. Mamluk
leadership had waned and weakened, and they tired of constant warfare.
Many of their bedouin allies had been bought off with promises of land
and autonomy. Shahin Bey, Alfi's successor, had long since gone to the
zvali's camp, although the mamluks tried to woo him back. Because the
mamluks and the wali distrusted each other, negotiations between them
came to nought. Ibrahim Bey refused to believe anything the wali said
and assured his men that the pasha would continue to be as treacherous
and perfidious as he had been in the past, and gave them his version of
the rise to power of the pasha.

He first betrayed his master Muhammad Pasha Khusrev ... Having plotted
against him and taken the citadel with the aid of his brother, Tahir Pasha ... he
incited the Turks against Tahir Pasha and had him assassinated by them in his
house. After that he made himself our friend, promised us his assistance ...
joined Uthman Bey al-Bardissi, to whom he swore friendship and fraternity,
and egged him on against Ali Pasha al-Tarabulsi. The result was the murder
that everyone knows and which was attributed to us. He plotted to have al-Alfi
betrayed by his brother al-Bardissi; he sent us back the soldiers who requested
their pay and advised Uthman Bey to ask the people for the taxes. These
manoeuvres caused us to leave Cairo in the most abject state possible. He
brought Ahmad Pasha Khurshid and named him vizier and undertook an
expedition against us. Then he returned to Cairo, roused the soldiers against

70
