                                            Family, friends and relations

famous merchant who had made a fortune in trade in the Red Sea, and
who, as the richest merchant, became head of the guild of merchants,
the shahbandar al-tujjar. Muhammad had taken over that position on his
father's death, and from the outset become Muhammad Ali's banker,
advisor and chief merchant. It is not too fanciful to believe that al-
Mahruqi, who was anxious to reopen the lines of trade with the Hijaz,
was the one who inspired the wait with enthusiasm for that expedition.
Al-Mahruqi accompanied Tussun to the Hijaz and the prince was
ordered to do nothing without consulting the merchant who was to be
privy to all matters (cbi mashuratih wa itilaih, wa la yunafidhu amran
min al-umuri ilia bad murajaatih').3 Throughout the early decade of
Muhammad Ali's rule the name of al-Mahruqi crops up regularly in
Jabarti's chronicles, as did that of Umar Makram. As shahbandar, al-
Mahruqi controlled all the merchants and artisans, had authority over
their quarrels and regulations, in fact had absolute authority over them
(iahu-1 hukm ala jamii-1 tujjar wa ahl al-hiraf wa-1 mustasabibin fi
qadayahim wa qawaninihim wa lahu-1 amr wa-1 nahy fihim'). With the
Hijaz campaign, al-Mahruqi was appointed to supervise the bedouin
caravans, the loading of ships and their unloading, in brief he was put in
complete charge of all the goods travelling to and from the Hijaz and of
outfitting the army and supplying it with its needs.4 Clearly al-Mahruqi
was necessary to the commercial life of the country and the wall made
full use of his talents. Al-Mahruqi's son Hassan later expanded the Red
Sea trading links to India before Britain put a stop to that trade.5 As
trade with Europe increased, al-Mahruqi lost some of his importance, or
at least he is mentioned less frequently in the sources.
   Muhammad Ali made use of minorities as his specialists. Many of the
French technocrats who had come to Egypt with the French army of
occupation stayed on after the army had evacuated the country. Others
flocked to Egypt in search of jobs when Napoleon's empire collapsed
and the army disbanded. Still others, like the Saint-Simonians, came to
Egypt in hope of building modern pyramids. The Saint-Simonians
believed that the orient was destined to become the teacher of the old
world, because the spirit of liberalism there had become 'an invincible
obstacle to all great achievements'. Egypt was a tabula rasa and there
'individualism and its conquests do not hinder the march of genius'.
The Egyptian monuments they had seen during the French occupation
struck them with their grandeur and magnitude, and they thought they
could erect technocratic monuments in Egypt that would show Europe
what technology could do. Europe lacked 'faith in its rulers and the
practice of obedience. It will learn it from the orient.' So wrote
Lambert, one of the men who served Egypt long and well.6 To Lambert

                                                                       77
