Egypt in the reign of Muhammad- Ali

persisted in forcing them to reside in Cairo where he could keep an eye
on them. Some mamluks did return to Cairo, and took up service with
him, others like Ibrahim Bey exiled themselves to Nubia and the Sudan,
and were no longer a threat to anyone, unless it be to the hapless
inhabitants of the areas. The final coup de grace came in March 1811
when the mamluks were massacred in the citadel.
   That event was out of character for Muhammad Ali for, perfidious
and treacherous though he could be, he had never resorted to massacres,
other than on the battlefield. It was rumoured that the beys who had
joined his ranks were secretly plotting with those in the Said and that
suspicious letters had been intercepted which showed plots with
Sulaiman Pasha, the wali in Syria. Whether true or not, the pasha's aim
was to rid himself of any potential source of opposition and the mamluks
in Cairo who were not wholly won to his side would always be that. The
occasion for trapping the mamluks was the ceremony of investiture for
his son Tussun Pasha, who was to lead the army sent to fight the
Wahhabis in the Hijaz. The ceremony took place in the citadel and all
the grandees had been invited to attend. Of these 24 beys and 40 kushaf
showed up. When the ceremony was over, they were trapped in a
passageway on their way out of the citadel and killed to a man. The
incident, which was nothing more than a mopping-up action, has been
exaggerated beyond all recognition by so-called eye-witness accounts of
people who were nowhere near the scene of the crime. Drovetti claimed
the death of 500 mamluks, including 25 beys and 60 kushaf and added,
'Alfi's house has been almost entirely destroyed.'17 Muhammad Ali's
account to the sultan listed 24 beys (cyirmi dort nafara umara-i
malanat5) and 40 men ('kirk fardi'),18 the ears and heads of whom he
sent the sultan.
   While the incident shocked Drovetti and no doubt any number of
other people, it merited the wali a letter of congratulations from his
overlord in Istanbul, who commended him on his action and was to take
a page out of his vassal's book and finish off the janissaries some fifteen
years later. From then on Muhammad Ali was sole ruler in Egypt and
any opposition to his plans was to come from within his own entourage,
or from the Porte, who tried one last overt attempt to overthrow him.
   When the Egyptian army had conquered the Hijaz, the wali had sent
his son Ismail, accompanied by the 'keeper of the keys' {anahtar agasi),
a certain Latif, to the Porte with the keys of the Holy Cities. There Latif
may have been induced to carry out a coup against his master, with the
promise that he would succeed him. On his return to Egypt Latif
allegedly tried to overthrow the wali. Muhammad Ali was then in the
Hijaz and during his absence, so the story goes, Latif tried to spread the

72
