Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Alt

in their conversation with the pasha, for 'he is a presumptuous young
man, ignorant and tyrannical and might cause you harm'. The ulama
understood the implied threat and answered, 'We will never go and
meet with him so long as he commits such acts. When he ceases to
impose taxes and avania we will go to him as we have done in the past,
for he has sworn to be just, not unjust.'8
   The ulama vowed to stay at home and hold no lessons at the
university until they had received satisfaction from the pasha. Such
tactics had worked with the mamluks, but they did not seem to be
working with the pasha, who knew the time had come to get rid of the
native elite, who stood between him and his sources of income and could
threaten his security. He therefore intrigued with two shaikhs, Shaikh
al-Mahdi and Shaikh al-Dawakhli, who were won over to his side by
promises of largesse and were opponents of Makram. After waiting for
five days to no avail, Makram and the ulama met with these two shaikhs
who informed them that Makram's accusations were unfounded and
that the pasha had denied that any taxes were to be levied. Makram
indignantly said that he had in his possession the letters which ordered
the taxes levied.
   The two arch-intriguers managed to woo another powerful shaikh to
their rank, Shaikh al-Sharqawi, the rector of al-Azhar. Shaikh al-
Sharqawi bore a grudge against Makram, who had previously intrigued
against him, and joined forces with the two ulama who further managed
to bring Shaikh al-Sadat over to their side. They trumped up charges
against Makram, who was accused of having intrigued against Shaikh
al-Sadat and Shaikh al-Mahdi and of having falsely entered names of
Copts in the register of the ashraf, the register which bears the names of
those descended from the prophet's lineage. Makram, who had made a
lot of enemies from among the ulama by his activism and his close
friendship with Muhammad AH, found that no alim would stand by
him.
   Makram was something of a dark horse. Although he claimed to be a
notable (sharif) his known lineage went back only two generations and
could never be traced further, let alone to the Prophet. He had never
been a bonafidemember of the ulama group and had been appointed
naqib al-ashraf as a political reward by the mamluks. However, he had
always been a popular leader and a populist himself, in spite of his great
wealth. He had manipulated, roused and dominated the masses on a
number of occasions, and relied on, rather than feared, the power of the
masses which strengthened his own authority vis-a-vis the other power
blocs in the land. The masses recognized in him some element to which
they responded; they may have instinctively realized that he would

68
