                                                 Master in his own house

news of the wait's death. The Kikhya Bey discovered the plot and sent
troops to Latif s house, but the man escaped capture. Meanwhile, other
dissident elements among the population appear to have joined that
revolt, among them a former popular leader Hajjaj al-Khudari. Latif
was captured and beheaded and Hajjaj was hanged.1' Whether the
incident was a trumped up one to get rid of Latif or a genuine attempt at
overthrowing the pasha is unknown, but the Ottomans were the obvious
suspects.
   From then on resistance was local, when a number of rebellions broke
out for a variety of reasons which had nothing to do with the Porte but
were purely internal. In 1815 there were rumours of an army being sent
against the pasha because he had refused the post of grand vizier,20 but
these were just rumours. That year the wali introduced the European
mode of exercise among his troops, which occasioned discontent. Some
of the troops attacked his house in Ezbekiyya, but the wali had got wind
of the action and had prudently and secretly gone to the citadel. For two
days the troops went on a rampage until they were quelled. The
insubordination of his Albanian troops was an added cause for changing
the formation of the army and turning it into a more disciplined fighting
body - an action that was to have profound effects on the Egyptian
population.
   Within Egypt a radical change in power elites had taken place by
1811. The previous pattern of an alliance between mamluks, ulama and
tujjar to contain the wali, who was changed yearly, and to exploit the
resources of the country to their advantage was now destroyed. In its
place arose an alliance between the wali and his officers and bureaucrats,
a select group of tujjar and a smaller and more select group of ulama.
The previous fluid system of manipulations and shifting alliances
between evenly matched forces like those of Murad Bey, Ibrahim Bey,
Alfi Bey and their ulama allies for ad hoc purposes, such as taxation or
trading in some commodity, was becoming institutionalized into a
government hierarchy as the sole repository of power from whom
emanated all rewards. Alliances and alignments were created within the
government structure and not without it as had been the practice in the
past.
   Throughout these years of turmoil, beginning with the French
occupation of Egypt, while the elite ruling the country had changed a
number of times, from mamluk to French to Ottoman/Albanian/mam-
luk to Muhammad Ali, the lesser echelons of the administration had
continued to function in some semi-permanent capacity. Taxes were
still imposed and collected, albeit haphazardly, and officials had sur-
vived. The image of utter and complete chaos that one is tempted to see

                                                                       73
