Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

and one man who became his alter ego. That man was Boghos Bey the
Armenian, who served the pasha loyally and faithfully to the end of his
days. As Muhammad Ali's interpreter, advisor and general factotum in
matters of trade and commerce as well as foreign relations, Boghos
played a powerful role in shaping Egyptian trade and rose to become
minister of foreign affairs. The links between the two men were so close
that when Boghos died the wali mourned him as he would a dear
relative. Boghos was described as an intelligent, amiable man who died
poor and incorruptible. He was extremely polite, showed sagacity in
judging human character and possessed a great deal of information on
the European markets and political events.2 Many thought Boghos had
amassed a great fortune in the service of his master, but he never did, for
the accumulation of wealth did not interest him, which may explain why
such an astute man never succeeded as a merchant on his own account.
Nubar in his memoirs recounts that when Boghos died and they entered
his house they discovered a few gold pieces in the treasure box and little
else. Boghos had been given several cartes blanches by the wali and could
draw on the treasury for any sum whenever he needed funds for himself.
He was never paid a regular salary but the wali trusted him to do as he
pleased in terms of payment. For a man as suspicious as Muhammad Ali
was, this was signal proof of trust and a unique favour allowed to no one
else. Towards the end of Boghos' life, when Abbas was appointed
katkhoda (or kikhya) of Egypt he fixed a salary for Boghos, who was so
offended by this act that he allegedly wasted away, would not eat and
died in January 1844. When news of Boghos' death reached Muhammad
Ali and he was told that Boghos had been buried simply and quietly
without the honours due him, the wali was furious and sent a letter to
Osman Pasha, the governor of the city, which began 'Donkey, brute'
and went on to rain threats and insults on the man's head for having
failed to give Boghos his due with a state funeral. He ordered him to
exhume the coffin and have it buried again with full military honours,
which was promptly done.
   Boghos brought a number of Armenians into the Egyptian adminis-
tration who served as translators, interpreters and high officials in the
bureaucracy. The line of loyal and efficient Armenian servants of the
state continued until the end of the nineteenth century when the
bureaucracy became fully Egyptianized. None, however, occupied as
powerful a position with the ruler as Boghos had done, for Boghos never
betrayed the trust that the wali placed in him.
   One other man whom the wali trusted in matters of trade and
commerce was Muhammad al-Mahruqi, who had probably taught the
wali the ropes when he first came to Egypt. Al-Mahruqi was the son of a

76
