Chapter 5


Family, friends and relations




From the image of Muhammad Ali that we have presented it should by
now be clear that the wali was a man who planned his moves after a great
deal of thought. To assume that he acted capriciously or under the
inspiration of a third party is to misjudge his character completely. He
consulted his advisers, the few he respected and the many he despised,
but he believed in action after mature reflection. In his letters to his sons
that trait comes through very clearly, especially in his letters to his son
Ismail who was rash and impetuous. He wrote to him, 'the position of a
commander-in-chief - (ser asker) - is not attained through heroism
(butula), which we call courage (basala), but through good planning
(husn al tadbir), and through constant inquiry and consultation with
your officers on all matters. Therefore ask, question so that you can
learn everything that will lead to victory.'1 In another letter he
admonishes him to seek 'advice from your subordinates from the
highest to the lowest ranks'.
   Muhammad Ali believed in the value of specialists. He searched them
out, learned from them and made use of that knowledge. He tried to
teach his sons the virtue of the expert, and every son who was sent out
on a military expedition was given two tried and experienced men and
enjoined to take no steps that these two had not approved. That way he
hoped his sons would learn the art of war from those who were adept
and experienced at it, until the time came when the young princes had
learnt the trade and needed no mentors. He himself had gone through
the school of hard knocks and wished to spare his sons, and himself, the
consequences of mistakes that could cost him the throne, or the life of
one of his sons. Ismail did not heed his father's advice and died in
consequence. Ibrahim did, and lived to become an eminent strategist
and a great general.
   During his first decade in Egypt Muhammad Ali learnt from the
mamluks, the ulama and the tujjar. Few of these early associates
remained close to him or lasted longer than their usefulness to the state
except for a handful of men among his Albanian relatives and friends,

                                                                          75
