                                                     Master in his own house

him [Khurshid] and told Sayyid Umar Makram and the ulama that the pasha
planned to have them assassinated. The latter incited the populace and we know
the wars that followed. Sayyid Umar Makram served him zealously ... but once
he attained his goal he exiled Sayyid Umar ... He did the same with Uthman
Bey and the others. Who can trust such a man and make peace with him? ... the
taxes of Egypt in the past were enough to support ten thousand mamluks.
Today Muhammad Ali makes more money out of one tax than the entire
province yielded and yet he cannot even give us enough funds to live on with our
families and retainers ... He wishes to lay a trap and sacrifice the last one
amongst us.12

   That grim and biassed analysis of Muhammad Ali's career missed the
basic motive force behind the wall's plots; the need for a centralized
authority. It was not that he begrudged the mamluks funds to live on, he
begrudged them their potential authority in the land. Unless they
accepted his paramount authority, he would seek to exterminate them.
The mamluks, though greatly weakened, were still capable of mischief,
if only by wreaking havoc with the crops of the Said, and the viali
wanted them neutralized if not eliminated. Further warfare broke out
between both parties in the Fayyum and in Upper Egypt. By July
Drovetti could write to his minister, 'He has made himself master of all
the land until Bani Suif, including Isna.'13 The pasha announced his
victory over the mamluks in Upper Egypt by claiming to have killed 700
of them.14
   The effects of these constant battles were devastating to the popula-
tion. 'This internal war ruins agriculture and commerce. The villages
are destroyed, the peasants escaping from all areas. In Cairo nothing is
bought or sold. Money is tight, and the debtors avoid all payment.'15
Others reported that one third of the land had been abandoned and all
industry had disappeared.16 There may have been an element of
exaggeration in these reports since their authors never went out to the
countryside to view the desolation and were only repeating hearsay
accounts. We can, however, take it for granted that no land is left
untouched after an army has gone through it and when battle after battle
has been fought over it. Small though these battles may have been in
terms of numbers of combatants, their destructive power was neverthe-
less considerable. One positive aspect of Muhammad Ali's victories over
the mamluks was that he found a vast amount of grain stored in Upper
Egypt, which he put to good use as an export item that was to yield him
his first substantial profit in trade.
   These were decisive battles for Muhammad Ali, and from then on the
mamluks were on the run. They tried to get him to grant them
territories or income of their own while they resided in the Said, but he
