                                            Family, friends and relations

while another Greek, Baqi Bey, was director of finances, a post which
Ahmad Pasha al-Manikli, an Ottoman, also occupied. Most of the ranks
of the civilian administration were therefore occupied either by relatives
or by Ottomans, all of whom had thrown in their lot with the wali and
stood to rise or fall with him.7
   The military establishment, on the other hand, was dominated by
mamluks, who filled the higher officer ranks, although some mamluks
such as Khurshid Pasha, a Georgian, or Maho Bey, a Chiote, were civil
administrators. These mamluks were either former grandees of Egypt
who had defected to the winning side, sons of grandees, or slaves bought
expressly for the purpose of manning the officer corps. It was only when
the Ottomans put an embargo against the sale of mamluks to Egypt that
the wali was forced to look elsewhere for his officers.
   The leading ulama, especially the rector of al-Azhar, the heads of two
powerful sufi fraternities, al-Bakri and al- Sadat, and the marshal of the
notables, were perforce his men, since his support was necessary to
maintain them in office, and they were necessary to help him keep the
population quiescent. Lastly there were the Coptic administrators, like
Muallim Girgis al-Gawhari and Muallim Ghali Sargios, who taught the
wali all they knew about taxes and how to raise them. Together they
helped him establish centralized power in place of the diffused decen-
tralized mamluk system of government.
   As far as the merchants were concerned, their association with
Muhammad AH was an extension of their earlier associations with the
military. Through the new wali they hoped to reconstruct the lines of
trade and commerce as in the past. The local tujjar hoped to retain that
trade in their hands, since by then the French and foreign merchants
had been cut out of the picture. By befriending the new wali they
planned to gain total control of trade. The Syrian Christian merchants
who had been displacing the Muslim merchants needed the wali for the
same reason. They had risen to power with the assistance of past waits;
they needed the new wali to continue to trade as successfully as in the
past. To them it mattered little who ruled Egypt as long as they were
permitted to continue in trade. The wali needed both these groups of
merchants for they each had an area of expertise that would enrich the
state, and they were equally valuable.
   Once the wali came to control the country, he turned to a third group
of merchants and technocrats, the Europeans. These were men who had
links with the western markets, and had the connections and know-how
that could extend local production on the international scene. They
showed the wali how much richer he could become by trading through
them and with them, and convinced him of the advantages of a western

                                                                      79
