                                                Family, friends and relations

hostage. Ibrahim and his father closely resembled each other physically,
although morally they were very different and clashes between father
and son were to become frequent later on. Yet the only letters that show
glimmers of affection were the ones the tvali sent Ibrahim when he was
fighting in the Sudan with his brother Ismail. In one letter the father
wrote: 'My son, I love you and your brother Ismail [Tussun had died in
1816]. [You] are the soul in my body and the light in my eyes and yet I
have sent you to these miserable lands and loaded you with so heavy a
burden in order to gain for ourselves and for our family fame and high
rank.'11 In a footnote to that letter he added, 'Though our bodies are
[physically] separated and far apart yet our hearts are [morally] united
and that spiritual communion gives us joy.'
   All his letters to his other sons bear terms of affection like 'my soul'
(canim), 'flesh of my blood' or literally 'sliver of my liver' (Jaldhat
kabidi), but in none does such open affection as in the above letter exist.
Later on the exchanges between the two men take on the affectionate
character of two old colleagues, although Ibrahim always wrote with
great respect to his father. He was, however, equally capable of writing
in the tone of an irate commander-in-chief who was not getting proper
support from the civilians back home. Clashes over the promotion of
Egyptians to the rank of officers broke out between the two men; clashes
over policy and tactics occasioned a break as we shall eventually
discover.
   Ibrahim in later life was described thus: he was a short, fat man with
large, clear blue eyes, a high forehead and a brownish red beard
struggling from beneath a face much marked by small-pox. His appear-
ance suggested an active, intelligent man full of enterprise and eager for
instruction.12 A writer who knew him at first hand, Dr W. H. Yates, said
Ibrahim was

always dignified and just; his word is law; he is firm and resolute, valiant and
though a strict disciplinarian, kind and indulgent; and he never expects the
meanest man in his army to do that which he would not do himself. No man is
more rigorously obeyed, for he is able to punish; nevertheless, he is in full
possession of the hearts of his soldiers.

His behaviour in the field was similar to that of the common soldiers; for
he would sleep on the bare ground, and even the bare snow as in
Anatolia, which crippled him with rheumatism and gave him the
consumption that later killed him. He referred to his soldiers as his
children (atvlad), and his rallying cry before a charge was 'C'mon boys'
('Yallah ya awlad'). Often short-tempered and irascible, he learnt to
curb his temper in his later years. When danger was at hand he was

                                                                             83
