                                            Family, friends and relations

their father. The rest of the thirty died as children, so that in fact
Muhammad AH had only ten children whom he knew. His two youngest
sons were sired when the pasha was 63 or 64 years old.
   The wait's naming of his sons was most revealing. Two of his sons
were named Iskandar, i.e. Alexander, for whom the father had a great
deal of admiration and about whom he read much. Five of the sons were
successively named Halim or Abdal-Halim. The term in Arabic comes
from the root Mm which means clemency, forbearance, tolerance,
magnanimity, patience. It is one of two qualities which Arab historians
have attributed to Muawiya, the founder of the Umayya caliphate. The
other quality was political finesse (daha). The pasha was blessed with
both these qualities, but he obviously prized the first particularly. In
choosing to name his sons Halim, the pasha was both describing what he
believed to be his foremost quality, and also begging the Almighty to
continue granting it to him.
   The pasha's relationship with his sons was aloof when they were
young; they were brought up in the harem until a certain age then
handed over to tutors. From the age of twelve the boys were treated as
adults and given administrative responsibilities. At the same time they
were provided with mentors to guide and teach them their new
functions. Like all parents he was capable of showing them affection, yet
equally capable of chastising them when the occasion arose. His
punishments were never cruel, despite his frequent threats they would
be. Yet that was an age of extreme cruelty towards children. In jhe west
children were whipped until they bled. Both in the east and in the west
the poor were forced to bond their children. Muhammad AH by and
large was a generous and tolerant father, but a clear-sighted man who
saw his children's weaknesses and analysed them in an objective, almost
clinical manner. They were his sons but they were also members of his
administration, and he looked at them in that dual capacity.
   Muhammad Ali's two older sons had arrived in Cairo on 28 August
1805 when Ibrahim (1789-1848) was barely 16 years old and Tussun
was four years younger. Their father had been wali hardly a month and
his position was still precarious. He had been separated from his
children for four years. The day following their arrival, the elder of the
two boys was installed by his father as governor of the citadel in
Cairo. A year later, in October 1806, Ibrahim was on his way to Istanbul
as a hostage. That year in Istanbul must have been the reason for
Ibrahim's disenchantment with the Ottomans, a feeling that later turned
to one of outright animosity and contempt for them, their government
and their military character. Unlike his father, Ibrahim never identified
with the Ottomans. He learned Arabic and spoke it with his men, and

                                                                       81
