Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

distasteful to his father. In an excess of zeal after a battle he sent his
father 300 pairs of Shaiqiyya ears. The father rebuked him, writing
It is well known among governors who are guided by reason that the way to gain
the affection of their people is through spreading justice ... it is clear that no
ruler can do anything without justice ... it was your duty to gain the trust of the
Shaiqiyya by kindness and just treatment... instead you have alienated them ...
Have you not heard how people behave in times of war? Have you not heard how
just the French were in Egypt? ... Do you no longer remember the justice and
kindness the English showed not so long ago?20
The principle of just rule was one the father assumed he followed in
Egypt - justice not necessarily to be confounded with kindness or
gentleness. Ismail had been given two seasoned veterans as his military
advisors and ordered to consult them before he took any decision. In his
arrogance Ismail disregarded his father's advice and chose to appoint
another officer as his advisor, much to the father's wrath, who wrote
demanding an explanation:
How can you name as your A.D.C. a man ignorant of the science of war, who
has never been in any battle, and put him in a position of authority over the
heads of men experienced in the art of war like Ahmad Agha and Abdi Kashif
[his nominees]? How can you expect them to accept him as their leader? If they
feign an outward acceptance they would never in their hearts accept him. Such
actions lead me to assume that you have committed other reprehensible acts and
that you do not heed my advice. Do you not know that your absolutism and
fatuousness can bring about disastrous consequences?21

   Not content with that broadside, three days later Muhammad Ali sent
a second one in which he told his son that the function of a commander-
in-chief was to exercise good management, perspicacity and affability in
his relationships with his officers. He warns him of the consequences of
absolute authority and recommends that he obey his father's advice on
pain of arousing his anger and bringing swift punishment in conse-
quence.22
   Ismail did not seem amenable to advice, for more rebuke was
forthcoming when his father accused him of indulging in 'childish
behaviour'. Finally, in exasperation, the father wrote: 'If you choose to
love yourself above love of your men, I will not love you ... If you will
not heed my words, I swear to drag you back and imprison you in a
small hut, for shame cannot be tolerated.'23
   Ismail's disregard of his father's advice to treat the population with
clemency and kindness brought about his own undoing. He treated the
conquered Sudanese population with great cruelty and humiliated their
rulers. One of these rulers was so offended by Ismail's insults that he set

86
