Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

was wont to call himself an Egyptian and not a Turk, much to his
father's chagrin.
   On his return to Egypt in autumn 1807, Ibrahim was appointed
defterdar by the sultan, a position he held until 1813.8 Finances and
shortage of funds plagued the wait and he needed someone on whom he
could rely absolutely to do- his bidding, someone who would raise the
necessary cash without cheating him of part of it. As inspector-general
of accounts, Ibrahim's function was to raise as much money from the
population as he could, which earned him the odium of the multazimun
he was dispossessing.
   Tussun (1793-1816), the younger son, was destined for less impor-
tant but showier tasks. He was placed at the head of the Hijaz army
against the Wahhabis in 1809, and given the title of 'pasha with two
horse tails' by the sultan.9 At the time the wall was preoccupied with
internal matters and had simply named his son to the position to silence
criticism from the Porte. The campaign was to take place only two years
later. The fact that Tussun was granted the title of pasha before his
older brother has caused historians to wonder why. Some believed that
it was because the wali was fonder of Tussun, who had winning ways,
than of Ibrahim, especially when Tussun had remained by his side when
 Ibrahim was a hostage. Others used it to invent the myth that Ibrahim
was not Muhammad Ali's son but his stepson. In these suppositions the
missing ingredient was that Muhammad Ali had no authority to grant
titles; he had not made one son a pasha and neglected the other. The
granting of titles was an imperial prerogative. The sultan granted a title
to Tussun to encourage a campaign which meant a great deal to the
throne but as yet little to Muhammad Ali, and assumed the title would
be an inducement to hasten the expedition. As far as the wali was
concerned, Ibrahim was doing the truly critical task of raising the funds
he needed; he could not be spared to go abroad and fight the sultan's
wars, but Tussun could.
   In one of the rare letters we have dating from before 1820, there is one
from the wali to the sultan dated January 1812 in which he wrote:
God has given me three sons who are as dear to me as my life or my sight. I
cannot separate myself from one of them for a second. And yet I have sent my
eldest son, the defterdar of Egypt to the Sudan [chasing mamluks] and I have
not seen him for 6 months ... I have appointed my other son Tussun Ahmad
Pasha for the Hijaz mission ... Though separation from my two sons tears my
heart ... I did it to serve my master.10
The wali could have scarcely written in that fashion were Ibrahim only
an adopted son. Neither would the sultan have accepted him as a

82
