                                            Family, friends and relations

fire to his hut and burnt him alive. Muhammad AH grieved over his
son's terrible death, and extracted vengeance from the Sudanese by
worse atrocities committed on them by his son-in-law the defterdar.
   Although Ismail had been a source of disappointment to the father,
the greatest burden the whole family had to bear seemed to be that of
Tussun's son, Abbas.
   Abbas (i 813-1854) orphaned at the age of four, had been raised by his
grandfather in much the same fashion as the other royal children. One of
the earliest letters addressed to him by his grandfather was one of gently
couched reproach that he had been indolent in the pursuit of his studies:
'My son, my soul, if that be true it is not seemly that you spend your
days without studying. Show us your zeal and return to your previous
diligent ways and inform us as to which sura you have reached in
learning the Quran, and what are the subjects you have read. We would
also wish to see samples of your handwriting.'24 He added a postscript
warning the boy not to listen to those detractors who told him that he
would attain a high position regardless, for if he did not study, he would
be given no position, not even one dirhem.
   Three months later he was urged to send his exercise books for his
grandfather's inspection. This was followed by an irate letter to his
katkhoda ordering him to see to it that Abbas pursued his studies or the
wali would come and pluck the katkhoda's beard for him.25
   Abbas seemed to be not only slothful but a dunce. His grandfather
constantly complained that he neglected his studies, did no physical
exercise, no horse-riding or walking, but simply went hunting, which
the wali regarded as of little value and mere self-indulgence. When
Abbas requested a new horse, the wali refused, 'unless he pursue his
studies, in which case all his requests would be granted'.26
   Abbas was, if anything, persistent and would not take no for an
answer. A week later another letter from his grandfather continued in no
uncertain terms to refuse him the horse he wanted. This time it was
couched in the third person. 'His Highness's actions are contrary to
reason and wisdom and simply capricious. He already has far too many
horses. We want a complete list of all the animals in his daira',27 the
letter ends threateningly. A few months later Abbas requested a
houseboat. His grandfather refused that extravagance with indignation,
pointing out that Abbas already had a houseboat in Bulaq and a boat in
Mansura.28
   Muhammad Ali was a stickler for protocol and proper appearances.
When someone reported seeing Abbas wearing a bedouin cloak the wali
was incensed. Was this his strict Ottoman identity speaking out or was
there more? He fired off a letter to the hapless katkhoda who was

                                                                       87
