Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

trading partner. No doubt the Muslim and even the Syrian Christian
tujjar were disgruntled when the wait turned to western merchants, and
even to Greek merchants, but by then they had little option left but to
continue their association with him. Having helped him come to power
and control the government of the country, the Muslim tujjar found
themselves gradually displaced in favour of other ethnic groups.
  As far as Muhammad Ali was concerned, we need to ask to what end
did all these machinations lead? To gain independence, insisted Dro-
vetti as far back as 1807. Muhammad Ali wanted to create an indepen-
dent state for himself and sought alliances with France and Britain to
achieve that end. The Piedmontese was not the only one to hold that
belief: it was shared by his British counterpart in Egypt. Ali Bey al-
Kabir had tried to do the same, only to find himself betrayed by his
erstwhile supporters who sold him out to the Ottomans in return for his
position in Egypt. Muhammad Ali prevented the possibility of such a
coup by destroying most potential opposition to his rule in Egypt and
coopting the rest. The Ottomans were in the throes of their own
revolution and Sultan Mahmud was not secure enough to tilt with his
vassal. Planning, time and luck paid off, and Muhammad Ali could with
justification declare himself the sole master of Egypt.
  The sole master was nonetheless constrained to rule with the assis-
tance of others, and these others he found in his own family. The
manner in which he dealt with his family and his relations is significant,
for it was an echo of the manner with which he ruled the country.
   Muhammad Ali had thirty children. In a family as large as that it is
dimcult to believe that he was close to any of the younger children who
were born in Egypt at a time when he was involved in fighting for
survival and too busy to pay more than cursory attention to their
welfare. His relationships with his eldest sons and with his grandson
Abbas are fairly well documented.
   Of his female children only Tevhide, Nazli and Zainab IV lived to
become adults; the other ten died as small children. Tevhide was
married to Muharram Bey and died in 1830 at the age of 33, while Nazli
was married to Muhammad Defterdar, and outlived her father to die at
the age of 61 in i860. Zainab, the fourth daughter to bear the name
successively - all the others having died in infancy - died at the age of
59. She was married to Yusif Kemal Pasha, the grand vizier, but
divorced him when she caught him sleeping with her slave, threatening
to commit suicide if she were not granted a divorce.
  Among his seventeen sons, only Ibrahim, Tussun, Ismail, Said,
Husain, Abdal-Halim and Muhammad Ali the Younger reached man-
hood. Said, Abdal-Halim and Muhammad Ali the Younger outlived

80
