Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

and the Saint-Simonians the sight of thousands of Egyptians working
together to dig a canal was a marvel, for in Europe, they maintained,
such a mass of workers would have rebelled and sown discord, while
Egypt still retained 'the ancient religion of industry'. Women and
children working together with the men, far from inspiring repugnance
or pity, inspired the Frenchmen with thoughts of more workers
building more canals and dams.
   Muhammad Ali knew that his Albanian friends and relations had a lot
to learn from the west, and he hired the experts who could teach them.
Most visitors from Europe were granted an audience with the ruler. All
of them gave accounts, consciously or unconsciously, of how he picked
their brains, asked about events in Europe, and especially about new
machinery that had been invented and was used for various purposes.
Ibrahim had inherited that curiosity about machinery and its function.
Father and son had only to hear about a new machine to s:nd for it and
put it to use. In the middle of the Hijaz campaign, Ibrahim heard about
a machine that made ice. His interest was heightened because of the hot
climate in which he was forced to fight, and he bought two of these
machines, one for himself and one for his father in Egypt. One author
complained that on a trip he had taken with the pasha he had shared his
tent and was woken up by him in the middle of the night because he
wished to ask him questions. The wali needed very little sleep himself
and had no sympathy for those who wanted to sleep the whole night
through when he was impatient to get answers to all his questions.
Greek merchants like the Tossizza, Anastasi and Casulli, French
soldiers like Seve, Italian doctors like Bausani and Gaetani, etc. flocked
to Egypt to serve the new ruler and to set up the projects that we shall
describe later. The real administration of the country, however, was in
the hands of Muhammad Ali's allies, family and supporters.
   Apart from the members of his immediate family, his major associates
were Albanians from Kavala, his birthplace, or Ottomans from various
parts of the empire, e.g. Circassians, Georgians, Mingrelians, Laz,
Greeks. The men from Kavala were also his relatives and in-laws. His
two nephews, the Yakan brothers, held high military and civil rank,
while his other nephew, Muhammad al-Sharif, was a director of
finances and later governor of Damascus. His sons-in-law were Mu-
hammad Bey al-Defterdar and Muharram Bey, governor of Alexandria
and commander-in-chief of the navy. His third son-in-law, Yusif
Kamil, was an Ottoman who became a bash muatvin. Among the leading
Ottomans in the wall's service were Muhammad Lazoglu, his katkhoda,
and Muhammad al-Khazindar, who headed the treasury (khazina).
Sami Bey, who came from Greece, was for many years the bash muawin,

78
