                                             Family, friends and relations

cruel in the modern world, although by the lights of his period he was
regarded as a just man.
   Unlike his father, Ibrahim was an educated man who had one of the
largest libraries in the land, including some 9,000 volumes in Turkish,
Arabic, Persian and Armenian. The works dealt with astronomy,
astrology, medicine, history and travel17 as well as poetry and literature.
He was fascinated by machinery, and his farm was the first to use steam
power to irrigate the land.18
   Ibrahim was his father's right hand man, but Tussun may well have
been the father's favourite. He had a gentle and sunny disposition,
unlike his quick-tempered older brother and his dour and arrogant
younger brother, Ismail. He was extremely popular with the army and
with the populace. The men loved him for his generosity and affability,
and he often opposed his father's sterner actions and interceded with
him in favour of the people. He could also be capricious and extrava-
gant. When his father reproached him for his prodigality and compared
it with his own frugal manner of living, Tussun allegedly answered,
'You were not the son of a viceroy, but I am Muhammad Ali's son and
have to show myself generous'.19 Tussun fought bravely in the Wahhabi
campaign, but he was not really a first-class general, and his victory had
little to do with his personal qualities. On his return home for rest and
recreation he contracted plague, allegedly from one of his harem
beauties. Within ten hours of the onslaught of the disease in his palace
near Rosetta, where he was guarding the coasts, he died. Muhammad
Ali, stunned at the sudden death, followed the funeral bier from Bulaq
where it had landed to the cemetery, weeping all the way until the body
was buried in a plot in the Imam Sham' cemetery.
   Ismail (1775-1822), the third son, came to Egypt later with his
mother in 1809, and therefore spent the formative years of his life away
from his father, whom he knew at a distance. He never struggled with
his father against their common enemies within the country, and the
camaraderie that existed between the father and the two older sons was
absent. Equally absent may have been the affection that had developed
between the wali and Tussun when, with Ibrahim in Istanbul, he was
the only son at his side. Ismail came to Egypt when his father was well
established as wali and his two brothers had won renown in the land. At
the age of twenty-five he had been sent to wage the Sudan campaign. By
then Tussun had died in 1816, Ibrahim had successfully brought the
Wahhabi wars to an end and razed Dariyya, the Wahhabi capital, to the
ground, returning to Egypt a hero in 1819. Ismail had to contend with
these glowing reputations and seek to emulate them in the Sudan.
  Unfortunately the means he used to impress Muhammad Ali were

                                                                        85
