Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

always cool and clear-headed, and displayed intrepid courage at all
times.13
   Nubar, who became Ibrahim's private secretary after the Syrian
campaigns, and who was Boghos' nephew gives a different view of the
man. He describes Ibrahim and his father as being 'very mistrustful'
and explains that Ibrahim had chosen him, Nubar, as a secretary
because he was trying to allay his father's suspicions towards himself
and so chose a nephew of Boghos' assuming that Nubar would spy for
his uncle, and the wait. Nubar described Ibrahim as a 'cruel conqueror,
a pitiless lover of justice', but added that both the man and his father
were 'good judges of men'.14 Nubar added that Ibrahim had a reputa-
tion for cruelty and was feared even by Abbas. On the other hand most
of the archival material at our disposal reveals Abbas to be a cruel brute
capable of acts of great refinement in the repertoire of sadistic deeds, for
which he was often rebuked by his grandfather. Ibrahim was the only
family member who was never censured for cruelty, unlike Abbas and
Ismail who had to be restrained. Yet Nubar writes that when Ibrahim
died his entire household were as happy as at a wedding and the only
one who showed red eyes from strain was Nubar himself. The members
of the household mistakenly assumed the red eyes to arise from weeping
for the departed master and he was told, 'You're the only one who weeps
for Ibrahim'.15 Jabarti likewise gave us an image of a cruel and
extortionate Ibrahim, which he may well have been before he had
become secure and established in his position.
   The truth about Ibrahim probably lies somewhere in between the two
extremes. He was just and fair and strict with his soldiers, and it is with
the army that his reputation is the finest.
   His correspondence with his father reveals a general dedicated to the
welfare of his troops, a man who rebuked his father when the well-being
of his men was at stake. During the Syrian campaign, letter upon letter
was sent to Cairo until the father took offence and all communications
between the two men went through the chief secretary (bash muatoin);
the tenor of the letters was 'Are these men not counted amongst
humanity? There is no justification for allowing our soldiers to be
gnawed by hunger just to save the government money (ctawfir al-naqd
li-1 hukuma'.).'16 His soldiers appreciated his efforts on their behalf and
were well disciplined and a capable fighting force. They did, however,
revolt when they had been starved, through lack of funds, because
rather than live off the land Ibrahim had insisted that they pay for all
they took from the population.
   As an administrator Ibrahim was efficient and able, but his actions in
an age when the ruler was absolute and life was cheap would appear

84
