                                            Family, friends and relations

campaign was siphoning off all the ready cash in the treasury, but it also
expressed a firm belief in the value of a lack of ostentation or show of
luxury. He himself dressed simply and wore no decorations of any kind,
save for a fob watch, unless he was trying to dazzle an Ottoman
emissary. He expected his children to avoid excessive luxury as an
unworthy trait in the sons of the great. In a sense there was an inverted
snobbery to his ostensible simplicity. He believed that he and the
members of his family did not need to show off; they were who they
were, there was none better and no external signs were required to mark
them out.
   The one time the pasha came near to showing cruelty towards any of
his children was in the case of his second oldest daughter, Nazli, the
wife of the dejterdar. Nazli was a debauched woman who led something
of a scandalous existence, although it was kept somewhat hidden from
her father. While her behaviour was not known outside palace circles,
within the family she had a notorious reputation. She overstepped the
bounds of the possible when she had one of her boon companions put to
death. Her father heard of the incident which so offended his sense of
morality and justice that he ordered Abbas to execute his aunt. Abbas
spent the entire night pleading with his grandfather to spare his aunt's
life, and at last the pasha gave in and rescinded the order.52
   Nubar Pasha's memoirs revealed a side of Muhammad Ali that had
not appeared in any other material at our disposal. He recounted an
incident in which he understood Ibrahim to tell him that the wait
planned to have him, Ibrahim, assassinated. That incident took place in
1844 when tensions between father and son were high (see chapter 11
for details). In a public assembly Muhammad Ali had announced that
there was a 'traitor', meaning Ibrahim, among them, and a 'covetous
man', referring to Sharif Pasha, and he wanted them delivered up to
him. The assembly was stunned, as were the two men in question who
feared for their lives, or so Nubar informed us. Ibrahim then received a
letter from his father filled with accusations of 'treacherous behaviour'.
He determined to go to the palace and reason with his father, but he
believed that that step might cost him his life. Ibrahim therefore
ordered his men to be ready to strike should an attempt be made upon
him. No attempt was in fact made and the quarrel between father and
son was patched up, but Nubar believed that Ibrahim was convinced
that his father was planning to murder him, and by the same token he
was ready to murder his own father.53
   Nubar gave us another sidelight into Ibrahim's character, one that
differed from our image of a gruff soldier-cum-administrator. He
recounted that on one occasion when Ibrahim was in Europe he wept

                                                                       95
