Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

positive achievements and your name will become inscribed in the pages
of time.'49 It is true that Muhammad Ali never used any of his titles in
his correspondence, but it seems that some of the annoyance over
Ibrahim's title was that it included the word 'Arabistan' as though
Ibrahim were setting up an Arab kingdom, which he may well have
thought of doing. Muhammad Ali was very conscious of his Ottoman
heritage and it pained him to see Ibrahim set it aside in favour of an
Arab title, or a title that smacked of an Arab connection rather than an
Ottoman one.
   Like many parents, Muhammad Ali had little faith in the natural
qualities of his children and set himself the task of moulding their
characters into his own image, or into what he thought was his own
image. Lest they deviate from the strict directives he gave, he placed
spies in each of his sons' households and learned every detail of their
life-styles. In the case of the older sons this may have been motivated by
political caution, for he trusted no one, not even his sons, but in the case
of the younger ones it was to make sure that he was obeyed to the letter.
In spite of the threats he frequently made, he never punished any of the
sons, save for refusing to grant a favour when displeased. Otherwise he
did what most parents do; gave advice and accepted the outcome with
some measure of equanimity. He had few illusions about his family and
could dissect the members with a cold, clinical eye, a rare trait for a
parent, at the same time that he loved and cared for them.
   The same affection that Muhammad Ali bestowed on his sons he also
showed to his daughters. At a time when women of the elite received
little if any education at all, his daughters were given tutors and were
educated. A letter to his wife expressed his pleasure at hearing that his
eldest daughter was devoted to reading. A letter to his youngest
daughter, probably Zainab, praised her proficiency at her lessons and
the examples of the various scripts which she had sent him at his
request. 'My fondest hope', he wrote, 'is to see you show zeal at reading
and writing. Send me from time to time reports on your progress in
learning.'50
   The daughters did not escape scoldings and homilies either. In a
letter to his eldest daughter he explained that he did not begrudge them
money for clothes, but when the requests exceeded the bounds of reason
they departed from good taste, he scolded. 'If the mothers say "Are
these clothes too much to ask for the offspring of the great?", then
answer, "The great in the eyes of the sharia is the one who constantly
serves the people" ... accustom yourself to be satisfied with little and
learn economy for the day when you will have to be responsible for your
own expenses.'51 That letter was sent at a time when the Syrian

94
