Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

Said reproaching him for being slothful and consorting with the wrong
kind of people,
... ignorant old-fashioned sea captains who have no learning and little respect
for education ... My son ... your father was well brought up from his youth and
with time polite manners became second nature ... If a youth does not acquire
good manners when young... he is devoid of human characteristics and can best
be described as bestial... duty impresses upon you the task of consorting with
learned people ... you are cursed with that damnable trait of arrogance ...
beware my son ... acquire traits of modesty. Your uncle Ibrahim rid himself of
that trait and he is 28 years older [sic].45
Ibrahim was in fact 33 years older. That letter clearly demarcates the
wall's values. Education ranked at the top of the scale, followed closely
by good manners and by modesty. That was the proper pattern for
young princes to follow, to enable them to rule wisely and knowl-
edgeably, to be liked by their people and to make their name glorious. In
another passage in that same letter Muhammad Ali revealed his
thoughtfulness and kindness towards inferiors, when they were not
guilty of wrongdoing. Said's tutor in Persian was a mystic who despised
social graces that smacked of modernity, which he anathemized as
innovation (bida). He was particularly offended over Said's use of a knife
and fork at meal times. The wali advised his son to permit the tutor to
eat in his own quarters rather than at the prince's table, but warned him
to make sure that the tutor's food was as good as that served the prince.
   Said never lost his corpulence, but he did study assiduously and he
did acquire a sense of humanity towards his people in contrast to Abbas'
undoubted brutality.
   The younger princes were just as severely controlled and their noses
kept to the academic grindstone as had been the case with Said and
Abbas. They did have one extra bonus in that Ahmad Rifat and Ismail,
Ibrahim's sons, and Abdal-Halim and Husain, Muhammad Ali's sons,
were sent to study in France in the Egyptian Mission School. While
they were in Egypt they were made to go through all the requisite
Arabic, Persian and Turkish studies including grammar, poetry, calli-
graphy, mathematics and geometry.
   That love for education that the wali evinced was shared fully by his
son Ibrahim, who had an extensive library and in the middle of his
campaigns would ask that certain books be sent out to him. When his
son Ismail, who was struck with ophthalmia, visited the father in Syria
he set him to learning poetry and rewarded him by allowing him to ride
a horse. Ismail learnt the poeu-y rapidly but recited it in the Hijazi and
Persian style, much to the amusement of the father and his friends.46
   In Paris the princes were never far removed from their sire's constant

92
