                                                 Family, friends and relations

homilies and sermons, and their daily schedules were sent home for
approval. At one time Husain, who seemed to have been going through
some sort of crisis, received a letter from his father which read:
My son, whoever begins an undertaking with feelings of despair and a belief that
he will not succeed will undoubtedly fail ... but he who says there is no
impossible and begins to work with true determination will undoubtedly reap
the rewards of his efforts. My birth and upbringing were in a town deprived of
learning and education so I grew up deprived of both, but my natural
disposition led me to set aside hesitation and doubt in any undertaking and
taught me to take effort and zeal as debts upon myself. You will learn as you
grow older and mature that I have performed great deeds out of nothing. As for
you my son, you will attain ... in the city of light... the arts and sciences where
learning in all its branches is established, that city where countless great men
were reared and which continues to rear others equally great. My son, my flesh
and blood, show me your zeal and work diligently ... learn that the dearest wish
of my old age is to see you multiplying your energy to please and delight me so
that I might see you in the near future become counted among the superior and
the knowledgeable.47
This letter as do most of the pasha's letters to his sons, shows the esteem
in which he held learning. To him that was an open sesame to success.
But that letter also reveals that Muhammad Ali had an open-ended
personality, one that recognized few ego boundaries or limits to
possibilities. These were not simply words of encouragement sent to a
despondent son who was lonely, alienated in a foreign country and
undergoing cultural shock; these were words that denned the father's
credo, and described his own self-image. Success had come to him
beyond his wildest dreams; it had not been easy, but he had achieved the
impossible; how much more could his sons, armed with a modern
education, achieve. To Halim the wait wrote:
My love for the arts and the sciences and my profound desire to educate you and
make you cultured overcome my repugnance at being separated from you ...
acquire reason ... learn that you are a pupil like all the others and obey those
above you and treat every individual well and train yourself day and night to
become modest, diligent and so gain good repute and my joy and favour, and
become respectable among men.48
Discipline and self control were the key notes to Muhammad Ali's
nature and he desperately wanted his sons to acquire similar traits.
Likewise he prized modesty and detested any show of arrogance. At one
time he rebuked Ibrahim for signing his orders in Syria 'Ser Asker
Arabistan', and wrote '... be satisfied with (signing] "Ibrahim" alone
just as your father takes pride in the name "Muhammad Ali", devoid of
any title. Direct your zeal towards gaining a reputation through your

                                                                               93
