Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

and Ibrahim had died. When he became khedive his animosity towards
his grandfather surfaced in the mean funeral he gave him.
   Muhammad Ali's fourth son, Said, was born on 17 March 1822/1237.
He was brought up in the same fashion as his nephew Abbas except that
he had an extra weight to carry, that of several pounds of fat. Said was
interested in his studies and by the age of three the father was pleased to
learn that his son could read five pages in 15 days and had learnt the
Quran up to the fifth sura.36 The toali then suggested that the portions of
the Quran be copied and bound separately and given to Said to learn
piecemeal to make it easier for him to memorize and so build up his
sense of accomplishment.37 Said was praised for being diligent and the
father kept close watch on his progress. Muhammad AH demanded that
he be kept informed of which books the boy was reading, how many new
words a day were learnt, thus carefully following all details of the boy's
education, even in the midst of his campaigns. He constantly stressed
his admiration and respect for education to his children. He advised
Said to learn while he was still young, 'for learning in youth is durable,
like an inscription cut in stone'.38
   Muhammad AH, who was himself illiterate until the age of 47, wanted
his children to have the best education. Every letter to Said and the
other royal children carried the same message, 'Study! Learn!'. By the
time that Said was 11 years old, he had learnt Turkish, Arabic, Persian,
and was given two European tutors to teach him languages, geometry,
and mathematics. When a plague epidemic broke out that year his father
ordered that he be quarantined and his tutors along with him so that he
could continue his studies. Said learnt French and English, but being a
shy boy, probably because of his corpulence, he would not bring himself
to speak these languages. When Muhammad AH found that out, he
ordered the boy to make the rounds of the major European consuls daily
and address them in French until he shed his timidity and could use the
language fluently.39 Such Draconian measures worked and Said came to
like and befriend the French consul, Ferdinand de Lesseps, with
dramatic consequences for Egypt.
   At the age of 13 Said became an ensign in the navy. He was placed in
the charge of the admiral of the fleet, Matush Pasha, who was told to
treat Said on board ship as he would any other ensign, and to grant him
no special treatment. To his son Muhammad AH wrote:
Do you remember that I told you that the King of England had served in the
navy as a lieutenant and rose in the ranks like all other officers until he became
an admiral, shortly after which he became king? So long as you remain on board
a vessel remember that you are nothing but an ensign. You are to carry out your
allotted tasks and to learn naval arts and sciences, and to obey your senior

90
