Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

because he saw the French countryside so beautiful and green when
Egypt was so miserable: 'I will change all that if God gives me life', he
told Nubar.54 Along the same theme of a man dedicated to the
betterment of his country, Nubar said that once when Ibrahim was
sitting for a painting in Pisa in 1847 he suddenly shouted out loud, 'No,
I will not die. God created me for the good of Egypt, to make her rich
and prosperous. It would not be fair to recall me before I had made her
breathe and be happy.'55 By then Ibrahim was ill with tuberculosis and
the disease was taking its toll, for he was to die a few months later. At the
same time his father was ill and losing his senses because his European
doctors had administered a dose of silver nitrate to cure his dysentery.
The silver nitrate may have cured the dysentery but it also caused
massive brain damage, and the old ruler became demented and began to
'have bouts of madness followed by lucidity'.56 Others, who did not
know about the drug, attributed these fits to 'senility' brought on by an
aphrodisiac that he had imbibed when his daughter presented him with
a new slave.
   It was only a matter of time before Ibrahim was to become wali of
Egypt in succession to his father. While in Europe, Ibrahim was only
interested in visiting factories. He seemed to know all about industry
and was up to date on all facets of progress, according to Nubar.17
Nubar added that both Ibrahim and his father were kept abreast of
European politics and economies, for the speeches of the ministers in
the parliaments of both France and England were translated by Nubar
daily and read by Ibrahim and his father.38
   Nubar characterized Ibrahim as having good sense leading to the limits
of genius, but being avaricious like his father, and renowned for his
ponderation. Ibrahim was cruel but believed in justice. One time in
London he saw a drunk being led off to gaol by a policeman, and he turned
to Nubar and remarked, 'There is the grandeur of Britain, not only in her
factories', and he meant the respect for the law.39 Nubar equally praised
Muhammad Ali who was a fine judge of character. He added that the wali
may have lacked 'instruction' but he certainly did not lack 'education'.
Hekekyan, a much less shrewd and a more capricious observer, fre-
quently changed his mind about the wali. In one passage he wrote, 'The
great misfortune of the viceroy is his extreme avidity and profound
ignorance of the arts and sciences.'60 On another page he wrote, 'The
viceroy is by nature so sensitive and humane',61 and on the same page he
changed his mind and said that he was not generous, he was ostentatious,
which belies his remark on avidity. In yet another place he wrote, 'The
viceroy is really very liberal minded. A better and greater man than
Mohamed Aly has not appeared and will not appear in Turkey.'62

96
