                                               Family, friends and relations

he neither works nor allows others to work, he is neither brave nor
attentive towards his responsibilities. His rank and background should
lead him to set a good example for others to follow.'32 A year later
Ibrahim gave up on him and asked that he be recalled, 'All my efforts to
train him are fruitless', he explained. 'I have no time to undertake his
education since I am occupied with military matters.'33
   Abbas returned to Cairo, and bore a grudge against his uncle that was
to last till the end of his days. His resentment against his grandfather
and his uncle was to surface later on when he headed a party of
opposition to Ibrahim. Upon his return to Cairo, Abbas was appointed
governor of the province of Gharbiyya in the mistaken belief that he
might pull himself together and show some talent in government when
given a position of responsibility. A year later he was in serious trouble.
The wali had warned him repeatedly not to be brutal towards the
population, which he was inclined to be and showed a clear streak of
sadism. That time he went too far when he condoned the death of his
baker. It was rumoured that he had had the mouth of one of his harem
women sewn up when he caught her smoking, and the woman starved to
death. Since Abbas was a homosexual, one doubts that he was much
interested in what his harem women did, so the story may be apocry-
phal, then again it might not. Cruel, inept, indolent and incompetent
Abbas certainly was, but he was a member of the family and had to be
found a place within the state apparatus. He was a great disappointment
to his grandfather, who had deluded himself into believing that the son
of Tussun would have the father's qualities. In one of his letters the wali
began by threatening to recall Abbas and appoint someone else in his
place, but in a postscript he added, 'You have dashed my hopes in you. I
had hoped you would bring joy to my heart by performing your duties
conscientiously. Look at your uncle. And me in my old age. Truly your
indolence has pained me exceedingly. Abbas, you must pull yourself
together and set aside self-indulgence in favour of earnest work.'34
Muhammad AH and Ibrahim were obviously the wrong examples to
offer Abbas and simply fed his resentment against his elders. In another
letter the wali reproached Abbas for his ruthlessness and advised him to
go round and make amends to those whom he had offended, adding that
that 'is fitting behaviour' for 'to act like a lion befits savages and does not
befit someone in your position'.3*
   In time the wali gave up on Abbas and the letters of remonstrance
diminished. Abbas was given responsible positions in the administra-
tion, but both grandfather and uncle despised him. Abbas knew their
feeling and repaid it by hating them both, although he was careful to
keep his feelings about his grandfather to himself until the wali fell ill

                                                                            89
