                                           Family, friends and relations

   Hekekyan, who seemed to have been a bitter man with a touch of
paranoia and who was disappointed in not becoming as influential as his
other Armenian relations, therefore resenting them and his employers,
regarded himself as an Englishman for he had been educated in England
- he talked about the British as 'we'. He looked upon Egypt from the
viewpoint of an outsider with little sympathy for the place and less
liking, but he also seemed to have suffered much at school in England.
In a particularly vicious passage regarding the Egyptian princes who
had been sent to be educated in France he wrote, 'I should have
recommended their parents to send them to England, and after a
previous education in some of our public schools, when their insolence
and pride would soon have been made to ooze out of their noses, they
should be put into military and other special establishments."3
   Muhammad Ali and Ibrahim worked together as a team. Muhammad
AH supplied caution and a brake on too rash movements, while Ibrahim
supplied strategy, military prowess and the cement that kept the
Egyptian army together and made his men fear and love him. The
younger man was more liberal in his thinking and had more affection for
the country of his adoption, which was the only country he really knew.
The father was torn by his desire to remain an Ottoman, and his desire
to create an empire. He despised the Egyptians, and while he under-
stood Arabic perfectly he would only speak Turkish.64 He admired the
Ottomans, because he was a member of an ethnic and linguistic minority
within the Ottoman empire yet looked upon himself as an Ottoman. To
deny that would be a denial of his roots and being. Ibrahim had no
problems of self-identity; he liked the Egyptians and hated and despised
the Turks, therefore he was apt to be more ruthless towards the
Ottomans and more radical. Together these two men and their associ-
ates were to carve an empire for themselves out of Ottoman territories,
which became a mighty power for a brief moment of time. That empire
diminished eventually, but it separated Egypt quite definitely from the
Ottoman empire.
   The new government in Egypt did not start out with a clear pattern of
reform, or even with a clear idea of how to go about governing the
country. Instead it adopted a series of ad hoc policies which arose from
certain economic beliefs. These beliefs can best be described as forming
a mercantilist approach. It was not that the wait and his men were self-
consciously mercantilist, for, after all, the term was probably unknown
to them, but they espoused economic policies which faithfully followed
mercantilist principles.
   Such of their policies as reflected mercantilist thought were the
following. In the first place they felt the need for the accumulation of

                                                                      97
