                                                 Family, friends and relations

officers. I sent you to the navy in the hope that you will become a beacon for the
family. Rumours have reached my ears that you do not stand to attention for
your superiors and that the Pasha [Matush] does not sit in your presence until
you give him leave. My son, apple of my eye, I have sent you to the navy
according to British custom, and while you are there you are to behave like an
ensign should, you are nothing but a junior officer on board and snould be so
treated. Off ship you are Muhammad Ali's son and all owe you deference and
respect. The more you broaden your education and knowledge die more your
reputation will be enhanced.40
   Like Abbas, Said got his share of scolding, although in a much milder
manner since his sins were minor. His major shortcoming was his
corpulence which offended the wali, and which he was ordered to lose
by climbing the ship's masts twice daily.41 Exercise seemed to have little
effect on fat Said, who at the age of 13 weighed 195 lbs. His irate father
showed little sympathy and wrote, 'I am disgusted at your weight... it is
in your power to lose that corpulence which offends all people and to
acquire a slim body ... should you arrive in Alexandria in your former
shape I will exile you to a small house and keep you there.' Muhammad
Ali had never had a weight problem himself, for he ate very frugally, or
he might have shown more sympathy towards an insecure adolescent
who found refuge in eating.
I have advised you time after time, orally and in writing, but my efforts were
fruitless and I am deeply pained ... your tutor has tried to conceal your
condition and to protect and encourage your hateful corpulence ... I have been
forced to spy on you ... Should I find you equally fat I shall put you in die
charge of a rough man and make you walk every day as I did with Abbas ... I
will not permit people to humiliate me and say that I am incapable of educating
my sons when I educate the sons of all the others.42
   Some of the threats had an effect and on occasion Said would slough
off 2 lbs a week and earn a warm letter of commendation from his father.
Any activity that was believed to reduce weight was condoned. For
example the wali was informed that Said was galloping his horse all over
Alexandria and did not stop to greet passers-by. Such rude conduct
would ordinarily have brought a stinging rebuke from the wali who was
a stickler for proper behaviour, but since he believed galloping to be a
means of losing weight Said was forgiven.43
   Any action that savoured of arrogance or of conceit on the part of any
individual member of the family was instantly rebuked by the pasha, yet
he enjoined on them pride of family and of name. Muhammad Ali heard
that Said was helped out of his bunk in the morning by his agha and sent
an immediate letter scolding the agha and threatening to throw him into
the sea if he did not stop indulging Said.44 Another letter was sent to
