Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

addressed as 'donkey' (eshek). 'Have we ever worn a cloak for you to
allow Abbas Pasha to carry out his childish whims at will? Such
behaviour will force us to punish him which we do not wish to do. See
that he puts an end to caprice and returns to his studies.'29
   Abbas could do nothing right. Every month he received a letter
pointing out some misdemeanour and ordering him to pursue his much
hated studies diligently. He was expected to send in monthly reports
with a full timetable of his activity, the chapters and pages of the
textbooks he had read and samples of the different scripts he was
learning. A glance at his timetable for the month of Shaban 1245
explains why Abbas did not seem to enjoy the studies, on which he was
expected to spend more than eleven hours every day.30 According to
Arabic time a new day began at sunset and continued until the following
sunset. The twenty-four hours were divided into two lots of twelve,
with twelve o'clock evening marking sunset and twelve o'clock morning
marking sunrise. Abbas was supposed to spend 2-5 Arabic time (8-11
a.m.) reading mathematics and geometry; from 5 to 6 (11-12 a.m.) was
lunchtime followed by an hour and a half of calligraphy, and an hour
and a half of grammar. He then took off half an hour for a walk, and
spent the following three hours studying Arabic parsing, which brought
the time to roughly 3 o'clock Arabic time of the new day, or 9 p.m. It is
little wonder that Abbas rebelled at such an iron discipline and
announced that he no longer wished to work with tutors and would
study at his own pace, when he felt like it. Muhammad AH gave up on
him and concluded, 'He is incapable of work and shows proof of a crude
nature.'31 Abbas was ordered to return to his rigid schedule, but broke
out in occasional bouts of truancy. While rebellion taught Abbas that he
could not coerce his grandfather, it also taught him the virtues of
manipulation and intrigue in order to get his way. It equally confirmed
the grandfather in his low estimation of his grandson's capabilities, and
throughout his lifetime Muhammad AH was to refer to Abbas as
'indolent' (happa).
   By the time the Syrian campaign had begun in 1831, Abbas at 18 was
deemed ready for military life and was sent off to learn how to become
an officer under the tutelage of his uncle Ibrahim. He was as little suited
to military life as he had been to the life of a scholar. Complaints about
his military behaviour, or lack thereof, flowed regularly from Ibrahim.
Abbas was negligent, refused to obey orders, behaved heedlessly in
times of crisis, was careless and, much worse, he was gun-shy and a
coward. Ibrahim in high indignation wrote to his father, 'If he [Abbas]
were devoid of courage but at least paid attention to his duties, or at least
would order others to do their duty ... one might accept his failings, but

88
