Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

tians became employed in the administration the language of the
bureaucracy gradually changed from Turkish into Arabic (by the end
of the century Arabic had completely displaced Turkish in the adminis-
tration). This took the Egyptianization of the country a step further.
Once the wali sought to make Egypt independent from the Ottomans
Egyptianization was inevitable, even though the elite remained Otto-
man. This was to pose problems of identity among rulers and elite that
we shall discuss later.
   In Ottoman practice the chief financial officer in the country was the
defterdar, who was traditionally appointed by the sultan. He supervised
the ruzname, headed by a ruznamji, whose functions were to keep a
record of the daily revenues and expenditures of the treasury and to
compile monthly and yearly summaries of both revenues and expendi-
tures. When in time the mamluk beys seized the post, placed their own
men in it, and diverted the funds into their own pockets, the Ottomans
reorganized the treasury and left the defterdar as the titular head, while
the actual power was shifted to the ruznamji, who received no pay but
held his position as a tax farm, and derived his revenues from the sale of
offices. Under him he had the Coptic scribes, or sarraf. When the
French occupied Egypt and all the Turkish officials fled, the head of the
corporation of sarraf, Muallim Girgis, became the director of the
treasury.16 Under Muhammad Ali the functions of the defterdar as the
chief financial officer were reinstated, especially when Ibrahim was
appointed to the post by the sultan after his return from Turkey in 1807
where he had been held hostage. Ibrahim held that post for six years.
   As finances were a major problem in Egypt several attempts were
made to reform the entire system, and to handle the several financial
organisms that dated from Ottoman days. The first of these organisms,
the ruzname, which came under the supervision of the defterdar, was by
way of being a general administration of finances. The ruznamjfs
function was to assess and collect the taxes, and to pay the expenses of
the state.17 All the sums derived from the land tax, the miri, were paid
into the ruzname, and allocations, or muratabat, were paid out. Under
Muhammad Ali the/atz was paid out to the former multazimun from the
ruzname. Muhammad Ali departed from customary usage and ap-
pointed his private secretary to supervise the tax registers and the
assessment of taxes. That man was a Coptic sarraf, Muallim Ghali.18
Ghali had informed the wali of new means of taxing the population and
enriching the treasury and had therefore been rewarded for his zeal by
that appointment. His end was far from rewarding. When Muhammad
Ali sought to impose a new tax on date palms, Ghali opposed the
measure. Ibrahim Pasha, who by then was entrusted with the organiza-

106
