                                                              Internal policies

everything that happens in the chancelleries of the Porte as well as in those of
the diplomatic corps and sometimes with the most minute details.8

  Deny gives details of how government officials were chosen with a
careful regard to their degree of education, and were frequently sent
back to school, so to speak, to fill any gaps in their education. Each
functionary's name was inscribed on the page of a special dossier, with a
formula specifying remedial exercises inserted beside the name. For
example one man had, 'shall study Arabic (or Turkish or Persian as the
case may be) daily, shall write ten (or twenty) lines and read for ten (or
twenty) minutes the history of Naima (or Peter the Great or the
epistolary art of Rifat), for so many days'.9 The dossier noted daily
whether the official had done his homework or not, and he was
frequently asked to present a written report on his progress every few
days.
  The maiyya saniyya was formed of two branches, the maiyya saniyya
turki and the maiyya saniyya arabi. All communications written in
Turkish were translated and transcribed into Arabic before they were
sent out, and the same was done for any incoming material. According
to a statute issued in 1818/1233, two principles dominated the entire
administrative organization. The first, accentuating the deliberative and
consultative nature of the administration, stated that (1) all matters must
be examined in council and settled according to the majority of voices.
The second principle, totally contradicting the first, stated (2) that all
matters must come under the control of the viceroy who centralizes all
matters.10 While the first principle was supposed to nurture a spirit of
initiative and reasoning in the administration, the second was a re-
minder of the absolute authority of the wali. Such contradiction in the
administration was born of the wait's innate suspicion of the motives of
everyone involved in the administration, and also out of a knowledge
that his officials were not yet adept at administration and needed to be
checked and guided. It was also, no doubt, a product of the wall's own
autocratic nature and military exactitude which developed the need to
supervise every detail in person. Such attention to minutiae and
excessive centralization kept the officials on their toes, but also resulted
in an accumulation of papers and a tedious weighty bureaucracy that
overwhelmed the diwans and the officials, and diminished efficiency.
  In the face of such a powerful entity as the maiyya, safeguards were
necessary to protect the functions of the rest of the administration from
being engulfed or overwhelmed by it. An ordinance was issued setting
forth the various functions of the diwans of the administration, and
specifying that 'each functionary in his sphere has as much influence

                                                                            103
