Chapter 6


Internal policies




Muhammad Ali conceived of Egypt as a mulk, a possession he had won
by the sword. A legitimate monarch can take his time in planning for the
future, secure - sometimes - in his knowledge that continuity will
prevail. Muhammad Ali was neither a legitimate monarch, nor was he
even secure, and he had strong doubts about any continuity for his line
unless he took steps to establish and institute such continuity, by the
sword if necessary. His actions were geared towards improving his mulk
and making it yield greater profits, and towards establishing firm
foundations for its government that would resist change and time. Such
foundations led to the creation of a centralized bureaucracy, and
involved a series of ad hoc decisions in response to circumstances, which
in the final analysis created the trappings of a modern state. It was a
piecemeal progression, a series of trials and errors that established a
centralized authority, brought about a control of trade and commerce,
the total reform of agriculture, the establishment of industry, and finally
expansion beyond the frontiers of his territory.
   The corner-stone of Muhammad Ali's internal policy in Egypt was
law and order. That was the prime reason for which he had been
supported by ulama and tujjar, who saw in him a potential Ali Bey
ushering in a period of stability and security wherein they could go
about their business. The upheavals which had swept the country over
the last decades had played havoc with the financial and commercial life
of the country. Agriculture had suffered when various armies had swept
back and forth across the land and forced fallahin to flee for their lives.
Marauding soldiery had preceded or succeeded bands of roving bedouin
looking for easy prey and equally devastating village and soil. River
pirates dominated the Nile, and boats sailing down to the capital with
food were attacked and pirated, leaving the capital vulnerable to
starvation. The bedouin who controlled the caravan routes had not been
paid their dues by the bankrupt governments, and attacked all caravans.
The British fleet had blockaded Egyptian ports and disrupted the flow
of long-distance trade. In brief, the commercial life of the country was

ioo
