Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

This message clearly underlines that the waifs main preoccupation with
reforms arose from a preoccupation with the development of agriculture
and the supervision of the new crops that had recently been introduced.
Later that year the country was reshuffled into new administrative
divisions. Lower Egypt was divided into 14 aqsam, grouped under three
units headed by the pasha, Ibrahim and the defterdar. Upper Egypt was
divided into 10 aqsam grouped into two major units under the katkhoda
and Tahir Pasha. Each qism was governed by a mamur.3 Egypt had just
suffered a plague epidemic and two consecutive years of drought, both of
which had devastated the countryside and caused extreme hardship to the
fallahin. These administrative changes were instituted in an effort to
alleviate that distress, and to help the country recoup its losses.
   Muhammad Ali took upon himself the active administration of affairs
instead of leaving them in the hands of the kikhya or katkhoda bey as had
been the custom. Consul Salt wrote, 'He actually sits in judgement from
8-10 hours at his diwan every day', while his kikhya was sent round the
country to determine 'the true cause of general misery'. Salt did not
believe that the drought and the plague were sufficient causes, and
attributed the misery to the fact that the government took two thirds of
the produce.4
   Sometime later these districts were grouped into provinces called
iqlim and finally reformed into mudiriyya, governorates, headed by a
mudir.5 At first there were seven provinces, then they increased in
number and from 1830-4 they became ten, seven in the Delta, three in
Middle and Upper Egypt. The function of the hierarchy was to keep
public order, collect the taxes and administer justice.
   All major decisions were taken by the viceroy and his cabinet, the
maiyya saniyya, which literally means 'the vice-royal suite' .* The maiyya
did change its name at least once during the viceroy's reign, when it
became the shura al muawana from 1833-44, t h e n it returned to its
previous nomenclature. The function of this organization was to see to
the orderly functioning of internal affairs by promulgating vice-regal
orders to the various officials, to prepare and present reports (kushufat)
to the wali, and to act as the administrative channel that enabled the wait
to govern effectively.7 It also acted as a disciplinary council to try
officials accused of some misdeed, and to deal with correspondence with
foreign powers and the Porte.
   Mimaut has left us a description of these officials of the maiyya. He
wrote:
Muhammad Ali has no offices ... his secretariat is composed of effendiya who all
write in the palms of their hands, crouching on a divan ... It is true he is
accurately informed not only about the general course of affairs, but about

IO2
