                                                          Internal policies

tion and cadastre of Upper Egypt, received a letter from his father
pointing out that the government had too much at stake in imposing the
tax to listen to contrary opinions, and advised him to try and change
Ghali's position against it. The viceroy added that he knew that Ibrahim
would not succeed in convincing Ghali, but if he did then all the better,
and if he did not then he was to cut Ghali's head off, 'so that the
interests of the government may not be compromised through wrong
ideas'.19 Ghali apparently continued to oppose the tax and was forward
with Ibrahim, who summarily executed him. Ibrahim then took upon
himself the support and education of all the deceased man's children,
and they were given government positions and grants of land.
   In due course the ruzname became part of the diwan khidiwi in
1837/1253, and by 1848/1265 it became incorporated into the diwan of
finances.
   The second financial centre was the khazina, or treasury, which had
always formed part of the diwan al-wali in the past, and was part of the
diwan al-khidiwi, when it became called qalam al-khazina al-khi-
diwiyya. The treasury controlled the accounts of the provinces, includ-
ing the accounts of the Hijaz and the Sudan, and prepared monthly and
yearly accounts of receipts and expenditures. A total accounting of the
monthly and annual accounts was submitted to the viceroy at the
beginning of every month and of the new year, and was then submitted
to the majlis. In 1834-5/1250 the khazina lost some of its attributions to
a parallel institution which was called diwan al-iradat. Three years later,
in 1837/1253, the diwan al-iradat was divided into two diwans which
were to handle the accounts of all revenues, other than agriculture, and
the accounting of all the provinces, of Crete and the Sudan. The
accounts deriving from agriculture went to the diwan al-tijara, while
Syria had a separate accounting under a supervisor, a mubashir, Wasif
Tiyab. This dual function of a diwan for Lower Egypt and Crete and
one for Upper Egypt, the Hijaz and the Sudan was further handicapped
by the fact that government expenditures were paid only after they had
been approved by the diwan al-khidiwi, which would then authorize the
khazina to disburse the funds, a process which added 'slowness and
confusion' according to the Russian consul.20 Taxes were collected by
the mudiriyyun of the provinces and remitted to the diwan al-iradat. On
the advice of a Frenchman, Rousset, who was hired for two years from
the French ministry of finances to improve the condition of Egyptian
finances, the diwan al-iradat, which did not give satisfaction, was finally
abolished in 1844/1260. All government financial transactions were
consolidated into one diwan al-maiyya al-misriyya, under the supervi-
sion of a nazir."


                                                                       107
