                                                             Internal policies

not only at a standstill, but progressively deteriorating at a time when
money was of the essence.
   Once Muhammad Ali had defeated his opponents, his first task was to
reinstitute law and order and allow the country to return to a normal
life, and recover from the wounds inflicted on it by so many invaders
and intruders. Sea trade was re-established with the full cooperation of
the British fleet, for the British armies battling the French in the Iberian
Peninsula needed Egyptian grain. The new government, conscious of
the shortage of ships to ferry the produce from the hinterland to the
ports, ordered the construction of afleetof river boats, which effectively
restored and expanded the channel of communication with Upper
Egypt, the main granary. Egypt had few roads, the Nile being the main
artery of communication. Anyone who controlled a portion of the river
could waylay river traffic and prevent food from reaching the capital, as
the mamluks formerly had done. The security of the capital depended
on the uninterrupted flow of river traffic, and the finances of the state
depended on the maximum trade with the outside world. River pirates
were hounded and destroyed and the river was made secure.
   In 1814/1229 the former system of governorates ruled by mamluk
beys was reformed. A more centralized authority was set up, aimed
at supervising and improving agricultural practices and extracting
more surplus from the fallahin. The governorates were subdivided
into departments (aqsam), each one under a kashif. The governorates
(wilayat) formed a total of 13, if one counts the oases as one governorate.
These were Girga, Manfalut, the oases, Ashmunain, Bahnasawiyya,
Atfihiyya, Fayyum, Gharbiyya, Daqahliyya, Sharqiyya, Buhaira,
Qaliubiyya, Giza. Later on Minufiyya was added, bringing the num-
ber of wilayat to 14. Jabarti refers to a new hierarchy of authority
when he talks about 'governors of provinces, kushaf and aides' (chukam
al-aqalim wa kushafuha wa nuwabuhum').1 French sources also men-
tion the presence of a qaim-maqam. That measure of reform did not give
full satisfaction and in 1825/1241 the viceroy decided to visit the
provinces himself, and sent word to his governors in the following
message:

When I divided the country into aqsam the reason was to facilitate the prosperity
and progress of agriculture, but there is a lack of attention and of precision from
the department heads (jnamurun aqsam), and especially a lack of attention given
to the growth of new imported crops ... I have thus decided to visit the corners
of the country, and note shortcomings on the part of any matnur, qaim-maqam,
district chief (hakim khutt), shaikh and overseer (khatvli). I will gather them in
the middle of the land that has been neglected, will order a hole dug and bury
them alive.2

                                                                           IOI
