                                                           Internal policies

off to pay the firda, which the nazir found unjust and appealed to the
diwan for a decision. The diwan agreed with the nazir and ordered the
governor to let the men who were out of work off the tax.13
    Other diwans were those of the kikhya or katkhoda, who used to be
the governor of the city of Cairo until the wali took over that function.
Later on when the viceroy established residence for most of the year in
Alexandria, the function of governor of Cairo was again entrusted to the
kikhya. This diwan handled correspondence, and later on, the estates of
the royal family, the cafalik and uhad.
    The diwan al-taftish handled reports of inspectors in the entire
country and issued decisions, circulars and regulations. Previously there
had been a system of inspectors sent out to check on the administration
of the provinces, who sent in their reports (jurnalat) to an office
(warsha) in the capital. There were six such wurash, three for Lower
Egypt, one for Cairo, and one each for Upper and Middle Egypt. In
 1828/1244 the wurash and jurnalat changed and we have the diwan al-
 taftish, or inspectorate general, with the kikhya as the inspector general.
The jurnalat or reports were constantly demanded by the wali who
prized them as a means of keeping tabs on the administration, in the
 hope of nipping any errors in the bud. His maiyya, therefore, constantly
 clamoured for the reports and harassed the employees for them, if they
 were ever late. There were two kinds of reports, those which were sent
 on a monthly basis, in a regular fashion, and those which were sent on an
 ad hoc basis, i.e. independent studies and reports (jurnalat mustaqila wa
faniyya), or reports of a technical nature.14 Among the most important
of these reports were those emanating from the irrigation engineers. An
order to the chief engineer of the governorate of Qaliub warned him
 that, 'Should you neglect for a second time to send in the reports as is
usual ... I will send a Turkish qawas, who will no doubt cut off your
head.'15 This passage reveals graphically the importance the wali placed
 on the jurnalat.
   In 1837 the administration in general was once more re-formed, and
other diwans were created bringing the total of diwans to seven: the
diwan al-khidiwi, the treasury, which was divided into two sections for
Upper and Lower Egypt; the diwan al-jihadiyya, the diwan of war; the
diwan al-bahariyya, diwan of the navy; the diwan al-madaris, or public
instruction; the diwan umur afranjiyya wa tijarat Misr, foreign affairs
and commerce; and the diwan al-fabrikat, industry. Each diwan was
divided into bureaux or qalam, and into wurash, or workshops. At the
heads of the diwan was a nazir, although later the title changed to mudir.
The officials who manned the diwans were recruited from the govern-
ment schools and had to sit for an entrance examination. Once Egyp-

                                                                        105
