Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

(nufudh) as the benefactor [viceroy] in the whole of the public do-
main'.11 These officials, who were called aide, assistant (muawin), were
under the direct orders of a chief (bash muawin). Sami Bey held the
position for ten years, from 1831-41, then he was succeeded by Husain
Pasha, Raghib Pasha and Yusuf Kamil Pasha. Muawin was a title that
was held on a variety of levels, from the army where it was a rank equal
to that of a lieutenant-colonel, to the ministries of war, marine and
public instruction where the number of muawinun varied.12
   According to Deny, who is our main authority on the Egyptian
administration and its procedures, the majlis, or assembly, corre-
sponded to the tendency the wali had to use a deliberative system of
administration. Thus the diwan al-khidiwi and the diwan of war were
both doubled in a majlis ali in 1824-5/1240. This majlis lasted, under
different names such as majlis al-jihadiyya, until around 1842-3/1258.
The majlis was presided over by a nazir, had judicial attributions and
disciplinary functions. In 1258 these functions were entrusted to the
haqqaniyya or high court of justice.
   The daily management of the state resided with the diwans. The most
important of these was the diwan khidiwi, which dealt with the interior,
except for finances. This diwan was a combination of various diwans
that had formerly existed. By 1846 a number of bureaux depended on
that diwan; these were the treasury, atvqaf, real estate, expenses,
accounting, census, payments, secondary affairs, quarantine, passports,
post, law-suits and disputed claims, orders of the viceroy and the arabic
bureau. All these bureaux had grown along with a need for them. From
the outset the diwan had dealt with judicial matters, unless they had a
religious or commercial bearing, in which case they were sent to the
competent courts. Crimes of murder, theft, treason, defamation and
other 'infamous acts' were sent to the diwan, where after due process,
involving an inquiry, an account of which was sent to the mudir, the
affair was charged in the diwan. The members of the diwan visited the
prisons regularly to make sure that no prisoner had been illegally
detained for more than ten days. According to a statute of 1837/1253,
the diwans dealt with nineteen administrations among which were the
wall's household provisions, cattle, the arsenal of Bulaq, the treasury,
marble quarries, the Mahmudiyya canal, the mint, the post, and
commerce with Europe. As an example of the cases the diwan dealt
with, we have one on 25 Rabi Awal 1244/1828 where the nazir of the
rice-producing areas of Rosetta said that the previous year he had had
467 workers who paid afirda, or tax on earnings, of 9,220 pts., but this
year, the crop being less, he had only 319 workers who paid afirda of
6,309 pts. The governor of the area wanted the workers who were laid

104
