Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

bullion, which became an overriding concern throughout their years of
administration. In the early years, 1805-11, the administration needed
money to pay off the Albanian and Ottoman troops. Then it needed to
import arms and ammunition to strengthen the army and stave off
invasion. While the need for money is common to all states and is not in
itself specifically mercantilist, the next steps the administration took, to
accumulate capital in order to invest it in projects of agriculture and
industry, were mercantilist. The search for capital led it from 1808
onwards to step up the export of agricultural commodities. A concomi-
tant measure of such a step was the necessity to control agricultural
resources so as to export as much as the government found necessary,
and to coerce the fallahin into growing crops for export rather than for
local consumption.
   The success of exports to Europe led to the expansion of trade and
commerce and the need for more commodities to export, with conse-
quent changes in land tenure and taxation to meet that need, beginning
in 1811 when iltizamat in Upper Egypt were confiscated. The capital
accumulated from trade and agricultural commodities was invested in
irrigation projects, starting with the Mahmudiyya canal. In turn, the
irrigation projects, supported by barrages and dams, increased the area
of agricultural land and permitted irrigation on a perennial basis in some
parts of the country. As a result new crops were introduced.
   When further capital was obtained it was invested in industry; at first
it was invested in war-related industries in 1809, and went on to textiles
and other manufactured commodities the following decade. Industry
was to provide import substitution and cut down on imports, to develop
new commodities that used local raw materials and which could be sold
both internally and for export as a means of establishing a favourable
balance of trade, dear to the heart of all mercantilists. The new
government seldom exported more than it imported, for the machinery
necessary to set up industry necessitated increased imports.
   Once industry and manufactures were started, from then on, and in
accordance with mercantilist logic, military expansion became inevita-
ble in order to find markets for the finished products and raw materials
lacking in Egypt to feed the new factories. There were other reasons that
supplemented the economic ones and justified expansion overseas: the
need for independence from Ottoman domination, as we shall see later,
and maybe a need to glorify the name of Muhammad Ali and his family.
The first foreign venture was the war in the Hijaz, 1811-19. This was
followed by a campaign in the Sudan in 1820, which left Muhammad
Ali master of an empire. The Morean campaign in 1824 was intended to
add further territories to the wall's holdings, and satisfy his goals of

98
