Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

minorities lent the fallah money at usurious rates, and charged anything
from i to 5 per cent per month.
   Not only was the fallah exploited by the merchant and the money
lender but also by the bedouin and the government official. The bedouin
tribes had always abused and exploited the fallah. They imposed
themselves on a village and levied protection money, or claimed a share
in the agricultural production of the fallah on pain of destroying his crop
or carrying off the livestock. The government attempted to stop that,
and decreed that any bedouin claiming ownership of land should
provide a wrinen document proving his claim, a rukhsa, and pay the mal
on it. Officials were ordered to inquire into ownership of the crop and if
it was proven not to belong to the bedouin legally, or if he had not paid
the mal on it, it was to be confiscated until the mal had been paid. All
shaikhs in Middle Egypt where such abuses were prevalent, were
warned that anyone who cheated, or illegally claimed any connection
with a fallah, was to be punished.33
   The tvali kept a stria eye on all affairs, but in spite of his vigilance he
could not control all infractions. He tried to intimidate new appointees,
as in the following letter he sent to Ghaitas Effendi, the ruznamji.
In spite of my ordering you to send reports about everything that is happening
in the corners of the country, reports that are free of falsehood and deceit, so
that I may be kept informed on all matters andrightthe wrong, and guide the
way to the right path, it has reached my ears that Hasan Bey, mudir Qaliubiyya,
has removed a number of his nuzzar and appointed others, and has imprisoned a
sarraf and mentioned none of that in his report. A deficit of 30,000 pts has been
shown in the books of a sarraf of a village in Minufiyya and the inspector of the
provinces of Lower Egypt wrote that he obtained the sums from the sarraf's
guarantor, but never registered any of that in his report. Mudir Daqahliyya
wrote a letter scolding muawitt Bahr, and never mentioned that in his report
either. All these events have grieved and upset me, for after giving up all hopes
of organizing this country, my hopes had revived with the new heads of
divisions that I appointed ... If you are to follow the example of the above-
named officials and not reveal the truth in your reports, and hide from me any
part of events, you will in consequence have disdained public interest (al-
maslaha alamma), for which we all work. And should you so disdain public
interest it is imperative, legally and rationally, that you be ousted from public
office.14

   Muhammad AM was under no illusions as to the quality of his officials
or his population for that matter. On 5 Shawwal 1247/1832 the tvali
learned that defeatist rumours were whispered about the performance of
the army in Syria. He therefore wrote to Habib Effendi, the mamur al-
diivan, saying,

112
