                                                        Internal policies

supervised the gathering of the crops all over the district. The local
shaikhs remitted the taxes they had gathered to the khutt officials who
handed them over to the district treasurer. His supervisor was a nazir
qism, department chief, who in turn reported to the mamur, whose
superior was the provincial governor, the mudir. The mudir was
ultimately responsible for the entire governorate, and received his
orders directly from the capital. The mudir was always a Turco-
Circassian, while the lesser ranks were filled by fallah Egyptians. By the
late 1820s the rank of mamur was filled by Egyptians. Consul Salt
believed that the French consul Drovetti was responsible for 'persuad-
ing' the wali to adopt what Salt called 'a dangerous innovation', which
was 'not to employ any Turkish kashif or qaim-maqam in villages' but to
replace them by 'Arab sheikhs - in fact to make his rule depend entirely
on the Arabs', by which Salt meant Egyptians.44 Why Egyptians should
have been 'dangerous' but Turks not, Salt did not explain. Presumably
he believed the Egyptians to be totally inept at collecting taxes, while
the Turks, who used brutal methods, were not.
   There was a rumour that Muhammad Ali had chosen to use Egyp-
tians to collect taxes because the umad could gouge more money out of
the fallahin, and could control them better as they came from the same
milieu and were therefore familiar with all the wiles that could be used.
Another, simpler reason may have been that there were not enough
Turco-Circassians in the country to man the administration; and much
as the wali had needed Egyptians to man his army he needed them to
swell the ranks of his administration. The nazir qism replaced the old
position of the kashif, and the mamur and mudir replaced the mamluk
beys in their administrative functions, so that the new chain of
command bore some resemblance to the old one, but was much tighter.
The major difference between the old mamluk system and the new
centralized one was that the governors had become government employ-
ees, rather than semi-autonomous iqta or iltizam holders, who were
closely supervised by the wali and at his mercy to maintain or oust. The
old mamluk beys had had no real hierarchy save the vague one of
'households', a loose one at best, and an authority that was diffused and
divided. The new administration was an example of the more central-
ized state formation that was being implanted in Egypt.
   The Egyptian countryside therefore underwent improvements as well
as disasters. The improvements were noticeable in the system of
irrigation which increased the crop area and the number of crops per
year. That increase was unmatched in magnitude by any achieved by
succeeding regimes. At the same time the canals demanded a work force
that put a strain on the population and dislocated whole rural communi-

                                                                     117
