                                                          Internal policies

belonging to an individual trampled and destroyed the crops of another
person and the owner had deliberately allowed his beasts to enter that
field, he was to be beaten with 50 lashes of the kurbaj, and was to pay
damages to the owner of the field. If, however, the owner of the beasts
was blameless and it was an accident, he was merely to pay damages
without suffering corporal punishment. Should a shaikh or a fallah
deliberately set fire to the barn or house or property of another, then if
he had means restitution should be made, and he was to be sent to the
penitentiary for a year, but if the arsonist were destitute he was to serve
a life sentence in the penitentiary.24
   The majlis also decided that fallahin working on corvee duty should
be used for only five months of the year, and during the important
months were to work on the land, not on corvee duty.25 They decided
that corvee workers were to be relayed every week, and only factory
workers were to be exempted from the corvee. Shaikhs and/or bureau-
crats (jnuwadhafuri) who were found guilty of misdeeds, such as taking a
bribe, were to be sent to jail for six months. If they were found guilty of
embezzlement from the government they were to be sent to the
penitentiary for periods varying from six months to four years, depend-
ing on the amount stolen. Any sarraf, if found guilty of theft, was to be
sent to jail for five years, unless he could reimburse the stolen sums,
when he would be sent to jail for two years only. Should the thief or
embezzler be employed in collecting the miri, he was to be executed as
an example to others. Lesser shaikhs were to be beaten with 300 lashes
of the kurbaj, and removed from office. High shaikhs were to be sent to
the penitentiary.
   Having set up an administrative, centralized bureaucracy, the wait
tried to make sure that he could control it, and encouraged the
population to complain to him personally against any abuse of authority.
A series of ordinances was passed prescribing punishments to be meted
to officials who transgressed against the population, who abused them,
lied or cheated and stole from them.
   Muhammad Ali and his administration were ethnically Turco-Cir-
cassian and Albanian, who despised the Egyptians and looked upon
them as an inferior race of dirty peasants (pis fallah) created to work for
the benefit of their masters, the rulers. The rulers equally realized that
they would have to treat the subject race in a humane manner, if they
were to extract from them what was needed without constant resort to
force. At the same time the wali and his bureaucrats came to look upon
Egypt possessively as 'their' property. A man may look upon his cow as
a beast, but he will nonetheless treat it in a humane fashion if only to be
able to milk it the better. The same attitude had developed among the

                                                                       109
