                                                          Internal policies

in-chief when he heard rumours that soldiers (Junud) were lending
money to village chiefs and umad ('yuqridun umad al-qura wa kibari-
him3) at usurious rates (bi-l riba). He ordered the commander-in-chief
to investigate these rumours and to put an end to such goings on.28
   Complaints against government officials were plentiful and ranged
from dual taxation, to abuse of authority, to taking bribes (rashwa). In
one case the shaikhs of three nawahi presented a complaint against their
immediate superior, the nazir qism. Bribery was abhorrent to the wali
when practised by his officials, although he himself bribed Ottoman
officials generously. Whenever any government official employed by the
maiyya was convicted of accepting a bribe, he was sentenced to 1-3
years of hard labour. One such incident came to light in 1838/1254 when
a sectional chief offered a bribe to a member of the maiyya. Muhammad
Ali ordered an investigation and said, 'If someone raised in the diwans
could stoop to such an act, then maybe other employees who are used to
the give and take ('al akdh wa-1 atta') [back scratching] will commit the
same act.' The man was sentenced to hard labour for a year and an
investigation was carried out in the bureaux to find out if any more
employees had been guilty of such deeds.2' One man who was found
guilty of bribery in Syria was executed.30
   The government lent the fallahin money. Destitute villages, which
had been ravaged by disasters of some kind, were lent funds to carry out
their sowing. The money lent was ultimately deducted from the price of
crops sold to the government at the end of the season.31 Lending the
fallahin money arose out of dire necessity and out of a desire to see that
no one other than the government exploited the fallahin. Local mer-
chants knowing the fallahin's need for money lent it them at a high rate
of interest that went up to as much as 25 per cent. Hitta recounts this as
happening among the fruit growers. Grape growers would borrow
money at 25 per cent and during the harvest season the grape merchants
bought the grapes from the growers at a lower price than the market,
cheating them in weight of fruit as well. When the fallah could not pay
off all the money he had borrowed on the first crop, the remainder of the
debt was added to the next sum he borrowed and charged 25 per cent
further. In 1830 the government put a stop to such exploitation, which
diverted funds to the merchants, and paid back to the growers the sums
charged them by the merchants as rates of interest.32 Some merchants
lent the fallahin money on the crops that lay in the fields, that is, bought
the crop by anticipation at a cheap rate as a gamble. By 1838 such sharp
dealings were stopped by the government, although the fallahin resorted
to them clandestinely when they were short of funds.
   Other than the merchants, money lenders among the natives and the

                                                                       in
