Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

wali, his family and his retainers. Without Egypt they were nobodies,
simple adventurers or mercenaries. With Egypt as a base, they were able
to create an empire. A happy and fruitful Egypt was better than a sullen
and starving one, for it would be more productive and easier to milk. A
well-fed and contented cow yielded better milk than a starving one.
   Muhammad Ali tried to instil some measure of balance in the manner
in which his administrators treated the fallahin. He even went so far as
to say, 'Egypt has two sovereigns, Sultan Mahmud and the fallah.' As
his actions towards Mahmud had been neither those of a dutiful or even
a subservient vassal, the administrators could be forgiven for assuming
that the wall's directives about treating the fallah decently were to be
equally disregarded. But the wali was serious, and ordered that the
fallahin were to appeal directly to the mudir when they were ill treated,
and if that appeal failed they were to appeal directly to him. Throughout
his many trips round the countryside, any fallah with a petition was
allowed to present it. We can tell that such directives were taken
seriously from the number of appeals that we have in the sijillat, and
from the fact that complaints were investigated. For example, in
1237/1821 a man from a village, illegible in the dossier, sent a complaint
to the governor of Buhaira province, stating that the village had been
ruined as the result of a disastrous flood 'qaryatuna ashrafat ala-1
kharab', and the villagers had asked the government official to help
restore the village in return for mal on the harvest, but now the official
had requested the mal twice from the same village. The governor
investigated the complaint and determined that taxes were not to be
collected twice from the same village. On another occasion a man from
Minuf complained to the wali that the agha of the Delhis troops had
seized fallahin for corvee labour on an area of land of 150 faddans which
he had had planted half with barsim and half with cereals. The fallahin
complained that because of the corvee they could not work their own
land. The wali investigated the affair and sent the agha a reproachful
letter saying, 'If [these allegations] be true we cannot allow i t . . . should
you need barsim for your cavalry then the governor of the province is to
supply it, so go to him for it, but do not obstruct government
interests.'26
   A few years later the wali heard that some government officials,
nuzzar, kushaf and qaim maqams, cavalry commanders and infantry
commanders and soldiers all grew cereals and exploited (mustaghilin) the
fallahin, sometimes sharing (mushtarikin) their crops with them. 'Such
practices are contrary to military order, and must cease instantly',27 the
pasha warned in a circular. The year 1823 was a bad one for the fallahin,
for a few days later the wali had occasion to reprimand the commander-

110
