Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

   All these reforms, or attempts at reform, were supposed to arrest
malversation, fraud, and careless handling of government funds, much
of which resulted from an archaic system of bookkeeping, which did not
have double-entry procedures. These last were finally instituted by
Ibrahim Pasha.
   Along with the need for reform came a belated awareness that an
efficient control of the countryside could not be imposed from the urban
centres alone, but would have to include the collaboration of rural
leaders as well, and not solely in their administrative capacity. In
August 1829/124s a council, majlis al-shura, was assembled. The majlis,
the first of its kind, met under the presidency of Ibrahim Pasha, who
referred to it as his 'parliament'. It was composed of 33 high officials,
heads of diwans and departments, religious dignitaries, muftis, Shaikhs
al-Bakri and al-Sadat, 24 mamurun of departments, and 100 shuyukh al-
balad.22 The majlis may have resembled the traditional grand diwan, or
even Napoleon's grand diwan, in some measure, but it differed mark-
edly from either in its composition, for the majority of the members
came from the lowest bureaucratic echelon, that of shaikh al-balad.
   The reason for creating such a majlis ostensibly was that it was to
advise the government on how to administer the country (cal-nazar fi
idarat shuun al-bilad')." The Morean campaign had ended in a debacle,
and the government needed to raise funds from the population in order
to finance its impending Syrian campaign. That turn of the financial
screw had to be effected as peacefully as possible for the Egyptian
government was planning to face the forces of the country's legal
 suzerain, the Ottomans, in Syria. One wrong step and the Egyptian
 regime could be faced with a local uprising in support of the Ottomans
 that could threaten the success of the campaign and even undermine
 their very position in Egypt. Moreover, with the impending campaign
 the government needed men for the army as well as funds, and so sought
 to achieve its aims peacefully and with the cooperation of the rural elite,
 which it thus brought into the majlis.
    The majlis had no legislative powers; it was purely consultative, but it
 did pass a series of recommendations which were implemented and
 became standard procedures. There is little doubt that Laihat ziraat al-
fallah wa tadbir ahkam al-siyasa bi-qasd al-najak, which appeared in
 Rajab 1245, four months after the majlis was constituted, was the brain
 child of that body. The Laiha was a manual on how to grow crops in the
 proper fashion, and how the different hierarchies were to conduct
 themselves in the rural milieu in order to achieve success or najah. The
 document was a mixture of how to improve agricultural practices along
 with rules of criminal and civil procedure. For example, if the beasts

108
