                                                              Internal policies

distance from water with those which are healthy because of their proximity to
water, so that those who have funds could pay the tax (mal) for those who have
none, thereby effecting an equilibrium in government finances. When the
hakim and shaikh khutt present their registers to nazir qism, the latter must go
to the tnamur and investigate the registers, check a village or two and put a seal
to the registers every year. If every village is checked every year they can catch
up with any deficits or moneys owed the state. It is clear that such prosperity
and progress will be attained through building dykes and digging canals and
good management. The mamuriyya of Qaliubiyya, while it was late in collecting
the mal last year, because of its preoccupation with preparing the Sharqawiyya
canal in Zifta and Qaliubiyya, knows at present the value of irrigation in the
planting of maize (dura) and that the inhabitants of the canal banks are content
and as though they had witnessed a new world and have applied themselves to
agriculture.40

   The chain of command in the administration began with the lowest
man in the hierarchy, the shaikh al-balad or umda. The title of umda was
supposed by some historians to have appeared around 1850, while
Barakat situated it earlier in 1843.41 References were made to an umda at
least as early as 1823 in an ordinance sent to the commander-in-chief
which refers to village heads and seniors (umad al-qura wa kibaruha).
My feeling is that the term of umda was used for the more important
shaikhs as heads of shaikhs {umad al-mashayikh), while lesser ones were
referred to as shuyukh. Later on the two categories became used
interchangeably. There are government dossiers of the period entitled
umad wa mashayikh with little distinction being implied.
   The shaikh al-balad or umda was frequently a hereditary function
within a family, in that a member of the family succeeded to the former
umda, although that member was not necessarily the former umda's
son.42 In some villages the position was frequently disputed amongst the
leading families. In the eighteenth century the umda was the multazim's
man in the village. He collected the taxes on the iltizam from the
fallahin. At the same time the shaikh was the village buffer against the
multazim's excessive rapacity, and on occasion was its mouthpiece to the
authorities. Whatever his functions may have been, these same func-
tions in the new regime took on an added importance when the
government legalized them and entrusted the umda with distributing
the taxes among the villagers in the same fashion as the guild elder did
among the guild members, and in the same fashion as the shaikh had
done during the iltizam system. Now the shaikh applied this function to
the entire village and not merely to the iltizam under his control. The
umda decreed which lands were uncultivated (bur), and exempted from
taxation. He was entrusted with distributing the lands of the deceased or

                                                                           "5
