                                                              Internal policies

The people of our circle and the inhabitants of Egypt fall into three categories.
Thefirstcares for nothing but his personal comforts, the second group, though
people of high rank, because of their brutality think not [to distinguish] the bad
and the good, the third group are by way of being animals (fi hukm al-bahaim)
and think nothing of spreading idle talk for which they must be punished.
He ordered that spies be appointed to report on anyone found spreading
defeatist rumours.35
   The first two categories that the wait described fitted his friends, and
relations and the top ranks of the bureaucracy, while the third grouping,
the bahaim, was applied to the native population. That attitude on the
part of the wali explains why he treated the administration much like a
school teacher treats a bunch of naughty school boys. He constantly
bombarded them with threats and homilies as a means of keeping them
on the right path, and tried to supervise the slightest details of work. He
neither trusted his men nor respected most of them. He set one official
to check the work of the other, and the reports that reached his ears were
seldom favourable or reassuring. The registers abound in such reports,
and in the consequent threats that poured on the administrators. For
example the kikhya reported that Muallim Ghali, a Copt, was always
saying that affairs were running smoothly and things were in good
shape, when they were not. When asked for an accounting Ghali
presented a defter which neither the kikhya nor the defterdar, Ibrahim
Pasha, could decipher. The kikhya then commented, 'these infidels will
never give up their traditional guile'.3*
   Turkish mudiriyyun and Egyptian nuzzar fared no better. The nazir
of Daqahliyya was warned that further laziness would earn him blows of
the nabut. When he did not heed that warning another missive informed
him that he would be beaten by the nabut until his waist was broken
(yiksar vristak), a colloquial expression meaning beaten to within an
inch of his life; even worse, the nazir was threatened with being broken
back to the ranks of the fallahin, 'You pig (khanzir)', the letter ended.
The nazir's shortcomings lay in that he had not sent the cotton, rice or
recruits that were demanded of him. Eventually the man was deposed
without suffering any bodily harm. All the threats of bodily damage
were supposed to put fear in the heart of the wrongdoers, but we seldom
hear of punishments being meted to officials of the rank of nazir and
above. The scapegoats were generally umad and shuyukh al-balad.
   The nazir qism al-Mahalla and Jafariyya received a warning against
the 'lies and falsification of his accounts'. He was also remiss in sending
recruits and was warned that any further dereliction of duty on his part
would be rewarded by death, as a punishment for him and a warning to
others.

                                                                            113
