Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

escaped fallah, as in the past, for fallahin had fled their lands from time
immemorial. The shaikhs were rendered responsible for chasing and
catching the fleeing fallah, for public security, and above all were
responsible for supplying conscripts for the army from 1820 onwards.
This last function gave them tremendous power in the village, for they
could pick the sons of their enemies and exempt the sons of their
supporters, or they could be bribed to do one or the other. That was a
major accusation frequently levelled against them by the villagers.
   The second source of power for the shaikh was the fact that in return
for his functions he was given land free of taxation, entitled masmuh al-
mashayikh wa masmuh al-masatib, which had also existed in the eigh-
teenth century but which was regranted to the shaikhs. That one source,
added to whatever lands the shaikhs worked themselves or through
hired labour, made them the single most affluent individuals in the
village. Through that affluence the umda could lend money with
interest, or in return for a land mortgage, and could finance the high-
yield but expensive crops like rice, sugar or cotton. On the other hand,
when taxation became a village responsibility the umda had to make
good the lack of tax (tnal) if the fallahin did not pay their share. The
shaikh was also held responsible for any escaped fallah, or for harbour-
ing any escapees. More often than not the umad urged the fallahin who
were in arrears of taxation to flee the village, so that they could take over
the lands of the escapees themselves, probably calculating that if they
were going to be forced to make up the difference in tax themselves they
might as well benefit by planting the land and directly controlling it as
well. Sometimes shaikhs conveniently forgot to register fallahin who
had died, and so worked their land instead of redistributing it among the
fallahin as was customary.43
   It is therefore not surprising to find umad and shaikhs as well as
bedouin among the first mutaahidun, and it was not uncommon to see
the domination of whole districts by certain families. The family of al-
Shawarbi in Qaliub, for instance, held three out of the five positions of
umda in the region. In Gharbiyya, five members of the Salim family
were umad. The leading umad of that time became the leading landown-
ing families in Egypt in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries,
which was certainly no coincidence. Some were families of bedouin
tribal chiefs who had become sedentarized and some were local gentry
or ayan as they were called, like the Sultan, Shawarbi, Abu Stait, Abaza,
al-Zumur, Badrawi Ashur, al-Fiqi, Sharif, Lamlum, Foda, etc.
   The hierarchical superior of the umda or shaikh, the shaikh al-khutt,
or section head, informed the shaikhs of their divisions, or districts
(nahiya), of the quota of crops required by the government, and

116
