                                                         Internal policies

soldiers from the Sudan, which was one leading reason for undertaking
its conquest. As Muhammad Ali wrote to his son Ismail, who was taxing
the newly conquered Sudanese areas too harshly, 'We are not there for
money, but for slaves', and ordered that he tax them moderately."
   Some of the regiments from the Sudan did become part of the
Egyptian army, but the attempt to recruit a slave army failed for a
number of reasons. It was then that the idea of an army of Egyptian
fallahin was suggested to Muhammad Ali. At first the wali was offended
at the idea of an army of fallahin. In 1814 he had even given strict
orders, when recruiting Maghribi troops in the army, not to take any
fallah who might insinuate himself (yandass) amongst the Maghribis.67
Necessity finally overcame his initial aversion and Egyptians were
drafted into the army. To begin with these Egyptians were recruited in
small numbers, to help out the main army in the Sudan. It seemed that
the heat of the Sudan was too much for the Albanians who suffered
sunstroke and heat prostration, so the wali ordered 4,000 Egyptians sent
out in their place,68 but later on the bulk of the army was formed of
fallahin.
   The first nucleus of the nizamjadid, as the new regiments were called,
was composed of former mamluks and some slaves from the Sudan.
These were trained by a Frenchman, the famous 'colonel' Seve, in
Aswan in preparation for the coming Morean campaign. Seve, who in
the French army had never risen beyond the rank of corporal, and who
had been cashiered for insubordination, although he was pardoned and
went back to the army, claimed to be a colonel in Egypt. His life before
Egypt shows him an adventurer of the first order. He had become
involved in a plot to liberate Marshal Ney from prison, and when the
plot had failed he fled France. He landed in Egypt in search of a job, as
many of his compatriots had done, and to bolster his chances of being
hired he posed as an officer of the imperial army. When he applied for a
position, the wali decided to use him to train his new army in Aswan.
   At first Seve had a hard time winning the trust and the respect of the
men, for they could not speak his language nor he theirs, and they
despised him as a Frenchman and a non-Muslim. Even more they were
disgruntled at having to learn a new method of warfare in which they
did not see much value. When target practice came round, more rifles
were aimed at Seve than at the target. Fortunately for the man, the
soldiers' aim was bad, but Seve's courage in standing up to the men won
their admiration and they accepted his teaching.
   The regiments were organized along French lines, with initially six
regiments, each composed of five battalions, the battalion being formed
of eight companies of fusiliers. When Seve went off to the Morea with

                                                                      127
