Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

nahwa 4,000 faddan5).5* His son, Al-Sayyid Abaza, had an uhda of 20
villages and was eventually made a pasha.
   In a minor way the Abaza family seemed much like the tribe of the
Hawwara at the time of Shaikh Hummam, who was nicknamed Amir al-
Said. Hummam grew sugar-cane, cereals, and had slaves and mamluks
both white and black. He controlled the whole of Upper Egypt until Ali
Bey sent an army of 3,000 men against him in 1769. The rest of the
Hawwara who had not been finished off by Ali Bey were destroyed or
coopted by Ibrahim Pasha. The two tribes resembled each other in their
authority and affluence, but there the similarity ends, for while the
Hawwara were scattered the Abaza flourished.
   Other tribes who were not as sedentarized were induced to leave their
nomadic way of life by grants of land, and were also coopted into the
army as cavalry irregulars. The Aid, the Harbi, the Hanadi, and the
Jawazi accompanied Ismail on his campaign to the Sudan.60 If the tribe
did not cooperate, its horses were confiscated for the army, for the
bedouin were often horse breeders, and they were forced to sedentarize
for economic reasons. Late-comers to the region, like the Awlad Ali of
the Western Desert, were settled in the province of Buhaira and
Fayyum, while the Jawazi settled in Middle Egypt.
   The process of sedentarization did not take place overnight. Nomadic
tribes exist to the present day, while the descendants of Awlad Ali
continue to claim dual nationality today, Egyptian and Libyan, showing
that their origins were never forgotten. The bulk of sedentarization,
however, did happen under Muhammad Ali and for sound economic
reasons.
   When the bedouin could no longer make a living by attacking the
fallahin or levying protection fees on villages or on caravans, they had to
turn to other means of livelihood. When the tribal chiefs saw that money
was to be had from agriculture, the natural process of settlement took
place. Agriculture on a subsistence level was no inducement to settle,
but agriculture for sale or for export was, as Shaikh Hummam had
discovered. The tribal chiefs soon became rich gentry and the rest of the
tribe was turned into fallahin, a natural process in most of the areas
where the tribes settled, whether in Egypt or elsewhere in the Arab
world. The government, which needed manpower to till the soil, treated
the bedouin differently from the other fallahin, for instance they did not
have to perform corvee duties, although Mubarak claimed that the Aid
did. Conscription did not bother the bedouin either because from time
immemorial they had been the irregulars in the armies and continued to
perform the same tasks under Muhammad Ali.
   The land grants given the bedouin by the wait were of three kinds.

124
