Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

some Turkish troops and mamluks who had joined the new administra-
tion. New recruits were brought in from Turkey or were bought from
the Ottoman empire. There were also Maghribis or North Africans,
mostly Tunisians and Algerians, and bedouin auxiliaries. All the
soldiers obeyed their own superiors, and fought in their own style, using
whatever weaponry they had at their disposal. There was thus no
unified command, let alone unified weaponry and ammunition. During
the Hijaz campaign Tussun had complained that the Maghribis did not
have one leader but eleven, all disagreeing with each other.65 While in
the past the system had worked well enough, although it was not
efficient and Ali Bey had tried to reform it, at present the system showed
its shortcomings. Moreover the army in Egypt was unruly and apt to
demand its pay at the most inopportune moments, that is when the
treasury was out of funds, and to go on rampage when it had not been
paid, which was fairly frequently. The pay of the troops was given to
them through their officers; that is, the commander of a troop was given
the funds by the treasury and he disbursed them at will. Loyalty was
therefore to that commander and not to the state or the wali. Discipline
was lax, and troops could opt out of battle if they so desired, and there
was little their commanding officers could do about it. In brief, the army
was an organization of mercenaries, and behaved as such.
   Muhammad Ali and his generals had seen British and French troops
in action and were impressed by their martial arts. Alfi Bey had
converted his forces into European-style troops and Muhammad Ali
had been unable to defeat him and his men. All these events led
unmistakably in the direction of converting the army into the European
style of troops. It was certainly not a novel idea with the wali, for Sultan
Selim III had lost his throne for trying to do the same thing with the
janissaries.
   In 1815 some three to four hundred soldiers returning from the Hijaz
war had looted shops, stores and houses in Cairo. That was the excuse
the wali needed to try to replace the Albanians by a disciplined,
modernized army. That year the wali ordered the creation of a new
army, the nizam jadid. The troops did not take kindly to having their
traditional system changed so radically and, turning against the viceroy,
they tried to assassinate him. It was only the timely warning of a fellow
Albanian, Abdin Bey, the brother of Hasan Pasha, that allowed him
time to escape in secret from his house. This act of treachery on the part
of his men more than ever decided Muhammad Ali on finding a new
source for his model army. The Ottomans by then were making it
difficult for him to recruit men in Turkey, and had placed an embargo
on sending any mamluks to Egypt. The new source was to be slave

126
