Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

ties: while the public works were in progress the workers were followed
by their women and children to the site of the canal. If the workers had
no family left behind to till their lands, the land was either taken over by
someone else or the crops suffered. Basin irrigation had put a lesser
burden on the fallah, who worked roughly 150 days of the year on the
soil and who could turn to cottage industries to supplement his income
during the summer months. With perennial irrigation he worked more
frequently, and, although the maximum number of days was no more
than 230 out of the year, that was nonetheless a massive increase of his
working days, especially if one added corvee duty to it. Any improve-
ments to the land were met by higher taxation, as well as presumably a
higher rate of profit to the fallah. These taxes, though onerous, did not
lead to the depopulation of villages as some eye-witness accounts would
have us believe. Fallahin who were in arrears of taxation had always fled
their villages, as Sultan Selim noted when he occupied Egypt in 1516. It
was not a new phenomenon brought on by Muhammad Ali's tyranny.
When one fallah fled his village he went to another village where he
settled and started a new life, and his place in the old village was taken
by someone else. The result was more akin to a game of musical chairs
than to depopulation. It is true that whole villages were deserted, but
only as a consequence of a high flood, when the village would move to a
higher ground (a tall), or after an epidemic - of which there were all too
many. Such epidemics did wipe out whole villages. No villages were
permanently depopulated through tax arrears, although the inhabitants
may have hidden out for a while, because fallahin who fled their lands
were, if caught, forcibly returned to their village within fifteen days.
The same was true during the iltizam system. Should the escaping
fallahin be found labouring on other land, then they were to be returned
to the village of origin after the harvest. Spies who reported escaping
fallahin were given 100 pts. reward, and any nazir khutt in whose
district an escapee worked was punished by 100 strokes of the nabut,
because his connivance was presumed. Village shaikhs were ordered to
report the names of fleeing fallahin; these names were then checked in
daftar tarabi al-misaha to make sure that they belonged to the village,
and, if found, the fallahin were returned to the land.45 Clearly, some
fallahin escaped detection, while others did not. Fallahin who escaped
the land permanently sometimes sought refuge in foreign lands, as did
the 6,000 fallahin who fled to Acre, and gave the wali his excuse for
invading that territory.
   From 1800 to 1844 there were several epidemics of cholera and
bubonic plague. There were also famines in consequence of Nile floods
being either too high or too low. During one of the worst of these

118
