                                                           Internal policies

The first kind was supposedly granted and taxed at half the kharaj tax.
We know little about that kind of land grant save for one reference.61
The second kind of land grant was exempted from taxation on condition
that the bedouin tilled the soil themselves. Traditionally the bedouin
scorned the tillers of the soil, whom they had fleeced, and felt it
demeaning to turn into fallahin. Instead they hired the fallahin to work
for them as sharecroppers, or rented the land out to them. Since the
raison d'etre of the land grants was to turn a new population into fallahin
and so increase the agricultural manpower, the government tried to end
that practice, and to force the bedouin to till the land themselves or
forfeit it. Some of the more enterprising bedouin simply laid claim to a
share of the agricultural output of the fallah, but without sharing any of
his tax liabilities. The government ordered an investigation into similar
bedouin activities and ordered that the bedouin who laid claim to any
land should be given a permit (rukhsa) and made to pay the mal in cash
{al-mal naqdan).62 The third kind of land grant was in the form of an
ibadiyya. These were distributed in varying quantities, from whole
villages granted to important tribal chiefs, to areas of ioo to 150 to 200
faddans for lesser men.63
   Because the bedouin were also shepherds and the wool from their
sheep was necessary for the cloth industry, they were treated as valuable
members of the community. They were also livestock breeders, espe-
cially of horses and camels, which were indispensable for the army.
Frequently the bedouin would drive their flocks to graze in the fields of
the fallahin, thereby ruining the crops. Swift punishment was meted out
for such acts, and they were ordered to pay double the price of the crops
they had ruined.64 In time the bedouin learnt to leave the fallahin alone
and to cooperate with the government.
   The sedentarization of the bedouin was the by-product of an expan-
sion of state power at the expense of the tribe. Tribal leadership was
incorporated into the wider government system, and the shaikhs drawn
into government cooperation so that their position in the tribe was
compromised. Since the government was better armed and had powers
of coercion, it could impose its will and its laws on the tribe and override
tribal authority. Lastly, by putting an end to tribal protection over
villages and dismantling the traditional economic resources of the tribe,
the government presented the tribes with no alternative but to submit or
move out. In most cases they submitted.
   A second source of problems to the government was the army (see
chapter 9). In the past the army had been formed of mamluks or
mercenaries, a new departure introduced by Ali Bey al-Kabir. With the
advent of Muhammad Ali the army was formed of Albanian troops,

                                                                        125
