Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

was not employed the year round, even on lands with perennial
irrigation. Wages were sometimes not paid the fallah, who was coerced
into corvee labour unjustly on the estates of the notables. This,
however, was strictly illegal. An order was sent from the wali to all the
governors and government officials never to use the fallahin as labourers
on their lands without paying them a wage, which meant that corvee for
any labour other than public works was strictly forbidden. In fact the
law stipulated that if anyone was caught using fallahin in corvee labour
on his lands he was to pay the fallahin twice the normal wage in
punishment.51
   One can wonder why, if the wages of the fallah had improved, at least
on paper, and his agricultural output had increased, some fallahin
continued to flee the land and others to maim themselves. Those who
fled did so as individuals for a number of reasons, mostly having to do
with failing to pay their taxes. The land law of 1847 had specified that
when these individuals in course of time returned to their lands, they
were entitled to regain their lands, even if in the interim, the lands had
been redistributed, on condition that the escapee repaid the land tax. It
is interesting to note that Said's law of 1854 limited the fallah's right to
return to the land to a fifteen-year absence, whereas Muhammad Ali's
law had specified no time limit whatsoever. The later law also men-
tioned that the returning fallah should be given land, but did not specify
that it be the fallah's original soil.52 On the other hand, those who
maimed themselves did so to escape conscription into the army.
Conscription was the bane of the country, for it not only endangered
men's lives, or maimed them seriously, but it also took them away from
their lands. If there were no other males in the family to replace the
conscripted fallah, the fallah's lands were then given away to someone
else. Even if the land was tilled in the man's absence by his closest male
relatives, when he returned he often had a struggle to recover it.
   Another difference in the fallah's life under Muhammad Ali stemmed
from the regimentation that was imposed on him. He was told what to
plant by the bureaucracy, when and how to plant it. The fallah, from
being a relatively free individual in his work habits although in little
else, found himself regimented, pushed and prodded by the state. In the
process his agricultural practices no doubt improved and the crop
production increased, but his personal freedom was infringed in many
new ways. Under the mamluks the fallah had also been coerced - to
deliver up more of his surplus, to give corvee labour on public works
and on the multazim's land; he had been forced to return to the land
when he fled from it, and was treated 'like a slave', as Jabarti pointed
out. However, he grew whatever crops he wanted, worked half the year,

120
