                                                          Internal policies

epidemics, in 1834-5, it w a s estimated that half-a-million people
perished, that is, nearly one fifth the total population. That factor
caused the decimation of whole villages. The same happened in this
century with the outbreak of malaria and cholera epidemics.
   The population of Egypt had been declining in numbers from the
middle ages. That trend was arrested under Muhammad Ali. In spite of
plagues, famines and five major wars, the population rose from
3,854,000 in 1800 to 4,304,000, perhaps even 5,000,000, in 1840,46
because of public security more than for any other reason. The increase
in population did not keep up with the demands for labour, and
manpower shortage remained a perennial problem, especially at times
where men were drafted into the army or navy, into corvee gangs for
public-works projects, or to work on a princely estate. Administrative
changes were instituted to alleviate that shortage. Where a village was
found to have more land than the population could till, that land was
removed from the zitnam of the village and forcibly distributed to those
of a neighbouring village or to those among the original village who had
money and could take on the burden of more land, so that no land would
be left fallow.47 On the other hand, villages which were so vast that the
fallah wasted time going to and from the fields were allowed to build
new hamlets (kafr) closer to the fields. Large latifundia (ibadiyyat)
which needed manpower were sent landless fallahin from other villages;
five men per hundred faddans were assigned to the Said and eight men
per hundred faddans in the Delta, since more men were necessary on
lands which grew summer crops as in the latter. These men worked for a
share of the harvest or for a daily wage, and were exempted from corvee
labour,48 which explains why the fallahin preferred to work on iba-
diyyat. Rice-growing areas, such as Buhaira, Gharbiyya, and Daqah-
liyya, were at first exempted from military service so as to encourage rice
production, but when the need for military men outweighed the
demands for rice production, they were subject to conscription like
everywhere else.
   The wages of the landless fallah, or the fallah who hired himself out as
a part-time labourer, either because his land was too small to support
him and his family or because in certain years the flood had cut off his
land, differed depending on the work itself. In 1840 on royal cafalik the
men were given 30 paras, the youths 15 paras and children 10 paras a
day. The wages were paid weekly half in cash and half in kind. The
highest wages were allegedly paid on Ibrahim Pasha's cafalik, where the
men received 1 pt. or 40 paras per day.49 According to al-Hitta, the
living expenses of the highest-paid fallah came to half his daily wage, so
the wages were sufficient to defray his expenses.50 The fallah, however,

                                                                       119
