                                                         Internal policies

the Sahara to the western provinces of Fayyum, Buhaira, Minufiyya and
Giza. Some of these tribes had long been sedentarized and had become
major multazimun in the area, while others were semi-sedentarized,
frequently using the fallahin as their labourers, or simply living off their
produce. Still others were nomadic and roamed at will, taking what they
pleased from the fallahin, and making a living from guiding caravans
across the desert and collecting protection dues. The problem facing the
Egyptian administration was how to cope with these groups. Those
tribes who made a living from guiding caravans were coopted into the
system and paid handsomely for their services in order to restore the
flow of commerce. Especially was this the case with the routes going to
and from the Red Sea, either via Suez or Qusair, the Sudan trade, and
trade with North Africa and with Syria.
   Those tribes who were completely sedentarized were given land
either as masmuh al-mashayikh or as masmuh al-urban and thus turned
into local rural gentry. Among such local sedentarized groups we have
the examples of three well-known families, who are renowned to the
present day. These are the families of the Abaza of Awlad Aid in
Sharqiyya, the Shawarbi family in Qaliubiyya, and the Shiraii family of
Sammalut, in Minia. All these families had been settled before the
advent of Muhammad Ali. Mubarak describes some of them as having
been cfi khushunat al-Arab3, 'as rough as the Arabs', in their dealings
with the other Arab tribes, which may well have been in self-defence,
for as sedentarized tribes they would become fair game for the nomadic
ones. When the wali gave them the option of being treated as nomadic
Arabs, and thereby forgoing their lands, properties and date-palm
groves, or being treated as fallahin, that is taxed, they opted for the
latter treatment, and undertook to pay taxes as the fallahin did, although
they were allowed to retain possession of their lands. Family tradition
has it that the Abaza branch of the Aid tribe had derived its name from a
Circassian grandmother, who was so beloved and respected by her
husband and her sons that they gave the family her name, or rather, the
name of her place of origin. There may be some truth in the legend, for
the Abazas remain notoriously blonde and pink-cheeked, a living proof
of continued Circassian and Turkish intermarriage. A long period of
sedentarization must have occurred to permit the tribal chief a marriage
outside the tribe. Some of the family members became village shaikhs
and two, Shaikh Hasan Abaza and his brother Shaikh Baghdadi, sat on
the tnajlis created by Ibrahim Pasha in i829.58 Hasan served in higher
positions than that of village shaikh, for he became nazir, then mamur,
then bash muawin of the provinces of Sharqiyya and Daqahliyya.
Mubarak described him as 'planting 4,000 faddans' (cwa kana yazrau

                                                                      123
