Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

of the elite, so that by the end of the forties many fallahin had lost their
land to the new estates.
   In a society which was undergoing economic changes, as Egypt was,
the majority of the producers put in more work for less benefits.
Whatever surplus was accumulated by the government was partly
ploughed back into land, but was also diverted into other investments:
industry, the army, etc. These investments were presumably to benefit a
later generation, but did not benefit the fallah entirely. Even when the
fallah's money wages rose, the result to him remained negative in terms
of affective response. Women suffered most from such socio-economic
changes. The family, which had been a self-sufficient unit of production
in which each member contributed a share, was now displaced in favour
of state-controlled production. Fallah women could no longer contrib-
ute to the family income when cottage industries became state con-
trolled and regulated. As their productive abilities were diminished,
they lost much of their leverage within the family unit, becoming more
dependent on their males. Moreover, since land was not privately
owned, females did not inherit land as it was not divided according to
the sharia but simply went to the sons. There are, however, cases of
women appealing to the wait to inherit land and he agreeing on
condition that they paid the taxes in advance. Further dislocation in the
family unit occurred when men went out on corvee duty or were
conscripted. Women were forced to accompany their men when they
had no other means of survival or were unable to depend on the
extended family. Often these women worked alongside their men on
corvee duties.56
  The fallah's response to government exploitation was similar to that
in all peasant societies. He sought short-term migration, resorted to
social banditry or to outright rebellion as means of active resistance.
When the fallah feared to rebel because of the coercive power of the
state, he resorted to passive resistance, seeking to improve his condition
through cheating the landlord, pilfering some of the crops, slowing
down work, sabotaging crops. Passive resistance was more widespread
than organized acts of violence, the reason being that a peasant in
general seeks to minimize the risk of disaster rather than to maximize his
average return, and his final test is 'what is left to him1 not 'what is
taken' by the state.57
   In its search for law and order, the administration had to face three
major issues and try to resolve them: the first was the issue of the
bedouin, the second was the army and the consequences of conscripting
the fallahin, and the third was the issue of revolts or uprisings.
   Bedouin tribes had roamed the land at will, going from parts west of

122
