                                                             Internal   policies

would not have enough N.C.O.'s left.82 He decided to promote Egyp-
tians from the ranks, much to his father's dismay. The wali did not
believe that Egyptians possessed leadership qualities. Under duress he
finally allowed Ibrahim to promote Egyptians to the rank of captain
(yuzbashi).
   Ibrahim laboured to convince his father that the Egyptians not only
made good soldiers but also made better officers than the Turks. He
wrote a long letter to his father laying the facts before him. He
recounted how he had ordered a Turkish yuzbashi to occupy an enemy
position, but the man barely moved twenty paces then held back in fear.
Ibrahim then asked an Egyptian yuzbashi, 'who jumped from his
position and advanced so swiftly that the rest of the platoon was
encouraged to follow him'. He then wondered why his father refused to
promote Egyptians to the higher ranks of the officer corps. They showed
an excess of courage, 'fart al-shajaa ... and their love for us grows as
they rise in the ranks, so what prevents your Highness from appointing
a number of them to the rank of lieutenant-colonel?' He added that after

twenty years of experience, I can say that if 300 out of 1,000 Turks are loyal
(mukhlisin), then 700 out of 1,000 Arabs are loyal. Believe me because I am the
most truthful of your Highness's sons and the most loyal to him. I also speak
plainly because I have been raised from my youth in a free military way and
believe in plainly asking why do we not promote the Arabs?83

By Arabs here Ibrahim meant the native Egyptians. His ending phrase
was a request to create medals for the men who deserved recognition of
their valour.
   In appealing to his father to promote Egyptians to the higher ranks of
the army, Ibrahim was impressing on his father the notion that ethnicity
was of no consequence, that an elite of Egyptian military personnel was
possible. Muhammad AH, whose ideology posited an elite of Turco-
Circassian ethnic stock, was disturbed by his son's desires. To him Egypt
was a piece of property he had acquired by guile and ability. The
Egyptians were there to do his bidding; they could become cannon
fodder, workers and fallahin, or even minor administrators, but no more.
The very ethnicity of the Turks made them fit for government. That
explains why works of sixteenth-century Ottoman authors were pub-
lished in the new press at Bulaq, to sustain and feed the cultural and
linguistic separateness of the rulers from the ruled. The rulers spoke and
read Turkish, the ruled spoke Arabic. The rulers were Ottoman
gentlemen, the Egyptians were dirty peasants, and one could not mix the
two. Such an imperialist attitude was not unique to Muhammad Ali. It
was to be duplicated years later by Lord Cromer in Egypt, who believed
