                                                         Internal policies

   Drovetti then describes uprisings in Upper Egypt, 'a few uprisings'
against the tax collectors and the troops sent to support them. He said
that measures of extreme rigour had to be taken, several villages were
burnt down and the inhabitants slaughtered. But he then added, 'it is
believed that these movements were part of the plan for insurrection of
the exiled leaders and that Laz Ahmad was no stranger [to them]'. His
reasoning was that this was not strictly speaking a 'peasant revolt' but
was fomented by Laz Ahmad, who was governor (amir) of Qus and
Qina, in his attempt at a coup d'etat. That may well have been, but the
population of Upper Egypt who had been rudely handled by the new
regime for their presumed support of the mamluks, rose in an at-
tempted revolt against Muhammad Ali on the assumption of an
imminent return to power of the mamluks, with the aid of Laz Ahmad.
That certainly would account for the burning of villages and the
slaughter of the inhabitants, which refusal only to pay taxes would not
have. It was tempting to assume that a revolt coming on the heels of a
grain monopoly would be seen in the light of cause and effect, but
there was more to the incident than the effects of a grain monopoly
which bred animosity; there was a hint of an attempt at overthrowing
the government which went beyond a simple peasant revolt.
   The rest of the insurrections concentrated on two regions: Min-
ufiyya and Sharqiyya in the Delta and the region of Isna in the Said.
The revolts in the Said began with one in 1820/1236 led by a man
named Shaikh Ahmad al-Salah. He gathered a following allegedly of
40,000 men and, according to Mubarak, became so conceited (ightar)
that he set up his followers as governors. He seized government stores
and government funds. When an army was sent out against him, the
revolt ended with the first shot.** Mubarak gives no hint as to what
caused the revolt. A year later another Ahmad, surnamed al-Mahdi or
al-Wazir, started a similar movement in al-Bairat, near Luxor. Dro-
vetti described it as 'a riot of peasants in the region of Esneh and
Keneh against the innovations introduced by Mohamed Aly'. '- Peas-
ants easily dispersed', he ends tersely.89 St John gives a more elaborate
eye-witness account of the revolt and the fallahin who followed the
'prophet', who was rumoured to have a following of 3,000 men. The
'prophet' told his followers that the Prophet Muhammad and his
angels would be fighting for them and that cannon balls would not
affect them.90 The following year another revolt was incited by an
Ahmad 'mogrebin fanatique'.91 Ahmad had refused to pay a tax levied
upon his goods imported at Qusair on his way back from Mecca, and
had roused the local inhabitants into revolt. He went to Qina, Isna,
and Farshut where the army met them. Mengin recounts the events,

                                                                      133
