Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

Ibrahim Pasha, General Boyer took over the task of training the army.
Muhammad Ali kept a close watch on the new army in training. When
he was informed that the men's aim was bad, he ordered all the recruits
to recite 'Al-Fatiha', the first sura of the Quran, in order to gain baraka,
before they started target practice. He was certain that would improve
their aim."
   The need to recruit Egyptians into the army showed a further
development towards the modern state in creating an indigenous army
that was to displace the traditional mercenary or mamluk armies. The
army, which became an instrument of unification, was also an instru-
ment of defence against invasion, but in addition it became a means of
carrying out imperial designs. An army of 18,000 to 20,000 was enough
to defend the land, as under the mamluks, but an army of over 100,000
was clearly formed with imperial intent, and grew along with the desire
for expansion.
   The first native recruits were told that their duration of service was
three years, when they would be allowed to visit their homes and
dispensed from any financial charges, but would be considered soldiers
for the rest of their lives. This was along the lines of the Ottoman
regiments. The Egyptians, who were unused to the military life, did not
think much of these terms, and did not want to become recruited into
the army. The army was an unknown factor, and feared. They ran away
to avoid conscription or hid themselves. When the first batch had seen
battle and returned to tell their tales to their countrymen, probably
more men sought to avoid conscription. The recruiters then resorted to
violent means to catch the fallahin, but the wali was appalled by such
means and counselled moderation. He sent an order to Ibrahim Pasha
warning him to stop using brutal methods for recruitment ('al-kaff an
asalib al-unf) and to attempt to recruit men by persuading them of the
value of a soldier's life.70 He wrote that it was inevitable that recruit-
ment should be disagreeable to the fallah, even though it was carried out
for the triumph of Islam, and it is from that point of view that it should
be put to the fallah, through the village ulama and preachers, who
should also point out that when the French had occupied Egypt the
Copts had responded to the appeal of their co-religionaries and had
joined their army.
  Attempts at using the ulama as a means of public relations, or for
propaganda for the army, resulted among other things in a tract written
by an alim from the Azhar, Shaikh Khalil Ibn Ahmad al-Rajabi, at the
instigation of Shaikh al-Arusi, his mentor at the university. The work
was composed of seven chapters and entitled, The History of Muham-
mad Ali. The last chapter of the work was written in praise of

128
