                                                         Internal policies

themselves to defy the officers of the government', and that the men who
were taken to work in the rice mills ran back to work on their own fields
where they earned more by working for themselves.94 On the following
page he added that the absence of Muhammad AH and Ibrahim in
Istanbul had produced, 'a series of passive revolts', some village shaikhs
refusing to pay their customary taxes or send men to serve the
government needs. Hekekyan wrote that in many instances government
executives were beaten off from the villages by force or by intimidation.
He said that a mudir told him that the pasha took 80 per cent of the
produce, and the men avoided paying the capitation tax, the firda, by
running away from their villages, and that the wages paid to the
labourers were imaginary for no money was issued.95 Both Minuf and
Sharqiyya had large bedouin concentrations. Minuf saw the influx of
tribes from the Libyan desert, of the Awlad Ali fleeing from tribal
warfare in their regions, while Sharqiyya was an area of Hanadi and
Hawwara tribes. The former were newly sedentarized peoples who had
not learned to bow to authority. Members of such tribes had in the past
been used as cavalry auxiliaries by the mamluks, and indeed some of
them continued to be used in that capacity by Muhammad Ali's army.
Such men may have resented being conscripted into the army as
common soldiers, on a par with the fallahin whom they despised.
  Jabarti's chronicles abound with accounts of uprisings, both rural and
urban, and we can go so far as to say that uprisings were endemic to the
eighteenth century. They were rarer under Muhammad Ali. Fallahin
did break out into acts of violence when their individual or collective
rights had been too often infringed, when they were too shamelessly
exploited, or when they resented government control. The fallah has
always hated the government, with good reason, and has always
resented paying his taxes, and probably continues to do so to the present
day. He manifested his discontent by periodic outbreaks of violence
against the tax collector and the local-authority figure. These outbreaks
were seldom prolonged; nonetheless they were important examples of
peasant resistance. Such resistance took the form of increasing rural
disorder, with acts of brigandage, piracy, crop burning and crop
sabotage. One can read in such actions the protest of primitive rebels, in
Hobsbawm's use of the term, during periods of inflation, as in the
twenties and the thirties. One would have expected more overt acts of
protest to occur in areas that were undergoing crop changes, such as in
Middle Egypt, where regions were being turned to cash crops - sugar-
cane, and cotton - which slowly displaced the fallah's own food crops.
Yet Middle Egypt was not involved in uprisings; these were concen-
trated in the Said and in the Delta. It may well be that these regions,

                                                                      135
