Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

   Those among the soldiery who were married did not pay thefirda tax,
but as they could not cultivate their athariyya lands, orders were given
to distribute that land among their relatives and neighbours so the land
would not lie fallow.75 That may have been another major reason for the
reluctance of the fallah to join the army, and in some cases it led to the
destitution of the soldier's immediate family. Generally soldiers were
not allowed to marry unless they were well behaved, when marriage was
held as an inducement to good conduct.76
   Coptic soldiers were also recruited into the army, and orders respect-
ing those among them who worked in the shipyards in Alexandria were
issued exempting them from paying both the fir da and xhejizya, or poll
tax.77
   The wali kept a strict eye on the army. When he heard that some
officers did not follow lines of organization in the regiments and
battalions, he sent orders to the minister of war and to all the officers in
the army, warning them that those who allowed themselves the slightest
departure from established practice were to be instantly punished.78
Only the literate among the rank and file were promoted to the higher
ranks, but Egyptians were never promoted beyond the rank of first or
second lieutenant. Muhammad Ali was most disturbed when he heard
that Ibrahim wanted to promote two of his dead brother's mamluks to
the rank of colonel (ntiralay), and pointed out that those who were
superior to their fellow officers in matters of reading and writing should
be promoted.79 In some odd fashion the wali assumed that literate
officers were necessarily superior officers, while Ibrahim, who was
closer to the men, assumed that brave officers and leaders were not
necessarily the most literate among them.
   How officers were appointed was later to cause friction between father
and son. Muhammad Ali simply bought mamluks, or ordered that his
mamluks were to be made into majors and lieutenant-colonels but must
know how to read and write. Papers for manumitting them were
prepared and they were all set to become field officers.80 Ibrahim
complained at the low calibre of such instant officers and asked irately
how, if they were incapable of controlling their men, 'can we take them
into the lands of other people (bilad a/-mw)?'81
   There was a high casualty rate among second lieutenants in the Syrian
campaign, and in some cases battalions lost all their young officers.
Ibrahim then fell on the novel idea of appointing Turkish prisoners of
war as second lieutenants in the Egyptian army, and nearly had a mutiny
on his hands. The troops grumbled that they had risked their lives to
capture the Turks, and now they were to become their superiors in the
field. Ibrahim was in a quandary. If he promoted the sergeant-majors he

130
