                                                          Internal policies

conscription. It quoted the Quran and the Prophet that the soldier who
dies in battle goes to paradise.71 Such arguments convinced few among
the recruits or the rest of the fallahin.
   In the early days the recruits returned home after three years armed
with a stamped certificate (tadhkara makhtuma) which would exempt
them from further service.72 Later on, when demands for men exceeded
the supply of recruits, neither the length of service nor the certificate
was respected.
   The military advisors who had convinced the wali to recruit an army
of fallahin were the Frenchmen in his service. The methods of recruit-
ment that were used were those that had been applied in France before
and after Napoleon by the racoleurs, who received a fee for every man
they dragooned into the army. Those recruits who tried to escape the
army were chased and forcibly dragged back. The punishments inflicted
on these 'soldiers' were 'the branding iron, convict ships or death ... for
the slightest mistakes'. Napoleon's need for fighting men had rendered
the system even more brutal so that men who avoided the army were
punished and all those who were related to them as well, 'his father,
mother, brothers, sisters and brothers in law, his entire family; all those
at whose house when worn out by hunger, cold and misery, the unhappy
man had drunk, eaten, worked or slept; later on the punishment was
extended to the entire commune'.73
   That system was adopted in Egypt as the need for men became acute.
Orders were issued punishing the family of the recruit who had escaped
and taking in his place another member of his family or, if none was
available, then another member of his village, punishing the umda who
allowed him to get away, and the person who had given him shelter.
When escape from the army became harder for the fallahin, some of
them took to maiming themselves by putting rat's bane in their eyes,
drawing out the front teeth so they could not bite the bullet, cutting off
the first joint of the index finger so they could not pull the trigger, or
blowing off a toe so they could not march. These acts, in turn, were
punished by the administration with sentences ranging from imprison-
ment, to lashes with the kurbaj, to death.
   The campaign in Syria put further pressures on the population, and
nuzzar aqsam were threatened with having their heads cut off if they did
not send recruits immediately.74 Some shaikhs resorted to desperate
measures, like shanghaiing boatmen and sending them off as recruits
from their village. Orders were circulated commanding punishment for
such actions by taking the shaikh's son or, if no son, then his brother,
and if he had none then any other male relative; if he were totally devoid
of relatives then he himself was to be taken in place of a recruit.

                                                                       129
