Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

which had already grown sugar-cane and cotton in smaller quantities
under the mamluks, accepted the expansion of these crops with equan-
imity, for, as Barrington Moore has shown, 'what infuriates peasants is a
new and sudden imposition or demand that strikes many people at once
and that is a break with accepted rules and customs',96 which a gradual
increase of crop acreage would not have done. Muhammad AH said to
Boislecomte, 'with me the fallah earns little, but he is assured of sale,
and our prices are calculated to allow him a reasonable gain'.97
   The rest of the country was remarkable for its tranquillity. The
government possessed greater powers of coercion, but repression alone
has never given a country tranquillity, nor rendered it immune from
acts of violence or protest. The fallah, cowed by the government,
generally resisted it passively. He may have wanted a period of
tranquillity after the upheavals of the past decades, and the past natural
calamities that had befallen the country. The natural leaders of the
fallahin, the village shaikhs, had improved their own lots and, becoming
part of the government apparatus, managed to keep the fallahin
quiescent. It may be that the fallah, in spite of the exactions laid upon
him, still had enough left to him to accept the system.
   Muhammad Ali knew the value of his reforms, but he also knew that
reforms are ephemeral and seldom win permanent friends. He was
obsessed by the fear that the Ottomans were plotting to topple him, which
fear was perfectly justified, since they eventually sought to do so. He was
equally obsessed by a fear that his achievements would turn to dust. In
1829 Mimaut had reported the pasha's fears to Paris: 'Muhammad Ali
can hide from no one, nor hide from himself that, in spite of his efforts to
give this country a military establishment, to organize and civilize it, and
in spite of the prodigious results he has obtained, the means employed to
found his system have raised discontent and misery, and that his work,
once attacked, will find many hands to demolish it, and will, unless some
unexpected help appears, collapse in a little while.'98
   Whether these fears were real or the wait had articulated them at that
time in order to prepare the ground for his invasion of Syria, is moot.
What is perfectly clear is that the wali knew that his position and that of
his successors in Egypt did not depend on any popularity contest within
the country, for there would always be local elements ready to join the
Ottomans against the government, whatever the government, and that
his only hope for survival was to neutralize any Ottoman attempts
against his position in Egypt. When we understand that fear, a genuine
one on his part, we can clearly appreciate his need for declaring his
independence from the empire, his need for going into Syria, and
forcing the recognition of the Powers to that independence.

136
