Chapter 7


Agricultural changes




The concept that economic systems are self-regulating and that in time
they will work out for the greatest benefit of man is one that came in
with laissez-faire reasoning and post-dated Muhammad Ali's thinking.
Muhammad Ali thought in economic terms, as does every merchant; to
him and to his age the congruence of economics and politics was obvious
as it had been obvious to the mamluks and the tujjar when they had tried
to control the resources of the country, with less success than the wali
had.
   A mercantilist approach to government could work only when the
government was centralized and had a free hand in managing its trade.
Two requirements arose from that approach. The first was that such a
government must needs become independent from the Ottoman empire
in order to run its financial affairs as it pleased. That was also the
conclusion reached by Ali Bey al-Kabir. A second and equally impor-
tant requirement was that pursuit of such a policy should not conflict
with the economic interests of other, more powerful, mercantile coun-
tries.
   The first steps taken by the new administration were then in the
direction of restoring fiscal equilibrium in the country and raising
money. When the mamluks in the immediate past had been faced with a
similar problem of how to raise money, they had come up with an easy
answer: forced loans and increased taxation. All manner of extra-legal
taxes had been imposed on the fallah to the point where the fallah either
actively or passively rebelled, that is, he deserted the land, set fire to the
crops, or rose in rebellion when the burden became unbearable and
when he could gain the support of some of the native elite. Once the
taxes had been paid for a number of years, they were registered and
became official. In that fashion the fallah paid some 24 different taxes.1
He paid mal al-hurr to the multazim, who out of that paid the miri, or
legal land tax, and two other taxes and kept the rest, the faiz. Next the
fallah paid the multazim the barrani, or external, the mudaf, added on,
al-wajba, the impost; he paid the kushufiyya to the provincial governor

                                                                        137
