Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

commenting that in Qina and Isna the people had shown the greatest
distaste for conscription.
   All these insurrections were clear examples of resistance to govern-
ment policies of various kinds: to conscription, to corvee, to the new tax,
thefirda, imposed in 1822, to an increase of land taxes that went up to 22
per cent. At the same time these were years of natural catastrophes. The
Nile flooded the fields in 1820 and ruined the crops; this also heralded
the first appearance of the cholera epidemic, which was particularly
traumatic. Plague broke out in 1823 and drought in 1824. The drought
continued into the next year, which saw another outbreak of plague.
These were years of physical fear, of hunger and moral tribulation.
Epidemics have always been regarded as a scourge from heaven to
punish people for their sins, or for 'innovations'. In times of crisis
people everywhere turn to the Almighty or to supernatural phenomena
to explain their tribulations and console their anguish. Religious leaders
take the lead, and urge the population to turn to God and depart from
their sinful ways, and the population follows them. That is why the
leaders of these insurrections had religious overtones, as we can tell by
their surnames of al-Mahdi or al-Salah. These leaders told the fallahin
they would be invincible in battle, that government bullets would melt
before they hit their targets. Thus, as well as being fallah movements of
resistance to the government, these revolts took on the air of millenary
or chiliastic movements.
   The uprising led by Ahmad the Moroccan was a revolt of disgruntled
artisans and pieceworkers of the textile trade.92 The region of Qina had
been a centre of textiles as well as of agriculture, both of which had been
disrupted by the changes in the Egyptian economy. Especially was this
the case with the textile trade which had been practically ruined by
imported British textiles. The Sudan conquest had also managed to ruin
a number of small merchants and entrepreneurs who had made their
livelihood out of the caravan, and who were put out of business. The
large-scale tujjar had been coopted into the administration or had
turned to other occupations, but the small-scale merchants had been
ruined. The merchants, being coopted or put out of business, were no
longer in a position to control the artisans as they had been wont to do in
the past, and some indeed may have joined them in their uprising.
   The uprisings in the Delta took place in two regions which had
important bedouin populations. In 1823 Drovetti reported 'an insurrec-
tion ... in the province of Menouff. It was provoked by the too high
exactions of Mohamed Aly Pasha's agents and by military conscrip-
tion'.93 The last uprising in 1846 was reported by Hekekyan in his
diaries. He wrote that in Sharqiyya were 'entire villages arming

134
