Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

that Egyptians were a subject-race fit to be ruled and incapable of habits
of self-government. To Muhammad Ali his very ethnicity was a
justification of leadership, an entitlement to leadership and domination of
the country. It also allowed him to remain within the family of the
Ottoman empire culturally, even when he was fighting that very family.
   Ibrahim on the other hand hated his Ottoman identity, and had no
option then but to opt for his new 'Egyptian' one, and to push for a
recognition of its virtues.
   The appeal to promote Egyptians to the rank of lieutenant-colonel
(binbashi) did not work, and it was only under Said that Egyptians
finally were promoted to the rank of colonel. In 1882 there were only
four native Egyptian colonels in the entire Egyptian army.
   Although Egyptians were not promoted beyond a certain rank, they
rapidly displaced Turkish officers in the lower ranks. In 1829 the wali
even dismissed the Turkish officers in his navy and replaced them by
Egyptians trained by French naval officers.84 He also disbanded 2,000
artillery men who received 60 pts. per day as a wage, and replaced them
by Egyptians who were paid one fourth that amount, 15 pts. a day.
   Consul Salt gave the troops of the nizam jadid high marks. 'In arms
and firing', he said, 'nearly as perfect as European troops.'85
   Conscription had two adverse reactions on the country. In the first
place it meant removing necessary manpower from agriculture, which
could absorb any extra hands, let alone lose some necessary hands
among the youngest and most able-bodied. Secondly, recruitment of
fallahin was to be given by some historians as a reason for uprisings in
the land. Revolts and uprisings are the third major problem of internal
policy that the state faced. Baer mentioned five 'peasant revolts' as
taking place during that period, and Rivlin added two further ones.86
These uprisings took place in 1812,1820-1, 1822-3, 1824 in two places,
Minufiyya and Qusair, and in 1846.
   In 1812 the government imposed a policy of monopolizing grains in
the country. That same year Drovetti recounts a series of dramatic
events. He explained that, when the Egyptian army in the Hijaz first met
with defeat in 1812, four of the chief generals returned to Egypt in flight
by various routes and conspired to overthrow Muhammad Ali and put
in his place an Albanian named Ahmad Bey. Their plot was uncovered
and defused. Ahmad Bey was poisoned and the other three were exiled.
Drovetti added that there was question of exiling Laz-Agmad-Aga [sic],
commander of a corp stationed in upper Egypt: 'this leader enjoys an
excellent reputation in the army and is feared because of his influence
and spirit of enterprise, [he] is the only [man] who can overshadow
Mohamed Ali's supreme authority'.87

132
