                                                     Agricultural changes

mamluk beys, but in the eighteenth century tujjar, ulama, bedouin, and
women joined the ranks of the tax farmers, albeit in lesser degree than
the mamluks who remained the largest group of tax farmers.6 Many of
the tax farmers were absentee, and collected their dues or faiz, through
their agents, the village leaders, the shaikhs and umad of the village.
In time, and certainly by the last half of the eighteenth century,
these shaikhs became money-lenders, and petty landowners within their
own purlieus. By virtue of their authority in the village, they became a
local rural elite, and the intermediaries between the fallah and the
multazim.
   Society at that time was built on a series of intermediaries acting as
buffers between the population and the administration. Guilds in the
towns had elders who assigned and collected the taxes from the guild
members, and intervened on behalf of the guild with the administration
when necessary. Individual members did not have to face the adminis-
tration. The minorities relied on their religious leaders to act as
intermediaries between them and the administration, while the populace
had recourse to the ulama. The authority of the central government was
gradually usurped by the intermediaries, especially in times of crisis.
The intermediary performed the function of a buffer, but also extracted
some value from his services, either in terms of authority or in financial
terms. This was the case with the village shaikh by the mid-eighteenth
century, who came to be the power broker in the village, the money
lender, and the petty landlord forming the rural notability. The surplus
from land was distributed four ways in consequence of that system: the
minimum went to the fallah, some to the village shaikh, much to the
multazim and his hordes and a small percentage, the land-tax (miri)
reached the central treasury. In short the system, though it benefited a
large number of people, was wasteful and unproductive in terms of the
central treasury. While the various intermediaries between the fallah
and the treasury benefited in some measure, the bulk of the funds went
to the mamluks, who used the wealth unproductively. They used wealth
to import luxury items, to buy slaves or mercenaries and to buy
armaments. Little, if any, of the wealth that was extorted from the fallah
was reinvested into the country, especially during the last decades of the
eighteenth century. In brief, no primitive accumulation of capital
permitting further investment was possible.
   When the Ottomans reconquered Egypt in 1801, Sultan Selim tried
to change the system of land tenure, claiming that it had been rendered
null and void by the reconquest, according to Ottoman custom. Because
the hold of the Ottomans on Egypt was tenuous, that attempt at
changing land tenure fell through lack of power to implement it. It did

                                                                      139
