Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

among the fallahin for cultivation according to time-honoured practice
of athariyya. This was the right the fallah had, the only one, to till the
same piece of land and to pass it on to his heirs so long as the taxes were
paid. The shaikhs of the village were entrusted with distributing the
land in Upper Egypt every year according to the flood levels, and were
also entrusted with distributing the land of a fallah who died without
male issue, or who defaulted on his taxes for several years. In recogni-
tion of these services the shaikhs were granted 5 faddans out of every
105 as masmuh al-mashayikh in some areas, although it differed in others
as did the percentage of zimam granted to shaikhs. Important umad were
granted extra land as masmuh al-masatib, to defray expenses incurred
while offering shelter and hospitality to government officials, or feeding
and sheltering travellers.25 Masmuh lands of both kinds were exempted
from taxation. We have as yet no indication of the full extent of masmuh
lands, but we do know that in the Delta some 440,127 faddans were
exempt from taxation as being either bur, usya or masmuh land. In
Upper Egypt the figure for similar land was 1,775,611 faddans exempt
from taxation for bur, usya, masmuh and also ibadiyya land, i.e., a grand
total of 2,215,738 faddans. Barakat estimated that of that total 1,396,378
were ibadiyya, leaving a remainder of 819,460 faddans as usya, masmuh
and bur. The usya lands did not come to more than 73,070, if we are to
believe Sami's figures, leaving us with an approximate acreage of
746,390 faddans as bur and masmuh.26
   The masmuh lands formed the nucleus of land property owned by the
new native rural elite, and in time some of these lands were to develop
into the latifundia familiar to a later age, as their owners expanded their
holdings, due to a number of devices we shall mention later on. Some
owners were also to lose their holdings and revert to the lot of the
landless fallah.
   Lands were also exempt from taxation for other reasons. For example,
if the land remained unwatered as a consequence of a low Nile (sharaqi),
it was exempted from taxation in some years. However, this policy was
not consistently pursued, and at other times only poor lands were
exempted when sharaqi, or half the mal would be collected. At times the
shaikhs were accused of carelessness and the responsibility of the lands
becoming sharaqi blamed on them, and the tax collected as in 1824 and
 1825, or the Nile was regarded as having reached a sufficient level, even
when some lands remained unwatered as in 1826 and 1827. In 1842 no
exemption was henceforth allowed on sharaqi lands. Land that was
flooded (mustabhara) was generally exempted from taxation especially
after 1822. Agriculture that had failed (hayif) was also exempted. The
same principle applied to crops that had been burnt, unless they were

144
