                                                     Agricultural changes

burnt deliberately. Burning crops was a favourite blow perpetrated by
families or villages that waged vendettas, and fields were deliberately set
on fire by a fallah who did not want to pay taxes on the land. When
deliberate malice was established the mal was collected, otherwise the
lands were exempted from taxation, though past practice had been to
make the fallah pay mal on two faddans out of five.27 Land policies,
while moving in the direction of a mitigated exploitation of the fallah,
were not uniform, especially in years of need. The bureaucracy was
learning to function and there was sometimes a time lag between orders
given and their application.
   Hand in hand with these changes in land tenure and in taxation came
the monopoly of agricultural production. Monopolies of commodities
had long been an established custom for the Ottomans, as was the
custom of imposing embargoes on certain items. Egypt had always
exported grain to the Ottoman empire, and to the southern
Mediterranean, even when the Ottomans had placed an embargo on the
sale of grain outside the empire. The same thing had happened when an
embargo had been placed on coffee. The beys and tujjar simply
disregarded such directives when the profits proved tempting enough.
Muhammad Ali followed in their footsteps, and disregarded Ottoman
injunctions when it suited his pocket to do so. Following Ottoman
custom, and in need of ready cash, Muhammad Ali monopolized the
stocks of grain in the land and sold them to the British merchants who
were buying grain to feed the British army during the Peninsular wars.
The rest of the Mediterranean, which normally provided grain, was
unable to do so as the result of three years of drought, while Black Sea
grain had been cut off from the region through a Russo-Turkish war
that lasted until 1812. Consequently Egypt was the sole supplier of grain
in large quantities. For the next few years, until 1812, Egyptian grain
was exported at exorbitant prices, or so it seemed to the British
merchants, who had no other options and were forced to buy at any
price. Throughout that decade grain continued to be the single most
important item for export.
   The fallahin were forbidden to sell their grain to private individuals
or merchants and were forced to sell it to the government, at a price
fixed by the government. The merchants who had previously been
involved in the grain trade became government officials, or lost their
profession and had to find other means of livelihood.28
   The French consul in Egypt desperately tried to stop the export of grain
to the British army and recorded the first grain sale in March 1810;29
Jabarti on the other hand records the first sale as being in 1808.
Muhammad Ali excused his actions to Drovetti by explaining that, as he

                                                                       145
