                                                     Agricultural changes

and the poorest at 2 riyals. The total land tax was estimated at
39,390,315 riyals, or 177,255 purses (kis), where the purse was worth £5,
giving a total of £886,275.20 At that time the household expenses for a
middle-class Cairene family of four for a year came to 2,600 pts. or £26.
An upper-class house cost £150 and a labourer earned 1 pt. or lessaday.21
One by-product of the cadastral survey was the relative unification of
the size of the faddan in the country. In the past the faddan had varied in
size as had the unit of measurement, the qasaba. In 1814 Ibrahim wrote
to his father to ask him to decide the issue. He said that Muallim Ghali
had told him that the Delta faddan was made of 333.3 qasabas while the
size of an Upper Egyptian faddan was unknown. Ibrahim added that it
seemed that the Upper Egyptian faddan was 400 qasabas or 1,333
metres, while in Lower Egypt it was 333.3 qasabas or 1,000 metres.22
Since the land of the Said fluctuated yearly with the rise and fall of the
Nile waters, it made good sense to adopt the measures in use in the
Delta, at the same time the differential in the faddan allowed the
government to confiscate lands in the Said. Nonetheless the measure of
the faddan continued to vary in two provinces as did the length of the
qasaba.
   Once the cadastre in the Delta was carried out, multazimun were
dispossessed as tax farmers, although they were compensated by a sum
equal to xhefaiz, and with a lifetime tenure of the usya lands which had
comprised the iltizam. These usya lands could be transferred, donated,
or sold back to the government, 'haqq al-faragh, wa-1 hiba wa bayiha li-1
hukuma'.23 Since there was no usya land south of Minya, that measure
left large areas of land untenanted which the wali arrogated to himself,
his family and his retainers. He also arrogated former iltizamat in the
same fashion to his new elite.
   Waqf or rizqa, agricultural land endowed for charitable purposes, or
endowed in trust both to a family and also for charities, was confiscated.
Waqf lands were estimated to constitute one fifth the total lands under
cultivation. Much of that land had been illegally turned into waqf as a
means of evading tax payments or avoiding confiscation of land by the
authorities. The new administration demanded to see the deeds of
ownership that proved the legality of the waqf. When these could not be
produced for a variety of reasons, some of them perfectly legitimate, for
example if the waqf was ancient, the waqf was confiscated. Owners of
legal waqf were paid a monthly pension and allowed usya land in
compensation on condition that that land be sold only to the govern-
ment. These lands could legally be constituted into waqf if the owners
wished, or could be donated or transferred to the legal heirs.24
   All land was parcelled into plots of various sizes and distributed

                                                                      143
