Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

not go unnoticed, however, and in due course Muhammad AH took a
leaf out of Selim's book.
   The search for funds led the government to its first step: control of
agricultural resources through a change in the system of land tenure and
taxation. Whether these notions were derived from blueprints that the
French had set up for Egypt under Menou, or from early Ottoman
practice or from sheer common sense, the fact remained that a major
source of income for the state was diverted into private pockets and the
state coffers were consequently empty. Anyone with any notion of
government, and certainly any mercantilist who believed in the neces-
sity of government regulation of the sources of wealth, would have
turned his attention to a reformation of that system, as did Muhammad
Ali. He urgently needed funds to oil the wheels of the administration,
and to pay the army. Popular acclaim would not pay the government
bureaucrats or the army and without these two pillars the wali would lie
at the mercy of the Ottoman authorities should they choose to depose
him or send a new wali to replace him, or even should a foreign power
decide to occupy Egypt.
   The wali began by a series of tentative steps, the first of which was
imposing occasionally a forced loan or a tax (firda) in cash and in kind.
This was imposed on the population but the ulama of the Azhar, the
waifs main allies at the time, and the poor were exempted.7 The ulama
took advantage of that situation to buy up lands and take fallahin under
their protection.8 The rest of the population resented that exemption of
the ulama.
   In 1806 the government arrogated to itself three quarters of the/atz,
half to be paid by the fallah and half by the multazim, again exempting
the ulama.9 The following year a tax was imposed on masmuh lands,10
followed by taxes on rizqa and usya land as well as sharing thtfaiz with
the multazimun.11 This last move so incensed Umar Makram that he
refused to go along with it, and thereby wrought his own destitution and
exile. All previous requests for funds from the multazimun, the guilds
and the tujjar had been funneled through Makram, who had raised the
money and had talked all the officials involved into paying the sums
requested, in the belief that these requests would not set precedents,
were for ad hoc purposes, and once the crisis had gone would not be
renewed. The crisis of course differed with every request; once it was to
pay the army its salary, then to pay the Albanians so they could leave the
country, then to pay the Delhis for the same reason, etc. Muhammad Ali
had no control over funding and was forced to make these requests and
channel them through his intermediaries. Behind that piecemeal system
of raising money there was the firm intention that, once the opposition

140
