Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

could not avoid selling grain to the British, he had made it so costly that
speculators could not afford the price and would no longer wish to
purchase grain.30 The excuse did not work, and in June Drovetti reported,
'Malta has almost no other resource than Egypt to provision herself with
grain', while Istanbul, he added, lacked grain and demanded it from Egypt.
Drovetti knew that the high export duties sustained Egyptian finances and
were necessary tofinancethe army,31 which was still battling the mamluks.
Practically every month Drovetti reported ships departing with cargoes of
grain for Malta.32 Even the grain that was shipped to the Ottoman capital
was imposed with a large export duty, when the capital was suffering
famine. Here again Muhammad Ali followed in mamluk footsteps by
imposing higher taxes during times of want. Drovetti remarked on the
enormous grain resources the wali had acquired in the Said and said that
other than the sale price, 'he derives duties which reach 10-12 pts. per
ardab. Most of these grains go to Malta, others to the islands of the
Archipelago, but few to Constantinople where the treasury seizes them'.33
He also bemoaned the lack of trading activity in Cairo where he reported
that nothing was bought or sold.
   By October 1810 the current price of wheat was 26 pts. per ardab and
the export duty cost another 10 pts., the total coming to 36 pts. per
ardab34 and yet an estimated thirty ships were loaded with grain for
Malta. Drovetti glumly noted that the price was likely to rise still
further. He calculated that each ship could load 1,200 ardabs and come
to a total of 1,440,000 pts., which, added to all the amount of grain
previously exported, would reach a sum of 3 million francs.36 He
pointed out that cloth which used to form the bulk of French exports to
the Levant, 'on which we had no fear of foreign competition', was being
displaced by cheap British cloth. In the past the British had exported
tin, lead, thread, watches, shawls and cottons to Egypt, but, because of
the high cost of Egyptian grain and their consequent debts to Egypt,
they were selling or dumping cloth which 'by being cheap will be used
in preference to that which other nations used to supply'.36 Indian
muslin was replacing the cloth which the French and the Italians had
been wont to supply Egypt.
   Wheat which had been selling locally for 12-15 P*s. was exported at
62-80 pts., and the new harvest promised to be an abundant one,
leading to heavier trading. France, Egypt's foremost European trading
partner in the past, slowly and inexorably was being displaced by British
trade, which perforce needed to sell to Egypt if only to pay for the grain
being purchased. The items of British trade which had predominated in
the past no longer headed the list of commodities sold, and we see cloth,
weapons and ammunition, cannon-balls, listed among British exports.37

146
