Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

towards exporting it, and lastly to compensate loyal followers with
grants of land which had been confiscated.
   Since taxes had to be collected and land supervised, the rural local
elite was coopted. Shaikhs and umad were given the tasks previously
assigned to the multazim, and which had gradually devolved on them. In
that fashion the new government earned the support of the village
shaikhs, for the time being, and was assured of getting its taxes, for no
one was better equipped to extort money from the fallah than the shaikh
of the village. The fallah was at first delighted with the multazim's
ouster and when some of them came round to collect their dues they
were sent off empty-handed and told, 'We are the pasha's fallahin, we no
longer work for you.' 17 A diwan was set up to investigate the complaints
of the fallahin against their multazimun. The multitude of taxes which
had previously been imposed on land were cancelled and combined into
one tax, the kharaj, which was collected at regular times. Before more
radical changes could be undertaken, the government carried out a
cadastral survey to help it establish the amount of cultivable land
available. Cadastral surveys were a classic Ottoman custom, and their
value was obvious to rulers, new and old.
   In 1814 the Delta was surveyed by Mahmud Bey al-Diwandar and
Muallim Ghali Sargios. Three hundred villages were surveyed in the
provinces of Gharbiyya, Minufiyya, Mansura, Qaliubiyya, Sharqiyya
and Buhaira. When the umad and fallahin of Sharqiyya and Gharbiyya
showed resistance, the areas had to be surveyed a second time. These
provinces had a heavy bedouin population and constantly resisted any
incursions by the government on their prerogatives, and any attempts at
imposing central control. The total acreage paying the land tax, or
kharaj, was 1,903,788 faddans. Some areas covering 440,127 faddans
were exempted from taxation and included usya, masmuh and lands not
brought under cultivation, bur. In 1820/1, Rabi Thani, 1236, a survey of
the rest of the agricultural lands was conducted under the supervision of
Ibrahim Pasha, and taxable land came to 1,314,927 faddans in the Said,
while 1,775,611 faddans were exempted from taxation.18 The total
acreage of land exempted from taxation in both Upper and Lower Egypt
was 2,215,738 faddans, comprising land that was usya and did not pay
tax - although some 56,554 faddans of usya land did pay tax and were
included in the tax registers19 - rizqa, bur and masmuh lands. Out of a
total acreage of 5,434,455 faddans the land tax was collected on
3,218,715 faddans.
  With the first cadastre the tax was set at 11 riyals for the richest land
and 2 riyals for the poorest lands in the Delta (where the riyal was equal
to 2 pts. and 10 paras). In the Said the richest land was taxed at 20 riyals

142
