                                                      Agricultural changes

had been destroyed, Egypt's financial picture would be overhauled and
set up in such a fashion that no administrator would have to beg for
money to run the state. It was the eternal dilemma facing any ruler or
head of state. Modern states have invented various methods of taxation,
best of which is income tax. Early in his reign Muhammad Ali sought to
develop a method of taxation that would allow him to acquire sufficient
funds to invest as capital in further profitable ventures, as well as to pay
for his governmental projects, the army, navy and industry.
   Umar Makram could not appreciate that reasoning. He could see
only that he had been duped and used by a man he had chosen to
support and to trust, that he had given his word to the population which
trusted him, and that his word was being dragged into the dust. By then
he was no longer necessary to the central authority, and his opposition
was a menace to be silenced efficiently and ruthlessly. Muhammad Ali
used Makram's colleagues to destroy the man, just as in the past he had
used the mamluks to destroy the wali, and one faction to destroy the
other. By the time Makram had acceded so many times to Muhammad
Ali's requests to raise taxes, and had profited by the venture, along
with the other ulama who were multazimun, he had also created any
number of enemies who were willing to step in his shoes, and they
helped dispose of him. Some ulama swore to a trumped-up charge that
Makram had entered the names of Copts in the register of the ashraf,
the descendants of the Prophet, when he was marshal, and he was sent
into exile to Damietta.12 The rizqa remained untaxed, but they were
confiscated and their owners were remunerated with a monthly sum,
equal to the faiz, for their lifetimes. The government undertook to
defray the cost of the charities which were specified in the endowments
confiscated.13
   In 1810 a diwan was called to discuss the needs for funds and to
impose a new firda. The council reached no decision because some of
the members objected to exempting the ulama from the firda and the
ulama became incensed, so the council was dismissed.14 The following
year a firda was imposed on all iltizamat and came to four times the rate
of the tniri, faiz and mudaf taxes;15 later it went up to the rate of the
previous three taxes plus the barrani and usya.16
   In 1811 when the Said finally fell, the government took the drastic
step of confiscating all the iltizamat from their previous owners, who
were mostly mamluk beys. Those multazimun of the region who were
not mamluks were dispossessed as well, as a punishment for having
sided with the beys - as though they had had a choice in the matter one
way or another. The basic reasons behind that move was to undercut the
authority of the multazimun, to control all rural produce as a first step

                                                                        141
