                                                     Agricultural changes

   In January 1811 the British contracted for 1,600,000 pts. worth of
grain.38 A month later the Ottomans imposed an embargo on the
exportation of grain outside the Ottoman empire. The pasha defended
himself by claiming that wheat sales supplied the funds he needed to
raise fortifications that defended Alexandria against invasion. Further-
more they paid for an increase in the size of the army and financed
preparations for the impending war in the Hijaz against the Wahhabis.39
He also gave the added excuse that as the country was short of specie he
was obliged to accept taxes paid in kind, in grain, and was obliged to
trade in that commodity.40
   The Ottoman embargo affected the Egyptian situation little and grain
continued to be sold to British merchants, but, seeing how well the grain
trade was going, the wali decided to open a warehouse or compurir in
Malta which would sell grain in Spain and Portugal and buy whatever
Egypt needed from Europe. Drovetti was upset by such a move, which
he described as a departure from the 'healthy ideas' the wali had, and yet
he was the first to underline the progress made in Egyptian finances and
to point out by May that the grain trade had brought some 45-50
million pts. in profit.41 Shortages in other parts of Europe may have
induced the notion of basing Egyptian agents in Malta to sell to Sicily,
for example, but it also made the government 'the only trader in Egypt,
since the authorities exclude all competition and all rivalry'.42
   A little of the profit which the government made on wheat sales
reached the fallah. At a time when grain was being sold for 100 pts. for
export, it was sold in Cairo for 18 pts.43 There was method behind that
price differential for the price of grain within the land must needs be
kept low and stable to avoid want and famine, while the export duties
which were slapped on grain yielded a healthy profit to the state.
   Although the British government received its grain supplies, British
consul, Missett, who had returned to Alexandria in July 1811, sourly
noted the wali 'respects none of the privileges granted England in virtue
of our Capitulations with the Porte. He has sold or taken into his own
hands various monopolies; the old duties have been increased, and the
new ones are exacted upon all articles of import and export; and the only
answer which ... he returns to the remonstrances of European agents is,
that he has the power of making any international regulations within his
own government.' Missett added that while the pasha nominally
acknowledged the authority of the sultan, 'He refused to obey any order
from His Highness that may stand in opposition to his own private
interest.'44 Missett used terms like 'the capricious will of Mohamed Aly'
and his 'arbitrary disposition'. There was little caprice involved in these
transactions. Muhammad Ali had simply cut out the middlemen. The

                                                                       147
