Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

   The irrigation projects that were planned by the government were
aimed at storing the Nile waters and using them when they were needed.
Summer crops could be sown more extensively in that fashion, and,
since these were the main money-making crops, an attempt was made to
increase the area of land turned to summer crops. Between the winter
and summer crops the land was left fallow or sown with a catch crop like
barsim. Land sown with cereals was left fallow to recover its strength. In
areas of basin irrigation the Nile silt, and the land lying fallow for a
period to be aired and dried, restored its fertility and strength. With the
advent of perennial irrigation constant sowing weakened the land, hence
the extensive use of fertilizers in the twentieth century. With basin
irrigation small areas could be grown with two crops a year, but with
perennial irrigation large areas could grow two and even three crops a
year.
   The major public works that were carried out created saifi canals,
three rayahs, or main canals, the Mahmudiyya canal which became a
waterway, and various dams and barrages. Clot Bey claimed that 32
canals (tira) were built, ten jisr or dykes, including one that was 6 metres
wide and 2 metres high going from Jabal al-Silsila to the Mediterranean
on either side of the Nile, 53 forty-one dams and barrages (qantara).
These works totalled some 1,135,775 metres and stored 116,050,843
cubic metres of water.54
   Such public works demanded a tremendous outlay of manpower, and
their upkeep equally demanded extensive manpower in order to dredge,
clean and maintain the canals which would otherwise become clogged
up with silt and hold less water. Also dykes could spring leaks if they
were not tended. Villagers were called up to shore the canal banks or
entire villages would become flooded should the Nile waters rise to
dangerous levels. This form of corvee to stave off a crisis continues to be
used to the present day, although only in exceptional years since the
dams on the Nile have mitigated dangers of flood. Nonetheless, from
time immemorial when the waters rose all the fallahin were called out on
corvee to shore up the river banks. That task was exceedingly unpopular
with the fallahin, who were reluctant to do it year after year, when they
could see no physical reason. But by the time the physical reason had
become obvious it would have been too late, so the work had to be done
willy nilly. Every year, therefore, orders were sent out from the
administration to shore up the dykes and clean and dredge the canals
before the flood waters arrived. In one such circular the wali threatened
all his nuzzar in Upper Egypt and ordered 24,000 men gathered for the
task. He wrote to his officials,'... if you say it upsets the fallahin when
there is no need, then I say the boy does not willingly go to school but is

150
