                                                        Agricultural changes

named. Gharbiyya province acquired three new canals with a total of
1,790 kms. The rest of the Delta provinces which had acquired saifi
canals turned to rice and cotton production, while Sharqiyya became
the main cotton-producing area. A total of nearly 98,000 faddans were
now allocated to rice, and rice was sold at 125 pts. the ardab.80
   Cotton production had also been a lucrative commodity in the
eighteenth century, but Egypt, which grew short staple cotton, never
had enough of the raw material to satisfy local demands and had to
import much raw cotton from Syria and Palestine. Demand for cotton
on the part of France in large measure and on the part of Egypt in a
minor fashion had stimulated the rise of notables like Jazzar Ahmad and
Dhahir al-Umar, who created independent enclaves out of their
territories in order to fulfil the demand for cotton production and its
export.81
   Muhammad AH, in trying to increase the profit to be made out of cotton,
turned to industry and the production of cotton textiles. Through a stroke
of good fortune, a new strain of long staple cotton, later called Jumel
cotton, was found to grow well in Egypt. Unlike the short staple kind, the
long staple variety necessitated irrigation. Irrigation and the canal network
were necessary to increase cotton production and consequent cotton
exportation. Jumel, which was discovered in 1820, was first grown in the
province of Sharqiyya where Ibrahim Pasha had an estate. Muhammad Ali
asked his son to experiment with the new crop, given the strength of
Sharqiyya soil and the skill of its fallahin. The fallahin of Sharqiyya were
no more skilled than fallahin elsewhere, but as Ibrahim had estates there he
could supervise the growth of the new crop closely. Muhammad Ali
explained that the advantage of the new crop was that rumi cotton - the old
variety - was selling at 90 pts. the qantar, while the new cotton was selling at
300 pts.82 Once the cotton plant was successfully grown, the acreage sown
with cotton expanded.
   Cotton demands a great deal of service, unlike wheat, dura, or barley. It
needs to be watered every 12 days and the plants are at their best for
two years, production diminishing after the second and third year when
the plants have to be uprooted and new ones sown. At the beginning the
fallahin were well paid for the cotton, getting $16 per qantar when the
dollar was worth 12.5 pts., so that a qantar made 200 pts., and the average
faddan netted 400-500 pts., depending on the crop and the richness of the
soil. In 1824 cotton sold at $17, earning 12.5 pt. more per qantar. In 1828
the crop reached 59,200 qantars and sold at $I3. 83 The price of cotton was
to drop further in the 1830s when it sold for $ 1 o, when the dollar was worth
16-17 pts. As long as cotton sold well it was a popular crop with fallah and
landowner alike. Cotton demanded an initial financial outlay both in

                                                                          155
