                                                       Agricultural changes

they register the first budget increase of 347,521 pts. or 434,401 francs,
and estimate the yearly income to be a little under 9 million francs.48 But
the boom was coming to an end, or at least was slowing down, for Black
Sea wheat was now on the market in Europe, and Egypt was stricken by a
plague that carried off one third of the population of Alexandria and
spread to the hinterland where it ravaged the population and disrupted
agriculture for six months, from January to June 1813. Once the plague
was over, plans were made to increase government revenue further.
Wheat continued to be an export item after 1814, and was exported to
Trieste, Leghorn, Genoa, Malta and Spain. In 1816 Egyptian ships
carried grain to Sweden to trade for pig-iron.49 By 1822, in a report sent to
his minister, Drovetti estimated that from 1816 Egypt had exported
600-700 thousand ardabs of grain a year as compared to the maximum of
100 thousand under the mamluk beys.50 The trend towards the export of
wheat in increasing quantity continued with various ups and downs
depending on the internal conditions of the country, whether it had seen a
good Nile or a bad one, in which case the crop would be either plentiful or
devastated, and whether the wheat was needed to feed the army on a
campaign or not. By 1841 we find that 1,403,305 ardabs of wheat were
exported.51 Monopoly of wheat internally continued until 1830.
   The next step following the accumulation of capital was to invest it in
projects that would increase the acreage of land under cultivation and
increase production as well as introduce new money-making crops.
   During the last decades of the eighteenth century, because of internal
upheavals, the canals had been untended and in consequence had
become silted and blocked. Muhammad Ali set out to clear the old
canals and create new ones.
   Agriculture in Egypt depended largely on a system of basin irrigation,
by which the land was flooded by the Nile in August, and remained
under flood and fallow for six months of the year. After the waters had
receded around late October or November the land was sown with a
crop known as winter, or shitwi crop. This was mostly wheat, barley,
beans, barsim or clover, lentils, fenugreek and chick peas. While barsim
could be cropped several times, the other products were cropped once
and shitwi land yielded one crop a year.
   Another crop grown after the winter one, and needing extensive
irrigation, was sown in summer and consequently called saifi. This crop
could only grow along the edge of the river where water could be raised
by some device and the land irrigated. The crops sown in summer were
rice, sugar-cane, indigo and cotton, as well as the staple of the fallah,
millet, or dura saifi. A third crop was grown while the Nile was rising
and called Nili. That too needed irrigation by some device.52

                                                                        149
