Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

sowing and harvesting the crop. The administration was prepared to
provide credit to the fallahin, but the common cultivator who worked as a
field hand resented the extra labour he was forced to expend on the crop,
especially when the price of cotton dropped. Then the fallahin resorted to
acts of sabotage; they uprooted the plants, and neglected the crop so that it
died or gave a poor yield, to discourage cotton production. Three years
later the price of cotton rose to %i 5 when the dollar was worth 20 pts., thus
giving 300 pts. per qantar or 600-700 pts. per faddan.84 In 1844, when the
crop reached 153,363 qantars, it sold at an average of $i8. 8 5 Cotton
eventually became a popular crop even among the poorest cultivators, but
that was in the days of Ismail when the market was free and the price of
cotton was not fixed by the government as under Muhammad Ali.
   Under Muhammad Ali cotton remained an unpopular crop among
the fallahin, although a popular one among the landowners and the
shaikhs and umad who could afford to finance the crop, have the cotton
properly cleaned, and who supervised the classification of the crop so
they were not cheated by the government agents who wrongly classified
the cotton in order to pay the fallah less than his due.
   The fallah generally preferred to plant cereals which were less
demanding in terms of manpower and which yielded a decent profit any
year. After the irrigation works had been started cereal production rose
by three or four times its level twenty years earlier, even though by 1840
Egypt was exporting to England alone ten times more cotton than
cereals.86 By then well over half-a-million faddans in the Delta were
watered by summer irrigation and fields were yielding 2 and 3 crops a
year. Dura, the most popular crop among the fallahin since it was the
staple diet, was cropped several times a year.
   The most lucrative crop in the land was sugar, which was grown in
limited quantities in Middle Egypt. Egypt had always exported sugar to
the Ottoman empire. Part of the irsaliyya, or tribute, was 20,000 okes of
fine sugar and 30,000 sugar loaves.87 In 1834/1250 Ibrahim Pasha
demanded 1,000 faddans in Middle Egypt, in Malawi, Dairut and Dair
al-Baramun, to grow sugar.88 That crop demanded a greater capital
outlay than any other crop, for the canes produced only after a number
of years and needed manpower to harvest the crop, unlike cotton which
was harvested by women and children who were unpaid labour on their
own land, or were paid a pittance. Sugar-cane on the other hand could
only be harvested by men. Ibrahim's experiment was so successful that
in 1849/1266, 5,040 faddans were allocated in the region of Dair al-
Baramun89 to feed a sugar factory that had been set up in the region in
 1818/1234, and which was now producing more sugar. A further 2,500
faddans every year were supposed to be turned over to sugar.90

156
