                                                   Agricultural changes

forced by his parents until he grows older and knows the value of
learning, so driving all the men to dykes and canals is difficult for them
but is necessary'. He added that if the fallahin would not go willingly
then the nuzzar must summon soldiers from the governor (jnudir) and
force (qahran wa jabrari) the fallahin out.ss That measure was sand-
wiched in between two years when the floods had been disastrous, 1834
and 1837. Woe betide the officials who failed to keep up the canals. 'If
land is sharaqi because Jisr Banu Khalid is not well shored up there is no
punishment but death', warned the wait to all nuzzar aqsatn.56 'If we see
one qirat of land unwatered we will bury you in it', threatened another
circular." The fallahin were responsible for two months of corvee
labour out of the year, usually during the months when the land was
lying idle and there was little agricultural activity, but on occasion the
period of corvee was extended.
   The canals and the dykes were not built with unpaid corvee labour, a
popular misconception about that age. The workers were paid a wage, as
Jabarti reported regarding the digging on the Ashrafiyya canal: 'every
man at the outset received 10 riyals and 10 more were deducted from his
taxes. During work he was paid a piastre a day. One saw fallahin going
in droves (afwajan) to work areas.'58 The workers were not only paid
wages (Jri-l ujra)S9 but were also fed a soup (shurba or dashisha) morning
and evening, 'because it is winter', said a circular regarding work on the
Mahmudiyya Canal in 1819. The workers were also fed meat every few
days (kul iddat ayyarri).60 Orders were issued to all the mamurun to feed
the workers daily and to issue them rations of cereal ranging from 300
dirhems to 500 dirhems of dura.
   Foreign observers, some of whom were biassed against the wait
because he controlled the country's resources and would not allow them
a free hand in commerce and trade, have accused the wali of working his
people without payment, and specifically have raised that accusation
during work on the Mahmudiyya canal, which was said to have involved
some quarter of a million men and was dug in a great hurry. That canal
was the first major project of such magnitude and was carried out in a
disorganized fashion, for the government had not yet learnt how to
organize large-scale projects. No doubt abuses occurred, but the
government did try to feed and pay the workers, and mitigate abuses.
   Paid and fed notwithstanding, the fallahin did not like corvee labour
and on occasion resisted it because it disrupted their lives and took them
away from their homes and villages. Often their women and children
followed them because they had no other means of support and suffered
hardship. While the government learned how to handle affairs more
efficiently the fallah paid the price by suffering want, deprivation and
