                                                     Agricultural changes

   Muhammad Ali's government closely supervised the new crops and
supplied the cultivators with seed when necessary, that is, when the
crop had been damaged, or in times of crisis like flood or drought. In
1830/124691 government officials informed the administration of the
need for 193,663 ardabs of grain as seeds for 819,825 faddans in the
Delta, for the fallahin did not have the seeds. The fallah paid the cost of
the seeds out of the new harvest, but at least was sure of a crop.
   In order to increase productivity and encourage the cultivation of
untilled soil the administration thought of new ways and incentives. In
1826 untilled land (bur or ibadiyya) was offered as tax-free land (rizqa
bila mal), or it was specified that the mal be paid after a few years when
the land had been serviced and could produce crops. Such grants, which
were supposed to have come into being first in 1829, were in fact created
much earlier. Professor Barakat has found a register for such grants
dated 1826-7/" Most of these grants went to high officials, who had the
funds to spend on the land for the requisite number of years until it
yielded a benefit. Some of the lands were also given to ordinary fallahin
(anfar). Fallahin of some regions joined together and requested that
they be accorded ibadiyya lands; these were tax exempt for three years, a
tax being imposed the fourth year at 15 riyals per faddan. Records show
that shaikhs and fallahin who requested they be allowed to work the land
('mashayikh wa-1 fallahin talibin li ziraatiha')93 were granted these
lands, as were bedouin chiefs who had long been sedentarized such as
the Abaza, Sultan and al-Basil families. By 1837 usufruct of ibadiyyat
became inheritable, and years later full ownership of these lands was
decreed. Though generally benefiting the elite, the ibadiyyat also
contributed towards creating an exiguous native landowning class,
which was a beginning for Egyptian ownership of land.
   After the collapse of the wars of expansion in 1840, and the pressure
which England brought to bear to rescind the policies of monopoly (see
chapters 9 and 10), the pasha resorted to a new form of land tenure
known as uhda. Uhad strongly resembled the old iltizam system. The
first such grants had been set up in 1836, and perhaps even earlier as a
response to financial needs. The years from 1832 onwards had been bad
years in terms of Nile floods. Two years of a low Nile and drought were
followed by one good year in 1834, then by a disastrous drought and an
epidemic that carried off an estimated 500,000 people. This was
succeeded by a weak flood in 1836, a drought and a famine in 1837.
Simultaneously with all these natural disasters, the country was fighting
the Ottomans in Syria throughout 1831-3 and needed funds to pay the
army and to pay the forces of occupation in Syria. Funds were at their
lowest ebb. The administration, in search of revenue, thought of a

                                                                       157
