Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

government, using former merchants, bought directly from the fallah,
and sold directly to the buyer, also cutting out the merchants who had
previously bought the grain and then sold it on the European market. In
that fashion the Egyptian government could multiply its profits at the
expense of two sets of merchants who had previously gained from such
procedures. Missett, who represented the interests of the British
mercantile community in Egypt, was incensed at such steps as cut out
the merchants. He complained at the 'exorbitant' price at which wheat
was sold, and said that the wali used commercial deceptions which
would disgrace the lowest of mankind. This last remark referred to the
fact that the wali, after receiving payment for instant delivery of grain,
had delayed loading the vessels until others, freighted to his own
account, had been loaded. The merchants had to pay a long demurrage,
and were probably beaten at the ports of arrival by the Egyptian ships
which could sell their grain at a higher rate.
  Too many agents for the same commodity spoiled the market and the
Turks, Greeks and Europeans sent by the wali to Malta, Spain and
Portugal with wheat cargoes competed against each other and were
eventually disbanded. By the end of 1811 Drovetti estimated that the
wali had extracted an annual revenue of 8 million pts. from indirect
taxes, customs and appaltos, added to the profits made in trade.45 He
believed that Egypt could easily export more than 200,000 ardabs
without depriving the local inhabitants. The following year that rosy
picture faded when the waters of the Nile receded too rapidly and the
crop was ravaged by insects. The price of foodstuffs then doubled.
Wheat consumption in the country had dropped, in part because the
army had gone to the Hijaz and wheat was exported to feed it, and
because the largest consumers, the wali and his family and retainers,
'make much less a show of luxury and of display than the former
mamluks'.46 The fallahin seldom ate wheat but instead ate dura, maize
and millet.
   In spite of the poor harvest the wali estimated his future profits at 20
million pts., and to help transport the grain down the river to Alexan-
dria 200 germes were constructed for river traffic, and also to help
transport the troops as well as the grain. By June 1813 the Turco-
Russian war was winding to a close and grain from the Black Sea region
was shortly to become available on the market in the Mediterranean.
Thai, news plus the low harvest decreased the price of wheat, although
some 40,000 ardabs were sold at 3,060,000 pts.47
   Muhammad Ali was now considered the richest pasha in the Ottoman
empire, Drovetti claimed, and had an annual income of 20 million francs a
year. The Egyptian archives are more modest and only in 1813-14/1229 do

148
