Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

dislocation. The benefits to be derived from these large-scale works
were obvious to the pasha and to his entourage, but they were not at all
apparent to the fallah, who saw little advantage to his work on these
ditches, especially if they were dug far away from his home village and
benefited no one in his zimam.
   The public works allowed for the extension of summer crops and also
allowed for the introduction of new crops into the country.
   Watering crops regularly was an elementary lesson that any fallah
child knew. Having increased irrigation by public works, Muhammad
AH was determined that his efforts should be rewarded, and the crops
irrigated at least three times in winter by mechanical devices such as
sawaqi. The chief engineer of the Delta received orders to set up sawaqt
in all areas of the Delta to ensure that they were irrigated.61 It was
estimated that some 52,836 sawaqi were built.62 The saqiya can water
three quarters of a faddan in 24 hours, but the waterwheels wear out and
have to be replaced every five years, so upkeep is necessary. Sawaqi were
registered in the government dossiers as was the land they irrigated. If
these lands fell below the registered number then the saqiya was used to
water adjacent lands. Anyone found damaging a saqiya was severely
punished.63
   The entire irrigation system that had existed was overhauled, all the
canals were dredged and deepened so they could hold summer water, for
example in 1829/1244-5 orders were issued to dredge the canals in the
province of Gharbiyya, of which there were 43 with a length of 74,302
qasaba. That project included building in Mahalla a new canal with a
work force of 32,300 men.64
   These public works caused a major increase in the land under
cultivation which was unmatched at any later time. Unfortunately many
of the statistical figures formerly used by scholars when studying that
age were erroneous. Some of these accounts, like those of Mengin for
example, halved the population and doubled the taxes, which gave a
skewed look to the system of taxation. His cadastral figures, which he
claims to be derived from government sources, are belied by the figures
given by Egyptian government records." Barakat's recent work on
landownership has set us right. The area of land that was taxable before
the public works had been carried out was 3,218,715 faddans. That area
came to 4,395,303 M in 1863, that is, early in the reign of Ismail and
before any other public works had been carried out. From these two
figures one can conclude that 1,176,588 faddans had been brought
under cultivation, thanks to the reforms and public works carried out by
Muhammad Ali.
   The expansion of arable land was accompanied by the introduction of

152
