                                                     Agricultural changes

new crops. The story of long staple cotton, first introduced in 1821, is
well known and ably covered in Roger Owen's Cotton and the Egyptian
Economy: 1820-1914. Other crops equally important to Egypt were
encouraged. The cultivation of sugar-cane, which had been grown in
limited quantities, was expanded and in time became a major industry,
as did the growth of indigo, flax and rice. Orders were given for trees to
be planted on bur lands.67 Some 200 new crops were introduced into
Egypt at the wait's behest; these ranged from fruit, like quince, varieties
of oranges, lemons and citrons, plums, pears, apples, apricots, carob,
banana, mulberry, walnut, sycamore, grapes, olives, figs, peaches and
pomegranates, to trees like the tamarisk, willow, china tree, cypress,
cordia myxa, Christ's thorn - which were used either for wood or to
make coal, or simply to beautify the countryside - and tobacco.68 Every
canal that was dug had trees planted on either side.69 Flowers of every
kind were also imported, for the wait was fond of beautiful gardens. The
majority of the fruits and vegetables that Egyptians eat today were
introduced by Muhammad Ali. Sami claims that between 1244 and
1246, i.e., 1828/9-1830/1, some 4,339,409 trees were planted.70
   Such improvements in agriculture were accompanied by government
monopolies of all money-making commodities. The first monopoly on
grain had been followed by monopolies of other export items such as
rice, green peas, chick peas, fenugreek, flax, sesame, carthame, indigo
and cotton. Some of the edibles were monopolized to feed the army in
the Hijaz, but the rest went to the export market. The fallahin were told
what crops to plant, in what quantity and over what areas, and scribes
kept books to make sure that the orders were obeyed. That policy never
wholly succeeded, but it was indicative of the government's tendency to
establish central state control over all the resources of the country.71 To
increase the country's productivity, large capital outlay was necessary,
and that could be procured with ease through the monopoly system, so
that monopolies became a state necessity. Drovetti explained to his
superiors that the wait made a virtue out of necessity: when specie was
short in the country he accepted taxes in kind, and could thus export
grain and other crops, a move that was dear to the heart of what Drovetti
called the 'philanthropic economists'.
   Storage houses for grains were built. The army was increased and set
to patrol the roads and highways. Public security was established and
allowed the free movement of supplies in the country, which facilitated
the export movement out of the country.72 Missett concurred in these
improvements and mentioned the 'complete personal security' that was
prevalent at the time in Egypt, in contrast to other parts of the Ottoman
empire.73 Salt was more emphatic: 'we owe so much to His Highness for

                                                                       153
