Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Alt

was bought abroad from England, France, Belgium, etc. This procedure
proved too slow for the wall's needs, for goods had to be sold in order to
provide the cash with which to buy the supplies. For example, Boghos
sent an order to his brother in Trieste to sell 3,000 qantars of cotton and
buy guns with the proceeds.9 At times the countries involved refused to
sell the necessary arms. As soon as guns, rifles, cannon and bullets were
bought, they were immediately copied to avoid having to return to the
European sources. The fact that Egypt possessed neither coal nor iron
presented a major obstacle to the manufacture of ammunition, for all the
raw materials had to be imported. The Sudan campaign was therefore
designed not only to find slaves for the army but to search for minerals,
(cal bahth amma yakun fiha min maadin').10 The Morean campaign in
turn led to an increase in shipbuilding. By then the military establish-
ments could call on the following factories: a complex of works in the
Citadel which produced 3-4 cannon a month and was the nucleus of
heavy industry, a musket factory producing over 625 muskets, various
kinds of hardware like swords, lances, etc., a munitions factory for the
production of cannon ball, gunpowder, bullets, etc.
   The second military industrial complex was the Tirsane in Bulaq, and
this produced small arms, cannon casting and copper lining for ships.
Six gunpowder factories were set up in various parts of Egypt, and the
natron lakes in the western desert yielded chemicals of fine quality
easily.11 Another gun factory in Hod al-Marsud supplied 800 muskets a
month.
   The need to pay for imported weaponry and machinery led to further
developments. At first the grain sales abroad had provided ample funds to
pay for any imports, but after 1813, when the grain sales had diminished,
new trading commodities were necessary. Throughout that period the
British merchants who bought grain from Egypt stepped up their exports
to Egypt in order to pay for the grain, and flooded the country with cheap
cotton textiles known as 'Indian muslins'. The influx of such stuffs had
caused a number of local workshops or fabriques to close down when they
could not compete with the cheaper British goods. Drovetti reported, 'the
article of [British] manufacture which is the most widespread in Egypt is
the cotton cloth called Indian, which the Egyptians use to make their
jackets, their turbans, and for household furnishings ... several of their
[Egyptian] factories have ceased all work'.12 Meanwhile, he bemoaned
the fact that French stuffs could not be exported to the Levant by sea
because of the British blockades. He regretted the time when cheap
Indian stuffs replaced expensive French products, and harked back to
mamluk days. He claimed that because the pasha wanted to save money
only his household and those of his sons and the officers of the court

166
