                                                     Agricultural changes

min umad al-mashayikh3) over the cafalik in 1834/1250. They were paid
a salary of 1250 pts. a month for their supervisory activities. Two years
later the cafalik were divided into parcels of 10-50 faddans and offered
to whoever wished to till them and pay the land tax. Those who had
children were given preference, for their offspring would provide extra,
unpaid labour. The division of cafalik among the fallahin, rather than
the previous custom of hiring nuzzar to supervise the land and fallahin
to till the soil through corvee or as hired workers, seemed a more
lucrative way of running the land. It also gave the land back to the fallah
as tenant, rather than as a day labourer. That step may have been
motivated by a lack of working hands, which was a problem at that time
since there was more land available than men to work it, and may
equally have been motivated by a need for more money, cutting out the
salaried middleman or nazir.
   The wali and his government up to that time had followed a policy
that was designed to cut out as many intermediaries and retain as much
of the surplus from the land as possible as a means of capital accumula-
tion. That capital was then expended in public works, in increasing the
area of production, and in importing and perfecting new kinds of
money-making crops. The funds were also used to finance industry and
the military, as well as expended on luxuries for the elite. In order to
ensure the smooth working of the administration, the supporters of the
state were rewarded by grants of land. These grants were not grants of
ownership but merely of usufructuary rights. However, by 1840-1 the
wali was faced with a power struggle internally and consequently was
forced to change his policy. The consuls even mention concern over the
stability of the regime. Throughout that period there are rumours of
change in the administration, of a pro-Turk and pro-fallah faction, of
differences of opinion between the wali and his son Ibrahim.96 It is not
inconceivable that, after the defeat in Syria (see chapter 10), the wali,
involved in negotiations with the Ottomans over the terms of his rule in
Egypt, the number of the men in the army, the amount of the tribute,
etc., sought to win the favour of the elite. The elite, realizing their
potential bargaining power at that moment in time, pushed for full
recognition of their rights, and managed to transform usufructuary
rights into full ownership. The wali, wooing de facto landowners, was
forced to make them de jure landowners by passing a law that turned
ibadiyyat and cafalik into private property. The rural elite, being a
necessary adjunct to that plan, was restored as an intermediary class of
landowners ready to offer the wali their political support and become a
revenue base for the state along with the latifundists by being made
responsible for paying the taxes.


                                                                       159
