Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

   Once the administration accepted the terms of the Ottomans, it was
forced to dismantle its monopolies according to the terms of the treaty of
Balta Liman signed between the Ottoman empire and England in 183 8. The
wali still sought to sidetrack the terms of that treaty by enjoining the
latifundists to refuse sales to private, that is western, merchants and to sell
their crops only to the government. At first the latifundists, grateful for
their new-found rights over the land, obeyed, but later they rebelled at the
system of indirect monopoly imposed on them by the government and
sought to sell their products on the open market where they could get
higher prices.97 Because they now owned the land legally, the administra-
tion could do little to stop them, especially when the first to rebel against the
system were members of the wall's family and household.
   By 1845 the largest landowners in the land were the wait and his
family, who owned 18.8 per cent of the land, a pattern that continued
and intensified until the revolution of 1952. The second largest land-
owning group were the government employees, the bureaucrats, the
Turco-Circassian elite such as the Minastirli, Daramanli, Topuzade,
Manikli families and a smattering of high Egyptian officials, among
whom were Rifaa Ran al-Tahtawi, Ali Mubarak, Nabarawi and some
Copts, Muallim Ghali Sargios and his sons. A third group comprised
the rural gentry, or ayan, like the Foda, and tribal bedouin chiefs, the
Abaza, Sultan and Abu Stait.98
   To summarize the changes that took place in the rural milieu as a
consequence of the reign of Muhammad Ali and his policies, one needs
to underline the continuity with some mamluk practices that survived or
that resurfaced. Taxes were collected more rationally and were unified,
which cut down on the gratuitous exploitation of the fallah by a number
of different groups and substituted the exploitation by the government
apparatus. New and alternative methods of production to increase the
wealth of the state were established at the expense of the middlemen,
who were pressed into the service of the state or who lost their
functions. A new popular rural group from among the petty notables
and the gentry was encouraged to become a government tool in
rationalizing agriculture for export, a tool that allowed the government
to exert greater control over the land. At the same time, the land base
was to become the first native landowning group in the country.
   Land exploitation was improved through public works, the introduc-
tion of new crops and improved agricultural habits. Changes in the
administrative apparatus sought to protect the fallah from the caprice of
the bureaucracy and to organize the bureaucracy more efficiently. While
the rate of success in all these plans was not consistently high - the
bureaucracy, for instance, continued to be capricious and inefficient -

160
