Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

scheme whereby the land tax would be paid in spite of the droughts, the
epidemics and the famines, and without placing a burden too heavy to
bear on the fallahin. That scheme was to make the rich administrators,
army generals, or members of the royal family disgorge some of their
wealth by forcing them to take over the tax liabilities of villages which
were in arrears. Affluent utnad and shaikhs who in the past had
volunteered to pay the tax liabilities of land and guarantee its future
taxes had been granted that land as an uhda. The procedure was now
extended to the more affluent members of the elite. The mutaahid, or
possessor of an uhda, was to allow the fallahin the right to cultivate their
athariyya lands, so they were not being dispossessed, but he was also
expected to hire day labourers to cultivate the balance of the land that
may have been left fallow or was uncultivated. The fallahin paid the
mutaahid the land tax (miri), and he had to make up the remainder of the
tax imposed on the uhda out of his own pocket. The mutaahid could not
legally use corvee labour nor impose any extra taxes on the fallahin as
had been customary in iltizam days, so that in theory his authority was
sharply curtailed. His profit was derived from the cultivation of the
fallow lands in the uhda, somewhat akin to usya land. However, once the
fallow land was brought under cultivation it was to be restored to the
fallahin.94 In the short run the mutaahid was to bear the expense of the
land and share in some of the profit, but in the long run the land was to
revert to the fallah. When Muhammad Ali died, that system was
changed and those who held lands as uhda kept them and cut out the
fallah.
   The earliest uhda document I have seen dated from 1252/1836 and in
it the shaikh al-balad of al-Qasba requested that he be allocated lands as
uhda and that the district be granted to him ('talaba mina an yata ahad
bil bilad wa yaltamis an tuhal al-nahiya ala uhdatihi3). When towards
the end of the decade, with the second Syrian campaign, the need for
money became more pressing, bureaucrats and officers were forced to
take on uhad which had previously been offered on a voluntary basis.
Uhad were traded for pensions, and by 1844 nearly one million faddans
had been distributed under that system.
   The fallahin liked the uhda system for it allowed them exemption
from corvee duties, and they were protected by the mutaahid from the
bureaucracy and from neighbouring landowners, even when they were
being exploited by him. Under the reign of Abbas, much uhda land was
confiscated because the owners were in arrears of taxation. By 1858
solvent uhad became private property.
   Cafalik, or grants of land to members of the royal family, at first were
supervised by village shaikhs appointed as salaried supervisors ('nuzzar

158
