                                                  Industry and commerce

Ismail Jabal Tariq, the wall's agent and admiral, was sent on board the
Africa to try to buy ships from England. When these were refused him,
the wali encouraged his friends and relations to invest in arms and
shipping for him. His Greek agents, Tossizza and Anastasi, built three
ships in 1818 which traded in the waters of the Greek archipelago. The
wali bought an American brig and three merchant ships and sent them
off on the grain trade. They returned laden with arms and ammunition
for the Hijaz campaign.6 Other agents stationed in Malta, Livorno,
Trieste, Genoa and Marseille drummed up trade for Egypt and in turn
bought up arms and ammunition.
   One of the basic rules of mercantilist thought was to ship on local
shipping, as the west had so successfully done. Muhammad Ali followed
that policy. Having been raised in a port city and been a merchant for
ten years, he was familiar with the need for shipping cargo, arming ships
and beating other ships to the ports. While he knew that his own fleet
could not rival that of the European powers, he hoped to make it the
strongest fleet in the eastern Mediterranean, and to carve out the lion's
share of trade. This trade, up to this point, had been in the hands of
Greek shippers. When the British fleet under Lord Nelson had block-
aded and sunk the French fleet in the Bay of Abuqir, the once all-
powerful French shippers who had dominated the Mediterranean had
temporarily disappeared from the sea lanes, and their place had been
taken by Greek ships and Ottoman craft. Muhammad Ali saw an
opportunity for displacing such rivals by his marine. Although his
captains were Greeks from the islands, his 'admirals' were Albanians
from Kavala, like Muharram Bey his son-in-law, Matush Bey the
commander of the fleet, and Ismail Jabal Tariq Bey.
    The Hijaz campaign also necessitated the establishment of ammuni-
tion, gun-powder and arms manufactories. In 1810 news of the Egyp-
tian workshops turning out such items leaked to the Porte, which sent a
firman warning the wali that it was forbidden to set up workshops
 (tourash) for making bullets and shot (rusas toa rash), for the Ottomans
had a monopoly on the manufacture of such items with two workshops,
 one in Uskudar and one in Izmir.7 The monopoly and the Ottoman
 directives went the way of all other orders from the Porte which
displeased the wali, and further workshops were set up and expanded.
 In 1815 a gunpowder factory was set up on Roda Island, which
extracted saltpetre as 'white as that of the English' and a cannon
 foundry, the Tophane, was created in the Citadel.8
    A whole ensemble of new industries relating to the army was set up
 providing a typical example of a military industrial complex of arsenals,
 shipyards,, factories, hospitals and schools. To begin with, ammunition

                                                                      165
