                                                Industry and commerce

bought expensive materials. Drovetti's venom against the English made
him write, 'England, enemy of all which could have contributed towards
reviving the old commercial prosperity of Egypt'.13 How such prosperity
could be achieved by importing expensive French goods rather than
British ones is not explained.
   The consequent collapse of Egyptian workshops showed Muhammad
Ali the need for reorganizing textile production and for placing an
embargo on British textiles to prevent them from swamping the market
or 'dumping' their cheap cloth. By such means the xoali hoped, to quote
Drovetti, 'this country would have the least possible need for foreign
products and that it would become capable of supplying such products
to its neighbours'.14
   Muhammad Ali used old hands to set up his projects and especially
from among those familiar with that particular commodity. The first
group he used were the Syrian Christian merchants, such as the Bocti
family. This family had come to Egypt during the last century, and
while one brother settled in Alexandria, one settled in Damietta, two
went to Cairo and one brother to Livorno.15 The descendant of one of
the brothers, Joseph Bocti, became Swedish consul and built the silk
factory at Khoronfish. Joseph developed trading relations between
Egypt and Sweden, Egyptian grain being sold in return for pig-iron.
Swedish ships were chartered to carry Egyptian grain abroad. Bocti also
set up the cotton factories. Syrian Christian merchants were the obvious
choice for Muhammad Ali because they had controlled the import of
European textiles and 'the resale of cloth' 1 ' as well as dominated the
import and export market to Europe. Another Syrian Christian estab-
lished in Egypt was Basile Farazli who became the wali's agent in
Marseille.17 Of the Greek merchants who settled in Egypt in 1811, the
most prominent were the Anastasi, Casulli, Zizinia and Tossizza
families. Tossizza was made director of a glass factory and later became
Greek consul to Egypt.18 Zizinia bought and outfitted a ship to expand
the wait's merchant navy, and provided him with his first frigates. A
number of Greeks from the islands became the captains of the new fleet
and some of them converted to Islam.19 From 1812, ships bearing Greek
labourers and tradesmen came yearly from Hydra and Spezia.20
   Muhammad Ali had agents in France, England, Malta, Izmir, Tunis,
Naples, Venice, Yemen and India. From 1816 the wait had offered
1,500,000 riyals to anyone who would undertake to organize trade with
India. Mahruqi, Briggs and the waifs Italian physician, Bausani,
accepted the offer and set up trading links with India.31 These agents
allegedly earned one third the profits as their share, which, if true,
explained their loyalty and support.23

                                                                    167
