Chapter 8


Industry and commerce




Dependence on the Nile river, while yielding admirable results in good
years, was, alas, a dependence on whimsical or capricious nature, which
through floods and droughts, good years and indifferent years showed
man how little he controlled his river, and how much lay at the mercy of
nature's forces when he was buffeted by catastrophe in bad years.
Muhammad Ali was too practical a man to trust wholly to the caprice of
nature, and tried to harness the river with the technology of his day.
Oriented as he was towards trade and commerce, he must needs develop
manufactures in order to have a favourable balance of trade: two planks
in the edifice of mercantilist thought. Diversification of investment into
industry, trade and commerce was imperative. These were fields that
Muhammad Ali understood even better than he did agriculture.
   Egypt had always been a cotton-textile exporting country, although it
had its ups and downs. It had imported all its raw silk and some of its
cotton from Syria. In return Egypt paid for these imports by exporting
rice and cereals to the area, and some textiles. Egypt had also exported
textiles to France in the early part of the eighteenth century. By the end
of the century that market had contracted for various reasons we have
already referred to, not least of which may have been the death of textile
workers from the plague that ravaged the land by the end of the century.
   Throughout the eighteenth century we notice struggles for power
among various Ottoman governors and notables in the Balkans as well as
in the Arab provinces, each one seeking to wrest a quasi-autonomy for
his region, to establish a centralized form of government, and to increase
export, all of which were interdependent. That phenomenon most
certainly arose in response to a demand from Europe for increased
commercial activity, one which could come about through centralization
of authority and a monopoly over the regions. The 'pull' from Europe
was answered by a 'push' from the Mediterranean area. That push came
when internal conditions allowed for an accumulation of resources, that
is, when a means to prevent surplus from being siphoned off to the
imperial capital was found. Such a situation explained the struggles for

162
