                                                 Industry and commerce

power on the part of the governors and their attempts to break away
from the deadly suction imposed by the needs of the capital city and its
government which also sought to centralize authority. Increased cen-
tralization in local governments was necessary in order to hasten
rationalization of agriculture towards the production of cash crops and
the export market instead of waiting for the market forces to operate. At
that time we note the creation of links between the local Christian
merchants and European merchants, and the rise in power and influence
of Syrian Christian merchants.1 Simultaneously we note an increase in
arms, in the use of mercenaries and warships among the leaders of the
regions. That one factor also necessitated a search for increased
revenues on the part of the local rulers and partly accounted for their
need to export more. Why such an increase in weaponry and more
expensive methods of warfare appeared at that specific time is uncertain.
Rising technology in Europe may have led the merchants to sell more
sophisticated weapons to the local rulers, and also indicate to them how
they could pay for the arms - by increased production and export.
   Jazzar in Acre, Dhahir in Galilee, Ali Bey in Egypt, all responded to
such pressures for export. Muhammad Ali in Kavala may also have felt
the pressures, for Kavala was on the way to Thessaloniki, a major port
in the Mediterranean trade and one which exported the cotton produc-
tion of that hinterland. He may well have sought to continue that trend
towards export in Egypt, hence his links with a number of Syrian
Christian merchants, some of whom were also European consuls, and
his links with the Greek merchants, whom he invited to settle in Egypt
and who became his agents.
   The response of the Ottoman government to these movements
towards autonomy was to strengthen her naval power after 1770 in order
to gain control over trade and over her provinces at one and the same
time. Both Jazzar and Ali Bey had also acquired fleets in order to expand
their trade and combat piracy, revealing a distinct trend not only
towards export outside the empire but also towards greater indepen-
dence vis-a-vis the Ottoman authorities. The Ottoman authorities tried
to crush the challengers to their hegemony when they could, by using
Jazzar to put down Dhahir, and Abu-1 Dhahab Bey to put down Ali
Bey, thereby diminishing the number of their opponents, even though
the tools they used continued to remain autonomous.
   Muhammad Ali was familiar with the commercial conditions of the
eastern Mediterranean and sought to capitalize on trade with Egyptian
products. Logically or instinctively he realized that the quickest means
to carry out a successful large-scale economic enterprise was to central-
ize authority, which became a first priority, as we have seen, and was

                                                                     163
