Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

indeed the first lesson in any mercantilist book. Mercantilists believed
the state must control and direct the flow of commerce, that agriculture
and industry must be encouraged, and import trade controlled and
limited to those commodities necessary for creating an infrastructure, as
long as the imports allowed a favourable balance of trade. Ali Bey al-
Kabir had espoused the same principles, as we have shown, but with less
success than Muhammad Ali.
   One of the basic nails in Muhammad Ali's mercantilist procedures
was as yet lacking, notably industrialization in Egypt, a lack he rapidly
sought to remedy. The first large workshops that were set up were war-
related ones. Ships were needed to carry soldiers to Upper Egypt to
fight the mamluks, and then later to carry cereal to the Mediterranean
ports from the hinterland. There again the wait learned from his
mamluk predecessors. They had acquired armed ships and a merchant
marine in order to protect their shores from pirates, defend their
shipping and expand their trade and commercial links, to say nothing of
moving their troops expeditiously, though they may not have succeeded
in all these purposes. Murad Bey the duumvir had hired three brothers
from Zante, who converted to Islam and established a cannon-foundry
and a fleet of river boats which patrolled the Nile. The largest of these
boats carried 24 cannon and was manned by Greeks, as indeed were
most of the other ships. The captains commanding the ships were also
Greek.2 Muhammad Ali went farther than the mamluks, and in 1805
and 1807 his army was seconded by gunboats3 when it fought the
mamluks. He was said to have used a squadron of six gunboats and 800
transport ships.4 These were ships built by the mamluks, but he soon
increased their number.
   The British invasion of 1807 had shown him how vulnerable the
Egyptian coastline was and led him to develop a navy. The war in the
Hijaz forced him to expand his fleet. The first ship in his new fleet was a
frigate, the Africa, which was found unfinished in the arsenal at
Alexandria. In 1807 it was sent to England to have its hull lined with
copper and outfitted with thirty guns. Work on the Red Sea flotilla
began in 1809, and eighteen ships varying in weight between 100 and
150 tons were built in the Bulaq arsenal and carried in pieces on camel
back to Suez where they were put together by 1811.1 Other ships
necessary for the Hijaz expedition were chartered from the sultan of
Masqat. Ship-building after 1829 was carried out in two major ship-
yards, the first and older one in Bulaq, and a larger and newer one in
Alexandria which was expanded to build an entire fleet to compensate
for the one lost in the battle of Navarino.
   Commercial interests led to the expansion of a merchant marine.

164
