                                                  Industry and commerce

cheap British textiles which had flooded the market and competed with
the Egyptian variety. Soon Egyptian cottons of the lower and middling
kinds swept the local market, and were exported to the Red Sea, the
Sudan, Syria and Anatolia once all these territories became part of the
Egyptian empire. Only luxury cottons, silks and high-grade woollens
were imported.
   Muhammad Ali imported the new technology of the power loom, and
in 1830 a British engineer set up steam engines for a weaving establish-
ment in Shubra which had 150 looms, and one in Qalat al-Kabsh with
200 looms. Steam engines were also used in hulling rice in Rosetta and
in the foundry at Bulaq. In 1847 the paper factory was also steam-
powered.36 Eventually, the cost of importing coal for the steam engines
mitigated their usefulness and resulted in their neglect, as well as in a
constant search for coal by the engineers hired by the wait for that
purpose. The old-fashioned hand looms, however, continued to func-
tion successfully.
   The expansion of cotton textiles came at a time of similar expansion in
England, where the industrial revolution had arisen on the basis of that
one commodity. The invention of the mule jenny had boosted spinning
techniques, but weaving was still done on a hand loom until 1820 when
the power loom was adopted, and power mills expanded rapidly. The
immediate outcome of that expansion was a pressing need for new
markets, or for expanded markets for British textiles, which by then
formed half of all British exports, while raw cotton made up one fifth of
its imports. As Hobsbawm pertinently remarked, the British balance of
payments as well as British shipping and overseas trade depended on
that single industry.37
   Roussel and the foreign experts and merchants in Egypt were worried
about Egyptian competition with European products, as Roussel frankly
admitted. Drovetti, on the other hand, sneered at 'this absurd project
wanting to turn to manufacturing a nation whose major interests lie in
agriculture'.38 He reasoned that through industrialization the pasha
would either produce cloth more expensively than the European variety
because he would need foreign experts to oversee the mills, or he would
rely on the natives who 'could only become imitators', and would never
be any match for European competition which would find new methods
to furnish 'the most beautiful at cheaper rates'. Drovetti conveniently
forgot that all European cottons had copied 'oriental' designs, since they
had few of their own, so that Europe had been the imitators, and that the
most beautiful cottons had been the Indian variety, not the French or
the British. Britain had to kill off Indian cottons because they were too
competitive before she was able to expand her own cotton production.39

                                                                      171
