                                                  Industry and commerce

were set up for weaving cotton, jute and silk, as were establishments for
building river barges ('amakin wa masani li nasj al-qatani ... min al-
qutn wa-1 harir wa kadhalik al junfis wa-1 sandal3).29 All these products
were monopolized, private looms were prohibited and workers drafted
into the factories to weave on government looms.
   The thrust of the industrialization projects was towards cotton
production. Throughout the eighteenth century cloth had been the
major artisan commodity exported from Egypt to the west. Linen and
flax goods such as minufi, batanuni, asiuti and shibirti from the Said, and
cotton goods such as dimity, ajami, mahallawi from the Delta were all
exported. Centres for weaving were in Mahalla, Rosetta, Fayyum,
Damietta, Shibin and Cairo, although the capital was outdistanced by
the provinces. Spinning and weaving of silk was, however, a Cairene
speciality, although rural areas like Isna did weave silk as well. Wool
was also spun and woven. The first commodities to become industrial-
ized were obviously the ones with an export potential, if not towards
Europe at least towards the Ottoman empire. Much of the cotton and all
of the silk used in the past had been imported from Syria and Palestine,
since Egyptian cotton, known as either baladi or rumi, was not grown in
sufficient quantities for local needs. That fact inspired the toali to
expand the area of cotton and try to grow mulberries and raise
silkworms in Egypt in order to cut down on the importation of raw
materials.
   The new factories that Jabarti mentioned in 1816 were the first
attempts at large-scale works, and were instituted in the hope of saving
the industry, or salvaging it from collapse when the influx of British
cottons from 1811 had caused the ruin of a number of establishments.
The factories were at first manned by workers from abroad, and Jabarti
mentioned 'artisans arriving from the land of the Franks' (carbab al-
sanai al-wasilun min bilad al-afranj'). He mentioned by name the
various items of machinery that were found in the factories and added
that they included 'machinery that was strange in composition and
construction', ('al-alat al-gharibatu-1 wad wa-1 tarkib'), referring to
machinery the likes of which he had never seen or heard of before for the
weaving of cotton and silk.30 These were references to equipment in the
silk workshops that Bocti had been hired to manage, manned by silk
workers imported from Italy and mentioned by Roussel as groups of
seventeen workers with sixty more being expected.31 In 1817 Roussel
commented, 'within a few years, the silk factories that are being
established in Egypt will deal a deadly blow to those of Italy, and even
ours'.32 He was then being over pessimistic regarding European produc-
tion. Hydraulic machinery may have been part of the 'strange machin-

                                                                       169
