Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

   In 1841 the wali wrote instructing his inspector-general of factories to
intensify production so as to meet the needs of the population fully and
avoid any imports from abroad, with the consequent exodus of capital.14
In that year he ordered that 5 per cent of the workers' pay be distributed
to them as a premium over and above their wages. In the month of
Rajab he ordered that 50 per cent of the gains (arbah) from the textiles
be given the master craftsmen in order to stimulate competition
amongst the textile workers and increase production.55 These were
hardly directives of a man who saw his industries going down the drain,
or even operating at a loss.
   Whatever else he may have done, Muhammad Ali did not throw
money down the drain. He accepted the principle that he had to operate
at a loss while the industry was in its infancy and until it had got on its
feet, but had it continued to lose money he would have ruthlessly
scrapped it. We have no grounds for assuming that he did not know
what was going on in his own country, and that foreign travellers like
Cobden and others who could barely move around the country, let alone
speak enough Arabic to understand what was going on, did. When we
note furthermore that the very people who moaned that the factories
were ruinous and losing money were also reporting that a piece of cloth
which cost the government 40 pts. to manufacture was sold at 105 pts.,
giving a 100-per-cent profit,*6 then we must review our beliefs regarding
the factories. Duhamel, who gave these figures of profit, added that the
figures did not take into account the profits that could be made from
selling the cotton wool as a raw commodity, and the capital invested in
the machinery, the buildings, etc., which merely highlights his eco-
nomic naivety rather than the truth of his allegations that factories were
losing money. One must therefore think in economic terms of the
advantage that industrialization brought to Egypt as weighed against the
disadvantages of importing finished products and exporting raw
materials. Whatever the cost of industrialization, the benefit outweighed
it by far.
   The chief reason for European, mainly British and French, animosity
towards Egyptian factories, other than the obvious one of fear of
competition, was to be found in the economic theories of the day. The
early nineteenth century in Britain had been characterized by a mood of
depression that not only derived from the loss of their American empire
but also from the falling rate of profits and what Ricardo termed the
'iron law of wages'. In 1830 Britain faced a severe economic crisis. The
rate of profit in cotton had declined drastically from 1 shilling in 1812 to
3.75 pence in 1830. Workers' wages had fallen and they were starving
and restless. The middle classes, worried over their loss of profit and

176
