                                                      Industry and commerce

another military man, Boislecomte, gave a different account of the
textile factories. He said,
The linen cloth factories not only satisfy the country's internal consumption,
but supply an export commodity of some value. In 1833 they provided
1,000,000 pieces of narrow cloth in the range of 2.50 to 5 francs. Half was used
up within the country, the other half was exported. These same factories
produced 30,000 pieces of wide cloth in the range of 12 to 16 francs, and worth
450,000 francs, which in its totality represents one twelfth the value of our
production.

   He added that every piece of cloth brought in a net profit of 2 francs
and that wide linens and cotton voile were beginning to be produced for
export. Elsewhere he wrote, 'they have generally managed to satisfy
local consumption and to produce commodities at the same price that
the Europeans normally sell theirs on the market'.41
   The budget for 1833 further gives a figure of 1,500,000 francs for
receipts from sailcloth (mansujat al-qulu) and of 1,200,000 francs for silk
textiles, which shows that some textiles produced a quick profit,43 even
silk, which was supposed to be a failure. Had all the textiles been
ruinous there would not have been such a commotion over them as there
was. Drovetti in fact wrung his hands over the silk textiles for fear that
they would 'deal a death blow to those from Italy and even to our own',
so that his sneers and constant carping over textiles were indications
that he feared their competition with French products rather than their
failure in Egypt.
   It has been said that the peak of industrial power was reached by the
mid-1830s and declined after that,43 that in 1837 there were 29 cotton
factories in the country and that by 1840 only 15 factories remained.
Pueckler-Muskau attributed that decrease in factories to war, plague
and cholera, while Duhamel et al. claimed that the pasha had discovered
that it was more profitable to put out the goods with entrepreneurs who
used the government's mule jennies and looms. Rather than continue
running the mills through direct government supervision, the govern-
ment merely supplied the entrepreneurs with the raw materials and
received the finished product.44 By 1834 yarn and cloth could be
produced by individuals on payment of a tax to the state. All of this
merely tells us that Muhammad Ali had discovered that private
incentives worked better than a nationalized administration, and that
some of the profit was, in the long run, more profitable than trying to
hog it all. It does not tell us either that the factories were worthless, or
that the idea of industrialization had failed. It does tell us that the pasha
had found a way of making more money out of the factories and textiles

                                                                            173
