Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

   Amongst the other Europeans the wait used was the French consul
Drovetti and the English merchant Samuel Briggs, both of whom encour-
aged trade between their respective countries and Egypt. England had
the edge, for it dominated the sea and carried off the giant's share of trade.
After 1815 a number of Frenchmen, formerly employed in the army or
with Bonapartist feelings, rushed to Egypt in search of a livelihood, and
there they were hired to teach the Egyptians technology, to train the army
on western lines, to direct and set up factories. The list of Frenchmen
employed in Egypt is a well-known one for the west has long credited
them with the modernization of Egypt. As far as the Egyptian ruler was
concerned, these men were tools in his hand: they were in Egypt to
perform a function, to teach his bureaucrats their knowledge, and once
that was done he wished to dispense with them, for he did not trust them
to look after his interests in the same way as his retainers would, especially
as many of them were 'job hunters and adventurers'.23 Egyptians were
placed in secondary positions of command, and were groomed to take
over from the foreigners. At first Muhammad Ali refused to believe that
Egyptians could be anything but fallahin or industrial workers, so that the
first group of students sent to study abroad were Turks like Uthman Nur
al-Din, who in 1809 was sent to Pisa and Livorno, on Bocti's suggestion,
to study military science, ship-building, printing and engineering.24 But
in 1815, an Egyptian, Husain Shalabi Ajwa, invented a machine for
hulling rice that made the task much simpler. The wait was impressed and
said, 'The Egyptians seem to have an aptitude for sciences',25 and ordered
that a number of Egyptians and some of his mamluks be gathered in a
school which was named the Muhandiskhana, the school for engineering.
There they were taught by several Europeans. This may have been the
first of a series of schools. In 1828 ten Egyptians were sent to Europe to
learn mechanics.26 In 1831 the schools of cavalry, artillery, infantry and
naval sciences were created. Technical schools for war munitions,
mineralogy, engineering, applied chemistry, signalling arts and crafts,
irrigation, translation, agriculture, languages, medicine, pharmaceutics,
maternity and veterinary medicine were founded.27
   Other than war-related industries, minor industries were first set up
with a soap factory in 1815. That factory was tied in with an agricultural
venture, for the wait had ordered an experimental area known as Ras al-
Wadi, near Bilbais, to be outfitted with satvaqi and be made to grow
mulberry trees for silk-worm production, and olive trees for the
extraction of oil. One thousand sawaqi were ordered for the region, and
a soap factory 'along Syrian lines' and oil presses, to extract olive oil as
well as use some of it for soap, were started.28
   1815 was a year of industrial activity when establishments or factories

168
