                                                   Industry and commerce

[England] had your beginnings as I have, and they were as expensive to
you as they are to me; I do not expect to begin with much success, but I
shall succeed by and by.' That is hardly the speech of a man who was
boastful regarding his achievements, but rather a sensible assessment, so
that when the wali claimed some profits we may equally assume that it
was unexaggerated. Bowring pointed out that cotton cloth was the only
article which had injured British commercial exportation, since England
no longer sends cotton cloth and Indian muslins to Egypt.51
   Rivlin has alleged that the Egyptian industries were 'doomed' because
of the 'weakness inherent' in Muhammad Ali's industrial policy, and
gives as her reference one line in Puryear (quoting Cobden, who first
emitted that opinion) and Fahmi who gave exactly the contrary opinion,
yet she failed to demonstrate any inherent weakness in industry.52 Her
arguments that the Egyptian managers were inadequately trained and
corrupt and that the machinery was imported is not an argument.
Inadequately trained men with time learn the ropes, and the machinery,
imported and imitated in Egyptian workshops, was not all that compli-
cated as machinery went. Equally, one can dismiss her remark that the
Egyptian workers resisted work in the factories because they did not
wish to become proletarianized, as though one opted to become a factory
owner or a factory hand, or even had a choice. All workers have resisted
working in factories, in England no less than in Egypt at the beginning
of industrialization. Her valid argument is the one regarding lack of fuel,
but fuel can be and was imported. Lack of fuel has never been a
deterrent for industry - witness Japan, to give but one successful
example. But there is another valid argument raised by Boislecomte to
account for any shortcomings in the new industries. He accused the
British of indirectly undermining Egyptian industry, for their advisors
had sent Egypt a profusion of 'incomplete machinery, defective, worn
out, incapable of functioning and all paid for at the highest prices; it
reached the point where one could see a system [designed] to stifle
Egypt's nascent industry, if love of gain and individual cupidity did not
suffice to explain all.'53 Harsh words indeed, but, if true and not merely
Anglophobia speaking, they might apply to some of the more elaborate
machinery that some people described they had seen lying around
unused. In brief, we have no concrete proof that the textiles failed, for
the simple reason that they had not failed, but were indeed a most
successful enterprise considering that it was one that dealt with new
machinery and considering the natural opposition of workers to facto-
ries in general. The surprise lies not in that the factories cost the state
sums of money, but in that they became working propositions so
rapidly.

                                                                       175
