Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

by putting out. Had they been such a failure, no sane contractor would
have undertaken the project.
   Some of the misunderstandings on the part of scholars may have
stemmed from reading too much into the reports of the consuls. For
example, when Drovetti in July 1822 reported, 'Already a large factory
destined to manufacture cloth has ceased work',45 this was interpreted
by one author to mean that the Bulaq factory had ceased production and
that 'several factories stopped operating'.46 This was patently incorrect,
for the only factory that had closed down was one in Khoronfish that
produced silk and had been reconverted to cotton production in 1818.
From 1820 onwards more, not fewer, factories were created. Not one of
Muhammad Ali's critics ever gave figures which supported the conten-
tion that the factories ran at a loss. While British consul Campbell said,
'Mehemet Aly would gain very much by destroying them [factories] and
importing all manufactures from Europe',47 Mimaut writing in 1830 to
Prince Polignac, the foreign secretary, said that Egyptian exports were
four times more considerable than their imports, and added that the
monopolies were 'onerous' only to the exporters,48 who could not make
a profit because of government monopoly.
  Although the goods manufactured in Egypt may have been of inferior
quality compared to those manufactured in France and England - and
that is by no means certain - nonetheless they had a vast market in
Egypt and in the conquered territories of Hijaz, Sudan and later on of
Syria. In 1831 when Egypt imported 140,000 pts. worth of linens, it also
exported 1,587,775 pts. worth of linens to the Ottoman empire,
Tuscany, Austria, Greece, and Malta. These were exported through the
port of Alexandria, leaving one to wonder at similar exports from other
ports which have gone undocumented as yet. On the other hand,
8»I53J525 pts. worth of cotton goods were imported that year, probably
because all the local cottons had gone into making uniforms for the
army. In 1840 the imports of cotton cloth decreased by £ 6 I , I 6 O . 4 9
  The picture that comes through regarding the imports of cotton was
that after a period during which a massive influx of British cottons had
ruined the local cotton production, no more cotton was imported by the
1820s. In 1831 some textiles were imported, but by 1838 the British
consul was expressing his misgivings about Egyptian competition,50
showing that the imports from Britain had been temporary.
  Bowring wrote that Muhammad Ali had told him that he was setting
up his factories in order 'to accustom the people to manufacture' more
than for any immediate profit that was expected. He also justified his
protective embargoes by pointing out that the same system was pursued
in England and France. Bowring reported the wali to have said, 'You

174
