                                                  Industry and commerce

their fear of a workers' revolt, put pressures on the government in the
shape of a Reform Bill. When the Bill was thrown out by the House of
Lords in 1831, serious violence broke out, there was a run on the Bank
of England, and the country seemed on the verge of revolution.57 The
Bill was passed in due course, but it had been a tense and frightening
period.
   The economic theories of the day, faced with such critical conditions,
'constructed theories of capitalist imperialism which held that empire
building was a necessity if the new industrialism was to survive'.58 The
science of political economy flourished. Ricardo argued for an increased
dependence on foreign trade to overcome the declining rate of profit,
while Wakefield saw industrial society as faced either with revolution or
with colonization. The industrial classes 'who made political economy -
with its message of laissez-faire and free trade - into a kind of secular
scripture ... called upon the legislature ... to make legislation conform
to its dictates'.59 British political ideology became linked to commercial
and industrial developments.
   British industrialists who had shifted to fully automated power looms,
thereby expanding textile production, put pressures on the government
to open up foreign markets for British goods. We then witness the
development of an aggressive expansion of British trade which forced
goods on markets hitherto closed to them, even by military means as in
the Opium Wars. Palmerston in 1839 could say with pride, 'Never was
there an administration that paid more attention to the commercial
interests of this country.'60 That ideology of the necessity for expanding
markets and informal colonization was to cause Muhammad Ali's
undoing and that of his industries, if one may anticipate. Britain did not
want a new independent state in the Mediterranean, one that was
militarily and economically powerful and therefore able to check her
advances in that area and in the Persian Gulf.
   The Egyptian rulers, faced with different conditions, adopted the
mercantilist gospel in opposition to the gospel of Free Trade, which was
not in their interest. Mercantilist thought believed that countries
became rich when they exported more than they imported, when they
saved bullion and became self-sufficient. They believed in the state
control of resources, which suited the philosophy of an adventurer who
had seized power, and who, in order to stay in power, had to dominate
the country, which otherwise would revert back to the control of the
Ottoman empire. Furthermore, the mercantilist creed was tied to a
concept of imperialism and expansion. It was obvious to the wait and his
circle of tujjar that more money could be made by the state in exporting
finished products than in exporting raw materials. Unlike the tujjar of

                                                                      177
