Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

Technology of the day was then fairly simple and could easily be copied
and adopted by unsophisticated workers, as were the British mill hands
and the Egyptian ones. Lastly, Drovetti failed to take into account the
fact that both France and Britain had used protective tariffs to nurture
their nascent industries, a fact which Muhammad Ali had noted, and
copied by imposing embargoes to render his industries competitive.
Unlike England, which did not possess the raw material and had to
import it, Egypt did. Egypt also had cheap labour and a captive market.
Drovetti and Roussel's remarks, as well as those of the other foreign
consuls, could thus be discounted as inspired more by political fears of
economic competition than by a feeling for the best interests of the
Egyptian state.
   Reports on the factories are frequently unreliable and contradictory.
In 1839 Mengin reported that only nine looms of the Birkal factory were
working. Four years later Colin saw the steam engines in the- Bulaq
factory lying unused while cattle propelled the looms. Yet in 1837
Duhamel reported that the machines at Bulaq were steam-propelled.40
While one can accuse these reporters of bias against the new industries,
which would explain their unreliable reports, one must take into
account the possibility that they were just confused. After all, no one
today would give much credence to accounts of eye-witnesses who
visited a factory nor use mem as authoritative reports had he had more
concrete figures to go on. There may well have been temporary
shutdowns in the mills because of wars, lack of animals, shortages of raw
materials, low harvests, any one of a number of reasons. The steam-
powered mills which were more difficult to maintain may also have had
temporary periods of idleness, which did not necessarily mean that they
had stopped working permanently. Muhammad Ali's own accounts had
been disregarded by many scholars because they believed them to be
boastful, which may or may not have been true. He at least had the
figures of production available to him which were not available to the
foreign consuls and observers. The toali had told Pueckler-Muskau that
he had spent ten million dollars on his factories and that they had
already yielded one million clear profit. Duhamel and Campbell denied
any such profit and added that Muhammad Ali should destroy his
factories and import everything from Europe. This made little economic
sense for Egypt, but a lot for Europe who stood to gain from such an
uneven exchange.
   Even the military became instant experts in economics when it came
to judging Egyptian industry, and General Belliard reported, 'Their
linens cannot stand competition with ours; all these establishments are
ruinous, but it is his [Muhammad Ali's] mania.' On the other hand,

172
