Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

the eighteenth century who had espoused the contrary belief because
they did not control the state, nor even the artisans, the new government
controlled both the production of raw materials and of finished prod-
ucts, and could manipulate prices and wring profits from workers and
fallahin. The tvali also knew that import substitution would halt the flow
of bullion outside the country, in so far as this concerned commodities
that could easily be duplicated, allowing bullion to be used for import-
ing commodities the country could not imitate, i.e., machinery, ships,
etc., although once these were imported they were then imitated and
substituted. He told Boislecomte that his factories, 'liberate me today
from the tribute which European industry used to levy on Egypt, and
the sums with which I paid for your cloth and silks now remain in the
country'.61 That situation was comparable to modern-day Egypt, when
precious foreign exchange was, at one time, hoarded to pay for
armaments rather than expended on luxury goods, or even on necessary
goods not of top priority.
   Before the Egyptian administration could implement such plans it
needed to develop a closed-market system to protect infant industries
and dump their goods on a captive market, without fearing competition
from rival commodities. Much as the industrialized nations were to
develop imperialism and for the same reasons, Muhammad Ali was to
expand the frontiers of Egypt in a search for markets and raw materials.
Protection of infant industries was customary among most industrial-
ized countries. It is still customary to some extent today when the
United States imposes protective tariffs against Japanese cars, for
example, and Japan places limits on US textiles.
   The one area in which Egyptian industry could become rapidly
competitive was in cotton and linen textiles. That was precisely the field
v/hich posed a threat to British interests. The riposte was an attack on
the policy of industrialization as being ruinous to Egypt, though this
should not have preoccupied England at all. Had it been genuinely
believed in higher British circles that factories could ruin Egypt, there
would have been no opposition to them, for Egypt would have become
so poor that the wali could not have afforded his army and would have
posed no threat to anyone. What Britain wanted was that Egypt should
turn more and more land over to planting cotton and raw materials, so
that Britain could turn the raw materials into cotton textiles; for, as
Bowring noted, these, 'formerly so much used, are now scarcely at all
sent to Egypt since muslins have been woven in the new factories'.*2
The success of Egyptian textiles appeared in their spread into Syria,
Anatolia and the Sudan, which were all potential markets for British
goods.

178
