Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

linen for the three requisite months.64 Clot Bey said there were ioo
looms employed in weaving silk and gold thread, and Bowring remarked
that the 'work is well done, the stuffs are carefully woven, and the
patterns are tasteful'.65
   Linen production had been an Egyptian industry from the time of the
pharoahs. Under the new regime workers remained in the realm of
cottage industries with flax spinning undertaken by women in their
homes. In 1830 the industry was organized and a register kept of all
linen spinners, who were supposed to deliver a certain fixed amount
every day. The thread was then woven in Cairo. Individuals were
allowed to weave at home in return for paying a duty of 360 pts. per
month per loom, which yielded the government an income of 20,000
purses or £100,000. Duhamei noted that in 1834, when weaving was still
a government monopoly, there were claimed to be some 80,000 looms
which could furnish 7 million pieces of cloth. He remarked that either
that figure was exaggerated, which it obviously was, or else the industry
had declined, for when the monopoly gave way to private enterprise the
number of looms had fallen to 23,000.** The industry provided sail-
cloth, ropes and linen cloth. Clot Bey, on the other hand, claimed the
more likely existence of 30,000 looms providing 3 million pieces of
cloth, much of which was exported to Trieste and Livorno. He also
claimed that in the past few years the cloth printed in Mabiada rivalled
that imported from England and Germany, so that the decline in the
importation of such stuffs was palpable.67 This is corroborated by
McGregor who lists £1,586,775 of linen exported in 1831, the bulk of it
being shipped to Turkey but some of it going to Austria and Tuscany.68
  As well as processing industries connected with spinning, cotton
carding, ginning and pressing cotton, rice hulling, weaving textiles in
wool, cotton, silk and linen, other manufacturing and processing
industries were set up according to needs. The first of these manufac-
tures was that of sugar. Three sugar factories were established in 1818 in
Roda, Minyat al-Rairamun and Saqiyat Musa. Rum was also distilled.69
Indigo plantations spread and indigo works were set up in a number of
places. While some of the indigo was used locally for dyes, much of it
was exported abroad to Turkey and Europe. Bowring estimated that the
quantity produced varied from 15,000 to 80,000 okes per year. Two
glass factories were set up in 1822 and 1836. When the manager of the
Alexandria factory, Tossizza, complained that the local product re-
mained unsold because too much glass was imported, Muhammad Ali
ordered that local glass was to be used and no glass to be imported.70
  Tanning had been an old guild production, and in 1827 a tanning
factory was set up. A Frenchman, Rossi, supervised the factory, which

180
