Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

   According to most estimates, these workers were paid wages that were
roughly double the wages of a field labourer, taking into consideration
the fact that the field labourer, if he were fully employed, would work
only 150-250 days a year, whereas the weaver, if fully employed,
worked six days a week year round, so that his gain was in actual terms
closer to three times the wage of the field worker. There are few figures
available that would allow us to make statements about the amount of
wages received in each trade, and we have to rely on occasional hints
here and there. In 1245/1829 indigo workers were paid one pt. per day.76
We read that master craftsmen were paid 175 pts. a month and their
assistants received 75 pts. during the indigo season and nothing
otherwise. Silk workers got from 200 to 300 pts. a month, while cotton
workers were paid by the piece. Bowring believed that the workers
preferred the factories to working in the fields, since they were better
paid.77 The average worker, presumably the landless wage labourer,
who was the poorest member of society, worked for no more than 30
paras or 0.75 pts. per day, when he was employed. He may have
supplemented his income by some cottage industry. The pay in textiles
varied from 20 to 100 paras or 0.50 to 2.50 pts. a day. Some more skilled
than others made up to 140 paras or 3.5 pts. a day.78 Workers were
supplied with food which was deducted from their pay. Salaries were
therefore relatively good, for the workers worked regularly and for
longer periods of the year than the wage labourer. Consideration of
income leaves aside a variety of more subjective factors in evaluating the
lot of the factory worker.
   When the government suffered a shortage of specie, as happened with
every war, then wages fell in arrears sometimes for as much as four
months, as in 1828 when finally the Khoronfish workers were paid half
in cash and half in kind. Workers in Mansura complained of the same
delay in wages, and forty workers escaped from the factory in 1826,
which caused the wali to scold his director and order him to pay wages
on a monthly basis and see that the workers had no further cause for
complaint.79 In 1827 the workers in the military establishments went on
strike for the same reasons. When in 1827 some unemployed workers
could not find jobs in any of the government factories, the wali ordered
that they be supplied with capital so they could open workshops of their
own. 80
   The tarbush factory in Fuwa seemed to be one of the better ones, and
wages varied from a master worker earning 600 pts. a month, to a
journeyman earning 300 pts., down to the common workers who got
from 1 to 3 pts. per day.81
   In describing his visit to Alexandria, St John mentioned a trip to the

182
