                                                     Industry and commerce

   While spinning is not 'painful' in itself, it is possible that pressure was
put on women to work in ever-increasing numbers in the factories, and
that the mores of the day made it repugnant for women to work in such
establishments with men, so that they may have chosen to maim
themselves rather than work in the factories. On the other hand, the
women who worked veiled may have been reduced to such labour as a
means of earning a livelihood, if there were no other alternatives. They
may have been urban women, for such women had frequently worked
side by side with their husbands in their trades. There were women
butchers, buyers and sellers. It is true that working within the protec-
tion of a husband and working on one's own were different things, but
some women may have been alone and the sole providers. It is not likely
that women were conscripted, for their numbers within the factories did
not warrant such conclusions. Conscription of women was a radical
measure that would have provoked resistance at the affront to the mores
of the population. It is, however, perfectly true to say that there was
resentment on the part of the population to working in factories, and
there was resistance to it. As for children, we have no figures as yet to
determine what percentage of the labour force they formed, but children
certainly were employed. Women and children have always worked as
unpaid labourers for their husbands and parents. The factory system,
for all its many defects, allowed them to be paid for their labour. When
we consider the number of men who were drafted into the army, work in
the factories for women and children may have been their sole source of
livelihood.
   Besides industry, trade and commerce was the other field of criticism
for foreign observers or consuls. By 1816 Muhammad Ali had become
the sole merchant in the land, or at least the Egyptian government had.
The government bought up all the saleable commodities at fixed prices
and became the sole seller, or so we are assured by our eye-witnesses. It
is true that the government did set up government monopolies, but it is
equally true that the number of foreign merchants established in
Alexandria in the import-export trade increased rapidly, which is
scarcely an indication that monopoly was severely practised. Perhaps all
these merchants were agents of the state, as Briggs was, and made a
comfortable living off the government, in which case their only com-
plaint would seem to be that they felt inhibited from making larger
profits by the restraining hand of the government. The Egyptian
government stopped free trade, or rather the free exploitation of the
country's resources by foreign agents. The foreign merchants who
complained of the monopoly system were those merchants who had
been cut out of a share of the pie, or who wanted a larger share. In true

                                                                          185
