                                                   Industry and commerce

   Not only was Egypt closed to British cottons, but the rest of the
Egyptian conquests could potentially be closed off to Britain (a fuller
account of these conquests is provided in later chapters). One can only
come to the conclusion that the tears spent over the ruinous expense of
Egyptian factories were at best crocodile tears shed by the British textile
manufacturer who could see actual and potential profits slipping
through his fingers at the time when he desperately needed new
markets.
   Other than cotton textiles, spinning and weaving factories, factories
for the production of woollens, silk and linens were also founded. The
first wool factory was not satisfactory and the second one was created in
1819 under the charge of the ubiquitous Mr Bocti. The function of that
factory was to supply the army and navy with uniforms. Another factory
was raised in Damanhur, and together they turned out 20,000 pics or
15,000 yds per year. (Clot Bey claimed that production was 13,540
metres per month.)' 3 The cloth, though not of superior quality, was
strong and well made and suitable for military wear. The success of that
enterprise, and the high price of tarbushes imported from France and
North Africa worn by the army resulted in setting up a tarbush factory
in Fuwa, which supplied the army with 720 tarbushes a day. At first
herds of sheep were confided to bedouins to raise for their wool, but in
1825 Cashmir goats were imported along with shepherds to improve
wool production and to expand it to include shawls for women, which
were generally imported from Cashmir. A carpet factory was also
started, but this was an expensive proposition and its carpets cost more
than the imported kind.
   Silk production began with the silk factory in Khoronfish in 1816
which was supposed to imitate Genoese velvets. A second attempt was
made in a factory in Birkit al-Fil run by Armenians brought in from
Turkey, who were experts in brocades and sirtna, embroidery in gold
and silver thread and pearls. That factory gave 60,000 okes of silk
annually and the result was cloth of good quality. The region of Wadi
Tumilat and areas in Fayyum and Asiut were planted with 10,000,000
mulberry trees for silk cultivation. The results in terms of silk produc-
tion were disappointing in spite of the fact that Druze families had been
imported from Lebanon to raise the silkworms. By 1827 the wali
expressed his disappointment at the poor results, but in 1832 an attempt
was made to reform or salvage whatever was possible and a regulation
was introduced exempting silk workers from military service. This was
certainly an exceptional measure, considering that Egypt had embarked
on the conquest of Syria and needed all men of draftable age. The
regulation also exempted women raising silk worms from working in

                                                                       179
