Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

mercantilist style, commercial activities were geared towards the estab-
lishment by the government of foreign trade monopolies and an attempt
towards acquiring a favourable balance of foreign trade made. That
measure was of benefit to the government, but naturally aroused the
animosity of the European merchants, who could see profits flowing into
government coffers instead of into their own. France and England both
had protective tariffs - witness the Corn laws, the embargo on Indian
textiles in England, and the embargo on grain import and import of
Egyptian textiles in France - but these restrictions were overlooked by
the European merchants who complained of trade barriers.
   The complaints of disgruntled merchants were the more outrageous
when we note that the wali allowed these merchants credit, and when he
called in the debts they objected violently. British consul Salt in 1818
had commented 'more than nine in ten of the merchants have been
originally adventurers, who in the first instance have no capital of their
own*. He noted that in favourable years the merchants were not called
upon to settle their accounts, but when the pasha needed money they
became 'absolutely subjected to the mercy of the pasha, scarcely one of
them being in a state to come to a final settlement'.81 Were these same
merchants in England, they would have been thrown into a debtors' jail
to rot for failing to pay off their obligations. In Egypt, the wali forced
them to pay their debts and, when they could not, they were asked to
leave the country; this annoyed the merchants who tried to bring
pressure to bear through the Porte.
   French consul Roussel's version of these events in 1818 was, 'If it is
not also true but probable that [someone] has conceived the project of
ruining all foreign merchants so that [only] those [merchants] who
surround the dominator [Muhammad Ali] could appropriate the exclu-
sive right to import and export in that province ... without doubt the
viceroy's conduct leads to that end.'86 The wali had tried to force
merchants to buy quantities of Egyptian commodities such as wheat and
beans at high prices, hoping to make a killing as he had done in previous
years. The merchants refused and went off to buy cheaper Black Sea
grain. The wali, knowing that that move would cost him a great deal,
asked the merchants to buy his goods on pain of no longer dealing with
them in the future. The merchants agreed to buy, under duress, then
found that shipments of wheat from the Black Sea and the Levant had
brought down the price of wheat in Europe so that they lost money.
Worse, the wali had sent off his own ships to Europe to sell grain at a
lower price than that offered by the merchants, who were in conse-
quence 'ruined and unable to fulfil their obligations'. The pasha then
promised them credit for a few years, but because they were such

186
