Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

unknown but it must have been very small. Fahmy gives the figure of
30,000 women spinners at home, but does not specify if any of the
workers in the textile mills were men or women.
   The treatment of workers in the factories, other than in the military
establishments that St John wrote about, must have been bad, as it was
everywhere else in the world. Egypt may not have treated its workers any
better than did England or France, where conditions were of the most
abject kind and the exploitation of workers a disgrace. Unlike the case of
British workers whose wages dropped so low that at times they could not
feed themselves, Egyptian workers were fed in the factories and the price
of the meal deducted from their wages. We must assume, however, that
the condition of workers was poor and that they were sufficiently
discontented to run away from the factories, go on strike, sabotage the
machinery or malinger. These were perennial problems in any factory at
the time and even today when absenteeism remains a major problem.
That the workers did not revolt or strike more frequently was not because
they were more passive than elsewhere, but because their alternatives
were far worse. The men who worked in the urban factories were either
the proletariat that both Chabrol and Raymond had referred to (see
chapter 1), and who comprised 10-12 per cent of the population of Cairo,
or in provincial factories were professional weavers. It is difficult to
believe that with labour shortages on the land fallahin would have been
drafted into factories, unless it was during the dead agricultural seasons.
The proletariat and professional artisans would have the option either of
working in the factories or of being conscripted. While the factory
conditions were appalling, there at least they earned a wage and could
support their families, which explains why workers remained by and
large quiescent, except when their wages were not paid.
   Contrary to Bowring, Rivlin has informed us that workers preferred
field labour to factory work, that women were forced to work in the
factories, and that a large percentage of the workers were children,
quoting Boislecomte as her source. If fallahin were forced to work in the
factories instead of working their own land then it is perfectly natural
that they should be dissatisfied with factory work. What Boislecomte
had written was that the men regarded the factories as another fleau and
only worked in them avec repugnance. He also said that women were
forced to spin a certain amount of flax which was distributed to them in
their houses. He added that he saw 150 women working veiled in the
factories of Damietta and Mansura side by side with the men. He makes
no mention of their being forced to work, although he does say that the
obligation to spin is so 'painful, that one sees [cases of self-induced]
maiming to avoid spinning'.84

184
