                                                  Industry and commerce

adventurers they were never able to pay their debts and so were sent
away from the country.
   The actions of the wali show him to be a sharp merchant, who
outmanoeuvred foreign merchants when he had to. The ships he sent to
Europe came back laden with merchandise which rivalled that brought
by the merchants themselves who could then find no buyers in the land.
The European merchants for too long had had the field to themselves as
the sole merchants, and they did not take kindly to competition. Roussel
was quite acid about those merchants who acted on behalf of the wali,
men such as Boghos' brother who had settled in Trieste, a certain
Englishman, Bethune, an American, who 'had turned Turk in Egypt',
and Briggs who had started the Indian trade for Muhammad Ali.87
   By 1819 Muhammad Ali's trade and commerce was so extensive and
lucrative that the wali decided to settle in Alexandria for three quarters
of the year to keep a close watch on trade. When he saw that some of the
European merchants were never going to pay off their debts, or when he
no longer needed the services of such merchants, he put an end to their
dealings. On 6 October 1820 he ordered all merchants to pay their debts
or leave the country. Pillavoine, the French consul in Alexandria
commented, 'I don't know what one can set against a creditor who is
generous enough to give up large sums of money on condition that his
debtors leave the country.'88 At the same time the man saw no anomaly
in seeking to change the wall's decision with regard to the merchants,
whom he recognized as defaulters. He met with the other consuls and
tried to get the wali to change his mind. The British consul claimed that
some of his nationals had no money to pay their passage home. 'I'll pay
it', answered Boghos Bey. Pillavoine then continued his tale, 'This
measure, which seems rigorous because pashas have no right to send
away Franks, is indulgent to the point of generosity.' The French
objected to the waifs arrogating to himself the right, which they did not
recognize, of dismissing from the land any unwelcome foreigner, so they
dragged in spurious legal rights only so far as it suited them, and
determined that another legal right, that of paying off debts, should take
second place. In their own lands such a right as payment of debt would
have been the first consideration of any court of law, showing the double
standard they applied elsewhere. The French secretary of state noted on
the minutes received from Egypt, 'One cannot allow the pasha to send
our nationals out of Egypt, it would be a violation of the Capitulations,
but there is nothing to be said.' Nothing in the Capitulations specified
that debts had to be settled.
  Pillavoine, who saw the generosity of the wait's action and who
admitted that the so-called bankruptcy of some of the merchants was

                                                                      187
