                                                         Industry and commerce

arsenal and supplied us with the following details. He said that the
stores and arsenal were as neat, as clean and orderly as they could
possibly be. Originally the heads of the different departments had been
Europeans, but at present the positions were nearly all filled by natives,
who rose under the instruction of the foreigners, or had been educated
in France or in England. Among these St John talked to the principal
mathematical instrument-maker, a very intelligent young man who
spoke English fluently:
with what a good accent, many of these speak our language ... I was struck with
the skill and neatness of several of the workmen ... all the workmen are enlisted
in the pasha's service as sailors or soldiers, and are drilled occasionally, so as to
be capable of almost immediate service. They are fed, clodied, and get from
fifteen to thirty piastres a mondi pay, which diey, and all the men in the service
of Muhammad Ali, receive into their own hands, to prevent any sort of
peculation. The wages of these artisans are raised according to their merit, and
are never in the same arrear as those of the army or navy ... if they have sons,
each receives fifteen piastres a month from the government, and the child must
be brought to receive it in his own hand. The wives are all in some sort of traffic
or huckstering, and add much to the support of their husbands ... they get three
meals a day ... the mid-day meal, which consists of a plentiful supply of coarse
brown bread and bean porridge; and for breakfast they are allowed in addition
olives ... All the artisans are given meat once a week, and the troops once a
month.82
   Women and children were also involved in industry. What St John
may not have realized was that the sons of workers were paid a wage
because they were hired out as 'boys' or apprentices and were trained in
the craft by their fathers. St John may not have known the true facts,
but he too supplied an eye-witness account, for what it was worth. His
figures are not too excessive and tally with government figures, such as
we have them. In 1818 children were used in labour, and government
agents gathered 4,000 children who were paid 1-3 pts. a day, depending
on the work they did. In 1830 the government ordered that 1,000
children be brought to Cairo and employed in the factories. The consent
of their parents was to be obtained first, and foundlings could also be
employed. 83 These rules broke with the guild system, and a child could
earn a trade and rise in its ranks by training instead of by heredity.
   Women were also hired in the factories, especially in those engaging
in spinning, sericulture and in the tarbush factory in Fuwa. Most of the
women were allowed to spin in their own homes, but some worked in
the factories, where they were as exploited as everywhere else in the
more industrialized countries and paid less than the men for doing the
same sort of work. The number of women employed in factories is

                                                                                183
