                                                   Industry and commerce

them debts of some 2 million piastres - an enormous sum of money for
those days. He pointed out that trade was thriving and that two houses,
Briggs and Co. and Anastasi, spent more than all the French and Italian
companies combined. He went on to sing the praises of the pasha and to
describe how trade, agriculture, public security had all combined and
flourished to revive commerce. He attributed such a flowering to the
waifs deeds, and noted that the wali needed to keep his financial system
of monopolies so as not to compromise state finances with their heavy
investments in the well being and development of the land. 'It would be
impossible to introduce a new order in the administration and in the
commerce of edibles without compromising the finances of the state', he
remarked. 'This is obvious to the least perspicacious.' The moderates,
he continued, would have liked the wali to give up the monopolies on
such items as cotton, linen, sugar, saffron, which were the money
makers, and 'certainly by renouncing them [the monopolies] Mehemet
AH would be making an advantageous concession to trade', but he did
not wish to do so because, said Drovetti, the wali believed that 'to give
the fallah the possibility of selling these commodities would place him at
the mercy of certain traders, monopolizers in their turn, who would, by
dint of advancing the fallah small sums in anticipation, corner these
articles and buy them at cheap prices as in the past'.92 If the fallah were
to be exploited, as he was bound to be, the wali preferred it be by the
government rather than by foreign merchants. He once explained to
Boislecomte, 'I have seized everything, but it was in order to render all
productive; it was a question of production, and who could do it other
than me? Who would have made the necessary advances? Who would
have shown the methods to be adopted, the new cultures to introduce?'93
The monopolies, rather than ruining commerce as the consuls chorused,
allowed trade to increase by leaps and bounds, as available figures
showed, save that now the proceeds of trade enriched the state.
   Those who may have been ruined by the new policies, and we have no
figures to tell us how many there were, or if there were any so ruined,
were the local merchants who had been involved in the Red Sea trade,
with the Sudan and the Syrian-Anatolian region. Many of these
merchants were kept on as government agents, much like al-Mahruqi
and Bocti had been; others had to find other means of support.
Merchants who traded locally within Egypt became government agents
instead of being independent merchants. They may have become
appaltatores or tax farmers, a system that existed alongside that of
government monopolies. The tax fanner who got land or the sale of a
commodity through an auction, as in the old days of the iltizatn,
collected the money owed on the items of the appalto (iqta) and kept a

                                                                       189
