Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

fraudulent, having on several occasions previously commented on the
criminal nature of some of his countrymen and on their crooked
dealings, nevertheless could not admit that the wali should act as
sovereign within his territories, and in 1820 said, 'I feel that commerce
will be nothing here so long as the pasha remains the sole proprietor; to
remedy that situation, Messieurs the Ambassadors should obtain from
the Sublime Porte the freedom of commerce in Egypt ... the Sublime
Porte must treat the pasha of Egypt as it had that of Ianina and change
him annually so that his successor does not seek to emulate him.' 89 That
passage, more clearly than any other, shows that the animosity towards
Muhammad Ali's policies and monopolies stemmed purely from the
selfish interests of foreign consuls and merchants and had little to do
with the merits of the case. That year Pillavoine bluntly suggested to his
superiors, 'To remedy so much abuse [he referred to the monopoly on
indigo] which leads to loss in our trade, the Sublime Porte must use its
authority. If it refuses by giving frivolous excuses or saying action is
impossible it behoves us to give the example by recognizing the pasha of
Egypt's independence and signing a commercial treaty with him ...
revoking the freedom of commerce accorded to strangers which ruins
him and to do so through a company having sufficient funds to do so
[trade] with advantage.'90 The utter cynicism of that proposal is
amazing. In one mouthful Pillavoine explains that his opposition to the
monopolies lies in that they fetter French trade, so the wait must be
ousted from power and replaced by a more docile viceroy. In the next
mouthful he decides that, if the wait cannot be ousted, then he should be
promoted to becoming an independent sovereign so that the French
government can make a deal with him that would cut out the same
merchants for whom Pillavoine wished to oust the wait, and keep only
those merchants with sufficient funds available - which was precisely
what Muhammad Ali was doing.
   Cochelet, another French consul, in 1838 claimed that he disliked the
monopolies because they destroyed, 'all freedom and commercial rivalry
... If the regime of exploitation in Egypt is maintained, Muhammad Ali
master of the property will continue to be master of the commerce.'91
   All these criticisms failed to underline the fact that foreign mer-
chants-cum-adventurers had flocked to Egypt with the advent of
Muhammad Ali and when trade had taken a turn for the better. Before
Muhammad Ali there were no more than 3 French merchants in Egypt,
but then they had risen to more than 70. Drovetti, who was more
sympathetic towards the wait, because by then he had become his agent
and therefore benefited materially from him, explained that these
adventurers who profited from the wall's generosity had left behind

188
