                                                   Industry and commerce

were compared by their authors to earlier equally ludicrous figures.
Barker estimated that in 1827 Egypt's revenues were less than £4,000,000
at best. Mimaut in 1829 estimated the revenues to be £5,000,000 or $25
million during that period, while Campbell in 1840 believed the
revenues varied between £3,500,000 and £4,500,000, i.e. between $18 and
23 million, and had only once reached £5,000,000. 102 Far from having
'exaggerated notions concerning the amount of revenue that was
obtainable in Egypt', as Rivlin believed, Muhammad Ali's figures were
quite modest by comparison. He knew what to expect and spent
accordingly, while the consuls really had no inkling as to the amount of
revenue and made wild claims. Muhammad Ali probably allowed the
consuls to believe that their figures were correct quite deliberately,
although he did not realize what use they made of these figures: notably
to show how wickedly he was exploiting the country, and at the same
time to raise the level of greed among foreign states who envied these
incomes and wanted a share in such profits. Bowring equally believed
the consular reports and even went so far as to say that there were no
statistics worth using in Egypt because ideas of orientals as to numbers
are ordinarily confused.103
   There is little doubt that the country was being exploited by a small
elite, as were most countries then, as Egypt had been in the past and was
to continue to be in the future. That a new elite of bureaucrats
controlled the economic and political life more thoroughly than their
predecessors had done, but were also more aware of local conditions,
was also true. Such an awareness bred the knowledge that a limited
exploitation would yield more long-term results than an unbridled one,
which is the sole reason why the exploitation of native Egyptians by the
new elite was tempered by some far-sighted measures that mitigated the
worse rigours. That elite chose to adopt those policies that allowed them
to make the maximum profits from the country's resources. At the same
time the country did profit from measures which ploughed capital back
into the land and into industries.
   What measures were undertaken were not done out of philanthropy
but arose from common sense and a desire to see an orderly state that
would not give the government too much trouble by constant uprisings
and tumult; a state that was either moderately content with its lot, and so
supportive of government measures instead of sabotaging them beyond
redemption, or cowed by the coercive power of the state and quiescent. At
a time when social conscience was practically non-existent, it would be
anachronistic of us to go any further or to believe that Muhammad Ali
thought in terms other than the good of his family and his retainers, but
he did think in terms of keeping the fallah quiescent and under control,

                                                                       193
