                                                   Expansion to what end?

find markets for his manufactures. Muhammad Ali followed the practice
of earlier mercantilist European countries like England and France who
had sought to build colonies in the New World, and for the same
reasons. That is why he regarded military expansion and imperialist
designs as essential to his economic development, and his economic
development as essential for independence. However, there were serious
setbacks to this policy.
   Imperialist expansion was to raise Egypt to the rank of an empire but
at the same time to bring about the wall's undoing, for it conflicted with
the equally imperialist designs of England. England may not have
embarked on formal imperialist designs in the Middle East but she
nurtured informal ones, that is, of controlling markets and trade, which
eventually led to the formal annexation of certain territories. At a time
when a search for raw materials and markets was vital, the Egyptian
ruler was pushed to the wall by a more powerful England in this clash of
national interests. The surplus that had been accumulated in Egypt
through its reorganization and centralization was, in the end, to be
dissipated in military adventures that briefly netted an empire, and then
lost it. And yet without these military adventures the wali could never
have obtained a recognition of Egyptian sovereignty. Was independence
worth the price which the Egyptians were forced to pay? Did they have
an option?
   In none of his letters did the wali mention the value of conquest as lying
in conquest itself. It was always posited in terms of what conquest could
add to Egypt's financial situation. Each new territory was chosen to
supply something that Egypt lacked. Expansion was economic planning
carried out by other means. At the same time, however, Muhammad Ali
was aware that the imperial option added lustre to his name and his family
and, by increasing his stature in the international community, would help
him gain international recognition. Muhammad Ali once boasted that he
could always buy independence from the Ottomans by bribing them
sufficiently. That was not strictly true. The real independence he craved
was one that was recognized by the powers, and rendered him immune to
any designs they might harbour towards Egypt. To achieve his goal he
needed to ally himself with a European power.
   According to Drovetti, independence was one of the wait's cherished
projects. In 1810 Muhammad Ali had offered the French an alliance if
they would support him in gaining independence. His ostensible reason
was that he wanted to trade in the Red Sea and the Mediterranean with
ships carrying a neutral flag, that is, not carrying the Ottoman pavilion
but flying the Egyptian one. These ships would be immune from any
involvement with any party to a conflict that included the Ottomans.1

                                                                         197
