Chapter 9


Expansion to what end?




Independent Egyptian rulers in the past had constantly sought to
overstep the boundaries of Egypt, to occupy neighbouring countries and
control trade routes that fed into Egypt. Muhammad Ali's regime,
following precedent, sought to insert itself into any actual or potential
vacuum in the regions surrounding Egypt and lying along her trade
routes. Unlike Ottoman notables such as Jazzar, Dhahir and others who
had merely sought quasi-automony for their provinces but were content
to remain within the empire, Muhammad Ali sought independence.
None of these provinces had the potential that Egypt possessed in terms
of resources and man-power. Egypt's resources were sufficient to render
the country independent, as Ali Bey had found, that is, to finance an
army and a navy, to invest capital in agriculture and in industry, in brief
to turn it into a state.
  Had the Egyptian ruler contented himself with aspiring towards
independence and a reliance on Egyptian resources alone he may not
have aroused foreign antagonism. Once Muhammad Ali had acquired
the trappings of a state - an army and a navy to protect his territory from
invasions - and had invested capital in expanded agriculture and
in starting industry, he wanted to go further. Economic expansion
necessitated markets. Egypt itself could have become a potential market
had the wealth of the country been distributed more equitably to allow
the local inhabitants to create a market for their products, a principle
some of the political economists of the day expounded, but an option the
new elite were unwilling to consider for it would diminish their own
wealth. The only other option was an imperial one that fitted in with
mercantilist thought with its imperialist flavour. In one sense the wait
was caught up in a vicious circle. In order to force a recognition of his
independence from both Ottomans and Europeans alike, he must needs
overstep his boundaries and acquire an empire, thereby earning Otto-
man and European enmity which inhibited his quest for independence.
At the same time his economic pursuits led him unerringly to the
acquisition of an empire in order to obtain raw materials he needed and

196
