                                                    Industry and commerce

explains how that city became the rallying point for the crooks and
adventurers who infested Egypt for decades with impunity, and bothered
the honest merchants who bemoaned their presence and wished their
governments did not issue them with visas so easily. Muhammad AH was
able in some measure to control the influx of rabble from abroad, but his
successors were unable to stem the tide. The merchants who came to
Egypt acted as the wait's agents, advisors, sources of information
regarding Europe, intermediaries with their governments - such as
Briggs tried to be with Palmerston - and bankers. Conditions of trade, in
spite of everything, must have been favourable, for even after the
bankrupted merchants had been expelled the number of foreign mer-
chants increased.
   Import substitution was set up to prevent too much money from being
spent on imports, and at the same time it created industry in the land.
Concomitantly, import substitution implied a great amount of money
expended in buying machinery, metals, coal, wood, etc., materials in
which Egypt was lacking, and which had to be imported. Muhammad AH
carried out a constant search for fuel in Egypt, the Sudan, and every
country he occupied, in the hope of finding coal and minerals which
Egypt lacked. Alongside import substitution, trade barriers and embar-
goes were set up. As a member of the Ottoman empire, the wali was
hindered from freely raising protective tariffs because of the Capitula-
tions. The Ottomans, however, admitted embargoes on commodities and
permitted the monopoly of goods or commodities, which was precisely
the line followed by the wali. By controlling all trade himself, he could by-
pass some of the clauses of the Capitulations which were unfavourable to
Egyptian trade, and could set the price he wanted for his commodities and
import as little or as much as he needed.
   Lastly, military expansion was undertaken, first of all to capture and
protect trade routes such as those of the Red Sea and the Sudan; to find
men and minerals as in the Sudan; to control the eastern Mediterranean,
which led to the Morean and Syrian campaigns. Syria was also highly
attractive as a trading centre, and rich in the materials which Egypt
lacked, so that it presented an added attraction in terms of commercial
expertise and future development. The wars of expansion were to open
new vistas before the Egyptian ruler and his bureaucracy, and were a
basic element in the overall mercantilist structure that they had erected.
The wars were to supply, through conquest, a captive market for
Egyptian industries and commodities, a source of raw materials neces-
sary for Egyptian industry, a buffer zone between Egypt and the
Ottoman empire, and finally a means of controlling the trading network
of the eastern Mediterranean.

                                                                         195
