Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

and in this he was in advance of his time. Under his rule a modern nation
state was coming into existence, and such a state necessitated a greater
degree of involvement in the economic life of the region, and a greater
control of the peoples and the resources, for the benefit primarily of a
small elite which ruled and controlled the region, but which incidentally
also came to benefit a wider group among the population.
   One can summarize the success of the mercantilist policy followed in
Egypt by noting the successful development of agriculture, with export
crops being planted in an area that had doubled, with the introduction
of new crops, and the general increase in the area of cultivable land.
The infra-structure was developed with irrigation projects such as
dams, barrages, irrigation canals, both shitwi and sayfi, which allowed
perennial irrigation in the Delta and the development of two or three
crops a year as compared to the former one a year. Infra-structure in the
shape of roads was also developed, for every canal bank was paved as a
road, and trees for shade, and for wood, were planted along the banks of
the canals. A river-fleet network was expanded. A system of cabotage
and caravaneurs for coastal trade was set up. By 1817 the wali by himself
had some fifteen ships other than those owned by private individuals but
which were chartered to his purposes. Public security enabled the free
flow of commodities, uninterrupted by banditry, pirates, or by bedouin
raids, which in the past had so badly disrupted trade.
   Industry had developed along with agriculture, as a diversification of
resources, and used the products of agriculture in factories. That
production was then partly consumed locally and partly exported to the
Ottoman empire and later to the Hijaz, Sudan and Syria when they
came to form part of Egyptian territories.
   Craftsmen, artisans, technocrats and agriculturalists were imported to
train the native counterparts in their field of expertise. The imported
personnel ranged from shepherds with flocks of Cashmir goats to French
engineers who built the barrages and dams that harnessed the Nile
waters. Those who were Levantines were encouraged to immigrate and
settle in Egypt, that is, the Armenians, who taught the Egyptian textile
weavers the art of brocades and sirma, or the Greeks to whom the wali
gave land grants and who were skilled fruit, garden and produce growers,
to say nothing of the merchants and sailors who manned the Egyptian
navy and marine. Europeans were encouraged to settle for a limited time
only, for the wali did not trust them, and once they had taught their
students they were frequently sent home. A few opted to stay and make
Egypt their home, as did Seve, known as Sulaiman al-Faransawi, or that
mysterious Bethune, or Shaikh Ibrahim, John Ninet, a Swiss.
   Foreign merchants were encouraged to settle in Alexandria. That

194
