Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

fee for himself. These iqtaat covered such money-makers as the customs
at Alexandria, Damietta, Old Cairo, Bulaq, the Khurda (which in the
past had been an iqta for the Azab regiment and included the jugglers,
gamblers, acrobats, dancers, sellers of hashish and entertainers, who
were licensed yearly, plus the tinsmiths, ironmongers, sugar and sweet
makers),94 boats on the Nile (which had been an iqta in the hands of
Shaikh al-Sadat), fishing rights in some of the lakes, etc. When some of
these iqtaat were finally suppressed in Cairo in 1838, Medem, the
Russian consul, reported them as cancelled because they brought in
little in the way of taxes, and listed them as the iqta of baths, coffee
houses, animal shearers, domestics, muleskinners, sellers of sandals,
Jewish butchers, tinsmiths, barbers, bakers, dancers, and buffoons,
gardeners, dyers, herbalists, etc., who brought in a total tax of 104,445
pts. per year.95
   At the same time we must remember that a number of merchants were
used in the administration to collect agricultural produce, to oversee its
storage, and to carry out the administrative procedures necessary for
gathering such commodities and shipping them to the ports, so that
former merchants became new bureaucrats. We have no means of
knowing what percentage of merchants thrived and what percentage
declined as compared to an earlier age, so there is no way, for the present
time, to decide whether merchants were ruined or merely coopted into
the administration. Among the merchants mentioned as agents for the
wali we have Ismail Jabal Tariq and his son Sadiq, Haj Ali al-Ujakli, al-
Mahruqi, Farazli, Muharram Bey, Halil Bey, Fakhr, Ahmad Zaraa,
Ahmad Abduh, al-Guindi, all merchants in Damietta, Badr al-Din, who
sold Fuwa tarbushes, Ahmad and Muhammad Al-Maghrabi. Among
the foreigners we have Briggs; the Armenians Boghos Yusufian and his
brother Bedros, Abraham Abro, and Jean Nubar; the Greeks Anastasi,
Tossizza, Zizinia and Petrakis; and Rossetti, Fernandez, Rambaud, le
Tourneau, de Livron, Devaux, Lobin and Pastre, who were French or
Piedmontese.9*
   Whatever trade figures are available to us are European figures and
therefore one-sided, for they do not give the figures for trade with the
Ottoman empire and the southern regions, and give figures from certain
ports and not those from others. For example, none of the figures we
have mention the trade from the port of Qusair, nor do they mention
much regarding trade from Damietta and Rosetta. Our figures then are
unbalanced and incomplete. Nonetheless, let us examine what we do
have.
   In the eighteenth century Egyptian trade with Europe, according to
Raymond, was one seventh of the total trade figures, the bulk of trade

190
