Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

coveted the Red Sea route and its trade. With the development of steam
navigation the whole Red Sea question gained a new dimension and
raised the need for coaling stations. The East India Company wanted
Aden, but Egypt controlled part of the littoral and her navy controlled
the Red Sea. The Egyptian conquest had allowed the wait to monopolize
the Red Sea trade and in 1819 he had extracted tribute from the Imam
of Yemen in the shape of a yearly supply of 20,000 bahars of coffee.21
Once Ibrahim had conquered Dariyya the Government of Bombay had
sent him a certain Captain Sadlier in 1819 to compliment him on his
victory and present him with a jewel-incrusted sword. The purpose of
Sadlier's mission was not purely diplomatic, but included a proposition
for an offensive alliance, in which British land and sea forces would
cooperate with the Egyptian army and pacify the southeastern regions of
Yemen, whose inhabitants from time to time attacked British shipping.
The British plan stipulated that the Imam of Yemen be associated with
the project. Ibrahim informed his father of the British proposal, but the
viceroy promptly declined, claiming that the troops needed to recover
from their exertions after the campaign. The Porte, which had been
informed of the British plans by the ambassador in Istanbul, sent a
message to Muhammad Ali warning him off the whole project and
saying that the purpose of the British was to put out feelers with a view
to conquering the entire region themselves.22 Muhammad Ali was well
aware of that, and was also aware that the British had few forces in the
area and only a couple of vessels; if there were to be fighting, it would be
done by the Egyptians while the benefits might well be reaped by the
British.
   Balked in that direction, the British government turned its attention
to Musqat and the countries of the Persian Gulf, where it landed forces
who joined the rebellious tribes of the Jawassim and the Banu Ali
against the Imam of Musqat. That year the British East India Co. sent
ten naval vessels to blockade Moka when the governor of the town
allegedly insulted the British resident. The excuse had all too frequently
been used to justify acts of aggression, and was patently designed to
wrest economic concessions. The British ships evacuated the port only
after the Imam had signed a treaty setting British customs dues at 2.25
per cent, which was 1 per cent lower than the duties levied on the
French. Istanbul, annoyed by the incident, ordered Muhammad Ali to
occupy all the Red Sea ports as far south as Aden, with which order the
wait complied.23 After the Egyptians had conquered the Sudan, they
came to dominate the African shores of the Red Sea with the occupation
of the ports of Massowa and Suakin, and were to rouse the alarm of the
British cabinet with rumours of further expansion beyond that area.24

204
