                                                 Expansion to what end?

  The Sudan expedition of 1820-22 was the second of the Egyptian
wars of expansion. Like the first war, it was motivated primarily by
military and commercial factors. In a letter sent to Muhammad Bey al-
Defterdar the wait said that the Sudanese campaign had no other
purpose than to provide large numbers of slaves, to bring the territory
under Egyptian dominion and to search for and discover gold mines and
other mineral resources.25 The wait, who had planned a new army,
could not get any Turks or slaves from the Ottoman empire which had
placed an embargo on the shipment of mercenaries or slaves to Egypt.
He thought instead of developing a slave army from the Sudan. He also
needed gold to finance his new projects and public works, for in the past
the Sudan had supplied Egypt and Europe with gold dust. The thought
of a gold source whetted the viceroy's appetite and a campaign was
prepared under the command of Ismail his third son. The wait also
planned to make the cataracts navigable and thereby open up the
interior of Africa to trade.26 The notions which the high command had
about the interior of Africa, or indeed about the Sudan itself, were
extremely vague. The viceroy admitted to his son, 'We have no idea of
the vastness of Darfur, Kordofan and Fazoghlu, therefore we cannot
comment on the feasibility of their administration.'27
  At first Ismail went out to conquer the region of Sennar, which was
done with relative ease, although disease and fevers decimated the army.
The following year a second army under Ibrahim Pasha headed towards
Darfur and a third army under the wait's son-in-law, the defterdar, was
to occupy Kordofan. Ismail headed south towards Fazoghlu and the
gold mines, while his brother went down the White Nile to the land of
the Dinka, where he hoped to sail down the White Nile in the hope of
reaching the Niger river, if possible, but if not he would go across
Darfur, Burnu, and return to Egypt via Tripoli thus bringing all these
territories under Egyptian rule.38 That plan naturally fell through, not
only because it was impossible to begin with, but also because Ibrahim
succumbed to enteritis in the land of the Dinka and had to be hurried
home, prostrate and in dangerous condition, for treatment. Further-
more, by then Muhammad Ali needed Ibrahim to help him with the
impending Greek expedition. In September 1821 Muhammad Ali had
written to Ibrahim a letter in which he gave his opinion that if the
Greeks increased their troublesomeness they - the wali and his son -
would be entrusted with conducting the war in the Morea. He suggested
that his son hurry to settle affairs in the Sennar and forget about Darfur
for the time being, since it was of the greatest importance that they
acquire as many slaves as possible at once to prepare them for the new
campaign.2'

                                                                      205
