Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

   The other two generals, Ismail and the defterdar, were successful in
their missions, although the gold deposits proved a disappointment and
not worth mining. On his way back to Egypt in 1822, Ismail stopped at
Shindi where revolts had broken out as a result of too heavy taxation.
There he was arrogant and brutal to the local king, who set his hut on
fire and murdered him and his officers. The defterdar, on hearing of the
incident, hurried to Shindi with his army and massacred a large number
of people, said to be 30,000, but failed to catch the Mek Nimr. The
memory of that massacre remained engraved on the minds of the
Sudanese for a long time after.
   The viceroy was stricken at the news of his son's death, but he soon
had to pull himself out of his grief and rally round for another war. The
Sudan campaign had not been an unqualified success, even though it left
the wait with an empire that was half the size of Europe. The slaves out
of which the viceroy hoped to create an army never adjusted to the
Egyptian climate or the food, and died like flies. The gold proved to be
of low quality, and Ismail had lost his life. The only plus for the
Egyptian government was that it now controlled both shores of the Red
Sea, and controlled the trade with the Sudan, which had been one of the
major reasons for the expedition.
   The Greek insurrection had left the Ottomans in dire straits with
their armies defeated by a handful of rebels. At first they asked the
Egyptians to quell the uprising in Crete, in return for which Crete
would become part of Muhammad Ali's possessions. Next the wall's
troops were ordered to Cyprus on the same terms. The Egyptian
victories in both places settled the Ottomans more sharply on the horns
of the dilemma. They desperately needed the aid of the forces from
Egypt, but at the same time they were afraid that the wait and his son
might turn their armies towards Istanbul rather than towards the
Morea. That is why they first sent them to Crete rather than to the
mainland, but finally in 1824 they ordered them to Morea. When
Muhammad AH requested that the Ottoman fleet be added to the
Egyptian fleet, under a unified command, the Ottomans jibbed. An
Ottoman official in the Reis Effendi's diwan actually wrote to Muham-
mad Ali explaining that there were rumours circulating in the capital
that the Egyptian army was too large for the Morea, and that the Powers
had hinted at a secret mission. The ser asker said that if the fleet and the
army were to come under the command of Ibrahim, the janissaries
would object, for they believed that Ibrahim would land in Istanbul
with 40,000 men, 'newly trained and organized' and enrol the janissaries
in the nizatn jadid. The Egyptian demands for a joint naval command
were denied and the Ottoman fleet put under the command of Khusrev

206
