Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

When the French turned him down the wait offered the same deal to the
British, who also refused. He finally appealed to the diwan in Istanbul.
   In a confidential letter addressed to his agent in Istanbul, Najib
Effendi, Muhammad Ali on 27 Shawwal 1225/Nov. 1810 suggested that
Najib try to get Egypt declared serbest (unconstrained, free and politi-
cally independent) like Algeria, so that, should war break out between
the Ottoman empire and the British, Egypt being neutral and indepen-
dent could remain on friendly terms with the latter and could use its
ships to supply the empire with whatever it lacked when Ottoman ships
were being blockaded by the British navy. Once the crisis was over, he
added, the Ottoman government could demote Egypt to the rank of an
eyalet again.2 The Ottomans were not dupes and turned down the
request. As long as the wait did not have a European ally he could not
afford to alienate the Porte, and so he bided his time hoping the tide
would turn in his favour.
  The Porte had requested that Muhammad Ali go to the Hijaz and put
down the Wahhabi movement. The Wahhabis, a puritanical sect of
Hanbali Islam, had started a movement of religious reform and auton-
omy of their own, but in so doing they had threatened the prestige of the
Ottoman empire through their occupation of the Holy Cities, Mecca
and Madina, and the Hijaz. They also affected the economic well-being
of the empire through controlling the pilgrimage caravan routes by
1803. Furthermore they seemed to be gaining influence in Syria.3
  When first ordered to go and fight the Wahhabis in 1807 Muhammad
Ali had refused, for he was occupied with consolidating his position in
Egypt, and he put the Porte off. The Porte demanded a written
guarantee that he undertake to fight the Wahhabis. He countered with a
request for a guarantee from the Porte that no power would occupy
Egypt in his absence. Since he had no funds, he requested ammunition,
supplies and 20,000 purses from the Porte before he would go on
campaign,4 none of which the Porte was willing to give him.
  The Egyptian agent in Istanbul encouraged the wali to believe that
were he to embark upon the Hijaz campaign 'all your demands will be
favourably received when you send your son Tussun to fight in the
Hijaz ... [this] will confound those who say "if you grant Muhammad
Ali the world he will still not go to fight in the Hijaz"'.5 Once he had
consolidated his position internally, the wali was ready to embark on a
war of expansion to revitalize trade with the Red Sea which had been
suspended for a number of years. Tujjar like Mahruqi urged him to go
into the Hijaz and help them and himself regain solvency, and had lent
him funds to start the campaign. By controlling the Hijaz the Egyptians
could divert much of the profit from the trade route to Egypt instead of

198
