Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

in Najd, and was in danger of being cut off from his supply base in the
Hijaz. His opponent, Abdullah ibn Suud, knew that he had little chance
of defeating the Egyptian armies, and negotiations between the two
forces finally took place. A tentative truce was set up, and a delegation
sent to Egypt to negotiate terms with the wait. In the interim Tussun
asked for permission to return home for a rest. The permission was
granted and he returned to Egypt on 8 November 1815 to be greeted as a
conquering hero, although the war was not yet over. A few days later he
contracted plague and died.
   Tussun's withdrawal from the region encouraged Abdullah to break
the truce and start fighting again. Ibrahim, the waifs eldest son, was
appointed commander-in-chief of the forces in the Hijaz. Within two
years he had occupied most of the desert forts and laid siege to the
Wahhabi capital of Dariyya. After a six-month siege, the capital
surrendered in September 1818. The campaign had been an arduous
one; the army had had to contend with diseases that killed more men
than did the enemy, with sandstorms that blinded them with ophthal-
mia, with lack of food and water. Ibrahim scrupulously paid for
everything his army ate, and sternly warned the men against molesting
the inhabitants of the region. Egyptian gold bought off the bedouin
tribesmen, who would otherwise have harried the lines unmercifully,
and cut off the passage of supplies to the front. Those who could not be
bought off were sent to swell the ranks of the Wahhabis and impose an
extra burden on their straitened resources.
   French authors like Mengin and Hamont, who are not always
accurate and had no first-hand knowledge of Arabia or the expedition,
have indulged in repeating exaggerated tales of horror about how
bloodthirsty Ibrahim had been as a general. On the other hand, William
Palgrave, who visited Najd decades after the war, gave a different
account based on the stories he had heard from the local population. He
wrote of Ibrahim's lenience towards prisoners, of his care to pay for
anything the army consumed, and in general of his correct behaviour as
a soldier.17 He did, however, give one account of Ibrahim putting
Wahhabi theologians to death after arguing with them matters of dogma
and doctrine.18
   Ibrahim was a first-rate general. Although ruthless, he was certainly
no more so than any other general of his time, Ottoman or European. He
was also a good administrator who knew that to rule a country
successfully he had to stamp out what he believed to be a religious
heresy, one which had galvanized the population. He conciliated the
chiefs of the area by treating them and their people with mercy,
tempered by strength, the bitter with the sweet, in Najdian terms.

202
