Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

has long entertained the design of making himself independent; for which
purpose he has increased the number of his troops as much as his pecuniary
means would allow ... undertook to expel the Wahhabis ... fully determined to
take possession of a country which would add so considerably to his resources.
The conquest of Palestine is also an object he meditates ... he still has prudence
enough to resolve not to enter-upon the execution of his plans, until furnished
by the Turkish ministers with a plausible pretext for so doing.10
In another report he specified that the pasha's 'secret desire is to assert
his sovereignty from Damascus to the extremity of Yemen'."
   The Hijaz invasion was carried out under the wali's second son
Tussun, and was expected to be an easy campaign. Initially 8,000 men
were sent off. Tussun was accompanied by Muhammad al-Mahruqi as
his advisor. The Sharif Ghalib of Mecca entered into a secret corre-
spondence with Muhammad AH, and helped him with information
regarding Saudi strength and force. Shaikh Shadid of the Huwaitat
tribe also joined forces with the invading army. His tribe, some of whom
resided in Egypt and the Sinai, had suffered from Wahhabi strictures
against the pilgrimage caravan coming from Egypt which was their main
source of livelihood. Ghalib, whose income came from the dues of the
port of Jidda, fared as badly under the Saudis, and preferred the
invaders, who promised to restore trade to the port.
   After a few minor victories, Tussun's army was caught in a narrow
pass and defeated in 1812. The Albanian commanders fled the field, and
against all orders returned to Cairo, having had their fill of the Hijaz, its
deserts and its limited booty. These men were dismissed from Egypt,
but their undisciplined and careless behaviour may well have sown the
seeds for a new army in the waifs mind, that were later to blossom into
the nizam jadid.
   Tussun was discouraged by his defeat. His father wrote him a letter to
keep up his morale saying,
My son if you are tired of warfare... to me war is an entertainment and the smell
of gunpowder to my nostrils is as the smell of aloes and rose water ... I have
fought the British and the French and the Egyptian princes and defeated them
with the help of the Almighty and have raised our name and increased our
station.
  Here we can clearly see that as well as having rational economic
reasons for expansion, there was a personal element of pride and self-
aggrandizement involved in conquest as well. He reproached his son for
having dealt lightly with the Wahhabis and exhorted him to give them a
taste of his sword.12
  A few months later the cities of Mecca and Medina fell in 1812 and

200
