                                                   Expansion to what end?

sharing it with all the other commercial elements who traded there, as
had heretofore been the case.
   Muhammad Ali finally may have thought it worth his while diplomat-
ically to win the good graces of the new sultan, Mahmud II, and hold on
to his position forever. Were he able to restore the tottering prestige of
the Ottomans with victory over the Wahhabis, the sultan could not help
owing him a debt of gratitude. Behind that debt lay the knowledge that,
where all the .other Ottoman viceroys had been impotent to undertake
such a task, he would succeed and gain the reputation of the strongest
military commander in the empire, a sound enough reason for the sultan
to leave him alone in Egypt, and perhaps grant him a level of autonomy
on a par with the Barbary states.
   Once a Hijaz campaign materialized the wali thought further to Syria.
He wanted the province of Syria to be transferred to his authority, his
uhda, on the excuse that that would facilitate the Hijaz campaign, as
there was an easy path from Syria to the Hijaz.6 The conquest of Syria
was obviously another constant in Muhammad Ali's planning, but there
he was soundly rebuffed by the Ottomans, and had to talk his way out of
an embarrassing situation. He explained that he merely wanted Syria for
logistical purposes, to facilitate the task of provisioning the army for the
attack on Dariyya, the Saudi stronghold ('lam yakun al-murad min
talab al-Sham awalan wa akhiran had al-manfaa wa la tawsi al-mansab
... bal mujarad ibraz husn al-khidma lil din wa-1 dawla al-ulya'). The
purpose was not to expand or increase his position but to serve the faith
and the Porte well. He also added that, were he to be asked to continue
governing Syria once the Hijaz campaign was over, he would be forced
to offer his resignation and request that it be granted to some other
vizier ('yadtar abdakum ila idjarakum bi istiqalati ma a rajai tawidihi
waitaihi li waziran akhar').7 This excuse was patently untrue for the wali
had previously told Drovetti that he could get Syria from the Porte by
sacrificing 7-8 million piastres. Drovetti commented, 'his ideas of
independence have strengthened in proportion to the successes he
obtained over his enemies'.8 Colonel Missett, the British consul, con-
curred with these views. Drovetti had further explained to the French
foreign office that Muhammad Ali was to contract a marriage with the
widow of the pasha of Dirna, who had been dispossessed by his brother,
the pasha of Tripoli, as the first step prior to an Egyptian invasion of
Cyrenaica.' While no Egyptian invasion ever took place, it was perfectly
true that Muhammad Ali coveted the coast all the way to Tripoli, and,
though he never acted in that direction, the idea lay dormant in his mind
until 1840 and surfaced from time to time. Missett went even further; in
a despatch he explained that the wali

                                                                        199
