                                                  Expansion to what end?

Pasha, Muhammad Ali's enemy from the days when Khusrev had been
wall of Egypt.30 A divided naval command, and the presence of Khusrev
himself, were to give Ibrahim a great deal of trouble.
   The Ottoman sadr azam, Rashid Pasha, led the ground forces, but
both ground and naval forces belonging to the Ottomans were ineffici-
ent, badly trained and badly equipped. Ibrahim constantly complained
to his father that all the Turks do 'is eat and do nothing'.31 He said their
ships needed overhauling and repairs, and their men were in as bad a
shape. At the same time, while his movements were hindered by the
inefficient Ottoman forces, the Porte reprimanded him for not moving
faster.
   Muhammad AH in the beginning thought he could manage to end the
war by peaceful means and without shedding too much blood.32 His
closest agents were Greeks, and he had even helped the Greeks. One of
the Tossizzas was involved in the Philiki Heteria, and the wait knew of
his activity in Egypt to raise money from among the Greek community.
'Not only did he [Muhammad Ali] not oppose [such activity], but he
encouraged it even by his inaction.'33 It seemed to the Greeks that
'Everything leads one to believe ... that Mohamed Aly knew of the
activity of the Heteria in Egypt.'34 Until 1822 the pasha contributed in
aiding the cause of Hellenic revolt. Politis claimed that the main reason
for this stand was that the wait wanted to keep the Porte busy with
matters other than with Egypt, and anything which weakened the Porte
was beneficial to his position. He was even supposed to have assisted the
revolt of Ali Pasha of Janina. Matters changed when the wait was invited
to put down the insurrection, and Politis believed that it was because the
wait wanted the Morea for his son. The wait did indeed want the Morea,
but he knew from the outset that sooner or later the Ottomans would
have to come to him for help. His position therefore did not change, but
he may have helped the Greeks in order to show the Ottomans how
acutely they needed him.
   Throughout the Greek war Muhammad Ali remained on the best
terms with the Greeks in Egypt. Many of his associates and merchants
were Greek; his merchant navy was manned by Greeks. Greek prisoners
of war were given jobs as gardeners in the royal palaces and treated well
by the wait.35 His plan for after the war was to use the Morea as a base
for European trade, with Greek merchants added to his list of agents,
and Greeks to swell his navy and marine. In that fashion he could
dominate the trade of the eastern Mediterranean, which up to that time
was largely controlled by the insular Greeks of the islands of Hydra and
Spezia. The Morean base would be his springboard for controlling the
Mediterranean trade routes to Europe and would mitigate reliance on

                                                                       207
