                                                  Expansion to what end?

Palgrave described it as 'conciliation and gentleness towards the na-
tional chiefs and common people, efficacious severity for religious
dogmatizers, order and progress, payment and justice for all'. Then, lest
his readers accuse him of partiality towards Ibrahim, Palgrave hastened
to add, 'I am simply repeating what was told me in Nehed, in the
conquered land itself.'1'
   When Abdullah had surrendered to Ibrahim, it was on condition that
he went to Egypt first and then to Istanbul. In Egypt Abdullah was
kindly treated by the wait as a worthy opponent, but in Istanbul he was
summarily executed. The town of Dariyya was razed to the ground on
Muhammad Ali's command; although Ibrahim had promised the town
immunity from such actions, he was overridden by his father who
wished to expunge any memory of a Wahhabi capital. Egyptian and
Arab enterprise soon had commerce flowing normally once again, the
true purpose of the expedition.
   Although the Egyptians had defeated the Wahhabis for the time being
they never managed to establish complete authority over the unruly
tribesmen. Egyptian military governors tried to impose a policy of
divide and rule. One governor had appointed 30 chiefs over a tribe
instead of one, so as to weaken tribal resistance and shatter its unity.20 A
Wahhabi kingdom, the first, had come to an end, but a few years later in
1824 a second kingdom was to reorganize itself in Najd once again,
under Turki, Abdullah's son. Egypt continued to hold the Hijaz and the
coastlands of Yemen until 1840, its attempts to reconquer Najd being
unsuccessful. The entire trade of the Hijaz was controlled and monopo-
lized by the wali so that his government became even more unpopular
with the Hijazis than the Wahhabis had been.
   For his prowess in the field Ibrahim was named a three-tail pasha by
the sultan and made governor of the Hijaz, which ranked him superior
to his father in Egypt. This was a deliberate attempt on the part of the
Ottomans to sow dissension between father and son, and set them up as
potential rivals against one another. That never happened, for Ibrahim,
in spite of his new rank and titles, continued to defer to his father in all
matters. Once the expedition had been brought to a close Muhammad
AH reiterated his request for Syria, and was soundly put in his place by
the Porte who wondered at his temerity in making such a request. With
victory over the Wahhabis assured, the Ottoman promises of granting
all the wall's wishes had evaporated.
   By then the war between England and France had ended, Napoleon
was safely incarcerated in St Helena, and the British government could
turn its attention to other matters such as trade in the Indian Ocean and
the Red Sea. British mercantile and shipping interests had always

                                                                       203
