                                                 Expansion to what end?

1813. The keys of the cities were expedited to the Porte in the keeping of
Ismail, the wall's youngest son. The fall of the Holy Cities did not mean
the end of the campaign, and that same year the wali went to the Hijaz to
perform his pilgrimage, and to give his son a helping hand by leading
one wing of the army while Tussun led the other. It was clear to the
father that his son needed assistance in matters military. Up to then
Tussun had lost 8,000 men, 25,000 beasts of burden and 170,000
purses.13
   The soldiers faced a rough campaign. The men lacked food and the
horses lacked fodder. At one time Tussun informed his father that for
the past three days the only ration the men had eaten was 20 dirhems of
dates.14 Muhammad Ali soon grasped Wahhabi methods of warfare,
their basic weakness lying in a lack of cavalry and of cannon. He
deployed his forces on a series of fronts, to scatter Wahhabi resources,
and won a number of battles. He also headed south, occupied the port of
Qunfuda in Yemen, and controlled the southern region. Tussun mean-
while was battling in the north. Suddenly, disquieting news arrived
from Egypt, and the viceroy hurried home in June 1815.
   The news from Egypt allegedly was that one of the wait's mamluks, a
certain Latif Bey, had attempted a coup d'etat late in 1813. Latif had
accompanied Ismail to Istanbul to hand the sultan the keys to the Holy
Cities, and had been made a pasha by the sultan. Such a singular
honour, hitherto reserved for the wait's sons, rendered Latif suspect to
the rest of the Egyptian administration, who were probably jealous of
Latif. On his return to Egypt, Latif, imbued with self-importance,
earned the enmity of the katkhoda, Muhammad Lazoglu, who hated all
mamluks. When the viceroy left on the Hijaz expedition he asked his
katkhoda to watch Latif carefully. Lazoghlu claimed that Latif had tried
to overthrow the government and have himself installed as wali over
Egypt. He arrested Latif and sent word to Muhammad Ali. Whether the
incident was a true attempt at a coup d'etat, instigated by the Ottomans,
or whether it was invented out of spite and jealousy by Lazoglu is
unknown.15 However, if the reason for the wait's return to Egypt were
the attempted coup, he would not have waited for over a year before
returning, as had been the case, and Lazoglu would not have waited for
a year after the incident before informing his leader of the events which
had transpired. It would seem that the most likely cause for the return of
the wali was the news of Napoleon's escape from Elba. Muhammad Ali,
well informed on matters European, feared that Napoleon's escape
might presage another French invasion of Egypt, and hurried home to
protect his interests.16
   Tussun had overextended his armies by entering the region of Qasim

                                                                      201
