                                                   Expansion to what end?

to give, he asked, to declare Egypt independent? That would cause the
Powers to fall into the very trap they thought to avoid, the trap of
creating an 'independent African authority'.52
   An independent African, or rather Mediterranean, authority was
exactly what Muhammad Ali wished Egypt to become, and what
England wished to deny him. Such a state in control over the trade and
commerce of the eastern Mediterranean would pose a threat to British
expansionist commercial aims, in terms of trade, and would turn the sea
into an Egyptian enclave over half its area. It is true that the Powers as a
whole wanted to prevent Egyptian forces from occupying the Morea for
the sake of the Greeks, and of Christendom, but above all for the sake of
the trade of the region which would fall under the hegemony of a
growing and encroaching state.
   The Greeks were in danger of losing the war. They had fallen
into a state of anarchy, of bitter infighting with each other instead of
uniting to face a common enemy, and in the process had devastated the
countryside. That devastation, to which no doubt the Egyptian army
contributed, was entirely blamed on Ibrahim's army. The Philhellenic
sympathies of the European populations had been roused by a press
campaign that pilloried and vilified the Ottoman armies, and depicted
the Egyptian forces as guilty of genocide and the 'barbarization of
Greece'. In private the consuls and politicians conceded a different
version of events. In 1822 Salt had reported, 'the pasha in everything
that concerns the Greeks had evinced a high degree of humanity and
consideration that does honour to his government'.53 He had also given
accounts of the dreadful manner in which the Greeks had conducted
themselves towards their Turkish prisoners in the Morea and Crete
when they had butchered prisoners and tied women to the ploughs like
animals. Canning, who spoke publicly against the Egyptian forces and
the Ottomans, privately referred to the Greeks as a 'rascally set'.54 To
end the Morean campaign and to bring in a European intervention,
rumours of massive deportations of Greeks to Egypt were spread, and
Ibrahim's actions defamed. Deportation of Greeks was the sole reason
that would move Russia to action according to the protocol of 1826, and
such rumours were cleverly spread.
  Athens had fallen in June 1827, in spite of the fact that the Greek
forces and the navy were led by Englishmen. The following month the
Treaty of London was signed by England, France and Russia on 6 July.
That treaty sought to interpose the mediation of the Powers between
Greece and Turkey with an armistice, and if the latter refused then the
Powers would recognize Greece by establishing commercial relations
with her, and eventually by withdrawing their representatives from

                                                                        213
