Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

lure of other sirens than the Ottoman. He had no illusions as to British
motives. As Boghos, his mouthpiece, said to the Austrian envoy,
Prokesch-Osten, 'Egypt's geographic situation and the fact that Indian
trade lies at the base of British grandeur have made, and very probably
will always make, this power seek to maintain Egypt a weak and
impotent province'.51 Nonetheless, being a realist, he also knew that
without British or French support he was impotent to break away from
the Porte, and so was willing to try other avenues.
   After the fall of Missolonghi it became increasingly apparent that the
Powers had decided to take a hand in the Greek affair and that they
would not allow Greece once again to fall into the hands of the 'enemy'.
By then the janissaries had revolted in Istanbul and been annihilated,
and Muhammad Ali's threat of withdrawal from the Morea was
rewarded by the destitution of Khusrev. Muhammad Ali moved heaven
and earth to find funds to get the army and fleet ready for an attack on
Hydra, but the following month the Ottomans reinstated Khusrev once
again as ser asker of the expeditionary forces.
   In the interim the Powers, headed by Britain, wooed Austria. Prince
Lieven, the Russian ambassador, wrote to Metternich in March 1827 to
suggest joint action between Austria and the other three Powers -
England, France and Russia. Britain suggested the Powers interpose
their squadrons between the Morea and Egypt, to prevent the continua-
tion of the war, which they claimed was being carried out by a 'third
party', Egypt. Lieven mentioned to Metternich the horrors of an
extermination of the Greeks by the Ottomans, which he claimed to be
the reason for such a demarche, and not any intention of declaring war
on the Porte. He pointed out that the Egyptian victory in Greece would
create a new African 'authority which, similar to Algeria, Tunisia and
Tripoli, will depend primarily on a system of piracy and brigandage
which infest the seas and end by giving telling blows to trade, already
affected by the anarchy of the past six years'.
  This outrageous statement was calculated to put fear in the heart of
the Austrian arch-conservative of an independent Egypt, which would
become a den of pirates and brigands. The statement was totally
mendacious, for there had never been any Egyptian pirates; they had all
been Greek. Egypt had become a model of public safety, unlike the
Balkans and Greece. Metternich was no dupe and pointed out that
Egypt bore no resemblance to the Barbary states that Lieven referred to,
and that to call Egypt a 'third party' when it was as much a part of the
Ottoman empire as Ireland was to the British or Hungary to Austria,
was to set a dangerous precedent. It meant treating Egypt as an
independent state. Was that the interpretation the Powers were seeking

212
