Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

 declare war but that is not likely so long as we show no fear or sign of
submission. The Europeans are our enemies and the enemies of our
faith in times of peace and in times of war.'"
   Ibrahim and his father knew the Europeans well enough to realize
that when their fleet fired at ships going to Patras, that was no bluff but
meant serious trouble.
   Admiral Codrington, who led the Allied fleet, had been given vague
orders from London, but was told to obey any orders given by Stratford
 Canning, the British ambassador at the Porte. Canning had told
Codrington that he was to act by fair means, if possible, to stop the
Ottomans and Egyptians, but'... it is clearly the intention of the Allied
governments to avoid, if possible, anything that may bring on war, yet
the prevention of supplies ... is ultimately to be enforced, if necessary,
and when all other means are exhausted, by cannon-shot'.62 Codrington
obeyed the famous cannon-shot letter literally, and was later made a
scapegoat by his government who denied having had any such inten-
tions. That letter was presumably the reason why three so-called
friendly powers blockaded the Egyptian-Ottoman fleet in the bay of
Navarino, which even Stratford Canning called 'a flagrant breach of
courtesy ... and a provocation',63 and 'accidentally' sunk most of the
fleet when a shot was fired in the vaguest of circumstances.
   According to Ibrahim's account of the events, when the Allied fleet
entered the bay the Ottoman commander, Muharram Bey, sent a
message requesting Codrington not to persist in bringing the fleet into
the bay. Codrington brusquely replied that he had come to give orders
not to receive them. Twenty-five minutes later Codrington 'took as a
pretext,' said Ibrahim, 'the fact that one of our fire boats was asked to
move, and when it refused to obey his orders he opened fire'. The
English version was that at 1.30 p.m. the admiral signalled to prepare
for action, and half an hour later the fleet entered the bay. The exchange
between Muharram and Codrington then followed as Ibrahim had
described, although Codrington claimed that 'everything seemed
rather to betoken an amicable feeling' on the Turkish side and they
'showed no sign of hostile intent'.64 A British frigate then ordered a fire
boat to move and sent a boarding party to carry out that order; shots
were aimed at the boarding party by the men on the fire boat and the
battle began.
   Who actually fired the first shot seemed irrelevant, for Codrington's
intention was to provoke the Ottomans, even though he had given his
men orders not to fire the first shot. The very presence of the fleet in the
bay was a provocation, and the Ottomans were certainly not ready for
battle, by all British accounts. Apologies were offered the Ottomans for

216
