Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

Istanbul. The Powers added that should the armistice not be accepted
they would effect a naval blockade and prevent any vessels from
reaching Greece with arms and ammunition.55
   Muhammad Ali, ostensibly annoyed by Ottoman perfidy towards him
and their reappointment of Khusrev, but in reality probably fearing the
outcome of a western coalition against his forces, called in Drovetti and
explained that he was ready to cooperate with the Powers, specifically
France, 'if and as we wish to the emancipation of Greece'. He demanded
the consul instantly send his message to France and he would await the
formal and categoric response of the French government.56 Drovetti
firmly believed in the wait's sincerity, but Guilleminot, the French
ambassador in Istanbul, did not and thought it simply 'calculated
delays', because Muhammad Ali had continued preparing his fleet.
While Guilleminot believed the fleet was to sail for Hydra, the tvali
claimed that it was to defend Egypt when he broke from the sultan and
an expedition was sent against him. If he were to make a bid for
independence, he reasoned, he needed a ready army and an alert navy.
Independence was more important to the wait than the Morea or any
other territory for that matter. His wars of expansion were a means of
acquiring independence extra-legally, but were he to become legally
independent it would be worth giving up any conquest. The Porte was
his main enemy and to sever ties with it was his desire. He told
Prokesch-Osten, 'I want nothing but Egypt. My wishes go no further.
Egypt is a small country, but so productive that, without this war, it
would have been a pearl. Ten years of peace and I will draw from it forty
million talaris [riyals]. If they leave me to work, this country will be so
transformed that beside the four great world powers, England, Russia,
Austria and France, Egypt by its money will be the fifth.'57 There was of
course a bit of boasting in that speech, but it also contained a large
measure of truth. Muhammad Ali may have wanted to expand beyond
Egypt, but he needed Egypt more than any other country, because he
could still expand commercially even though he might become re-
stricted in terms of territory. One way or another he would come to
dominate the area, and independence was the surest means to that end.
   By August of that year Salt was convinced the wait would 'withdraw
immediately his fleet and recall his son and army ...' 'His Highness
thinks of nothing but how to gratify his inordinate ambition ... has no
other guide of action but that of his personal interests',58 said Salt
unfairly, since he had done his best to gain the tvali to that point of view.
A Colonel Craddock was despatched in August to meet with Muham-
mad Ali and assure his neutrality. Craddock reported that Muhammad
Ali had said that the Morean campaign had rendered him a vast service,

214
