Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

pirates to waylay his ships. He asked how a vizier could be refused the
iltizam of such an insignificant island: 'it seems', he wrote, 'that I am to
have nothing to do with territory outside Egypt, and I will therefore
recall all the Egyptian soldiers in Cyprus, Crete, and Asir [Hijaz] and
order the return of my son, Ibrahim Pasha, the wait of Morea and [you
can] transfer his eyalet along with that of Jidda to someone else, since
you do not trust me'.42 This threat was calculated to put fear in the
hearts of the Ottomans who knew that without Ibrahim Pasha they had
no chance of putting down the insurrection in Greece. The good entente
between suzerain and vassal was becoming strained; the Powers sought
to capitalize on it, and the wali was ready to listen.
   Stratford Canning reported from Istanbul that without the
assistance or friendly interference from without, the Greeks appear to have no
chance offinalsuccess. They are already become very discreditable belligerents,
and without any further reverses the mere lapse of time, if it brings them no
succour, must lower them more and more, and render them, if it has not already
rendered them, unfit objects of neutral respect.43
As a means of bringing the Morean conflict to an end the British
government tried to woo Muhammad Ali away from the Porte. Strat-
ford Canning suggested to George Canning, the secretary of state, on 4
June 1826 '... would it be impossible to enlist the viceroy of Egypt - if
you do not go to war with him - in the service of Greek mediation ... by
holding out to him the prospect of a pashalik in Syria, in place of the
Morea, and some assistance, if he behaves well, in his ship-building
scheme?'44 It seemed to both men that it was a far better alternative than
for the wali to 'persist in wasting his resources on the reduction of a
stubborn population which must be exterminated before the conquest of
that country can be served'.45 This letter from Canning to Salt
overlooked the fact that Ibrahim had practically effected the occupation
of the Morea by then.
   Salt answered that Muhammad Ali's mediation would be unfavoura-
bly received by ulama and Turks as a sign favouring infidels. He said
that Muhammad Ali had not the slightest intention of gaining advantage
to himself on the side of Greece, and had entered the war voluntarily to
show the world 'that he could accomplish that which the Porte itself was
unequal to effect'. That opinion was not strictly true. The Austrian
emissary Prokesch-Osten was more perceptive when he described it as
an essentially Egyptian war.46 Salt amended his views and gave other
reasons for the campaign. He mentioned that the pasha 'will not be
satisfied until he obtains the Pashalik of Damascus for his son'. He said
that France had, more than once, urged the wali to assume his

210
