                                                 Expansion to what end?

independence but 'he is a person of cool judgement and will never take
any important step without scrupulously examining and balancing
beforehand all its probable bearings and consequences and the respect
with which he looks up to the British government would make its
opposition of great weight in deciding him'.47 Salt believed the sultan
too bigoted to consider British mediation, but that Muhammad Ali was
of different calibre. He reported a conversation he had had with
Muhammad Ali who told him that he never used any other inscription
or title on his seal save 'Muhammad Ali' unadorned, and that all he had
as insignia were his diwan and skawush (guard). 'Muhammad Ali is little
but will be free', the wali said, and added that there was nothing he
desired more than for Egypt and England to become friends. Salt
reported that when he was speaking informally with the wali, 'his
manner has a charm [sic] that it is difficult to conceive without
witnessing'. For the time being the wali was reported to be 'resting on
his oars' and waiting to see the outcome of British demarches.48 The
wali informed Salt that if the British government had any propositions
to make that might please him he would be ready to embrace their offers
and find the means to withdraw altogether his troops from Greece,
otherwise, why then, he'd 'finish the business'. Salt asked him what help
he envisaged and the answer was 'money is not my object, I do not want
it, I should despise it - but England might assist me in my marine. I
want ships and she might furnish me with them', and he shrewdly
added,'- to be paid for of course - nothing I know can be done without
payment in England'. He also wanted 'free scope to aggrandize myself
on the side of Arabia [Yemen]'. Salt commented that the wali had at
heart 'gaining from our government of some general assurance of
sanction to his independence should any circumstance drive him into a
rupture with the Porte'.49 The British government was not willing to
commit itself to helping Egypt achieve an independent status.
   The two years of war in the Morea had put a tremendous burden on
Egypt and its population. It was estimated that the expenses of the
campaign, added to the upkeep, repair and equipment of the Ottoman
fleet paid for by the Egyptians, had cost 20-25 million riyals.50 Plague
had struck twice, in 1823 and 1825, while two years of drought had
further devastated the country. Money was extremely tight and the wali
had a difficult time raising funds for the army in the Morea; he was
forced to borrow money from his officials and his ministers.
   Ibrahim was constantly at loggerheads with his Turkish co-com-
mander who neither gave him assistance nor stayed out of his way, but
balked him at every step. His army was unpaid, salaries being constantly
in arrears. Muhammad Ali was therefore quite willing to listen to the

                                                                     211
