                                                  Expansion to what end?

relish the 'erection ... of a new Puissance Barbaresque in Europe' were
the Egyptians to defeat the Greeks. Both the British secretary of state
Canning, and his cousin the ambassador in Istanbul, Stratford Canning,
wanted the pacification of Greece. Stratford Canning believed that only
something, 'more or less coercive ... but just short of war'39 would have
any effect on the Turks. France, on the other hand, had been ap-
proached by the Egyptian government to supply a military mission to
help with training the Egyptian army and navy, which it did, with the
approval of the French monarch, but there were also Frenchmen
serving as volunteers in the Greek forces. Lastly, in Austria, Metternich
detested the Greeks and their insurrection, for fear that such ideas
might spread to the empire.40
   Although the Greek request for protection from Britain was a clear
sign that they did not want Russian domination, England could not act
on her own, nor would she allow Russia to do so, and in 1826 the British
government sent Lord Wellington to Russia to treat with the Russian
authorities. The Russians, who at first wished to declare war on Turkey,
said they did not want any active interference in the conflict either by
themselves or by the Powers unless it came to the point where the
Greeks were being deported from their country. Together both states
signed a protocol on 4 April 1826 which expressed their desire to
mediate between the Porte and Greece. They believed Greece should
become a dependence of the Porte and pay it a yearly tribute, but it
should also acquire internal independence in the matters of religious
belief, trade and internal affairs. Greece was to be separated from the
Ottoman empire for the purposes of internal administration. These
were in sum the terms the Greek leaders, Mavrocordatos and Zogra-
phos, had communicated to Stratford Canning when he briefly stopped
at Hydra on his way to take up his new post in Istanbul/ 1 The Ottomans
quite naturally refused any mediation in a matter they considered one of
internal affairs in the empire.
  Once the protocol between Russia and England was signed, France
veered in her pro-Egyptian policy and, not wishing to be left out of any
European deal, joined the other two powers. By then the tides of battle
were firmly flowing in Egypt's favour. Ibrahim, named pasha of Morea,
planned to head towards Hydra, the pirate stronghold and the heart of
the revolution.
  The Ottomans had dangled the lure of the pashalik of Damascus
before the wali, but when it came to a definite nomination, there was
none. Even more, when Muhammad Ali demanded the island of Mish,
he was stiffly told to withdraw his request. The toali sent a letter to the
Porte saying that he needed the island of Mish, because it was used by

                                                                       209
