                                                      Expansion to what end?

the 'untoward event', a perfect understatement for the loss of a fleet and
the lives of the men on board.
   Once the Egyptian fleet had been sunk on 20 October 1827, Muham-
mad Ali showed his mettle. Barker, the consul who had replaced the
deceased Salt, wrote that the wali had displayed great magnanimity on
this trying occasion, and sent for the commander of the only man-o'-war
in port - a Frenchman - to assure him that events did not alter his
friendly sentiments towards all Europeans residing in his country: 'I
know well how to appreciate and to maintain the reputation I have
acquired for justice and liberality', he ended.65 To Najib Effendi the
wait wrote, 'Oh woe! Oh sorrow! Shall I lament my fleet that is
destroyed, or lament the fate of those Muslims who will fall victims of
starvation?' For the Allies had imposed a naval blockade and prevented
any Ottoman or Egyptian shipping from reaching the Morea. The army
stranded there was threatened with starvation. The wall's sharp mind
took over and he proceeded to analyse his options lucidly and realisti-
cally after this first outburst of emotion.

A declaration of war against the three Powers would have no other result than to
increase the numbers against us, since the others will join the coalition thinking
they cannot allow thefirstPowers to get all the credit. It would be better to end
the situation now with easy terms, and set ourselves the task of developing our
strength everywhere until the inevitable bad days are past ... it is better to
conclude peace now with easy conditions and busy ourselves with regaining our
strength and pulling our forces together ... the time is not opportune to wage
war against the Powers.64

The wall's main preoccupation was how to get supplies to his men in the
Morea, while the Ottomans were preoccupied with the loss of a large
part of their empire. The problems facing each of the partners were
different, as were the solutions they each envisaged.
   Ibrahim's reports from the Morea revealed that the troops were sick
and starving; consequently some regiments had revolted, some had
deserted and tried to make their way to Rumelia by land, killing and
stealing on their way. The rest were reduced to eating animals which
had died, and even to eating pigs.67 Earlier that year Muhammad Ali
had informed the sadr azam that he would withdraw Ibrahim and the
army from the Morea if no supplies reached him, and the sadr had
assured him that he would do his best to send supplies.68 These supplies
never reached Ibrahim and daily reports of starvation reached the wait,
as well as news of mutiny, for if the men were ready to die in bank they
were not willing to die of starvation.69 The Ottomans were impervious
to the condition of the Egyptians and blandly gave orders that, should

                                                                             217
