Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

European shipping, merchants, or even outlets. The Greeks with their
vast trading and commercial networks would supply him with the
missing link, the know-how and entry into European markets on his
own terms as an independent head of a vast empire.
   The Egyptian army landed in the Bay of Modon, and promptly
captured Choron on 2 March 1825. In rapid succession Navarino and
Tripolitza fell within three months, and the army headed for Nauplia,
the capital. The following year Missolonghi fell on 22 April 1826 and
finally Athens was occupied on 5 June 1827. In the beginning the Greek
war had not moved the European powers to action, although they had
paid lip service to the desire of a Christian nation seeking to be rid of its
Muslim overlord. It was only when Greek acts of piracy threatened
navigation, attacked neutral shipping and disrupted the Levant trade
that the Powers decided to take action. The Greek nationalists, who
doubled up as pirates when the need arose, operated out of Hydra and
Spezia. When they ran out of money, the famous klephtis (robbers)
financed the revolution by attacking all shipping in the area, regardless
of nationality. Black Sea trade, which from 1813 had increased, and the
entire trade of the eastern Mediterranean was a lucrative prize for men
such as Canaris and Miaulis until it became, in the words of the French
Admiral de Rigny, 'The most appalling maritime brigandage to which
the misuse of words has ever given birth.'36 The bays and inlets of the
archipelago offered wonderful hiding places for the klephtis, who were
aided and abetted by the Greek authorities. One pirate ship that was
caught inflagrante delicto, the Epaminondas, was owned by the president
of the provisional Greek government, Conduriotis.37 Before Nauplia
fell, Admiral de Rigny, who went to reclaim captured French vessels,
found 28 neutral ships pillaged and guarded by pirates awaiting trial.
The admiral was offended at this parody of justice where 'the pirates
were present at court, pistol in hand, threatening to burn the houses of
those who did not condemn [the neutral ships]'.38
   Once the financial and commercial interests of the Powers were at
stake they moved to do something about the situation. Furthermore, the
Russians disapproved of a revolution on the part of the Greeks, and
even more did they disapprove of a future independent state which
might become a haven for all revolutionaries in Europe. At the same
time the Russians wished a Christian, and orthodox, country liberated
from under the Muslim Turk, especially if that country were to fall
under Russian influence. Neither England nor the Greeks themselves
wished a future Greek state to fall under Russian influence. In Septem-
ber 1825 the Greeks clamoured for British protection. The British did
not want Russia to gain a foothold in the Mediterranean, nor did they

208
