                                                 Expansion to what end?

which Craddock interpreted to mean either that the Ottomans would
not now refuse him the pashalik of Syria, or, and more likely, that it had
allowed him the possibility of forming an army and a navy in order to
attain independence. In return for his neutrality the wait wanted
assurances of British support in his move towards independence.
Neither Britain nor France would commit themselves to such a move,
and the wali, finally reduced to, following the Ottoman path, sent his
fleet off to the Morea to finish the job. The Allies sent a combined fleet
to shelter Greece from the Egyptian fleet, and anchored just outside the
bay of Navarino, which contained the Egyptian-Ottoman fleet, with
orders to prevent the movement of the Egyptians out of the bay towards
Hydra and Spezia.
   Before the Allied fleet had arrived, Ibrahim had warned his father
that he did not have enough material and ammunition, that fighting the
Allies was against all reason and would end in the destruction of his fleet
- a mistake, if not a crime, he opined. In return the father wrote to Najib
Effendi, his agent in Istanbul, a message to be communicated to the
Porte, pointing out that, if the Powers planned a bluff, then they could
call it, but if they planned to stop the fleet from attacking Jamlica
[Hydra] then their fleet could match that of the Powers and would
destroy it. He pointed out that it would mean the loss of 30,000-40,000
men, the enmity of the Christian powers and people would say, 'it is
Muhammad Ali's fault, and I will be held responsible for the annihila-
tion of ... lives. I have therefore ceased to send orders encouraging
battle to my son.' He said that wars were not carried out through
dependence on the Almighty alone; they were fought with material
means, with a knowledge of the art of war, 'and we are at the ABC of its
art (alif ba min fununiha). But the Europeans have studied the entire
arts of war.' He advised the lesser of two evils, that the independence of
the Greeks be negotiated by the Austrians. 'I am in a quandary whether
to feel sorrow for the calamity that befell my country or the calamity
that befell my lost efforts', he ended, and advised the Porte to determine
what plan they wished to follow.59
   These canny words fell on deaf ears, for the Ottomans believed that to
grant the Greeks independence would mean the disintegration of the
empire.60 The sadr azam (grand vizier) sent Ibrahim orders to 'pay no
attention to the bluff and intimidations of the European powers ... in a
case of aggression on their part we need to place our trust in God and
deploy the necessary efforts to repel their attacks ... The Europeans
plan to attain their goals solely through bluff (tahwish), confusion and
intimidation. There is the secret of their pretensions and of the noise
they make ... perhaps discord will be sown in their ranks or they might

                                                                      215
