                                                 Expansion to what end?

birth and development of a Power capable one day of preserving an
influence coming from Europe ... a Power so naturally a friend to
France, interested as we are in the freedom of the Mediterranean, and
whose development secures for us useful political and commercial
relationships.' He asked Mimaut to offer the wait, 'all our wishes for
prosperity'.106 These words of encouragement were based on the belief
that Muhammad Ali only wanted Egypt and Syria, and once this was
accomplished he would learn to 'stop at the right time and to earn
further glory by wisely using his successes'.107 By this he meant that the
wait should come to an accommodement with the Pone and avoid any
'dangerous complications'. He warned that, if this did not happen, then
the government of France must regretfully withdraw its support for the
wali. Varenne, the charge d'affaires at the Porte, advised Mimaut that
the viceroy should evacuate Caramania and retain Syria, then enter into
negotiations.108 The Porte was slow to respond to these negotiations and
the wali predicted that the Porte would send an army against Ibrahim,
that the army would be defeated and the road to Istanbul left wide open.
The wali was ready to promise that Ibrahim would not move out of
Konia and would not attack first.109 A few days later the battle of Konia
took place and the Ottomans were defeated.
   On 22 December 1832 the Russian general Muraviev arrived in
Istanbul and announced the willingness of the Russian government to
help the sultan on land and sea. Once the news of the defeat of the
Ottoman forces had reached the capital, the sultan threw himself into
the arms of the Russians, against the advice of all his cabinet and
perhaps against his own better judgement. Mahmud had at first
appealed to the British government, but it was in no condition to render
Mahmud assistance. Palmerston, the secretary of state, had to face five
international problems which drove out all thought of British interven-
tion outside of Europe. These were the question of the Greek frontiers,
the Belgian revolt against the Netherlands, the Russian invasion of
Poland after the Poles had declared their independence, and events in
Italy and in Portugal. Each one of these issues directly threatened
British security and fully occupied the administration. Palmerston had
been vaguely aware of Muhammad Ali's growing importance and in
February 1831 had written to Ponsonby, the British ambassador at the
Porte, voicing a fear that the Egyptians might, through their occupation
of Syria, pose a danger and 'acquire the command of Mesopotamia to
the Persian Gulf. He believed that this would not give Muhammad Ali
the command of the Euphrates.110 But, with so many pressing European
problems, eastern problems were pushed into the background for the
time being. Internally England was also facing problems. In the 1830s

                                                                     227
