                                                        Expansion to what end?

popular revolt, not by force of arms. Once the sadr had been captured
Ibrahim planned another means of ousting the sultan, this time using an
Ottoman high official to that end.
   Ibrahim treated the sadr like an honoured leader rather than as a
prisoner of war, and went through a charade whereby his orders to his
army were given in the name of the sadr. Ibrahim's plan was to have the
sadr join the Egyptians and march to Istanbul: 'we can carry out the
deposition of Mahmud and place his son on the throne easily', he wrote
to his father.

If such a plan meets with your approval then let us know at once so that we can
start before it is too late. But if Your Highness intends to negotiate and simply
wants to threaten and frighten Istanbul into peace terms favourable to ourselves,
there is little purpose to be served in remaining here. It would be better for us to
leave for Iznik and seize the coastal cities through which we can be resupplied
from Egypt, and from there perhaps we can rouse a revolt (nuthirfitna)which
would mitigate our having to depose Mahmud.

Ibrahim, who obviously preferred the first option, said, 'Had it not been
for your orders I would already have been at Istanbul. Why do you
delay? Is it fear of Europe or for other reasons?'100
   Another letter three days later informed the wait that unless there was
interference from Europe the time was ripe to march to Istanbul and
tear out 'that affliction (baliyya al-dahma) by its roots'.101 Ibrahim was
sure that he could topple the sultan with little effort. Throughout these
letters Ibrahim's dislike for the sultan and his low opinion of the
Ottomans comes through very clearly. He had already obtained afatwa
which said, 'If the imam of the muslims oppressed (gar) the umma, is it
legal for them to depose him?', to which the answer was, 'It is, on
condition that the umma be composed of 12,000 men who are all in
agreement.'102 Both Ibrahim and the sadr feared that if word of their
efforts to depose him reached the ears of the sultan, 'his love of the
sultanate might cause him to kill the princes, which blemish would fall
on Egypt'.103 Ibrahim informed the sadr that neither he nor his father
coveted the throne; they simply wanted Abdul Mejid on it. When the
sadr objected that the prince was but a child, Ibrahim countered with a
diatribe against the Ottoman custom of breeding princes among the
women of the harem, asking how a man with such an upbringing could
learn about government and the affairs of state? If the prince were to sit
on the throne when young, he continued, he would learn under the
direction of wise tutors and slowly reach the state of the perfect human
being (insan kamil) until he were able to give kingship its due and the
nation its due. The sadr retorted that Mahmud was more likely to

                                                                              225
