Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

butcher the prince, to which Ibrahim countered that that could hardly
be blamed on him, and offered the revolutionary concept that they had
best do away with kings: 'we want the consensus (yma) of the umma in
its affairs and we renounce completely the existence of kings ('nastaghni
batatan an wujud al-muluk')'-104 These fiery words were prophetic, but
not for another century. The sadr must have been stunned at hearing
these words, as would indeed have been Muhammad Ali had he heard
them. He was certainly not content when he read them. Ibrahim
suggested to the sadr that they march on Istanbul and set the govern-
ment in order, and if the sultan appealed to the Christian kings then
they would struggle for the faith and receive the rewards of jihad. This
last move seemed to have won the approbation of the sadr, or else he
simulated such an approval fearing he had no other option.
   The Egyptian army marched northwards from Konia. The weather
was inclement and camels died from the cold. Ibrahim, who moved
without orders from his father, justified his move. 'So long as that
malevolent man known as Sultan Mahmud lives he will always harm us
whenever he can ... it is our duty to excise him and place the prince on
the Ottoman throne', he explained to his father.

If Europe does not like that, it will have little time in which to stop us, and what
can Europe do in the face of a fait accompli* I plan to go to Bursa and Mudanya.
I hasten to move before I receive a message from you to stop where I am because
we cannot live off this area; it is a poor region and only Bursa can feed us. If we
are asked why we move to Bursa we must answer that it is not out of enmity but
out of a desire to visit the capital of the sultanate, and if they accept that
argument we can move to Uskudar. If we have to fight diem that will give them
little time in which to prepare.105

By the time he had received orders to cease his advance he was already
in Kutahia, ioo miles from the capital as the crow flies.
   Ibrahim had underestimated the Ottomans if he thought they would
sit still while he advanced. The Ottomans asked the Powers for aid, and
when none was forthcoming they entered into an alliance with Russia.
That alliance galvanized the Powers into action, where the predicament
of the sultan had not.
   According to the reports sent to France by the French consul in
Egypt, Muhammad Ali was planning to declare his independence much
as Greece had done. The French government did not object to the
separation of Egypt from the Ottoman empire, although it had envis-
ioned the separation as some sort of vassalage along the lines of the dey
of Tunis. As the French secretary of state, Sebastiani, wrote to Mimaut,
'We have but to congratulate ourselves for having favoured in Egypt the

226
