Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

   At times Ibrahim's pleas for help sounded desperate, as when he
wrote, 'Why has the battery I requested not been sent? ... Why was
there no answer to my request? ... If no answer is forthcoming then I
will be daring and will be forced to leave your orders unfulfilled.' He
ended bitterly, 'I request something from my superiors and I get no
answer, I give orders to my inferiors, but I am not obeyed ... what pride
can I derive from my mission?"7 The remark regarding his inferiors was
in reference to his complaint that his cousin, Ibrahim Yeken, did not
obey his orders. Lack of pay had caused the 9th infantry regiment to
revolt and they had killed their colonel after going 15 or 16 months in
arrears of pay.
   In Egypt conscription was heightened, and interestingly enough there
were no uprisings against conscription. A couple of men had been
hanged for spreading rumours that the Egyptian army had been
defeated in Acre, in an attempt to end false alarms and defeatist talk
among the population. Some people did mutter at the thought of
fighting fellow-Muslims and opposing the sultan, but such talk was
minimal.
   Negotiations between the sultan and his vassal came to nothing, and
by spring 1832 Muhammad Ali and his son were divested of their ranks
and titles and their names omitted from the annual list of governors.
Once Ibrahim had gone beyond the Syrian frontiers and had reached
Konia, Muhammad Ali advised him to wait a year or two before pushing
on, until he had had time to find out the feel of the land with the
Powers.98 Ibrahim strongly objected to that procedure; he had run out
of funds, his men had no winter uniforms and were wearing thin
summer clothing in the midst of the snows of Anatolia, they had few
guns and needed more cavalry. Ibrahim disregarded his father's instruc-
tions and on 21 December a major battle took place between his forces
and those of the sadr azam. The battle of Konia resulted in a resounding
defeat for the Ottomans and the capture of the sadr azam, Reshid Pasha.
That victory was all the more sweet to Ibrahim because his army had
been outnumbered and outgunned by the Ottomans. Ibrahim reported
that the grand vizier had had 7 infantry regiments, 6 cavalry and 82 or
92 guns. On his part he had 5 infantry regiments, 4 cavalry and 6 gun
batteries. He had captured from the Ottomans 1 regiment of foot, 4
battalions and 20 guns, and added that all the Bosniaks in the army had
defected to the Egyptian side."
  Prior to the battle of Konia, Ibrahim had discussed with his father the
possibility of getting a fatwa from the mufti of Aleppo to depose the
sultan and then spreading the terms of the fatwa in Anatolia and
Istanbul. He hoped thereby to effect the deposition of the sultan by

224
