                                                   Expansion to what end?

which he referred to as 'my parliament' to help correct the abuses in the
administration and solve the problems of the fallahin.84 The Russian
consul reported these changes and remarked that Ibrahim was so feared
in Egypt that people trembled at the mere, mention of his name: 'it is
thought that such fear could mitigate in some fashion the oppression
which the inhabitants endure from their governors and the administra-
tors of the different provinces'.85
   Such feverish activities presaged impending action. Optimists be-
lieved it was to aid the Ottomans, others more realistic believed it was to
invade Syria. The Russian consul thought Muhammad Ali had lost his
opportunity to become independent because the Morean expedition had
ruined him financially and at the same time had revealed to the Porte the
full extent of his financial resources. The Porte exerted pressure on the
wait to increase their resources at his expense. He was instructed to
repair, restore and re-equip the ships that had escaped sinking in
Navarino, and ordered to send funds and raise regiments to help the
Porte in its war with Russia. The wait sent funds, but put off repairing
the fleet and sending troops, for obvious reasons. He was planning a
pre-emptive strike and needed all his resources. The Porte placed an
embargo on the export of wood to Egypt, which they knew he needed
for his navy, so the wait dismissed the Ottoman officers in his navy and
replaced them by Egyptian officers, trained by the French. Barker
estimated the dismissed Ottomans at 700-800. He also disbanded 2,000
artillery men who received 60 pts. a day and had them replaced by
Egyptians who earned 15 pts. a day.86
   By the end of the following year, 1830, the wait's preparations were
done. In a conversation he had with Barker he said, in talking about the
Ottomans, 'you may prop up here and prop up there, but all will be to
no purpose'. Referring to Algeria he wondered who would object to his
taking it: 'don't they know that I will end piracy? ... I am a cultivator ...
and essentially a merchant'.87 He told Barker that the only way to
strengthen the sultan was to support him, Muhammad Ali, because by
so doing the padishah would have at his disposal a disciplined army of
125,000 men ready to form a barrier against the Russians at Istanbul
and in Persia, for it was there that the British had to fight the Russians.
'The Porte is gone', he went on, 'and England must be prepared to raise
a force in Asia to meet the Russians and where can she find it but with
me and with my son after me?' This ploy for recognition was made
plainer when he added,
[the people] love me, and wouldflockto my standard; if the English would come
forward and support me ... the hostility of the English government paralizes
[sic] all my efforts ... with the English for my friends, I can do everything;

                                                                         221
