Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

war break out between Turkey and Russia as seemed imminent, then
Ibrahim should leave for Rumelia with his army.70
   The wali did not delay and asked the Porte for Syria in compensation
for his recent losses.71 In a meeting of the diwan which was attended by
the sultan from behind a screen, the sultan wondered what would
happen should Muhammad Ali be granted Syria and then later deposed.
Would the wali go to Syria and leave Egypt unprotected and open to
attack?72 These seemed nothing more than rhetorical questions for the
Porte had no intention of giving the wali any further territory, and the
debacle of the Morea was as good an excuse as any for not granting his
request for Syria.
   The wali, who had decided that the wisest policy was to pull his men
out of the Morea, negotiated with Codrington for the evacuation of the
Egyptian army, much to the fury of the Ottomans, who declared that
move 'premature and cause for unease ... and regret'.73 But Muhammad
Ali was no longer willing to abide by Ottoman decisions and intended to
minimize his losses.
   The Egyptians had paid for outfitting and supplying the entirefleetof
81 ships that had been sunk, which was a tremendous blow morally and
financially, but the wali was philosophical about his loss because he had
other cards up his sleeve. Within two years he had restored his navy,
using local Egyptian labour in his new shipyard, instead of buying ships
from the more costly European shipyards.
   Navarino was as much an economic triumph for western trade as a
political triumph in favour of the Greeks. Without the Morea as a base
Muhammad Ali could not control the shipping of the eastern
Mediterranean and the Black Sea, unless he substituted some other part
of the Mediterranean for the Morea: Syria for example. The lesson of
Navarino was not lost on the wali. He assumed the Powers had stopped
him because they wished to support Christian Greeks against Muslim
armies. He failed to understand that the British government, and the
rest of the Powers, did not want the rise of an 'African Power'. The
French government did, however, respond to his appeal for technical
assistance and even led him to believe that they might in time support
his bid for independence. Much as a later Egyptian ruler, Jamal Abd al-
Nasir, tried to do, the wali attempted to play off one power against the
other. The Powers, however, had more in common than they had
differences; although England and France had gone through years of
bloody warfare, peace had been the outcome and not cold war, and in
the final analysis they were more apt to cooperate than to oppose each
other, especially if opposition would lead to another war, which neither
nation wanted. The long war between these two countries had tilted the

218
