                                                    Expansion to what end?

Ibrahim had a search made for the looted articles and restored them to
their owners, punishing his officers for allowing such behaviour from
their troops.91
   As soon as Syria was occupied, Muhammad Ali wanted to raise levies
of men there instead of from Egypt. Ibrahim did not believe that was
feasible; he explained to his father, 'Egypt is ours to do with as we please
('Misr mulkina wa ahluha bimathabat mamalikina'), but these [Syria]
are recently occupied countries ... how can I stop them from escaping
when our own soldiers escape and we cannot find them?'92
   Escaping soldiers seemed to have been common among both armies,
for Turks defected to the Egyptian ranks and Egyptian soldiers disap-
peared. When Ibrahim caught a Turkish spy infiltrating his ranks, his
father advised him to treat the spy well, and show him how well paid,
fed and well treated the Egyptian soldiers were, compared to the
Ottomans. He ordered the spy released and returned to his side to
spread the news that all deserters who came over to the Egyptian side
would be well treated. By these means he hoped to encourage even more
desertions from the Ottoman ranks.93 The irony there must have been
unconscious since Ibrahim was constantly bemoaning the lack of pay for
his men. A few months later he sent a strongly worded letter to his
father remonstrating with him over the lack of funds.
Your energy which can move mountains is minimal towards the army, which
causes me puzzlement for if you have no feelings of affection towards me have
you none towards Egypt either? If things go wrong here are they not inevitably
to end Egypt's very existence (Jbaqafi We used to consider the Turks as lazy and
lacking in energy {la himma lahum), but they were spending their wealth and
paying their soldiers' salaries regularly. The last funds we got were 14 months
ago and came to 8,000 purses. Your Majesty, although I use crass terms to
describe our situation here ... their purpose is good, thus I beg your forgive-
ness.*4
   These complaints of lack of money, guns and men were to continue
unabated for the entire duration of the expedition. Muhammad Ali had
milked the country dry and had no funds to send Ibrahim. Cholera had
struck Egypt in 1831, while a drought in 1833 had made matters more
difficult. With the best will in the world the wali was unable to find the
money to send his son. In spite of that, the soldiers who were 'broke,
without a single dirhem. The officers' pockets are empty'95 were forced
by their commander to pay for every single thing they took from the
population. Later, when accused of living off the land, Ibrahim proudly
said, 'I pay the price of everything I use ... I am responsible for the
upright behaviour of my soldiers' ('istiqamat al-asakir wa husn sairi-
him'). 96

                                                                          223
