                                                 Expansion to what end?

balance in favour of England, and France was neither able nor willing to
seek a second round with Britain over such a small stake as Egypt.
   Muhammad Ali sought to woo the British by his economic projects
and his bait was to let the mails through to India, and deal fairly with
British merchants. He did not comprehend that a weak Ottoman sultan
who gave British merchants all the concessions they needed, and acted
as a dam against the flow of Russian power into the Mediterranean, was
more valuable to them and to their Mediterranean policy than a strong,
independent ruler in Egypt; the more so when that ruler had a policy of
his own that made him a potential commercial rival. Supporting the
Ottoman throne became British policy until 1899 when the locus of
imperial defence necessitated a new approach, the permanent occupa-
tion of Egypt as the safeguard for the route to India.
   In one sense, Navarino was a warning to Muhammad Ali that he had
overstepped his bounds; it was a warning that fell on deaf ears. Great
though his fear of England was, he had enough confidence in himself
and in his strength to push on with his plans.
   The Egyptian army was busy with new conscripts and manoeuvres.
Some people assumed these were to help the Ottomans in their war with
Russia, which had broken out in 1828. Drovetti rightly claimed that the
preparations presaged an impending invasion of Syria. He suggested to
his superiors that the wait be deflected and invited to invade North
Africa instead.74 At the time, Russian advances in Ottoman territories
had brought the French government to the point where it was ready for
the dismemberment of the Ottoman empire and was deciding what
compensations France would require once the empire had collapsed.
The French government therefore offered a complaisant ear to a project
whereby the Egyptian pasha would send an army to Algeria under
Ibrahim. The French were very insistent that it should be Ibrahim who
led the army, for they recognized his military value. Muhammad Ali
believed such an expedition would be over in two months, and that the
Ottomans, whom he qualified as donkeys, would not jib at the conquest
of territory that was nominally under their rule.7* In his negotiations
with the French government the wait demanded 4 men-o'-war, each
carrying 80 cannon and 10 million francs. The French cast the extra lure
of a promise: 'The outcome of the expedition may establish his power
and that of his family on a larger and more solid base',76 a hint at
independence.
  When the British government got wind of the project it tried to put a
stop to it. The French government was warned to abandon its plan of
action, while British representatives were ordered to inform the wali and
the Porte that the British government would not view with indifference

                                                                     219
