Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

without their friendship I can do nothing. England is all powerful, I foresaw
long ago that I could undertake nothing grand without her permission.
Wherever I turn she is there to baffle me.88
But England was not to help Muhammad AH and was to bring to a halt
his successful campaigns and force him to retrench.
   The Syrian expedition began when the land forces left Egypt on 31
October 1831, shortly followed by the naval forces. The excuse given for
the expedition was a quarrel with Abdullah Pasha of Acre. The wali
alleged that 6,000 fallahin had fled to Acre to escape the draft, corvee
arid taxes, and he wanted them back. That was simply an excuse, for the
wali had planned to invade Syria from his first years in Egypt.
   At first, the Egyptian forces had trouble occupying Acre, but within
six months it had fallen and in less than ten months the whole of Syria
was occupied by Ibrahim's army. The Ottoman forces that were sent
against it were no match for Ibrahim and his nizam jadid, and in a battle
outside Horns he captured eight Ottoman pashas, and a number of
cannon, baggage and 3,000 prisoners, so the battle became known in
Egypt as the 'defeat of the eight pashas'. The battle of Beylan closed the
first phase of the Syrian expedition and allowed the Egyptian army to
cross the Taurus mountains and advance to Konia, where they were
ordered to halt by the wali.
   Ibrahim's first reports concerning the reactions of the Syrian popula-
tion to an occupation were favourable. He reported that the inhabitants
of the country, especially the Christians, were agreeable to his rule, that
opposition came from the Druze, not because they were dissatisfied but
because of their opposition to Amir Bashir Shihab, Egypt's ally.89 Upon
entering Jerusalem, Ibrahim had declared that henceforth all distinc-
tions between Christians and Muslims would cease, a declaration the
Christians received with joy as presaging a new era.
   The occupation was carried out with little carnage. Muhammad Ali
had written to his son to deal with Abdullah and Acre with clemency,
and said,
Is there any enjoyment, my son, to surpass that of pardoning our enemies? I
have read in some book of history that forgiveness is the alms-giving (zakat) of
the victorious, and we willfindin revenge none of the pleasure we derive from
forgiveness. Such a trait has been innate in your father and it is understood that
the branch follow the trunk.90
He continued that when news of their benevolent treatment of Abdullah
had reached the consuls, they praised him for it and said it was worthy
of being written on the pages of time with a gold pen. When Ibrahim's
men had disregarded his instructions and sacked the town of Acre,

222
