Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

a change in the possession of African territories, especially if it meant
the promotion of French influence.77 An alliance between Muhammad
AH and the French implied that he had fallen under French protection:
an expansion of French power that the British government could not
allow. At the same time the Russians refused to fall in with French plans
for compensation in Europe, so the French decided to go into Algeria
themselves, using the Egyptians as an auxiliary force. The wali refused
to do that; he said it would make him lose his reputation and his honour,
and the joint project folded up. 78 This was fortunate for Muhammad Ali
for, unknown to him, the French had in mind a project that would not
only bring about their occupation of Algeria but would also extend and
prepare the way for their eventual possession of Egypt as well. 7 '
   On the other hand Muhammad Ali was playing his own game. Once
the Morean expedition ended he was afraid the sultan would plan
reprisals against him. At the same time he wanted compensation for all
his losses. He therefore planned the conquest of Syria. Syria would be
ample compensation and a buffer between him and the sultan should
any fighting break out between them. The detour to Algeria had been an
enticing morsel, but not one that distracted him for long from his main
goal, Syria. The Algerian venture would have supplied him with four
ships of the line, invaluable for the Syrian expedition, and they would
have given him naval supremacy over the Ottomans. He suspected the
French would stay in Algeria once they landed, especially if they were to
bring over French colonists, and that the event would present problems
for British interests in the Mediterranean, and so he told Barker in what
proved to be prophetic words.80
  From October 1828 when Ibrahim had finally landed in Egypt until
November 1831 when the Egyptian army invaded Syria, a great deal of
activity was apparent in Egypt. A French engineer, LeFebure de Cerisy,
arrived in May 1829 to take charge of a new shipyard in Alexandria where
the wali hoped to build himself a new navy. New levies of conscripts were
raised, new cavalry regiments created. The administration was over-
hauled and six provinces were set up, one under the wali and one under
Ibrahim, who was given a key role to play in the administration.81
Ibrahim tried a total change of administration and especially in the
khazina, the treasury. One of the first changes he ordered was to transfer
to double-entry bookkeeping, and in European figures.82 The accoun-
tants had to learn their arithmetic all over again, but the administrators
could make more sense out of the figures they were offered. New barracks
were erected in Alexandria, the swamps drained and cleared from the
middle of the city and the streets watered twice a day. Soldiers, paid 20
paras a day, were used for these tasks.83 Ibrahim called a majlis of 400 men

220
