                          The undoing: Muhammad AH and Palmerston

siphoning off of material benefits into other than Syrian pockets.
Neither the Syrian nor the British merchants relished that situation.
Moreover, Muhammad Ali's rapprochement with the Syrian Christians
at the expense of the Muslim merchants was to exacerbate the differ-
ences between these communities, which culminated in the conflicts of
 1840-60 in Syria.
   The crowning injury came when the wait ordered Ibrahim to
conscript Syrians into the army. Ibrahim warned him that that would
not work; they were newly installed in Syria and could not treat the
population as they did in Egypt, but the wait would not listen. Local
Syrian grievances might have come to nought, except to give the new
governor a hard time, with which he might have been able to cope, had
it not been for Ottoman and British interference. In time the Egyptian
occupiers might have modified their system of rule. After all, when
Muhammad AH saw the objections that were raised in Syria and in
Europe over the monopoly of silk, he rapidly rescinded the monopoly in
1835, although the government continued to exert a strict control over
the direction of trade. By then trade was booming, especially through
the port of Beirut, thanks to Egyptian efforts, and within five years
Britain had doubled if not tripled her trade with Syria. This was not
enough, and, in collusion with the Ottoman government, the British
consul fanned the embers of dissent among the Syrian population into
flames against the Egyptian occupation. No occupation is popular and
this one, placing strictures on trade and organizing commerce, was
threatening vested interests, and had not yet built a power base among
the population, save amongst the Christian mercantile community.
   Palmerston, who was secretary of state from 1827-9, 1830-4 and
1835-41, was disturbed by Muhammad Ali's expansion, the more so
when he blamed it for bringing a Russian presence into the
Mediterranean, contrary to British interests. Palmerston had gone as far
as accusing the wait of having the 'best understanding with Russia', to
which allegation the pasha retorted that he was not yet in his dotage to
commit such an act of imbecility.6 But the prejudice against the pasha
remained. Not only was the prejudice of a personal nature, Muhammad
Ali being likened to a waiter at a coffee shop 'seeking to be commander
of the Faithful',7 but also of an economic and political nature.
   As Puryear pointed out, by the late 1830s there was an increased
connection between politics and commerce, and the British government
was ready to defend and to extend her commerce by war.8 Foreign
economic policy throughout that period was directed towards expand-
ing trade into new, undeveloped overseas regions, while at the same
time retaining the local British agramn system of protection, strongly

                                                                    235
