Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

the British economy was suffering economic stagnation and labour
unrest, and the threat of civil strife over the Reform Bill. Quite
understandably the sultan's pleas for help from his encroaching vassal
fell on deaf British ears, for the navy had been committed to Portugal
and the Netherlands, and had no ships to spare. Mahmud was forced to
throw his lot in with the Russians, his traditional enemies.
   The Russians offered the Ottomans military aid in return for a
defensive alliance, in the Treaty of Unkiar Skelessi, signed on 8 July
1833. The treaty contained a secret clause which opened the Dardan-
elles to the Russians in times of war and closed them to everyone else.
   Muraviev went to Egypt to meet with the viceroy, and the sultan sent
Khalil Pasha, the admiral, after him to negotiate. Both men arrived in
Egypt within a week of each other. When this happened Ibrahim wrote
to his father suggesting terms for the negotiations.

The first in importance in our demands is independence {istiqlal). Second,
acquisition of the sanja\ of Antalia, Alaya, Cilicia and the island of Cyprus
[which Egypt had controlled from 1824 when it had pacified it]. Third, add
Tunis and Tripoli. We must not back down on any demands, for if we do not
acquire independence then our efforts would have been futile and the Ottomans
will continue to pester us with unreasonable demands for money. The only way
to be rid of them is through independence. As for our second items, the districts
of Antalia, Alaya and Cilicia, they are motivated by our need for wood.
Countries which have fleets need wood. Do you remember when the English
recently forbade the export of wood, and we went to Austria which turned us
down? Cyprus is indispensable for two reasons, to act as a base for our fleet, and
to prevent the Porte from having access to the heart of our possessions ... As for
Baghdad, we can raise the issue and drop it, for the possession of that pashalik is
of little value, it is too far, and like the Sennar poor in resources.111
   From this letter we have a clear picture of how Ibrahim and his father
viewed their recent acquisitions, and their reasons for seeking to hold
them. They saw Egypt as a naval power that would dominate the eastern
Mediterranean in terms of trade and commerce. Because of that they
needed wood for ships, copper from Tokat, to line the ships, and a naval
base in Cyprus - the same reason for which Britain acquired Cyprus a few
decades later. With Egypt, Syria and Caramania in his grasp, the wali of
Egypt would become a Mediterranean power. He controlled one route to
India through the Red Sea; he could now control the Levant trade as well.
What the Morea had failed to £ : ve him, a northern base, the new
conquests would do. This was not conquest for the sake of conquest; this
was conquest that was to turn Egypt into a regional power.
   Palmerston could see the danger behind the wait's ambitions. In
March he wrote to his brother, the British minister in Naples,

228
