                          The undoing: Muhammad AH and Palmerston

had enjoyed a measure of freedom under local rulers like the Azms, or
under waits who remained in office for a year and, having no power base
and less authority, had left the provinces pretty much to their own
devices. Such areas were not likely to accept passively a more central-
ized authority. Damascus in 1831, before the Egyptian occupation, had
rebelled against a tax imposed by the Ottoman governor, and for forty
days the city was ruled by the aghawat, the local military chiefs, and the
local notables. Druze uprisings in the Hauran had kept Ibrahim's hands
full for the first two years of his governorate. The Syrians would not
accept the presence of a new regime out to exploit Syrian resources for
its own ends, and the imposition of a monopoly system such as operated
in Egypt went down badly with them. Syria had a large class of tujjar, of
entrepreneurs and of compradors who resisted being cut out of their
livelihood. The earlier upheavals against the Ottoman wali, and pres-
ently against Ibrahim, were precisely a struggle over the country's
resources, a struggle that presaged more such attempts in the future.
   The Hauran was a grain-producing region that had been under the
control of the aghawat of Damascus, but was gradually coming under
the control of the Druze inhabitants of the area.1 These last were
threatened with displacement by the Egyptians, the reason for their
eventual uprising against the Egyptian occupation. Grain was an export
commodity which gained in importance, especially after the July revolt
in 1828 when France had abrogated the law prohibiting the importation
of grain. From 1830 England, which had previously had little, if no
relations with Syria and Lebanon, established consuls in Damascus,
Beirut and Jerusalem, and exported cotton textiles and thread to Syria.
These commodities were coming in through the overland route from
Smyrna, which took over the main road for trade with Damascus and
beyond.2 The Syrians, who used to export cotton thread and textiles to
France earlier, had turned to silk production when the French govern-
ment in 1806 had placed a high tax on cotton and forbade the
importation of cotton thread and wiles de coton.3 British merchants
exported cotton cloth into Syria, which eventually competed with the
local textile industry to its detriment. By 1839, for example, Britain
exported more goods to Aleppo than France, and British cottons had
replaced silk cloth in the area.4 In 1840 the textile industry in Syria
produced £1,000,000 annually, with an estimated 4,000 looms weaving
silk and silk and cotton (alaja) and 400 looms weaving cotton. Together
the looms produced 10,913,704 square metres of silk cloth and 1,616,867
square metres of cotton cloth.s Furthermore, the transit trade with
Baghdad was booming. The commercial population with such a positive
economic picture was not going to accept change passively. Syria's trade

                                                                     233
