Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

was thriving; control over that trade was well worth fighting over on the
part of the Ottomans, the Egyptians, the Syrians and also on the part of
the British who were just moving into the region. Syria was a plum ripe
for the plucking.
   The Syrians were used to a certain degree of laissez-faire and free-
wheeling. A number of Syrian rulers had tried bids for autonomy, and
had succeeded for short periods of time, before the Ottomans re-exerted
their influence on the provinces. Throughout that age the Syrians had
thrived as tujjar and entrepreneurs, geared towards an export market.
The Syrian Muslim merchants had developed an extensive network
which dominated the transit trade both to the Anatolian region and to
Iraq, Persia and the Hijaz. The coastal trade lay in the hands of the
Syrian Christians and the European consuls-cum-merchants. Muham-
mad Ali tried to modify that system as he had done in Egypt. He sought
to impose monopolies which would cut out some of the middlemen,
leaving a small, chosen group of agents. His chosen agents were the
Syrian Christians, for their contacts with the export market to Europe.
He imposed zfirda tax on the urban Muslims, who resented it for they
had never paid a personal tax before and, equating it with the poll tax,
found it demeaning and further resented his preferential treatment of
minorities, their trading rivals, who had benefited from being beratli.
Muhammad Ali, strongly oriented as he was to the export market,
needed the beratli expertise and mercantile contacts.
   The Syrians, though used to monopolies as a way of life within the
Ottoman empire, were also expert at evading them by means of practices
the Ottomans were too weak to halt. The new government under
Ibrahim was more efficient than the Ottomans had been in imposing its
will on the population, greatly assisted by the presence of an army of
occupation. The new monopoly system threatened to destroy the
traditional network and wipe out the vested interests that had grown up
over the past decades within the mercantile community. Where the
Syrians had been- slowly shifting towards the European industrial
system as suppliers of raw materials and as compradors, the new regime
attempted to set up a core industrial system of its own over the eastern
Mediterranean. That system continued to buy Syrian raw materials, but
at a much lower rate than the European merchants had done, and yet
exported foods and goods to Europe as well, so that the local merchants
lost out on two steps of trade. There was little advantage to Syrian
merchants in a system which accounted for and encouraged the artisans,
and a select group of merchants who were coopted into the system, and
cut out all the rest. The Egyptian occupation improved and expanded
trade with Europe, but its very presence implied change, and the

234
