Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

supported by a landowning parliament.9 Protective tariffs had sprung
up all over the continent after the Napoleonic era in order to allow
indigenous industries to develop. The fact that European markets were
closing off to British goods meant the British were forced to look
elsewhere for markets. Manchester manufacturers were obliged to live
on 'shirts for black men and brown men and for the muslim world'.10
After 1825, protective tariffs elsewhere than in Europe came under
attack by the Free Trade movement, which stood to gain from their
downfall.
   Palmerston was one of the few secretaries of state who was aware of
the value of economics in government. As a young man he had studied
economics with Dugald Stewart in Scotland, a major centre of political
economy at the time. Although Dugald Stewart was not a supporter of
the new school of political economy which believed England should
base her economy not on land but on commerce, nonetheless Palmer-
ston was exposed to the political economic currents of the day. With the
Napoleonic blockade and with President Madison's denial of the United
States as a market for British goods, he had become increasingly aware
of Britain's needs for foreign markets. The internal situation within
England called for more markets overseas as a means of staving off
economic disaster within the country. Wakefield and his supporters
were preaching colonies as the alternative to revolution." Palmerston
did not believe Wakefield's alternatives. He was himself a landowner
who believed in agrarian economies; nonetheless he was won over to the
Free Trade movement, and complacently reflected that 'backward
peoples' would be improved by the 'general influence of our com-
merce'." The White Man's Burden was in the making. Palmerston
frequently reiterated his view that England was a commercial nation, a
practical nation, one that acted only when British interests were at stake:
'we do not go in for chivalrous enterprises or fight for others as the
French do'. 13 It is doubtful that the French or anyone else ever did fight
for others, but it would seem clear from that argument that British
involvement in the Morea was dictated by British interests, as seen by
the ruling elite, not entirely love of Greeks, Philhellenism, or any such
emotional beliefs as were purveyed to the masses by the press of the day.
Equally, Palmerston was a strong believer in the right of Britain to
interfere in the internal affairs of other countries should British interests
call for such an interference: '... if by interference is meant inter-
meddling and intermeddling in every way, and to every extent short of
actual military force; then I must affirm that there is nothing in such
interference which the laws of nations may not in certain cases permit'.14
He was to put these principles into practice against Muhammad Ali and

236
