                           The undoing: Muhammad Ali and Palmerston

become his nemesis, because British interests, as Palmerston and the
British industrialists saw them, demanded it.
   As early as 1833 Palmerston had ordered a 'strong remonstrance
against monopolies' which caused prejudice to British mercantile inter-
ests, even when British trade was already expanding in the region, with
or without monopolies. From 1830 the overland route to India through
the Mediterranean and the Red Sea had been established; trade with
Syria flourished through the other overland route, providing new
markets for the ailing British textile industry. An Ottoman firman in
December 1835 gave British exporters extensive advantages when it
abolished monopolies in Syria, and Britain paid a 1.5 per cent duty on
exports from Syria.15 Palmerston was ready to enforce that treaty were
Muhammad Ali to oppose it, but the latter gave in and accepted its
terms. A weak sultan who acceded to British demands and was no
potential rival to British trade or to the security of British trade routes
was a better ally than a strong monarch who had commercial interests of
his own, whose textile industry was growing, and who dominated the
potential markets that Britain coveted. Such a rival was dangerous and
would have to go, no matter what facilities he offered or what conditions
he was ready to accept. After 1835 steam shipping became important
and developed the need for coaling stations along the route to India, that
is in the Arabian Peninsula, another reason to wish for the demise of
Muhammad Ali.
   Muhammad Ali tried to woo British friendship by promising all
manner of facilities to British trade. His envoy, the British merchant
Briggs, pleaded his case with Palmerston, pointing out how much the
pasha could favour British trading interests. Briggs, who made a
handsome living in Egypt since his profits in the Egyptian cotton trade
in 1832 came to more than $100,000/' had a hard time convincing
Palmerston. The secretary of state could see little advantage to Britain
in breaking up the Ottoman empire, which he believed to be an
inevitable consequence of any Egyptian pretensions at independence, or
in nurturing a strong and potential rival to British trade. Muhammad
Ali's hints at independence in 1834 fell on very deaf ears. The viceroy
was warned of the 'fatal consequences' of such a step to himself and was
assured that the Powers would not tolerate it.17 Campbell reported that
the wait would not rest until he had achieved his independence from the
Porte, and that his ambitions might tempt him to take Baghdad and 're-
establish an Arab caliphate in his own family'. An Arab caliphate per se
did not worry Palmerston, but the spread of Egyptian hegemony over
Iraq and the Persian Gulf did. T. Waghorn, steam agent in Egypt in
1837, wrote a pamphlet entitled Egypt As It is, in which he pleaded with

                                                                       237
