Chapter 10


The undoing: Muhammad Ali and Palmerston




The occupation of Syria was to create problems for Egypt, both local
and international. The Porte was not reconciled to the loss of important
provinces such as those of Syria and the region of Caramania, the
underbelly of Anatolia. Still less was the Ottoman government recon-
ciled to its defeat at the hands of an underling, a nefarious example that
others in the empire might seek to emulate. The Porte had not waged
war against the derebeys of Anatolia and the mamluks of Iraq success-
fully, only to accept defeat at the hands of a wait. The peace of Kutahia
to the Porte was a temporary suspension of hostilities until the next
round could be fought, and until the Powers, or some of them at least,
could be won over to the Turkish point of view. There was no treaty
signed at Kutahia, no formal agreement, simply the appointment of
Ibrahim as governor of the provinces he had conquered on a yearly
tenure; a position that in theory could be revoked at any time. In
practice, only force of arms could make him relinquish the territories.
   As far as Muhammad Ali was concerned, that peace was also a
temporary one, a hiatus until he could attain complete independence.
Yearly tenure was a tenuous position at best, and a constant threat at
worst, especially were he to die. The viceroy was 64 years old, a hale and
hearty man, but, given the short life expectancy of that period, he was
already long past his prime. He could not expect many more years ahead
of him, and he wanted to make sure that the edifice he had struggled to
erect would not crumble once he was gone. Ibrahim, his obvious
successor, was a capable and energetic man, even though he did not have
the subtle mind of his father. Both men awaited the propitious moment
to try a final bid for independence, with the approval, or connivance, of
a Power. Right after Kutahia, Ibrahim had predicted that sooner or later
he would come to blows with the Ottomans, and in spite of their new
German-trained army he would defeat them and march back into
Konia, if not into Istanbul itself. The father hoped to become indepen-
dent long before that contingency.
   The control of the Syrian provinces was no easy matter. The Syrians

232
