Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

thereby have injurious bearing upon the general interests of Europe. His
Majesty's Government therefore deem it of importance to prevent not only a
dissolution but even a partial dismemberment of the Ottoman empire.114

   The French government, though it did not wish for the dismember-
ment of the Ottoman empire, did not go as far as the British government
in restraining the wall's advances, but sought to limit his demands to
Syria.
   Suddenly the Porte acceded to the Egyptian demands and granted the
wali the island of Crete and the four Syrian pashaliks, withholding the
districts of Asia Minor, which did not satisfy the wali. The Powers
brought pressure to bear on him to get him to accept these terms, but he
demurred and asked them to guarantee 'Turkey from all aggression on
my part, and at the same time to guarantee me from all aggression on her
part'."5 This cannily meant that Europe would guarantee the integrity
of Egypt, and it was turned down by the British government.
   Palmerston had established the dogma of preserving the integrity of
the Ottoman empire because he believed that that was in conformity
with British interests. He believed that as it was crude to defend the
Turkish empire on the pure plea of realpolitik, he would have to
camouflage it under the guise of helping Turkey reform itself. Much
later he said, 'Our power of maintaining the Turkish empire depends on
Public Opinion in this country and that public opinion would not
support us unless the Turkish government exerts itself to make re-
forms.'116 Yet Palmerston had little faith in Turkish reforms and had
once cuttingly said, 'What energy can be expected of a people who have
no heels to their shoes?' As far as he was concerned Muhammad Ali was
a tiresome upstart who threatened British interests by his control of the
eastern Mediterranean and his threat to embroil all of Europe in a war
over the dismemberment of the Ottoman empire. Moreover, he was a
threat to British interests in the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf, and had
brought Russia into the Ottoman empire to sit on the banks of the
Bosphorus. Support of such a person was sheer madness, to Palmerston,
who knew that he would have to stop the Egyptian advance at some
point if the Turks continued to give in to the wait's demands.
  On 3 May 1833, the Porte informed Ibrahim that they would invest
him as governor of Adana, and the following day peace was officially
declared. When the news reached Muhammad Ali, and Boghos entered
the diwan to announce, 'Peace is concluded', consul Campbell, who was
present, described what ensued. 'The Pasha started up with tears of joy
in his eyes, and laying aside anything like Turkish gravity, burst into a
sort of hysteric laugh.'" 7

230
