                                                     Expansion to what end?

His [Muhammad Ali's] real design is to establish an Arabian kingdom,
including all the countries in which Arabic is the language. There might be no
harm in such a thing in itself; but as it would necessarily imply the dismember-
ment of Turkey, we could not agree to it. Besides the Turk is as good an
occupier of the road to India as an active Arab sovereign would be.112
  Muhammad Ali could not have cared less about countries which
spoke Arabic, which he himself did not, although he understood it, and
he certainly had no affinity with Arabs, for he regarded himself as a
Turk or an Ottoman. Ibrahim was the one who identified with Arabs,
spoke Arabic and admired the Arabs where he despised the Ottomans
and Turks. Neither did Muhammad Ali want to dismember the
Ottoman empire, although he would not have minded had it been
dismembered. He wanted control over these territories because they
would give him independence first and foremost, and because they
would set him up as a regional commercial and military power. Without
the one he could not have the other.
  Palmerston's worries over the road to India were justified. The
previous year, following a mutiny on the part of some Egyptian
regiment stationed in the Hijaz, Egyptian troops had followed the
mutineers into the Yemen with the aim of subduing that territory and
bringing it under Egyptian control. This would have extended Egyptian
hegemony over the entire Red Sea littoral from Suez to Bab al-Mandib.
Rumours circulated that the wait intended to send forces outside the
Red Sea into the Persian Gulf, and thereby threaten the interests of the
East India Company. He had also pushed for the reconquest of Najd to
that end. These moves were motivated by lack of funds in Egypt and the
desire to control more trade routes in order to refloat his economy,
overwhelmed by too many demands.
  The presence of a Russian army in the Bosphorus was a clear
deterrent to Ibrahim's advance towards the capital. He could not hope
to defeat the combined forces of Ottomans and Russians. 'The time to
advance was right after Konia when to reach Istanbul was as easy as a
drink of water', he wrote regretfully to his father.113
  Meanwhile a diplomatic onslaught was carried out by the Powers. A
new British consul in Egypt was primed with instructions specifying,
Her Majesty's Government attach great importance to the maintenance of the
integrity of the Ottoman empire, considering that state to be a material element
in the general balance of power in Europe, and they are of opinion that any
considerable encroachment upon the Asiatic territories of the Sultan, and a
consequent defalcation from the resources which he might bring to bear for the
defence of his European dominions, must operate in a corresponding degree
upon his relative position with respect to neighbouring powers, and must

                                                                           229
