                             The undoing: Muhammad Ali and Palmerston

except for France, responded to his call. France favoured the demands
made by Muhammad Ali, since they aided French policy, and posed no
threat to her interests. France, in occupation of Algeria, believed a
strong ally on the other end of the Mediterranean would further her
interests, and their combined fleets would become the strongest in the
Mediterranean, outflanking the British fleet. Muhammad Ali had
boasted of having 'the most magnificent fleet ever owned by a Mahom-
medan power'.31 Thiers, the French foreign minister, was all in favour
of supporting Egypt, even if it meant a showdown with Britain.
Palmerston, however, gambled on the weakness of Louis-Philippe's
position. He knew the French monarch feared a coup d'etat that would
oust him from the throne, and that that fear would prevent him from
going to war with England over Egypt, especially were England to
promise him support in case of a coup.
   From this time, 1839, onwards Palmerston's tone of patronizing
indifference to Muhammad Ali changed to one of virulence and moral
outrage at the rebellious vassal. In a letter that was a masterpiece of
casuistry, he wrote,
... the Sultan is the sovereign and though he may have been the aggressor still he
has right on his side. There was no treaty at Kutahya. There could be none; the
parties there were a sovereign and a rebel - no treaty can be made between such
parties - There was indeed an agreement, and the Sultan transferred certain
governments upon Muhammad and Ibrahim. But those governments were
given during pleasure, and the Sultan had therightto resume them... it was for
the advantage of every Power in Europe except Russia that the Sultan should be
able to reassume what he then conferred.32
In another letter he wrote,'... there is no question of fairness towards
Mehemet... a robber is always liable to be made to disgorge'. In a letter
to Granville, Palmerston wrote,
For my part I hate Mehemet Ali, whom I consider as nothing but an ignorant
barbarian, who by cunning and boldness and mother wit has been successful in
rebellion ... I look upon his boasted civilization of Egypt as the arrantest
humbug; and I believe that he is as great a tyrant and oppressor as ever made a
people wretched.33
When consul Campbell praised Muhammad Ali, he was reproved by
Palmerston for expressing opinions opposed to the sentiments of the
British government and removed from his position in September 1839.
  The wretchedness of the Egyptians was of little consequence to
Palmerston, who simply dragged in moral arguments as rationalizations
whenever they were needed, for between the wretchedness of the
Egyptians under the Ottomans and under Muhammad Ali there was a

                                                                            243
