Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

his commercial concessions. A decade later Palmerston was to declare in
the House of Commons, 'If in a political point of view the independence
of Turkey is of great importance, in a commercial sense it is of no less
importance to this country. It is quite true that with no country is our
trade so liberally permitted and carried on as with Turkey.'26
  Muhammad Ali was fully aware of the consequences to Egyptian
commerce and finances were he to apply the terms of the treaty to
Egypt, and refused to abide by them, much to the anger of the Powers.
Nothing could be done for the time being because an armed clash
between Egyptians and Ottomans seemed to be preparing. In that
eventuality Palmerston was prepared to coerce Egypt. He explained his
attitude to Granville, saying,
Coercion of Mehemet Ali by England if war broke out might appear partial and
unjust; but we are partial; and the great interests of Europe require that we
should be so. The maintenance of the Turkish empire ought to be the basis of
our policy; for its maintenance is essential for the preservation of peace, and for
the upholding of the independence of Eastern Europe. A partition of Turkey
would be fatal to the independence of Austria and Prussia, when it was
accomplished, and it could not be accomplished without a general war. No ideas
therefore of fairness towards Mehemet ought to stand in the way of such great
and paramount interests.37
   That the dismemberment of the Ottoman empire might have led to a
war in Europe, as the states scrambled for their share of the booty, may
have been undoubted, but the independence of Egypt and Syria did not
necessarily mean the dismemberment of the empire any more than the
independence of Greece and Serbia did. The question was not over the
dismemberment of Turkey, convenient though that was as an excuse;
the question was over the creation of a new power in the Mediterranean,
and an active and extensive power at that, with close links to France.
   The viceroy had given his son strict orders not to attack the Ottomans
first, and at one time seemed to believe that the Ottomans did not intend
to go to war. Ibrahim disagreed and pointed out that they were inciting
unrest in the Hauran, in Aintab and in the Kurdish mountains. He was
convinced that he would have to repel the Ottomans before their
intrigues succeeded in fomenting uprisings everywhere in Syria.28
Nevertheless he ordered his men not to come within five hours of the
frontiers, and not to provoke the Turks or shoot at them. The
Ottomans, however, crossed the Euphrates river, planning to catch
Ibrahim's army from the rear, and, as Ibrahim had predicted, fighting
broke out between the two armies once more. The Ottoman army, in
spite of its new German training, was yet again defeated by Ibrahim in
the battle of Nezib in June 1839.

240
