                           The undoing: Muhammad AH and Palmerston

by wars, industrial projects and public works, had been forced to
abandon some of his monopolies and in due course might have returned
to a system of free trade.23 As far as he was concerned the negative
aspects of the treaty did not lie in its abolition of monopolies, but in the
clauses dealing with customs tariffs.
   By its terms the treaty admitted all foreign goods into the empire with
a 3 per cent duty and a new ad valorem interior duty of 9 per cent. All
exports had a 3 per cent export duty plus a new interior duty of 2 per
cent. Internal taxes on imported goods by foreigners were abolished.
Palmerston claimed that in the long run the abolition of monopolies
would increase the revenues of Egypt and the Ottoman empire, presum-
ably through increased traffic, '... though it may for the moment
paralyse Muhammad Ali's scheme of finance'.24 The treaty was in fact to
be a disaster to the Ottoman empire even more than to Egypt, for it
restricted the government's right to tax, or even pre-empt goods it
needed. Bulwer in a letter to Addington wrote that the treaty was to give
aliens such extensive commercial privileges as would be likely to crush
her [Ottoman] indigenous industry.25 It was Bulwer who negotiated the
terms of the treaty and he well knew what he was talking about.
   Once the treaty was applied to Egypt, after 1840, it allowed European
merchants free rein in the market, and through the Capitulations in time
it gave them virtual control of that market. Secondly, the terms of the
treaty encouraged an influx of cheap British goods into the area, which
killed local industries. In Egypt the infant industries could not compete
without protective barriers, and in Syria the industries could not
compete with cheaper goods either, although their industry, older and
more established, resisted much longer. As a result both countries'
economies became inevitably geared to becoming suppliers of raw
materials to Europe and importers of finished European goods. Egypt
was in time reduced to the position of a poor and dependent participant
in the European world market, a position mitigating any pretensions at
economic independence, let alone at political hegemony over the eastern
Mediterranean, the Levant or the Red Sea areas.
   The terms of the treaty implied a support for the Ottoman empire,
which in turn had allowed the expansion of British trade in the area,
so that subversion of the empire in any manner entailed in direct
consequence the decrease of British trade, or so it seemed to British
interests. The French ambassador at the Porte called the treaty 'a
complete commercial revolution', since the rates of taxation on some
articles were diminished tenfold. France's suspicions towards Britain
were raised by the treaty, and they believed it contained a secret clause
which promised the sultan military aid against the Egyptians in return for

                                                                       239
