                           The undoing: Muhammad Ali and Palmerston

industries were dismantled. The Egyptian economic effort from hence-
forth became geared to turning the country into an export market for
agricultural products, as all the European experts had been urging the
Egyptian government to do. Egypt was to be an agricultural country and
to export her raw materials to Europe, where they were to be manufac-
tured and sold back to Egypt as finished products.
   The commercial bias against Muhammad Ali was made clear by
Consul Murray, who believed that Egypt would gain by destroying her
industries and importing all her manufactures from Europe. Murray
explained that there were no more than 40,000 industrial workers in
Egypt, who were secure from conscription and could be returned to
agricultural labour. He commented that the 'Arabs enter with pleasure
into the levies for Manufacture although badly paid - but this probably
is caused by the feeling that it will shield them from military levies'. He
added that the 'Egyptians show great aptitude for all Mechanical works,
and although what is made in the Arsenals and Workshops of Cairo and
Alexandria is inferior to what is made in most parts of Europe, and
above all in England ... it is still good and serviceable', yet in the same
breath he advocated the cessation of these same 'good and servicea-
ble' manufactures and the importation of all necessary goods from
abroad. The reasons for such a contradiction is quite simple, and is
summed up in a sentence that is a value judgement that belied his
previous estimation of Egyptian manufactures: 'Muhammad Ali, after
enormous expenses for erecting Manufactories ... has failed in his
projects.' How he failed, or on what criteria Murray based his judge-
ment of failure is never explained, but the following sentence is
illuminating: 'He will learn by experience ... if peace be established,
that they [indigenous manufactories] prevent the introduction of Euro-
pean capital into Egypt, and the foundation of permanent establish-
ments in that country.'40
   The wali had established manufactories in Egypt because he neither
wanted an influx of European goods nor of European capital, and still
less did he want the permanent establishment of that capital in his
country. All his plans had been geared towards preventing such a
consummation. After the treaty of Balta Liman had stripped him of
fiscal protection, the treaty of 1841 had left him without international
protection and put him at the mercy of the Powers and the Porte once
again. His attempts at economic self-sufficiency and industrialization
were to be arrested, and in their place he was assured of a permanent
influx of foreign capital and foreign goods, which would indubitably
deprive the country of any financial and economic independence.
   Muhammad Ali still hoped to outwit the powers economically, and

                                                                       247
