Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

did not want to go to war. He tells me that I talked of going to war; but
talking of going to war and going to war are two very different things.'38
   The sultan sent Muhammad Ali an ultimatum on 16 August and
ordered the withdrawal of the Egyptian forces from Syria, giving him
Acre and south Syria for life, and Egypt to himself and to his heirs.
Muhammad Ali refused. When a blockade was mentioned he scoffed at
it and said that he was self-sufficient and would, should the British
forces land in Egypt, charge them with as much gusto as he had done
three decades earlier. But this was brave talk. The British fleet sailed to
Beirut, where Napier announced to Sulaiman Pasha, the governor, that
he had orders to stop all ships sailing between Egypt and Syria.
Pamphlets were distributed all over the territory inciting the popula-
tions of Beirut, Saida, Jerusalem, Arish and Gaza to rise in revolt
against the Egyptians.39 The populations, disgruntled by conscription,
taxes, commercial policies and policies of disarming them, responded
readily to a call for revolt. The consuls attempted to bribe Sulaiman
Pasha to defect to the Ottoman side and, when he refused, Beirut was
bombarded on n September 1840 and an Anglo-Turkish force landed.
Uprisings broke out all over Syria, encouraged by news of a landing.
   During the previous year Ibrahim had warned his father that if
uprisings were to break out in different parts of the country there was no
way he could hold on to the territory. Once again his predictions proved
true. With a force landed in Syria, uprisings breaking out in a number of
places, with a naval blockade of the Mediterranean preventing supplies
from reaching him, there was no way Ibrahim could hold his ground.
The best he could do was retreat to Egypt, with as much of his army as
he could.
   When the British fleet appeared outside Muhammad Ali's bedroom
window in Alexandria, the wait realized he was beaten. He could have
battled it out to the last man, but without French support he decided the
wisest policy was to cut his losses and concentrate on making Egypt a
hereditary kingdom for his family rather than risk all in a war with the
Powers.
   Ibrahim's army returned to Egypt, some on British ships, for Napier
took a fancy to Muhammad Ali and tried to plead his case. The grand
design of an empire and of hegemony over the Mediterranean evapo-
rated. The treaty of 1841 which the pasha was constrained to accept
stripped him of all his conquests save the Sudan and the hereditary
pashalik of Egypt for life, succession, according to Ottoman custom,
going to the eldest male in the family. Without embargoes, a captive
market, and a large army to use up much of the manufactured goods,
Egyptian industrialization slowed down, and most of the war-related

246
