                          The undoing: Muhammad Ali and Palmerston

   Once the battle was over Ibrahim determined to push on to Konia,
but his father sent him strict orders to stay on his side of the Taurus
mountains until he could determine what effect the victory had on the
Powers. Sultan Mahmud had died before news of the defeat could reach
him and was succeeded by his 16-year-old son, Abdul Mejid.
   Had Ibrahim pushed on towards Konia and points further, there is
little doubt that he would have been successful and the Ottomans would
have capitulated to his demands, as indeed they were ready to do right
after Nezib. Muhammad Ali was afraid of the international repercus-
sions that further advances into Ottoman territory might entail. He
hoped the Powers would fulfil his desires without any further
bloodshed. There may also have been an element of ambiguity on his
part towards the Ottomans and the empire. Though he ardently wished
for political and economic independence for his territories, he may not
have desired the destruction of the Ottoman throne. He was on the
horns of a dilemma. He still regarded himself as an Ottoman, and, in
spite of his rebellion against his suzerain and his desire for indepen-
dence, he continued psychologically to regard the sultan as his suzerain
and the Ottomans as his people, if only they would leave him alone and
stop meddling in his plans - a dilemma resembling that faced by the
American revolutionaries against England. Ibrahim, on the contrary,
did not regard himself as an Ottoman; he had little liking for the
Ottomans, perhaps as a consequence of his year's stay as a hostage in
Istanbul when a young man, and less loyalty towards them. He
constantly paraded his 'Egyptian-ness', vaunted the valour of his
Egyptian soldiers, with whom he lived and whose language he spoke
fluently. Whereas Muhammad Ali believed his wars had been won
through force of Ottoman arms, for all the officers were Ottoman,
Ibrahim chose to believe that he had won his battles through the valour
of his Egyptian soldiers, and had no scruples about destroying the
Ottoman empire if that was necessary. Ibrahim, one must remember,
spent his time out in the field, aloof from European pressures, although
emissaries did pursue him there, while Muhammad Ali was daily under
pressure from the consuls who bombarded him with warnings and
advised him to stand still pending negotiations.
   Such negotiations as were pursued were clearly to be in favour of the
Ottomans and a means of restraining further Egyptian advance. After
Nezib the Egyptian wait and his son made further demands on the
Ottomans. Ibrahim's notions of 'secure boundaries' towards the east
had expanded to include Diyar Bekir and Urfa, from whence the
Ottoman army had crossed the Euphrates to attack his position. He
determined that his future boundaries should be the entire frontier

                                                                   241
