Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

his government to acknowledge 'Egypt as a separate and independent
kingdom .. .'1S because it would be to British advantage. The pamphlet,
an eloquent plea for British support of Egyptian independence, was
based on British commercial interests. The pamphlet was presented to
Palmerston and the author refused to make it public because he hoped
that Egypt would gain her. independence by 1837. When this did not
happen, he published the pamphlet the following year, hoping to sway
public opinion, but to no avail.
   By May 1838 Muhammad Ali announced his determination to declare
the independence of Egypt and Syria as a hereditary kingdom and even
offered to pay the Porte 3 million pounds as the price of his indepen-
dence. The foreign consuls advised restraint until they had received
directives from their governments. Palmerston despatched a warning,

The British Government ... feels itself bound ... to declare ... if he should
unfortunately proceed to execute his announced intentions; and if hostilities
should (as they indisputably would) break out thereupon between the Sultan
and the Pasha, the Pasha must expect tofindGreat Britain taking part with the
Sultan in order to obtain redress for soflagranta wrong done to the Sultan, and
for the purpose of preventing the Dismemberment of the Turkish empire."

   The French government, which was acting in concert with the British
government, warned the pasha not to proceed on a path that might lead
to peril and ruin.20
   Meanwhile the British government took steps to contain the wait by
sapping the financial roots of his strength. They believed that if the wait
were divested of his monopolies, he would have fewer funds with which
to finance an army and consequently would have his teeth drawn. That
at least was the argument presented to the Ottoman government, when
the British embassy at the Porte approached them with a proposal for
negotiating a new trade agreement between the two governments. The
Ottoman government bought the argument and the outcome was the
treaty of Balta Liman, signed in the summer of 1838.21
   The treaty was to be a nail in the coffin of all monopolies within the
Ottoman empire, including those of Egypt. The Ottomans, who had
practised a monopoly system for generations, agreed to revise that
system in the mistaken belief that it would be more adverse to
Muhammad Ali's interests than to their own. They hoped it would
bring him into direct confrontation, even conflict, with the European
Powers, should he disobey and refuse to cancel his monopolies." The
treaty dealt with two separate elements: the abolition of monopolies and
a new customs tariff. Ironically enough, the wali, whose finances by
1838 were in bad shape through the continuous drain on his resources

238
