Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

between Anatolia and the Arab provinces south of the Taurus moun-
tains. Such control would also give him dominion over northern Iraq,
and both the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. Urfa was important for its
proximity to the desert and to the bedouin tribes who remained a
potential source of sedition and a thorn in his flesh. He had previously
suffered from Arab uprisings in the Hauran, incited by the Ottomans,
and in Aintab and the Kurdish mountains. The only means to stamp out
future sedition in these territories would be to bring them under his
direct control.29 The territories claimed by Ibrahim were of prime
strategic importance vis-a-vis the Ottoman armies, but they were also
economically valuable in themselves, lying on the trade routes going
from east to west, and constituting a potential stepping-stone south into
Iraq.
   By Palmerston's standards these demands were too much, even the
Egyptian victory was too much. An Egyptian presence in northern Syria
was a direct threat to British interests, for it clearly presaged an
impending take-over of Iraq and the territories of the Persian Gulf, in
which direction the Egyptian armies in the Hijaz had been moving. To
make matters even worse, an Englishman, Chesney, had presented a
project for putting a fleet of steamships on die Euphrates which would
connect by direct railway to Alexandretta, thereby offering a route from
the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean as an alternative to going through
Egypt and the Red Sea.30 With Egyptian forces in control of the Red Sea
and of the region of the Euphrates river and Aleppo, as well as a large
expanse of Mediterranean coastline, the whole project would fall under
the control of Muhammad Ali, who would dominate both routes to
India. The trade of the Levant would be at the mercy of the Egyptian
monarch and his armies.
   Sultan Mahmud had been under the influence of the British ambassa-
dor Stratford Canning. The new sultan, a mere boy, would be even
more pliable, and was at least not a wily old fox believed to be under
French influence. The Ottomans and their commercial links were no
match for British trade, but Muhammad Ali could well become a
tiresome rival. For all these reasons, Muhammad Ali, having won the
war against the Ottomans, was to lose the peace through British
initiatives and intrigues.
   The Ottomans, who had lost their sultan at a most inopportune
moment, and whose new ruler was young and untried, had prepared a
message to be delivered to the victors which acceded to all their
demands. The British government prevented the Ottomans from send-
ing that message and urged them to do nothing and leave matters in
their hands. Palmerston then rallied the Powers - even Russia - who all,

242
