Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

definite tilt in favour of the wali. Other 'rebels' against the Ottomans
might be supported, especially if they were Christian rebels against the
Muslim sultan, like the Greeks or Mikhailovic in Serbia; it was not the
principle of rebellion that exercised Palmerston, but in that case it was
the policies of the 'rebel'. To justify to British public opinion interfer-
ence in that instance of Ottoman-Egyptian affairs, Palmerston sought to
discredit the person of Muhammad Ali along with his policies, and so
resorted to ad hominem arguments. From being a ruler, Muhammad Ali
was demoted into becoming a 'rebel', a 'robber' and an 'ignorant
barbarian', when he was not a 'waiter in a coffee shop', whereas the sultan
was raised to the status of a long and ancient dynast, one Palmerston
likened to an ancient tree that would continue to thrive long after upstarts
had been cut down.
  In 1839 Bowring had been sent by Palmerston to report to Parliament
on Egypt and Syria. His report contained passages in praise of the wall's
achievements in both countries. Bowring had suggested that Egypt's
independence be recognized, because that would earn the gratitude of
the wali who would join the sultan in an alliance against the Russians
and facilitate the lines of communication to India. Palmerston, who had
resolved to bring down the viceroy, in a separate memorandum of 2
February 1840 had written, 'I wish the manuscript of the Egyptian and
Syrian report to be looked over with care, and that any passages of a
political tendency and which may have a bearing on the question now
pending may be marked and submitted to me. Under this head would
come any exaggerated praises of Mehemet AH.'34 Parliament was not to
be swayed by praises of the wali but pushed into acting against him.
   Campbell, who had been recalled from Egypt, was also asked to write
a report on the country, and there too any praise of Muhammad Ali was
scorned by Palmerston. Where Campbell wrote that all the Englishmen
in the service of Ibrahim Pasha were 'warmly attracted to him',
Palmerston commented in the margin, 'Ibrahim is well known to
hate England and the English.'35 Further snide remarks in the
margin impugned the honesty and sense of justice of the wali. When
Bowring reported that 10,000 students had been sent to Europe to be
educated, Palmerston crossed out the number and wrote, 'some thou-
sands' in its place, adding in the margin, 'probably is a considerable
exaggeration'. Throughout the memorandum Palmerston's animosity
towards the wali, founded on his obvious bias against the man, comes
out clearly.
  Muhammad Ali had given British interests too many jolts. In the late
1820s he posed a threat with his projects for cotton development and
textile mills, and the expansion of his fleet. Navarino was the riposte. In

244
