                           The undoing: Muhammad Ali and Palmerston

the next decade he continued to be a source of worry in the eastern
Mediterranean and the Red Sea with his control of shipping, commerce,
and his protective tariffs that were supposed to be closing markets in the
face of British goods (though in fact they did not) at a time when Britain
desperately needed new markets. He controlled both routes to India,
which was an acute economic threat, and his projects seemed to favour
France and thus served to undercut Britain's strategic and economic
position further. The British government had good reason to fear that
an alliance between France and Egypt would dominate the entire
Mediterranean and squeeze England out of the Sea, for the French had
declared they '... meant to establish a new second rate maritime power
in the Mediterranean, whose fleet might unite with that of France for
the purpose of serving as a counterpoise to that of England'.36 Politically
Muhammad Ali's projects could bring France and England to another
war. The climax came on 7 July when the Ottoman navy defected to the
Egyptian side. The combined fleets posed a serious danger of a
formidable naval force in the Mediterranean.
   The Powers sought ways and means to settle the situation, egged on
and harried by Palmerston, who, from then, until the Conference of
London was held on 15 July 1840, deftly wooed the French monarch.
He wished to maintain Muhammad Ali as a vassal and strip him of most
of his conquests. Metternich, on the other hand, had suggested they
strip the wali of his Ottoman territories but declare him independent,
which Palmerston refused to accept.
   Muhammad Ali hoped that the French, who up to then had given him
their support, would help him out. Ibrahim had even written to his
father to say that, if it came to open conflict, they would expect the
French to help them militarily and they should officially notify them of
that expectation.37 The internal situation in France was not too secure.
There were rumours of an attempted coup against Louis-Philippe, and,
although Thiers was in favour of supporting Muhammad Ali for purely
French political reasons, Louis-Philippe was reluctant. Palmerston,
who had to cope with a divided cabinet, half of whom feared a war with
France and the other half of whom admired the secretary of state's
firmness, gambled that Louis-Philippe would be swayed to their side
and not go to war. The gamble paid off and on 15 July the Powers signed
the act for the 'Pacification of the Levant', with a reserved protocol
spelling out the coercive measures to be used against the Egyptian wali
to force his acceptance of their terms.
   The French government made violent statements in support of
Muhammad Ali but did nothing, and a month later it too signed the act.
Later on Louis-Philippe said, 'Mr Thiers is furious with me, because I

                                                                      245
