Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

faculties, when his fits of lucidity seemed to become rarer. From 1847
the administration of the country was left to Ibrahim, who finally
determined to go to Istanbul and ask for his investiture as ruler of Egypt
during his father's lifetime because the old gentleman seemed unlikely
to regain control of his senses.
   In Istanbul the sultan granted Ibrahim's request for investiture.
Nubar reported that this was granted easily and with no fuss because an
Austrian physician had predicted that Ibrahim would be dead within six
months. On the ship returning home Ibrahim succumbed to fever and,
during bouts of hallucination, revealed his terror that his father would
become lucid and punish him for having dared to seize power. Ibrahim
died six months later and was succeeded by his nephew Abbas. The old
pasha by then was so sick that he never even knew that his son had died.
A few months later he himself died on 2 August 1849 at Alexandria.
  British consul Murray described the funeral procession which was
met at Bulaq by all the surviving members of the family, with the
exception of the new wali, Abbas Pasha:
... the ceremonial of the funeral was a most meagre, miserable affair; the
Consular body was not invited to attend, and neither the shops nor the Public
offices were closed - in short, a general impression prevails that Abbas Pasha has
shown a culpable lack of respect for the memory of his illustrious grandfather, in
allowing his obsequies to be conducted in so paltry a manner, and in neglecting
to attend them in Person.
Murray claimed that the
attachment and veneration of all classes in Egypt for the name of Muhammad
Ali are prouder obsequies than any which it was in the power of his successor to
confer. The old inhabitants remember and talk of the chaos and anarchy from
which he rescued this country; the younger compare his energetic rule with the
capricious, vacillating government of his successor; all classes whether Turks, or
Arabs, not only feel, but do not hesitate to say openly that die prosperity of
Egypt has died with Muhammad Ali... In truth my Lord, it cannot be denied,
that Muhammad Ali, notwithstanding all his faults was a great man.

He went on to say that the wali, without any of the advantages of birth
or of fortune, had carved his way to power and fame by his 'own
indomitable courage, perseverance and sagacity'. When he assumed
power he had found an Egypt torn to pieces by feuds and factions,
plundered by roving bands of adventurers, its finances and commerce
prostrate and life and prosperity in every province at the mercy of the
strongest arm; and to redress such disorders among a people who owned
no law but force, said Murray, he was obliged occasionally to have
recourse to acts of severity and cruelty. Murray commented that the

256
