                                                            The aftermath

satisfy the members of his family, and it was perfectly normal Ottoman
procedure to give large tracts of land to one's relations - all sultans had
done it. Another reason that may be adduced was that since Muhammad
Ali had been forced to give up his monopoly system, he had probably
seen the writing on the wall after the treaty of 1838, and he had taken
steps to insure that, although he could no longer legally impose
monopolies, he could still control a large share of the country's produce
by the simple means of giving tracts of land to his relatives and
retainers, on the understanding that these new landowners would
naturally sell their produce to the government. This was the case.
   The foreign merchants, who after 1841 expected Egypt to become a
free market, were surprised and indignant to find that the pasha had
sewed up the market tight, and that if they wanted to buy anything, they
still had to go through him, for no one would sell to them directly. The
French consul, Vattier de Bourville, in 1842 realized what was in the
offing when he reported, 'My doubt, or rather my fear, comes from the
means the Egyptian government possesses to corner, impede, monopo-
lize everything while seeming to respect the principle. The distribution
of villages by His Highness to the members of his family and the court
shows his intention well enough so that it is easy to predict the necessary
consequences of that precaution.'1 Bourville added that that would hurt
'small business' only, because the large houses of commerce preferred to
trade directly with the government. This explains why the treaty of
Balta Liman was more popular among the members of the British
administration than among the British merchants trading with Egypt,
who had opposed it. Bourville continued his report, stating, 'the
freedom of articles released from monopoly is illusory. The members of
the pasha's family will appropriate the best lands and distribute them to
their creatures, and the government could always monopolize for itself
the articles in question. On the other hand if one takes into account the
hindrances constantly brought by the provincial authorities to the [free]
navigation and circulation of merchandise, one understands that trade
and the producers will gain little from this so-called new order.'
   Even better, article 3 of the treaty stipulated that any local article
bought by a foreign merchant would be subject to the same duties that
were paid 'by the most favoured class of Turkish subjects engaged in the
internal trade'.2 This clause allowed Muhammad Ali to subject the
French and British merchants to a new internal tariff. The French
consul moaned in dismay, 'it is almost impossible for monopoly to be
wholly banished from Egypt'.3 The new tariff, of 12 per cent, was
imposed at Bulaq and Cairo on articles that had till then never paid
taxes, such as butter, wheat, beans, lentils, maize and barley. Mooring

                                                                       251
