                                                            The aftermath

understand the ramifications of the incident, as did the other consuls,
who all reported that from 1841 the wait suffered bouts of insomnia and
fits of anger and that his mind was shaken and dulled, a normal enough
state considering the disappointments he had just suffered and the major
set-backs to his schemes. However, in 1844 w e a r e informed through the
reports of the Greek consul, Anastasi, that Muhammad Ali had suffered
fits of agitation and a collapse during which he swore to retire from
government. Six days later the consul reported that the melancholia
dropped from the pasha, his mind cleared, he inflicted a fine on those who
had incurred his wrath and went back to business as usual.
   That account rings untrue. To suffer a bout of melancholia does not
lead a man into an outbreak of rage, which is then followed by imposing
a fine on his officials. There is a missing link somewhere. The consuls
were simply unaware of the real issues at stake and attributed the wait's
anger to a mental condition, when it was nothing of the sort, but was a fit
of rage motivated by political reasons. Nubar in his memoirs, which are
invaluable because he was then Ibrahim Pasha's private secretary,
recounts that the pasha had become upset because the council had
queried taxes and procedures of administration. He added that Ibrahim
in consequence feared for his life, as did Sharif. Ibrahim received a
letter from his father full of accusations, and the former told his people,
among whom was Nubar, that he was innocent of these accusations, and
wanted to be buried with the letter on his breast. He went to see his
father and ordered his mamluks to loosen their sabres when they entered
the palace, and to strike at whomever gave an order for an attack against
his person. By that account Nubar implied that Ibrahim had ordered his
mamluks to strike the wait himself were he to order an attack against his
son. No such attack was ordered and the meeting ended in a reconcilia-
tion between the two men, although both Ibrahim and Sharif paid large
sums of money to the government.7
   We are not quite sure what the reasons behind that incident were, nor
the connection of Ibrahim with it, but it is likely that the incident was a
culmination of bad feeling between the wait and his son. This had been
exacerbated by the intrigues of Abbas, who may have whispered to his
grandfather that Ibrahim had either taken state funds or had withheld
them with the connivance of Sharif, that they were both plotting to
defraud the wait or even to unseat him.
   While Ibrahim was occupied with the Syrian expedition, Abbas was
advanced to high administrative rank and named kikhya, or executive
assistant to the wait. This gave Abbas the opportunity to gather round
him a group of supporters, mostly from among officials who were
opposed to the waifs policies of modernization and industrialization,

                                                                       253
