                                                            The aftermath

   The following year Ibrahim showed signs of illness that were serious.
Throughout his stay in Syria he had complained of rheumatic pains, but
it seemed that he had also been afflicted by tuberculosis, a cyst and a
serious bout of dysentery. He was sent to Italy to take the waters near
Pisa and seized the occasion to tour Europe, where he was lionized both
in England and in France. He was fascinated by the thriving industrial
plants that he toured, and was more interested in seeing factories than
anything else in Europe.
   Throughout this trip Ibrahim showed a lively interest in all matters of
government as well as industry. Nubar explains that he knew all about
industry and was up to date on all the latest progress made in that field.
He would happily tour the factories, asking questions and eating bits of
bread out of his pocket. Whenever speeches were made at receptions or
during meetings with the foreign dignitaries, he had the speeches
translated verbatim, and not just the general gist.
   The trip seemed to have helped the dysentery but the tuberculosis
was too far advanced, and he had taken to spitting blood. Muhammad
Ali could see that his son was sick and might not succeed him for long,
and so determined to go to Istanbul in 1846 and settle his affairs in a
definitive fashion. Peace between the sultan and the wait had been
crowned in 1842 when the sultan conferred upon him a rank equivalent
to that of grand vizier. This act, though an apparent mark of favour, was
in fact a means of putting the wait in his place as a servant of the
Ottoman empire, a vizier not an independent sovereign. The wait later
told someone that he had gone to Istanbul because, 'Ibrahim is old and
sick, Abbas is indolent (happa), and then children will rule Egypt. How
will they keep Egypt?'9 He sought to create bonds between Egypt and
the Porte that would prevent his country from falling prey to some
foreign power. Muhammad Ali was always obsessed by the fear that
Britain would occupy Egypt. He had told Burckhardt his fear in 1816 in
Taif, and nothing subsequently allowed him to change his opinion
regarding British designs on his country. History was to prove his fears
well grounded. When he had been approached on the idea of a Suez
canal he had refused to consider such a project because he believed it
would incite the occupation of Egypt by Britain, and in this he proved
prophetic.
   While in Istanbul the aged pasha was well treated, and returned to
Egypt feeling more secure about the future of the country. He planned a
visit to England for the following year, where, Palmerston - who had
once again returned to office - assured him, he would be graciously
received. The trip never took place for the silver nitrate his doctors gave
him earlier to cure his dysentery was taking its toll and troubled his

                                                                       255
