Chapter n

The aftermath




The frustrations of these few months might have destroyed a less
determined man than Muhammad Ali, or at least might have broken his
spirit. Many historians have assumed that his spirit indeed was broken,
and have claimed that he lost interest in his industries and his schools
after 1840, when the momentum slowed down. That was not the case.
Internal changes did take place after 1841, but they were necessitated by
the changing circumstances of the country and its changing financial
potential.
   Before the Syrian debacle the Egyptian government had been heading
towards expansion overseas and control of trade routes, if not of the
resources of the countries they had occupied. After 1841 expansion was
replaced by contraction to the territories of Egypt and the Sudan.
Egypt no longer controlled trade routes, and had to rely on her own
resources or on normal trade patterns. This affected Egyptian industry
as did the new trade tariffs that were now imposed.
   Prior to 1841 Egypt had a large army that reached well over 100,000
men (some figures, e.g., those of Sami, give twice that number). While
that army had siphoned manpower away from agriculture and industry,
such a large army consumed the products of the new industries in terms
of cloth for uniforms, leather for boots, saddles and gear, firearms and
gunpowder, cannon and ships, and all the products of the arsenals and
shipyards in terms of sails, ropes, copper plates, metal ware, etc. In
brief, all the war-related industries, which frequently have been the
start of many countries on the path to industrialization, came to a
resounding halt when the Egyptian army was legally curtailed to 18,000
men. Where it was economically sound for a country to manufacture the
requirements of a large army, it was no longer economically sound to
manufacture such products for an exiguous army, unless that country
were to export these manufactures and become an arms supplier, such as
Belgium was, or a ship-building nation. This Egypt could not profitably
do, for the competition was too strong.
   As for other industries like cotton, silk and wool, these continued to

                                                                     249
