Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

function at a lesser pace, and to m m out stuffs that could be consumed
internally. Since the Egyptian government could no longer impose
Egyptian textiles as an export item on their former 'colonies', they had
to compete on the open market with all other textiles and were rapidly
displaced by those from Britain. British textiles benefited from the new
tariff differential, which gave them a 9-per-cent edge on local goods, and
also from the fact that British merchants were lending the compradors
money so that they could buy up local raw materials for export.
Egyptian merchants could not offer the same financially interesting
terms, and could not compete. In these circumstances Egyptian textiles
were to diminish in importance, and, while they did not die out as some
historians would have us believe, nonetheless they diminished produc-
tion quite sensibly.
   We can then assume that the factories that were closed down after
1841 were closed not because the wali had lost interest in them, but
because they no longer had any markets for their goods. The wali tried
to stave off these changes for as long as he could by various devices
whereby he sought to outwit his foreign competition. The first such
device was to tie the land-owning element in the country closer to
himself and to his family by rewarding them financially. The means of
establishing such rewards came with changes in the land-tenure laws.
   In 1836 a new land system called the uhda had been set up in response
to a pressing need for money (see chapter 6); by 1844 nearly one million
faddans had been distributed as uhda lands, which were also distributed
to foreign merchants as well - Zizinia for instance. Large areas of land
known as ibadiyya had been granted free of taxes, so long as they were
brought under cultivation. By 1837 ibadiyyat were subject to inheri-
tance, and by 1842 they became private property. Around that period of
time, grants of land to members of the ruling family were made. These
cafalik as they were called, had been allowed usufructuary rights only,
but by 1842 a law was promulgated on Muharram 5, which turned them
into full property rights. Artin assumed that by these means Muham-
mad Ali hoped to develop a 'noblesse terrienne' that would be loyal to
his family and support the throne, as in other parts of the world. Yet
when we look closer at the list of landowners we cannot fail but note that
the largest landowners were the members of Muhammad Ali's own
family, who at least were presumably on his side.
  We might make a number of assumptions about the new land
changes. The first and most obvious is that the wali was setting his
children up with private property, in case they were ousted from power,
or replaced. In that case, purely usufructuary property would have been
forfeit or confiscated. A second reason was that he may have wanted to

250
