Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

charges for the boats coming from Upper Egypt and Bulaq also had to
be paid.
   French annoyance stemmed from the fact that the wali continued to
buy up all the cotton that was grown in the country and to sell it back to
the merchants abroad. That is, he was acting as a merchant and selling
his goods directly in Europe, cutting out the European merchants.
Equally galling were the duties he imposed on transit goods and on
imported goods.4
   The British consul was just as unhappy as his French opposite
number, and for the same reasons, although the wali had given a
concession to the British government which allowed the Peninsular and
Oriental steamship line (which had become chartered to take the Red
Sea route from India) to land at Suez. The passengers and goods were
then trans-shipped by land from Suez to Alexandria. This arrangement
was settled by September 1841 in return for a stated annual sum paid to
the Egyptian government.5
   1841 and 1842 were bad years for Egypt in more ways than one. The
Egyptian debts mounted to 80 million francs (or £2,400,000). The
flood was high and drowned crops and villages and, while a slight
improvement followed, the next year, 1844, brought in a cattle murrain
that ravaged the country's herds. The combination of these events
exacerbated arrears of taxation, and caused extreme hardship among the
fallahin. Sharif Pasha, the head of the diwan al-maliyya, or the minister
of finances, was too scared to tell the wali the true state of financial
affairs, which was little short of disastrous. He concerted with Ibrahim
Pasha, and it seems that together they drew up a report to the council
revealing the facts. Tax arrears came to 14,081,500 pts. out of a total
estimated tax of 75,227,500 pts. The report stated that villages could not
pay their taxes, and recommended that the debts of the villages be
remitted.'
   It was alleged that the report was first leaked to the wali by his daughter
in order to cushion the shock. Such a step made the wali suspect that he
had been duped, and that it was a first move preliminary to getting rid of
him. In a rage he railed at the council, and accused two unnamed, but
clearly identifiable members, one of being a ghaddar (traitor), and the
other of being a tama (greedy). He said that he wanted these men
delivered to him, that he was resigning as pasha of Egypt and would retire
to Mecca to spend his days in contemplation; he then stalked out of the
council. The man accused of treachery was Ibrahim and the one of greed,
Sharif, presumably because of a suspicion that he had pocketed the
missing funds himself. Muhammad Ali sailed off to Cairo and shut
himself up at his palace in Shubra. The British consul failed to

252
