Egypt in the reign of Muhammad AH

which they believed cost the state much money. These officials, and we
can only surmise as to who they were, were large landowners who were
interested in seeing the establishment of a free market, by which they
could offer their produce at the highest going price, rather than see it
sold at a fixed rate to the government, which made the larger profit by
reselling the produce for export. These officials may have been won over
to that viewpoint by the foreign consuls and foreign merchants, who
could not have helped but point out the advantages accruing to the
landowners from a system of free trade.
   Abbas detested his uncle, who humiliated him and never attempted to
hide his contempt for him, and the nephew made a concerted effort to
oppose all of his uncle's projects and policies. Whereas Ibrahim led a
progressive faction, and was enthralled by anything to do with machin-
ery and industry, Abbas represented a conservative, reactionary wing in
the administration, that neither understood industrialization nor cared
to. Probably Abbas' support came from the old traditional Ottoman
group, while Ibrahim was popular among the new, progressive adminis-
trators and the army. The animosity between the two men surfaced
when Ibrahim returned from Syria to find that in his absence he had
been displaced in the administration by his nephew, who had become a
power with which he would have to contend.
   During the Syrian campaign ill-feeling had been bred between
Ibrahim and his father. Ibrahim had written one too many acerbic
letters to his father, complaining of lack of funds, lack of cannon and
men and lack of action, so that for a while all communication between
the two men was conducted through the bash muawin, for the tvali
refused to correspond directly with his son. Ibrahim would also have
liked to conduct the campaign differently, to have pushed on to Istanbul
and settled the issue once and for all. He was restrained by his father's
orders, which he no doubt resented. He was deeply mortified at the
Syrian debacle, which cast a shadow on his reputation as a general in the
field, and which meant a waste of ten years of his life and efforts in
Syria.8 Perhaps on his return to Egypt rancour remained on both sides,
and may have been the reason why Abbas, whom the wait also despised,
was raised to such a position. At the same time one must keep in mind
that Abbas was a member of the family and had to be given a position of
importance, without regard to his talents or lack of any.
  Muhammad Ali, on learning the full extent of his financial insolvency,
may well have exploded in rage at what he considered the duplicity of
Ibrahim and Sharif in not informing him of the situation earlier, or may
even have suspected them of purloining the funds. Whatever the reason,
the quarrel was patched up between them.

254
