Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

who was enrolled in the army learned a lesson of self-identity and of
loyalty to a territorial entity. When he defeated the Ottoman army, the
army of those masters who had ruled Egypt for three centuries, he felt a
wave of pride that showed that he was well on the road to Egyptianiza-
tion, as when he refused to accept Ottoman prisoners of war as his
officers, even when the wali and his bureacracy had not set out to teach
that lesson.
   Under Muhammad Ali the new administration brought law and order
to a society that had been bereft of them for several decades. In so doing
it gave an impetus to trade and commerce. While the administration
carried out measures that tended to concentrate land in the hands of the
wealthy few and so created a latifundist class, it behoves us to point out
that that class had existed, de facto if not dejure, before the advent of the
new regime and that the regime had followed the trend set by the
multazimun of past eras, when convenient to do so. By and large,
Muhammad Ali left Egypt generally richer and better governed than he
had found it. But these are details that lead one to the inevitable
question of what the overall picture of Egypt was after the reign of
Muhammad Ali.
   The answer to that is that Muhammad Ali had created the structure
of a state and the apparatus that goes with it. In most other countries
feelings of nationalism are implanted and grow among the population
until their self-awareness leads them to break out into movements of
nationalism culminating in the creation of a state. The opposite hap-
pened in Egypt. All of Muhammad Ali's actions, his moves, planned or
accidental, fortuitous or calamitous, aimed at rendering Egypt indepen-
dent from the Ottoman empire. In order to make that independence
possible the wali created an apparatus that would allow the state to
survive qua state, and not as an appendage to an empire. He had to
control the land's resources, which were plentiful and susceptible to
further development, sufficient to permit him to become an independent
monarch. The governor of a mere province would have found Egypt
rich enough, but the ruler of a state needs to develop his resources as
much as possible, to render the country self-sufficient and capable of
 expansion on its own merits, not as part of a larger whole. The state first
 was created, then its existence encouraged and bred feelings of self-
 identity among the population, which grew until several decades later
 these feelings blossomed into a national movement in 1882.
  The creation of a state saw the simultaneous development of a
bureaucracy which raised funds that were invested in an army and a
navy - the tools of independence - the development of agriculture and
the establishment of a commercial network that stood on its own and

262
