Egypt in the reign of Muhammad Ali

   When Muhammad Ali and his bureaucracy had embarked on an
extensive scheme of exporting raw materials, they had placed a heavy
burden on the Egyptian population. By so doing they were following in
the footsteps of the tujjar and mamluks of the late eighteenth century
who discovered that they could make more money through exporting
raw materials and importing finished goods rather than the other way
round. In that way they could also dominate town and countryside, and
keep the artisan population submissive. The same tujjar had latched on
to Muhammad Ali and boosted him to power. He continued to expand
the policy of exporting raw materials, but reversed the trend of the
immediate past, in favour of a more distant past, by attempting to export
finished products as well and limiting the import of rival finished
commodities. This came at the time when Europe needed food to feed
its masses - who had been driven off the land and into factories with a
consequent diminution in agricultural production - and needed markets
for its finished goods. The concept of an international division of labour
was thus born to convince or coerce some nations to remain agricultural
and so supply food for the industrial world. Those countries that sought
to do both were cut down to size, as India and Egypt were.
   By granting land to private individuals, to friends and relations, as
Muhammad Ali and his government did in Egypt, they unwittingly
reinforced the pattern of export of raw materials over the export of
finished goods. The wali had hoped to sidetrack the effects of Balta
Liman by coercing the new private landowners to sell the raw materials
to him and to the government; he thus allowed land to become privately
owned, or rather conceded the private ownership of land under pressure
from his own entourage, having that principle in mind. In this last he
failed. The pull of the European market was too strong and the profit
motive, which the pasha had helped instil among his own followers, too
strong to resist the siren lure of ready cash. Balta Liman once again
permitted foreign merchants to buy directly from the landowners and
by-pass the government monopolies, which were dismantled. The
demands of the open market in the west showed the landowners that
instant profit could be made by them as individuals through exporting
raw materials. That profit had in the past been diverted into the
government's grasp. Greed - or, to be more just, the inducement of
profit - added to the terms of Balta Liman, finished off industrialization.
Whereas industry cost money and showed little profit at the beginning,
and what profit it showed went to the government, agriculture for
export showed instant profit which went to the private landowners.
Private ownership of land therefore aided in stripping the country of its
industrial potential.

260
