                                                              Conclusion

these arguments do not hold water. We know that the transfer of
technology can be done, that Third World countries can produce goods
that rival those of the more advanced west. Witness the quantity of
industrial centres that have blossomed outside the west and produce
commodities sold in the west but produced more cheaply elsewhere.
Why did the first essay in Egyptian industry fail, one might well ask?
   The reason stems more from external factors than from internal ones,
although there were some local ones. It is true that to set up industry
demands a tremendous outlay of capital and that after 1840 such capital
was less available. It is also equally true that no industry was set up in
Europe at that time without protective tariffs also being instituted to
sustain that industry until it could survive on its own merits. That
advantage was not vouchsafed Egypt. A second concomitant was that
the industrialized world needed external markets in order to sell its own
goods, for the internal markets were not sufficient, hence the need for
informal colonization, which later in the century became formalized by
physical military occupation. That second advantage also was not
vouchsafed Egypt. The treaty of Balta Liman prevented the wait from
continuing to protect his infant industries; worse still, it permitted the
unchecked influx of cheap western goods. Because aliens could import
and export at cheaper rates than the local citizens, and thanks to the
Capitulations became immune from local laws, the local markets fell
into their hands, and in time were to fall entirely under their control.
Whatever colonies Egypt had acquired were stripped from her, thereby
diminishing her markets. Whatever other markets existed in the area, to
which she could have had access to sell her goods, were no longer
operable because of Balta Liman. Her commodities could not become
competitive through the higher export and import duties imposed on
Egyptian goods by the treaty. Incidentally, the treaty operated in the
same fashion among the rest of die Arab territories of the area, and
rendered their artisan production equally non-competitive.
   Industrialization was doomed to fail in Egypt, not through the
shortcomings of the Egyptians, but because of external European
pressures which used Ottoman legal control over Egypt to kill off any
potential rivalry to their own industrial ventures.
   The only industries which might have been doomed to die a natural
death were the war-related ones once the army was dismantled. Yet even
there there is some doubt as to their doom. Egyptian shipyards could
have continued to flourish, as did those of Greece, had the Egyptians
been allowed to keep their freedom to manoeuvre on an open market,
and had been allowed to keep the commercial links that were encour-
aged in Greece but removed from Egypt.

                                                                      259
