Conclusion




It is the point faible of historians that we view events in the light of
hindsight, and then pretend to write history wie es eigentlich gewesen.
Wallerstein has pointed out that all historians write from a contempo-
rary point of view. They write as a result of their interests, and from the
angle of their current scholarly perceptions, so that there is no absolute
objectivity, only a relative one. Nevertheless, a historian must examine
his or her period of historical interest and compare it with the preceding
and the succeeding eras in order to determine what changes ensued and
the consequences of such changes to the country and to its population.
   It has been alleged by some historians that industrialization in Egypt
was doomed to failure because the country had little fuel and less
mineral resources. Others have pointed out the lack of an internal
market as a reason for the ultimate failure of industry. To my mind
these are not valid arguments. England had no indigenous cotton and
yet built up her industrial revolution on that one commodity. Japan has
no fuel yet today she is an industrial giant. Such arguments then do not
convince one of the 'inevitable failure' of industrialization, the more so
in a country where manpower was plentiful and cheap and where the
basic raw materials were grown. If Egypt had enough money with which
to import finished goods of a cheap and medium variety from abroad,
there certainly was enough money within the country to create an
internal market for her own industrial production. That Egyptian
workers were not skilled, another reason given for bolstering up the
argument of the 'inevitable failure' of Egyptian industry, is equally
irrelevant, for skilled workers are not born, they are trained.
   All the arguments which have till now been offered to explain that
Egyptian industry should have been dismantled were predicated on
arguments that were both Eurocentric and colonialist in approach. The
arguments assumed that Egyptians were not clever enough to learn
technology - only European workers having that capacity, as the consuls
were always pointing out - that Egyptians could never become skilled in
technology to compete with western workers and production. Today

258
