                                                                Conclusion

   A heavy burden had been placed on the Egyptian population in terms
of corvee labour for digging irrigation canals and public works. It is true
that these canals helped increase the land areas of Egypt and allowed the
production of new cash crops, but the toll in lives and in disruption of
society was tremendous. The fallah may or may not have benefited
directly from these public works, but he certainly paid the price that
benefited later generations. A new group, or a rising class of fallahin, did
benefit from these works, and came to form the nucleus of the native
landowning elite when land became privately owned, but the rest of the
fallahin were transformed into sharecroppers at best, or wage labourers
at worse. The time honoured hiyaza of land, to which the fallah
traditionally had been entitled, was transformed into mulk, and the
fallah demoted into a wage labourer. The disruptions occasioned by
these public works, which at least directly benefited the population at
large, were as nothing compared to the disruptions that affected the
fallah when the Suez Canal was built. There the Egyptian worker was
more shamelessly exploited by his government and by the French
builders of the canal, who had him dig it without providing tools, food
or payment. One hundred thousand Egyptians died in a project that was
hailed by Europe as a marvel of technology, which it indeed was. But
where were all the critics to bemoan the inhumanity of the rulers and the
Suez Canal Company then, to decry a project that led to a costly debt
which took over three decades to pay off, and to the inevitable
occupation of the country?
   Muhammad Ali's armies were excoriated by historians for siphoning
manpower off the land, thereby diminishing the production of raw
materials so necessary for European factories. In spite of all its
drawbacks the army did have definite advantages which though under-
lined when describing armies of other countries, were neglected when it
came to the Egyptian army. The army was the one chance the fallah had
for vertical mobility, other than joining the ranks of the administration
and the ulama. That too was a necessary step in the Egyptianization of
the country. Without an Egyptian army the country would always
remain at the mercy of mercenaries and foreign troops. Without the
artificial need for an army created by wars of expansion and conquest
there would never have been an Egyptian army. Consequently there
would have been no educational missions, no technical schools set up to
train men for various branches of the army, and incidentally to produce
doctors and technocrats of various kinds. The army was the great
educator and homogenizer then and today, as we can see in most third-
world countries and as happened in the case of France, Italy and
Germany where peasants were turned into citizens. The Egyptian fallah

                                                                        261
