                                                               Conclusion

was not part of the Ottoman world market. Unfortunately the wait did
not realize that by breaking away from one world market he was also
destroying that market and making it, and himself, dependent on a new
world market, that of Europe. The wali needed Europe as a trading
partner to replace the Ottomans, so that, should a conflict arise between
him and the Ottomans as was inevitable, he would still have a market for
his goods. That new partner was to effect his undoing.
   In creating the apparatus for the state Muhammad Ali inevitably
forced the country to Egyptianize the army and the administration. Yet
he still hoped to keep an elite of Ottomans, because he himself
psychologically could not make the transition to becoming an Egyptian.
It was too late for him, but not so for his son Ibrahim, who determined
to become an Egyptian; even when he treated the native population
high-handedly he tried to identify with the land and its men. On the
other hand, the toali thought of himself as an Ottoman, and feared the
Egyptianization of his elite. He wanted to keep them intact as an elite,
which accounts for his interest in sixteenth-century Ottoman literature.
He wanted his men to retain their self-identity as Ottomans and to that
end he encouraged interest in Ottoman literature of the golden age.
Much in the way that immigrants will cling to the customs of the Old
Country they left at the time they emigrated rather than as these
customs evolved at a later age, and so become more rigid than the
mother country in this respect, so the Ottoman elite in Egypt was
encouraged to cling to its Ottoman identity as a cultural identity, even
when they were fighting the Ottomans as a political identity. By so
doing the new regime differed from the mamluks who had, to a large
extent, adopted the identity of the Egyptians, that is, the Islamic-Arab
culture, when they came from different and alien milieux. The lesser
mamluks had fraternized with the people, even though their elite had
not intermarried with them, but they had learned to speak the language
and adopted the customs of the Egyptians, even while bringing in
customs of their own. The new regime sought to place a distance
between itself and the mass of the fallahin and so preserve its own
cultural identity. The reason for this is that, unlike the mamluks, for the
most part they were not slaves torn from their own roots and therefore
forced to find new ones, but were immigrants into a country they sought
to exploit but with whom they had not as yet identified. Much like the
British raj in India, they were the Turco-Circassian-Albanian raj in
Egypt, feeling possessive towards the land as the source of their well-
being and new-found authority, but having no sense of identity with it.
In so doing they forced the Egyptians into a self-awareness of their own,
into a national identity, distinct from that of their rulers.


                                                                       263
