

From  1784  until  1792  Pitt  allowed  the  military 
forces  of  the  country  to  sink  to  the  lowest  degree  of 
weakness  and  inefficiency;  and  in  1793  he  found  himself 
obliged  to  improvise  not  merely  an  army,  but,  owing  to 
the  multiplicity  of  his  enterprises,  a  very  large  army. 
He  fell  back  on  the  old  resources  of  raising  men  for 
rank  and  calling  into  existence  new  levies,  allowing  the 
system  to  be  carried  to  such  excess  that  the ;  Army  did 
not  recover  from  the  evil  for  many  years.  Never  did 
the  crimps  reap  such  a  harvest  as  in  1794  and  1795  ; 
and  never  was  a  more  cruel  wrong  done  to  the  Army 
than  when  boys  fresh  from  school,  in  virtue  of  so  many 
hundred  wretched  weaklings  produced  by  a  crimp,  took 
command  of  battalions,  and  even  of  brigades,  over  the 
heads  of  good  officers  of  twenty  and  thirty  years' 
service.  In  1793  the  bounty  offered  to  men  enlisting 
into  the  Line  was  ten  guineas  ;  within  eighteen  months 
the  Government  was  contracting  with  certain  scoundrels 
for  the  delivery  of  men  at  twenty  guineas  a  head,  and, 
X   H.D.  Speech  ofW.  Windham,  21st  Feb.  1805. 


4  PITT'S  BLUNDERS,  1 793-1 796         chap. 

long  before  that,  the  market  price  of  recruits  had  risen 
to  thirty  guineas. 

One  cause  of  the  extreme  clearness  of  recruits  was 
dread  of  service  in  the  West  Indies,  where  Pitt  had 
decided  to  make  his  principal  military  effort.  Nor  was 
this  repugnance  unreasonable,  for  West  Indian  duty 
in  those  days  was  practically  synonymous  with  death. 
But,  apart  from  this,  the  Government,  by  its  own 
military  policy,  had  done  its  utmost  to  hinder  recruiting 
for  the  Line.  The  Militia  was,  very  properly,  at  once 
embodied  and  made  up  to  strength  as  soon  as  the 
danger  of  war  became  serious  ;  but  substitutes  were 
allowed,  and  these  substitutes  were  precisely  the  men 
who,  but  for  the  heavy  bounty  which  they  could  gain 
from  serving  comfortably  at  home,  would  gladly  have 
enlisted  in  the  Army.  Furthermore,  by  enrolling  many 
scores  of  thousands  of  Volunteers  as  independent  units, 
dissociating  them,  contrary  to  all  precedent,  from 
the  Militia,  and  exempting  them  from  the  ballot, 
Ministers  diminished  seriously  the  number  of  men  who 
were  liable  to  be  drawn  for  the  Militia,  threw  the 
obligation  upon  a  smaller  class  of  the  population,  and, 
as  a  natural  consequence,  increased  the  demand  for 
substitutes.  Then  again,  they  had  raised  several  thou- 
sand Fencible  regiments,  both  horse  and  foot.  These, 
being  engaged  for  home  service  alone,  differed  from 
Militia  only  in  that  they  were  not  chosen  by  the  ballot, 
and,  consequently,  they  absorbed  thousands  of  men 
who  would  otherwise  have  taken  service  with  the 
Regulars.  Meanwhile  the  mortality  among  the  troops 
in  the  West  Indies  was  appalling  ;  and  yet,  for  military 
reasons,  it  was  urgently  necessary  to  obtain  more  men 
by  some  means  for  both  Navy  and  Army.  An  Act  was 
therefore  passed  for  levying  men  from  every  parish 
in  the  United  Kingdom,  after  the  precedent  of  Queen 
Anne.  The  measure  was  a  total  failure  so  far  as  the 
Army  was  concerned,  and  in  the  Navy  it  was  generally 
considered,  from  the  bad  character  of  the  men  produced, 
to  have  been  a  chief  cause  of  the  Mutiny  of  1797. 