

*  They  could  not  even  return  to  France,  but  were  obliged  to  take 
refuge  in  Spanish  ports. 


8  ADDINGTON'S  FALSE  POLICY        chap. 

1803.  without  seeing  the  force  harassed  to  destruction  on 
its  retreat.  Calabria  and  Apulia  were  ripe  for  revolt 
against  him,  and  the  rest  of  Italy  was  by  no  means  so 
quiet  that  he  could  afford  to  leave  it  weakly  occupied 
when  there  was  a  chance  of  a  reverse  to  his  arms.  The 
British  force  could  have  been  doubled  or  trebled  as  the 
augmentation  of  the  Army  progressed,  and  Napoleon 
would  thus  have  been  forced  to  fight  us  amid  a  hostile 
population,  at  the  end  of  a  long  line  of  communications, 
in  a  country  which  favoured  the  action  of  our  fleet 
even  more  than  Spain. 

It  may  be  urged  that  a  policy  so  audacious  was  too 
much  to  expect  of  British  Ministers  in  the  presence  of 
such  a  man  as  Napoleon  ;  and  such  an  objection  must 
not  be  lightly  dismissed.  Addington  was  such  a  proverb 
for  mediocrity  that,  though  he  was  popular  among  the 
country  gentlemen,  the  nation  felt  little  confidence  in 
him  ;  and  if  he  had  attempted  such  a  stroke  as  is  out- 
lined in  the  preceding  paragraphs,  he  might  well  have 
brought  a  storm  about  his  ears  and  have  been  compelled 
to  cancel  any  offensive  expedition,  even  if  he  had 
designed  it.  But  this  is  not  the  main  point.  The  real 
question  at  issue  is  whether  in  the  particular  circum- 
stances he  should  have  devoted  his  principal  effort  to 
reinforcing  the  Army,  which  could  serve  abroad,  or  to 
creating  a  huge  defensive  force,  which  could  only  serve 
at  home.  Obviously,  regular  troops,  which  from  their 
nature  are  superior  to  half-trained  levies  as  well  for 
internal  defence  as  for  foreign  attack,  were  preferable  if 
they  could  be  raised  in  sufficient  numbers  and  at  reason- 
able expense.  Indeed,  though  the  fact  is  occasionally 
obscured,  the  Regular  Army  is,  and  always  has  been,  the 
only  land  force  that  we  can  depend  upon  for  any 
description  of  war.  All  inquiries,  therefore,  into  our 
military  preparations  at  any  period  must  be  conducted, 
primarily  and  above  all,  to  ascertain  how  they  affected, 
for  good  or  evil,  the  strength,  numbers,  and  efficiency  of 
the  Regular  Army. 

War  was  declared,  as  has  been  told,  on  the  1 6th  of 


I  STRENGTH  OF  THE  ARMY  9 

May  1803.  Exact  returns  of  the  effective  strength  of  1803. 
the  Regular  Army  on  the  ist  of  June  are  fortunately 
to  hand,^  and  it  will  be  profitable  to  begin  by 
abstracting  them  here.  It  must  be  premised  that  the 
Regular  Army  consisted  at  that  time  of  three  regiments 
of  Household  Cavalry ;  seven  regiments  of  Dragoon 
Guards  ;  twenty-five  regiments  of  Dragoons  ;  seven 
battalions  of  Foot  Guards  ;  ninety-six  regiments  of  the 
Line,  all  of  one  battalion  apiece,  except  the  First  Royals, 
which  had  two  battalions,  and  the  Sixtieth,  which  had  six ; 
seven  Garrison  Battalions  ;  a  small  independent  corps 
at  Goree  ;  another  of  five  hundred  men  in  New  South 
Wales  ;  seven  foreign  corps  (about  3500  of  all  ranks) 
of  infantry  ;  the  Royal  Waggon  Train,  numbering  just 
over  two  hundred  men  ;  and  the  Staff  Corps,  or  War 
Office  Engineers,  which  had  been  called  into  being  during 
the  last  war  because  the  established  Engineers  under  the 
Office  of  Ordnance  acknowledged  no  master  but  their 
own  Master-General,  and  made  difficulties  about  obeying 
the  orders  of  the  Comniander-in-Chief.  The  above 
were  all  white  troops,  and  it  will  be  convenient  to  reckon 
them  all  together,  for  the  men  of  the  Sixtieth  were  for 
the  most  part  as  truly  foreign  as  De  Roll's  or  De  Watte- 
ville's.  Besides  these  there  were  four  thousand  native 
troops  in  Ceylon,  all  of  them  useless  and  some  of  them 
dangerous,  and  six  West  Indian  regiments,  which  for 
West  Indian  service  were  excellent  and  invaluable  troops.^ 
The  effective  strength  of  the  whole  (deducting  the 
Ceylonese)  was  14,734  cavalry  and  79,508  infantry, 
effective  rank  and  file^  that  is  to  say,  corporals  and  privates 
only.  Adding  one-eighth  for  drummers,  sergeants,  and 
officers,  we  obtain,  in  round  numbers,  a  total  of  1 5,600 
cavalry,  and   89,500  infantry,  or  as  nearly  as  may  be 