


CHAPTER    II 

I 

1802.  Upon  the  peace  of  Amiens,  Addington  made  it  his  first 
business  to  pass  an  Act  ^  to  enable  Yeomanry  and  Volun- 
teer corps  to  continue  their  service  if  they  were  willing 
to  do  so  ;  for  the  various  Acts  passed  by  Pitt's 
Administration  had  provided  for  the  maintenance  of 
Volunteers  only  until  the  close  of  the  war.  The  whole 
organisation  and  system  of  Volunteers  under  Pitt  had 
been  vicious  and  false.  The  corps  made  their  own  con- 
ditions of  service,  were  supported  by  private  subscrip- 
tions, and  were  directed  by  committees  of  subscribers 
who  were  not  necessarily  holders  of  commissions.  These 
committees  addressed  the  Secretary  of  State  directly, 
and  it  was  an  open  question  whether  they  or  the  officers 
were  the  true  commanders  of  the  corps.^  But  no  effort 
was  made  by  Addington  to  reduce  chaos  to  order,  nor 
in  any  way  to  correct  what  was  amiss.  Sections  2,  3, 
and  4  of  the  English  Act  provided  that  Volunteers  and 
Yeomanry  should  be  exempt  from  the  Militia  Ballot^ 
on  attending  five  days'  exercise  every  year,  forfeiting 
that  privilege  if  discharged  fi-om  their  corps.  For  the 
rest.  Volunteers  were  relieved,  under  section  7,  from  the 
duty  on  hair-powder,  and  Yeomanry  from  the  duty  on 

^  42  Geo.  III.  cap.  66  for  Great  Britain  ;  cap.  68  for  Ireland. 

2  The  documents  concerning  the  Volunteers  of  1794  to  1801  are 
so  scanty  and  imperfect  that  it  is  impossible  to  speak  of  them  except 
in  general  terms.  So  much  as  I  have  written  above  is,  however, 
certain. 

^  It  must  be  noted  that  as  there  was  practically  no  ballot  in 
Ireland,  there  was  no  exemption. 

12 


CHAP.  II         VOLUNTEER  ACTS,  1802  13 

one  horse,  in  addition.  Corps  which,  when  called  on,  1802. 
consented  voluntarily  to  march  out  of  their  counties  to 
repel  invasion  or  to  suppress  riots  were,  under  section 
10,  entitled  to  receive  the  same  pay  as  regular  troops, 
and  were  subjected  to  military  discipline,  with  the  pro- 
viso that  they  could  be  tried  only  by  courts-martial 
composed  of  officers  of  Yeomen  or  Volunteers.  Under 
section  1 1  officers  and  men  disabled  on  active  service 
were  entitled  to  half-pay  or  to  a  Chelsea  pension  respec- 
tively ;  and  therewith  the  enactment  was  complete.  Not 
a  word  was  said  as  to  the  preservation  of  discipline 
during  the  days  of  exercise  ;  not  a  word  to  prevent  the 
multiplication  of  small  corps,  a  thing  which  had  been 
the  curse  of  the  Volunteers  from  1794  to  1801  ;  finally, 
not  a  word  as  to  pay  and  allowances,  except  in  case 
of  invasion. 

The  Act  having  been  passed,  the  Secretary  of  State 
for  War,  on  the  2nd  of  July,  sent  round  a  circular  to 
the  Lords-Lieutenant  inviting  offers  of  service,  and 
tendering  the  following  allowances :  ;^2  a  year  to 
every  Volunteer  for  his  clothing  and  appointments ; 
^60  a  year  for  every  troop  of  Yeomanry  which  counted 
not  fewer  than  forty  rank  and  file. 