

The  improvisation  of  an  army  during  the  eighteenth 
century  was  generally  effected  in  three  ways  :  by  ordi- 
nary recruiting,  by  raising  new  corps,  and  by  raising 
men  for  rank. 


2  THE  OLD  SYSTEM  chap. 

Ordinary  recruiting  was  a  regimental  matter,  which 
kept  two  or  three  officers  and  a  small  party  of  men 
constantly  absent  from  regimental  duty.  It  was  usually 
stimulated  at  the  outbreak  of  a  war  by  adding  two 
troops  or  companies  to  every  regiment  or  battalion, 
which  gave  a  step  without  purchase  to  a  limited  number 
of  officers.^ 

The  raising  of  new  regiments  is  a  thing  that  explains 
itself.  Practically  it  offered  commissions  to  any  enter- 
prising gentleman  or  gentlemen  who,  by  hook  or  crook, 
could  get  together  a  body  of  men  ;  and  in  its  essence 
it  differed  very  little  from  raising  men  for  rank,  which 
signified  the  grant  of  a  step  of  promotion  to  all  officers 
and  of  a  commission  to  all  civilians  who  would  collect 
a  given  number  of  recruits.  An  increased  bounty, 
of  course,  necessarily  accompanied  the  whole  of  these 
arrangements  ;  and  though,  in  certain  instances,  men  of 
rank  and  station  could  raise  whole  regiments  of  excel- 
lent soldiers,  yet  the  backbone  of  an  improvised  army 
was  the  crimp. 

The  replacing  of  casualties  suffered  on  active  service, 
that  is  to  say  the  maintenance  as  distinguished  from 
the  formation  of  an  army,  was  left  wholly  to  ordinary 
recruiting  ;  and  it  need  hardly  be  said  that  in  a  long 
war  this  meagre  resource  invariably  failed.  Increased 
bounties  led  always  to  increased  desertion  ;  and  even 
in  Queen  Anne's  time  it  was  necessary  to  enlist  men 
for  short  service,  instead  of,  as  usual,  for  life,  and  to 
make  a  levy  of  so  many  men  from  every  parish  in  the 
country.  As  time  went  on,  the  difficulty  of  keeping 
corps  in  the  field  up  to  strength  constantly  increased. 
In  Marlborough's  day  every  regiment  sent  its  recruiting 
parties  home  as  soon  as  the  Army  went  into  winter 
quarters  ;  but  when  winter  quarters  ceased  to  be,  and 
campaigns  were  no  longer  bounded  by  the  seasons,  the 
problem  became  almost  insoluble.  Towards  the  end 
of  the  Seven  Years'  War  new  levies  were  raised  as  fast 
as  men  could  be  found  to  undertake  them,  but  the 

^  This  mode  of  augmentation  lasted  till  the  Crimean  War. 


I  MILITIA  ACT  OF  1757  3 

recruits  furnished  thereby  to  the  Army  in  Germany 
were  of  miserable  quality.  In  fact,  greatly  though  the 
sudden  peace  of  1763  was  blamed,  it  came  none  too 
soon  for  the  British  Army. 

That  war,  however,  brought  with  it  one  great  and 
solid  advance  in  our  military  system,  namely,  the 
Militia  Act  of  1757.  This  measure  provided  for 
passing  the  entire  manhood  of  the  country  through 
the  Militia  by  ballot,  in  terms  of  three  years  ;  but  it 
was  never  properly  executed,  and  hence  lost  very  much 
of  its  value.  The  ballot  itself  was  never  enforced^ 
until  the  American  trouble  became  serious  in  1775, 
and  then,  since  substitution  was  allowed,  the  traffic 
in  substitutes  interfered  gravely  with  recruiting  for  the 
Regular  Army.  The  price  of  a  substitute  rose  to  ten 
guineas  before  the  close  of  the  war,  which  meant  that 
recruits  for  the  Line  could  not  be  obtained  for  less  than 
eleven  or  twelve  guineas.  This  was  the  first  serious 
symptom  of  a  very  grave  mischief. 