

A  fair  number  both  of  cavalry  and  infantry  accepted 
these  terms,  more  often  as  isolated  troops  and  companies 
than  as  regiments  or  battalions  ;  but  a  great  many 
refused  further  service,  not  seeing  any  occasion  for  such 
patriotic  display  in  time  of  peace. 

The  Irish  Volunteers  Act  differed  not  a  little  from 
the  British.  Therein  it  was  enacted  that  the  men  should 
receive  clothing,  arms,  and  pay  from  Government  while 
out  on  exercise,  which  exercise  was  not  to  exceed  two 
days  in  each  month.  Permanent  pay  also  was  allowed 
to  one  sergeant  in  each  troop  ;  and  the  provisions  seemed 
to  point  to  real  desire  for  efficiency,  until  the  third  section 
stated  expressly,  with  startling  abruptness,  that  neither 
enrolment  nor  the  receipt  of  pay  or  allowances  should 
subject  either  Volunteers  or  Yeomen  to  military  duty  or 
discipline. 


14  MILITIA  ACT  OF  1802  chap. 

1802.  The  next  measure  of  Addington's  Government  was 

a  new  Militia  Act,^  whereby  several  previous  Militia 
Acts  were  repealed,  and  the  purport  of  them,  with  some 
amendments,  re-enacted.  The  population  of  the  United 
Kingdom  at  this  time  was,  roughly  speaking,  14,500,000, 
namely,  England,  9,000,000 ;  Scotland,  1,500,000;  Ire- 
land, 4,000,000.  The  Act  (together  with  its  affiliated 
Acts^)  provided  for  raising  altogether  51,489  men, 
between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  forty-five,  in  Great 
Britain,  according  to  a  regular  quota  for  every  county, 
and  for  giving  the  King's  authority  to  augment  that 
number  by  one-half  on  calling  Parliament  together 
within  fourteen  days.  This  augmentation  was  known 
as  the  Supplementary  Militia,  the  original  51,489  being 
distinguished  as  the  Old  Militia — technical  terms  which 
should  be  borne  in  mind. 

All  Militiamen  were  to  be  chosen  by  ballot,  and  by 
no  other  means  whatever,  and  were  positively  forbidden, 
under  penalties  (sec.  4),  to  enlist  in  the  Regular  Army. 
The  regular  period  of  training  was  fixed  at  twenty-one 
days  annually  (sec.  88). 

The  machinery  for  the  levy  was  as  follows  : — For 
the  purposes  of  the  Militia  each  county  as  a  whole  was 
governed  by  "  General  Meetings  of  the  Lieutenancy," 
that  is  to  say,  by  a  Council  of  the  Lord-Lieutenant  and 
of  his  Deputies.  The  Lord-Lieutenant  himself  was 
appointed  by  the  Sovereign  ;  the  Deputies,  of  whom  a 
qualification  in  respect  of  property  was  required,  were 
appointed  by  the  Lord-Lieutenant,  subject  to  the 
Sovereign's  approbation.  In  the  absence  of  the  Lord- 
Lieutenant,  the  Sovereign  could  give  three  deputies  a 
commission  to  act  in  his  stead.  With  the  Council  of 
the  Lieutenancy  was  a  Secretary,  known  as  the  Clerk  of 
the  General  Meeting,  who  was  appointed  by  the  Lord- 
Lieutenant  and  removable  by  him  (sec.  18). 