


I  THE  ARMY  FED  BY  MILITIA  5 

By  1796,  therefore,  the  Government  was  at  its  wits' 
end,  and  in  that  year  there  was  serious  danger  of  in- 
vasion. In  spite  of  all  its  Fencibles  and  Volunteers,  it 
did  not  feel  safe,  and  so  fell,  during  the  next  two 
years,  to  raising  more  Fencibles,  a  Supplementary 
Militia,  more  Volunteers,  and,  last  of  all,  a  force  called 
the  Provisional  Cavalry,  which  was  supposed  to  include 
all  mounted  men  not  already  gathered  into  the  Fencible 
and  Yeomanry  Cavalry.  The  Provisional  Cavalry  was 
a  crying  failure.  "  It  passed,"  in  Windham's  words, 
'*  over  the  country  like  a  blight.  It  was  a  pleasant 
*'  conceit  to  make  every  man  ride  another's  horse,  till 
"at  length  when  the  men  and  horses  were  all  brought 
"  together,  no  man  knew  how  to  mount,  and  so  they  all 
"  separated."  So  short-lived  was  this  force,  that  the  fore- 
going caustic  sentence  is  almost  all  that  is  discoverable 
concerning  it ;  but  it  is  very  evident  that  the  class 
which  the  Government  desired  to  enlist  in  it  contrived 
to  evade  service  by  procuring  substitutes,  though  paying 
dearly  for  them.  The  Supplementary  Militia  was 
more  successful.  Ministers  had  the  good  sense  not  to 
grant  any  exemption  to  the  Volunteers  until  the  ballot 
had  been  held.  But  even  so,  between  these  various 
calls  for  men,  bounties,  or,  more  accurately  speaking, 
the  cost  of  recruits  and  substitutes,  rose  in  1798  to 
sixty,  seventy,  and  even  eighty  guineas.^ 

It  was  very  plain  that  such  a  state  of  things  could 
not  continue;  wherefore,  in  1798  Ministers  passed 
an  Act  to  enable  ten  thousand  Militiamen  to  enlist  in 
the  Army  for  a  bounty  of  ten  pounds.  The  Lords- 
Lieutenant  set  their  faces  against  it,  not  wishing  to  see 
their  men  shipped  off  to  the  West  Indies  ;  and  the 
measure  was  a  failure.  But,  fortunately,  the  demand 
for  men  in  the  West  Indies  ceased  about  this  time,  and 
the  Government  was  able  to  reintroduce  the  Act  in 
1799,  with  the  additional  provision  that  the  service  of 
the  enlisted  Militiamen  should  be  confined  to  Europe. 
Then  the  ten  thousand,  most  of  whom  had  already 
*  H.D.  New  Series,  iii.  599. 


6  TREATY  OF  AMIENS  chap. 

received  large  sums  as  substitutes,  swarmed  joyfully  to 
the  colours,  and  having  received  their  bounty,  by  some 
extraordinary  folly,  in  advance,  reeled  round  them  in 
a  state  of  crapulous  insubordination  for  some  days  until 
the  money  was  spent.  After  that,  they  proved  to  be 
good  men,  decidedly  superior,  by  Sir  Ralph  Aber- 
cromby's  testimony,  to  the  ordinary  class  of  recruit. 
Many  of  them  volunteered  for  service  in  Egypt,  though 
their  engagement  did  not  bind  them  to  do  so  ;  and  in 
fact  the  Army  depended  chiefly  on  Militiamen  for  its 
recruits  until  the  signature  of  the  preliminaries  of  peace 
in  October  1801. 