

II 

The  Treaty  of  Amiens  was  admittedly  only  an 
experiment,  and  an  experiment  so  doubtful  that  it  could 
deserve  no  higher  title  than  a  suspension  of  arms.  In 
such  circumstances  it  was  impossible  for  Addington  to 
reduce  the  military  force  to  a  peace  establishment,  and  the 
lowest  number  of  regular  troops  for  which  he  dared  to 
estimate  was  1 32,000.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Fencibles, 
both  horse  and  foot,  were  totally  disbanded,  which 
diminished  the  force  for  home  defence  by  at  least 
20,000  men.  It  had  been  hoped  that  most  of  these 
men,  who  from  long  divorce  from  any  but  military 
employment  were  practically  soldiers,  would  have  en- 
listed in  the  Line ;  but  they  did  not.  The  nation  seemed, 
not  unnaturally,  to  be  sick  of  warlike  exercises,  and 
recruits  were  by  no  means  plentiful.  True  prudence 
and  forethought  would  have  dictated  special  efforts 
to  make  up  the  Regular  Army  to  its  full  establishment, 
for  if  war  was  to  come  again,  the  surest  method  of 
defence  was  certainly  to  take  the  offensive.  Such  a 
policy,  however,  would  have  been  construed  as  lack 
of  faith  on  Addington's  part  towards  his  own  experi- 
ment, though  it  was  less  for  this  reason  than  from  sheer 
want  of  foresight  and  ignorance  of  war  that  the  Ministry 
turned  all  its  energies,  as  shall  presently  be  seen,  towards 
purely  defensive  preparations. 


I  RENEWAL  OF  THE  WAR  7 

An  attitude  of  passive  and  inert  defence  is  very  1803. 
rarely  sound,  and  was  never  more  false  than  in  1803. 
It  has  generally  been  assumed  that,  in  the  circumstances, 
it  was  impossible  for  England  to  think  of  taking  the 
offensive.  Yet  this  is  at  least  open  to  question.  The 
enemy  to  be  encountered  was  indeed  most  formidable  ; 
but  before  rushing  to  the  conclusion  that  the  initiative 
must  necessarily  have  been  yielded  up  to  him,  some 
account  at  least  should  be  taken  of  his  position. 

Napoleon  was  not  prepared  for  war.  He  was 
entangled  in  costly  and  most  difficult  operations  at 
St.  Domingo  when  hostilities  began  ;  and  the  inter- 
vention of  the  British  fleet  turned  them  into  utter 
disaster.  Of  forty-eight  ships  of  war  which  he  had 
sent  off  to  the  West  Indies,  only  seven  ever  returned 
to  Europe  ^  except  as  British  prizes  ;  while  the  soldiers 
captured  by  the  British  amounted  to  over  seven  thousand, 
quite  apart  from  thirty  to  forty  thousand  men  who  had 
already  perished  of  yellow  fever  or  deserted  to  the 
enemy.  The  British  fleet,  owing  to  the  mistaken 
economies  of  St.  Vincent,  was  by  no  means  so  efficient 
as  it  should  have  been,  but  the  French  fleet  was  so 
contemptible  in  numbers  and  unreadiness  as  to  be 
hardly  worth  mentioning.  It  may  be  asserted  without 
hesitation  that  the  British  Government  could,  so  far 
as  the  safety  of  the  sea  was  concerned,  have  sent  any 
force  that  it  pleased  to  any  point  that  it  pleased  ;  and 
thirty  thousand,  or  even  twenty  thousand,  men  de- 
spatched to  Sicily  or  to  Naples  in  the  summer  of  1 803 
must  almost  certainly  have  broken  up  the  camp  at 
Boulogne.  Napoleon  had  violated  Neapolitan  terri- 
tory by  occupying  Brindisi,  Tarento,  and  Otranto  with 
a  small  force.  The  appearance  of  a  formidable  British 
expedition  would  have  compelled  him  to  reinforce  it 
and  the  whole  of  his  Italian  garrisons  very  heavily  ; 
for  he  could  hardly  have  withdrawn  this  detachment 
without  endangering  his  reputation  in  France,  or,  indeed, 