

1  Military  Transactions  of  British  Empire^  1803-1807.  Printed 
for  the  Commander-in-Chief's  office. 

2  The  return  shows  nine  West  India  regiments,  but  not  one  of 
them  was  600  strong  ;  and  they  were  in  process  of  reduction  into 
six.  They  were,  and  of  course  still  are,  composed  of  negroes  of 
African  origin,  and  frequently  of  African  birth. 


lo         DISTRIBUTION  OF  ARMY,  1803     chap. 

1803.  104,000  men.  To  this  figure  must  be  added  further  the 
two  regiments  of  Life  Guards,  700  of  all  ranks,  which  for 
some  reason  were  omitted  from  the  return,  and  the 
Artillery,  which  may  be  taken  at  between  9000  and 
10,000  of  all  ranks. ^  The  effective  strength  of  the 
British  Army,  therefore,  on  the  ist  of  June  1803  may 
be  set  down  with  tolerable  correctness  at  1 14,000  of  all 
ranks.  The  establishment  fixed  by  the  estimates  of  1 802 
was  132,000  men  of  all  ranks,  exclusive  of  the  foreign 
corps.  Hence  at  the  outbreak  of  the  war  the  Army  was 
over  twenty  thousand  men,  or  nearly  one-sixth,  short  of 
its  proper  strength. 

Of  the  effective  rank  and  file  9046  cavalry  and 
22,814  infantry  were  in  Great  Britain,  3215  cavalry  and 
16,556  infantry  in  Ireland.  The  remainder  were  abroad 
or  on  passage.  It  so  happened  that  the  force  in  the  West 
Indies  was  very  large,  for  the  garrisons  of  the  French 
islands,  which  had  been  captured  in  the  late  war  and  given 
back  at  the  peace,  had  not  yet  returned  home.  The 
Government  at  once  employed  them  in  recovering  some 
of  the  restored  islands  and  settlements.  St.  Lucia, 
Tobago,  Demerara,  Essequibo,  Berbice,  and  Surinam 
were  taken  before  the  end  of  the  year  with  little  diffi- 
culty or  bloodshed;  and,  since  many  of  the  Dutch 
prisoners  from  the  four  places  last  named  took  service 
with  the  British,  the  net  loss  of  men  was  trifling — 
possibly,  indeed,  was  turned  for  a  few  weeks  into  gain. 
But  the  whole  of  these  new  acquisitions  required  garri- 
sons, and  most  of  them  were  extremely  unhealthy,  so 
that  Addington's  single  offensive  movement  necessarily 
involved  an  increased  drain  upon  the  Regular  Army,  and 
that  for  a  station  which  was  loathed  and  dreaded  as  the 
grave  of  some  twenty  or  thirty  thousand  men  during 
the  last  war. 

However,  Pitt's  policy  of  "  filching  sugar  islands  " 
was  undoubtedly  popular  with  the  mercantile  classes ; 

^  Its  establishment  was  10,296,  and,  like  the  Guards  and  the 
Cavalry  at  that  time,  the  Artillery  had  no  difficulty  in  obtaining 
recruits. 


I  NEGLECT  OF  THE  ARMY,  1803  u 

and  Addington  may  be  pardoned  if,  with  the  great  man's  1803. 
shadow  always  across  his  path,  he  fell  into  the  same  evil 
ways.  But  when,  in  these  circumstances,  Mr.  Yorke  intro- 
duced the  Army  Estimates  on  the  6th  of  June  1803,  not 
a  few  members  of  the  Commons  were  staggered  to  find 
that  he  proposed,  and  plumed  himself  on  proposing,  no 
further  increase  in  the  Regular  Establishment  than  from 
1 3 2, 000  to  138,000  men.  On  the  other  hand,  he  pointed 
with  pride  to  the  figures  of  nearly  84,000  men  which  he 
assigned  to  the  Militia.  This  complacency  brought 
upon  him  a  furious  attack  from  Windham,  who  asked 
how  men  could  be  expected  to  enlist  in  the  Regulars  for 
life,  with  liability  to  serve  in  any  part  of  the  globe,  when 
they  could  receive  far  larger  bounties  to  serve  for  a  few 
years  comfortably  at  home.  "  How,"  he  added,  "  with- 
out a  Regular  Army  can  there  be  a  possibility  of  any 
but  a  passive  and  defensive  policy,  which  must  be  alike 
ruinous  and  dishonourable  ?  "  Pitt  echoed  Windham's 
criticism,  the  meaning  of  which  will  presently  be  made 
clear,  and  joined  in  his  condemnation  of  a  purely  defen- 
sive attitude  ;  but  Addington  disarmed  opposition  by 
asserting  that,  though  he  had  indeed  dealt  with  defensive 
measures  first,  owing  to  the  vast  preparations  of  the 
enemy,  yet  the  country  would  doubtless  aiford  means 
for  offensive  operations  as  soon  as  a  favourable  oppor- 
tunity should  arise.  Beyond  question  Addington  spoke 
in  good  faith,  probably  with  a  thought  for  a  certain 
Army  of  Reserve  Bill  which  was  already  in  preparation  ; 
but  he  was  completely  at  fault  over  the  possibility  of 
turning  his  defensive  measures  to  offensive  account.  To 
estimate  the  causes  and  consequences  of  his  error,  it  is 
now  necessary  to  see  what  those  defensive  measures 
were. 