

Ballotted  men,  or,  as  they  were  frequently  called, 
lot-men,  if  they  accepted  personal  service,  were  sworn 
in  to  serve  as  privates  for  a  term  of  five  years  (sec.  41), 
after  which  time  they  were  exempt  until  their  turn 
came  in  rotation  to  be  ballotted  again.  They  were 
known  technically  as  principals^  to  distinguish  them  from 
substitutes^  the  persons  who  must  next  engage  our  atten- 
tion, for  there  were  various  means  provided  by  the  Act 
for  commutation  of  personal  service.     In  the  first  place, 

^  A  nice  point  was  raised  as  to  the  exemption  of  a  man  whose 
second  legitimate  child  was  born  after  he  had  been  ballotted,  but 
before  he  had  been  enrolled.  It  was  decided  that  in  this  case  he 
was  exempt ;  but  that  if  the  child  was  born  after  he  had  been  enrolled, 
then  he  was  not  exempt  (JV.  O.  Mi/a.  Books,  S.  W.  to  Tho. 
Wright,  26th  Jan.  1803).  How  far  this  decision  may  have  affected 
the  domestic  arrangements  of  poor  families  we  are  not  told. 


II  PAROCHIAL  SUBSTITUTES  17 

any  man  chosen  or  ballotted  was  empowered  (sec.  41)  1802. 
to  produce  a  man  "  of  the  same  county,  riding,  or  place, 
or  from  some  adjoining  county  or  place,  able  and  fit  for 
service,"  and  having  not  more  than  one  child  born  in 
lawful  wedlock,  to  serve  in  his  stead.  Such  men  were 
called  personal  substitutes,  and  were  sworn  in  to  serve 
for  five  years,  or,  if  the  Militia  were  embodied  within 
that  period,  then  for  such  further  time  as  it  might 
remain  embodied ;  or,  in  fewer  words,  till  the  close  of 
the  war. 

Again,  the  churchwardens  or  overseers  of  any  parish 
might,  by  consent  of  the  inhabitants,  produce  voluntary 
candidates  for  the  Militia  to  the  subdivision-meeting,  to  be 
accepted  in  lieu  of  men  chosen  by  ballot,  and  might  levy 
a  parochial  rate  to  pay  them  a  bounty  not  exceeding  ^6 
apiece  (sec.  42).^  Such  men  were  known  and  named 
in  the  Act,  by  an  extremely  unfortunate  confusion  of 
speech,  as  volunteers.  They  were  really  parochial  sub- 
stitutes, and  for  the  sake  of  clearness  I  shall  call  them 
throughout  by  the  name  of  parochial  substitutes.  These 
likewise  were  enrolled  for  five  years,  or  until  the  Militia 
should  be  disembodied  ;  and  under  sec.  43  previous 
service  as  a  substitute,  whether  parochial  or  personal,  did 
not  entitle  a  man  to  immunity  from  the  ballot.  No 
ballotted  man  nor  substitute  of  any  description  whatever 
could  be  enrolled  for  service  unless  first  approved  by 
a  surgeon  (sec.  52). 

Again  (sec.  136),  any  man  on  the  list  of  ballottable 
men  might  offer  himself  to  serve  in  lieu  of  a  ballotted 
man,  and  might  be  accepted  by  the  Deputy-Lieutenants, 
provided  that  he  were  not  over  thirty-five  years  of  age 
and  had  no  children  living  under  fourteen  years  of  age. 
The  service  of  such  men  was  subject  to  the  same  con- 
ditions as  if  they  had  been  actually  ballotted. 