

Each  county  was  further  parcelled  out  into  sub- 

1  42  Geo.  III.  cap.  90. 

2  The  Affiliated  Acts  mean  those  for  the  City  of  London,  the 
Cinque  Ports,  and  the  Stannaries,  which  were  dealt  with  separately. 


II  METHOD  OF  BALLOTTING  15 

divisions,  under  the  control  of  two  or  more  Deputy-  '  1802. 
Lieutenants,  who  held  subdivision  meetings  under  the 
orders  of  the  General  Meeting,  and  had  likewise  a 
Secretary  known  as  the  Subdivision  Clerk.  Upon  the 
approach  of  a  ballot  the  General  Meeting  gave  orders 
to  the  constables  of  the  hundreds  (or  other  adminis- 
trative divisions  of  the  county)  to  draw  up  lists  of  all 
men  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  forty-five,  with  a 
statement  of  their  claims,  if  any,  to  exemption.  This 
order  was  passed  on  to  the  parish  constables  for  execution 
in  each  parish;  and  the  lists  when  completed  were 
affixed  to  the  door  of  the  church,  so  that  every  man 
could  see  them  and  have  the  opportunity  of  appealing 
to  the  next  subdivision-meeting,  in  case  his  claims  to 
exemption  should  have  been  omitted.  The  decision  of 
the  subdivision-meeting  upon  such  appeals  was  final,  and 
the  lists  as  amended  by  it  were  then  transmitted  by  the 
Clerk  of  the  General  Meeting  to  the  Privy  Council, 
which  was  charged  with  the  duty  of  fixing  and,  from 
time  to  time,  revising  the  quota  of  men  to  be  found  by 
each  county. 

The  numbers  of  his  county's  quota  having  been 
reported  to  the  Lord-Lieutenant,  a  General  Meeting 
decided  upon  the  number  to  be  produced  by  each  sub- 
division; and  the  subdivision-meetings  in  their  turn 
distributed  these  numbers  among  the  various  parishes. 
The  men  liable  to  service  were  drafted  into  five  classes 
(sec.  54)  :  (i)  Men  under  thirty  and  childless  ;  (2)  men 
over  thirty  and  childless  ;  (3)  all  men  having  no  children 
living  under  fourteen  years  of  age  ;  (4)  all  men  having 
but  one  child  under  fourteen ;  (5)  all  other  men 
whatsoever.  Notice  was  then  given  in  each  subdivision 
that  all  men  liable  to  be  drawn  should  attend  at  a  certain 
place  on  a  certain  day  within  three  weeks  of  the  sub- 
division-meeting; and  on  that  day  the  Deputy-Lieutenants 
again  met  and  held  the  ballot. 

If  a  part  only  of  the  Militia  was  to  be  embodied, 
and  if  the  number  of  men  to  be  called  out  was  equal  to 
the  number  of  the  first,  or  first  and  second,  or  other 


i6  EXEMPTIONS  FROM  BALLOT,  1802    chap. 

1802.  succeeding  classes  in  their  order,  then  the  Deputy- 
Lieutenants  might  take  those  classes  complete,  without 
ballot,  and  use  the  ballot  only  for  the  remainder 
(sec.  134). 

The  Deputy-Lieutenants  were  required  to  discharge, 
without  further  claim,  all  ballotted  men  under  the  height 
of  five  feet  four  inches,  and  all  men  physically  unfit, 
provided  that  they  were  not  possessed  of  property  to  the 
value  of  ;^  100.  Exemption  was  granted  (sec.  43)  to 
peers  ;  to  all  officers  on  full  or  half  pay  in  the  Army, 
Navy,  and  Marines  ;  to  all  non-commissioned  officers 
and  men  serving  in  any  of  the  King's  other  forces  ;  to 
any  officer  who  was  serving  or  who  had  served  for  four 
years  in  the  Militia ;  to  resident  members  of  the 
universities,  clergymen,  duly  registered  teachers,  con- 
stables and  other  peace-officers,  articled  clerks,  appren- 
tices, seafaring  men  and  men  employed  in  the  royal 
arsenals,  dockyards,  or  factories  ;  to  men  free  of  the 
Company  of  Watermen  of  the  Thames  ;  and  finally,  to 
any  poor  man  (which  was  construed  under  sec.  53  to  mean 
a  man  possessing  less  than  the  value  of  j^ioo)  who  had 
more  than  one  child  born  in  lawful  wedlock.^  Besides 
these,  the  Volunteers  could  claim  their  exemption  under 
the  Volunteer  Act. 