

Judging  from  the  surface  of  this  Act,  the  Govern- 
ment's intention  was  to  raise  by  ballot  50,000  additional 
Militiamen.  The  points  wherein  members  of  the  Army 
of  Reserve  mainly  difi^ered  from  Militiamen  were 
that  they  could  be  draft:ed  into  second  battalions  of  the 
Regular  Regiments  at  home  ;  that  they  could  enlist 
from  these  for  general  service  in  the  Regular  Army ; 
that  they  need  not  be  more  than  five  feet  two  inches 
in  height ;  and  that  substitutes  could  be  men  with 
any  number  of  children. 

This  measure  had  not  been  law  for  a  fortnight 
when,  on  the  i8th  of  July,  the  Government  brought 
in  yet  another  bill  to  amend  the  Defence  Act  of  the 
nth  of  June,  "and  to  enable  His  Majesty  more 
speedily  and  eff^ectually  to  exercise  his  ancient  and 
undoubted  prerogative  in  requiring  the  military  service 
of  his  liege  subjects  in  case  of  invasion  of  the  realm." 
This  bill  passed  on  the  27th  of  July,  and  was  known  as 
the  Levy  en  Masse  Act  (43  Geo.  III.  cap.  96),  the 
execution  of  which  was  as  usual  thrown  upon  the  Lords- 
Lieutenant  and  their  Deputies,  under  the  machinery  of 


II  LEVY  EN  MASSE  ACT  31 

the  Militia  Laws.  They  were  required  first  to  obtain  1803. 
lists  of  all  men  between  the  ages  of  seventeen  and  fifty- 
five  (sec.  3),  and  to  sort  them  into  four  classes  :  viz.  ( i ) 
unmarried  men  under  thirty,  with  no  child  living  under 
ten  years  of  age  ;  (2)  unmarried  men  between  thirty 
and  fifty,  with  no  child  as  aforesaid  ;  (3)  married  men 
from  seventeen  to  thirty,  with  not  more  than  two 
children  living  under  ten  years  of  age  ;  (4)  all  other 
persons  (sec.  4).  Exemption  was  granted  to  the  Judges 
of  the  Courts  of  Law,  to  persons  too  infirm  for  service, 
clergymen,  schoolmasters,  Quakers,  officers  and  men  actu- 
ally serving  in  the  Army,  Navy,  Marines,  Militia,  and 
Volunteers,  Lords-Lieutenant,  Deputy-Lieutenants,  and 
peace  officers  (sec.  12).  But  ministers,  churchwardens, 
and  parochial  officers  at  large  were  all  required  to  help 
in  making  out  the  lists  (sec.  13).  This  done,  the  King 
could  direct  any  parishes  to  be  provided  with  arms, 
which  arms  were  to  be  stored  in  the  church  or  other 
convenient  place  under  the  care  of  the  churchwardens, 
acting  under  the  directions  of  the  Deputy-Lieutenants 
(sec.  25).  The  King  could  order  the  three  first  classes 
to  be  trained  in  the  use  of  arms  for  two  hours  at  least 
on  every  Sunday  (or  other  convenient  day)  in  the  week, 
for  the  entire  period  between  the  25  th  of  March  and 
the  25  th  of  December,  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  being 
held  responsible  for  such  training  (sec.  27).  In  case  of 
emergency  the  King  could  further  require  them  to  be 
trained,  before  Christmas  1803,  on  successive  days 
during  three  or  more  weeks  as  the  Deputy-Lieutenants 
might  arrange,  the  total  number  of  successive  days  not 
to  fall  below  fourteen  or  rise  above  twenty  (sec.  28). 
The  Deputy  -  Lieutenants  could  further  appoint  a 
captain,  two  lieutenants,  and  an  ensign  to  every  120 
men  (subject  to  removal  by  the  King),  and  the 
captains  could  appoint  non-commissioned  officers  (sec. 
30).  The  Deputy-Lieutenants  were  also  empowered 
to  hire  out-pensioners  to  train  their  men,  and  to  pay 
them  not  more  than  half-  a  -  crown  a  day  out  of  the 
parochial   rates  (sec.   32)  ;    but  a  constable  was  also 