

Yet  again  (sec.  45),  any  ballotted  man  could  pur- 
chase exemption  for  five  years  by  payment  of  a  fine  of 
;^io  ;  or,  to  put  the  matter  in  different  words,  could 

^  From  this  rate  men  who  were  serving  in  the  Militia,  in  person 
or  by  substitute,  were  excused. 

C 


1 8    MILITIA  ACT,  1802,  SUMMARISED    chap. 

1802.  commute  his  term  of  five  years'  service  for  that  sum  of 
money.  But  this  privilege  was  not  extended  to  Quakers, 
who  were  required  either  to  serve  or  to  find  a  substitute ; 
and  if  any  Quaker  failed  to  do  so,  two  or  more  Deputy- 
Lieutenants  were  empowered  to  hire  a  substitute  for  him 
and  to  levy  distress  upon  his  goods  for  payment  of  the 
same  (sees.  45, 50).  The  fines  thus  collected  were  applied 
by  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  to  the  purchase  of  sub- 
stitutes for  those  persons  who  had  paid  them  ;  and 
any  surplus  remaining  thereafter  was  handed  over 
to  the  commanding  officer  of  the  County  Militia 
Regiment  to  be  included  in  the  regimental  stock-purse 
(sec.  66). 

For  the  relief  of  the  poorer  inhabitants  there  was  a 
provision  that  any  man  worth  less  than  ^^500  who 
might  be  ballotted  should,  whether  he  elected  to  serve 
in  person  or  by  substitute,  receive  from  the  Deputy- 
Lieutenants  a  sum  equal  to  half  the  current  price  of  a 
substitute  at  the  time,  the  money  being  raised  by  a 
parochial  rate  (sec.  122). 

The  general  and  designed  result  of  the  foregoing 
enactments,  though  it  may  not  appear  on  the  face  of 
the  Act,  was  as  follows  : — All  men  between  the  ages  of 
eighteen  and  forty-five  were  liable  to  serve  in  person  or 
by  substitute,  or  to  pay  a  fine,  unless  they  combined  the 
disabilities  of  being  physically  unfit  (including  a  shorter 
stature  than  five  feet  four  inches)  and  of  possessing  less 
than  the  value  of  ;^  100  in  property.  A  man  might  be 
blind,  deaf,  dumb,  handless  and  legless.  He  was  none 
the  less  liable  to  serve  by  substitute  or  to  pay  a  fine,  so 
long  as  he  were  of  the  right  age  and  worth  more  than 
^100  ;  and  this  is  the  explanation  of  the  relief  granted 
by  sec.  122,  quoted  in  the  preceding  paragraph.  The 
provisions  respecting  the  numbers  and  age  of  children 
in  the  cases  of  principals  and  substitutes  were  due  to  the 
fact  that  the  wives  and  families  of  Militiamen  were 
entitled  to  parochial  support  while  the  men  themselves 
were  serving  in  the  ranks.  Hence  the  criticism  of  this 
Act,  by  a  well-known  commentator  on  the  Army,  that 


II      POSITION  OF  MILITIA  SERGEANTS      19 

as  a  tax  it  was  local  and  personal,  instead  of  general  and       1802. 
imperial,   and,   as   such,   necessarily  levied   with   great 
inequality.^ 