


II  ARMY  OF  RESERVE  ACT  29 

provided  that  his  worldly  estate  was  less  than  ^^500  in  1803. 
value  (sees.  23,  25).  Moreover,  every  principal  upon 
accepting  service,  was  to  receive  two  guineas  bounty,  and 
every  substitute  one  guinea,  from  the  general  funds  of 
the  county,  the  money  being  paid  to  the  captains  of  the 
companies  and  accounted  for  by  them  to  the  men  (sees. 
25,  26).  It  may  be  reckoned  that  each  man  received 
one-half  of  this  sum  after  deduction  of  half  a  guinea  for 
necessaries. 

All  men  enrolled  under  the  Act  were  sworn  to 
serve  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  Channel  Islands  only, 
principals  for  five  years,  substitutes  for  five  years  or 
until  six  months  after  a  definitive  peace.  All  enrolled 
men,  whether  principals  or  substitutes,  were  further 
required  to  swear  that  they  were  not  ruptured  nor 
subject  to  fits,  nor  otherwise  physically  disabled,  and 
that  they  were  not  apprentices,  seamen,  members  of  the 
Army,  Navy,  Marines,  or  Militia  (sec.  19).  After  enrol- 
ment they  could  either  be  formed  into  new  corps  or 
embodied  in  old  regiments,  though  never  outside  the 
United  Kingdom  and  Channel  Islands,  and  they  were 
to  be  subject  to  the  Mutiny  Act  (sec.  29).  Vacancies 
through  death  or  discharge  were  to  be  filled  up,  as  in 
the  Militia,  by  ballot  (sec.  31)  ;  and  the  wives  and 
families  of  Army  Reserve  men  were  entitled  to  parochial 
support  in  the  same  way  as  Militiamen  (sec.  33).  They 
were  allowed  to  enlist  into  the  Regular  Army  if  they 
wished  ;  and  in  this  case  the  parishes  were  not  compelled 
to  fill  the  vacancies  thus  made  (sec.  33).  Colonels  of 
regiments  were  required  to  furnish  lists  of  vacancies  to 
the  Quarter  Sessions  of  each  county  on  the  29th  of 
September  1803  ;  and  for  every  man  deficient  of  the 
quota  a  fine  of  j^20  was  to  be  imposed,  a  further  fine 
of  the  same  sum  being  added  cumulatively  every  quarter 
until  the  deficiency  should  be  made  good  (sec.  35).  It 
was  specially  added  that  the  raising  of  men  under  this 
Act  was  to  be  no  excuse  for  not  levying  men  as  usual 
for  the  embodied  Militia. 

The  Scottish  Act  was  the  same   mutatis  mutandis. 


30  ARMY  OF  RESERVE  ACT  chap. 

1803.  except  that  the  fines  for  commutation  of  service  were 
to  be  made  over  entirely  to  the  parish  authorities  for 
the  provision  of  substitutes,  any  remaining  surplus 
being  remitted  to  the  Paymaster -General  of  the 
Army. 

The  Irish  Act  enacted  that  the  ballot  should  be 
employed  to  raise  the  Army  of  Reserve  (sec.  11),  but 
if  five  members  of  any  General  Meeting  were  of  opinion 
that  the  men  could  be  more  expeditiously  raised  by  beat 
of  drum,  the  Lord-Lieutenant  might  authorise  them  to 
dispense  with  the  ballot  (sec.  38).  If  within  five  weeks 
of  authorisation  the  county  raised  two-thirds  of  its 
quota  by  voluntary  enlistment,  the  Lord-Lieutenant 
could  grant  it  three  weeks'  grace  to  raise  the  remainder. 
If  without  such  authority  from  the  Lord-Lieutenant 
the  full  quota  was  not  raised  in  six  weeks,  or  if  the  three 
weeks  of  grace  proved  to  be  unavailing,  then  appeal 
must  be  made  to  the  ballot. 