

It  was  none  too  soon,  for  war  was  declared  on  the 
1 6th  of  May,  and  on  the  28  th  the  Lords-Lieutenant 
were  directed  to  enrol  the  Supplementary  Militia,  that 
is  to  say,  the  additional  number,  amounting  to  one-half 
of  the  established  Militia,  authorised  by  the  Act  of 
1 802.  On  the  previous  day,  the  27th  of  May,  an  Act  had 
been  passed  to  provide  for  the  usual  parochial  relief 
of  families  of  Embodied  Militiamen  (43  Geo.  III.  caps. 
47,  89)  ;  and  this  was  followed  three  weeks  later  by  an 
Act  for  the  more  speedy  completion  of  the  Militia  (43 
Geo.  III.  cap.  50,  nth  June  1803).  This  last  provided 
that  within  ten  days  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  should 
meet  and  fill  up  all  vacancies  in  the  Militia  without 
inquiry  as  to  their  cause  ;  that  Commandants  of  Regi- 
ments should  from  time  to  time  notify  to  the  Clerks 
of  General  Meetings  the  number  of  men  wanting  to 
their  full  establishment ;  and  that  the  Deputy-Lieuten- 
ants should  meet  and  supply  all  deficiencies  within  seven 
days  after  receiving  notice  from  the  Clerk  (sec.  i). 
Further,  the  fine  of  ^10  for  every  man  deficient  in 
the  quota  of  each  county  was  ordained  to  be  repeated 


24  INCREASE  OF  FINES,  1803  chap. 

1803.  cumulatively  every  quarter  until  the  deficiency  should 
be  made  good  (sec.  4).  A  new  oath  was  also  required 
of  a  Militiaman  to  the  effect,  among  other  matters,  that 
he  had  no  rupture,  nor  ever  was  troubled  with  fits,  and 
was  no  ways  disabled  by  lameness  or  otherwise  (sec.  9 
and  Schedule  B).  The  fine  for  commutation  of  five  years 
service  was  also  raised,  from  the  28th  of  May  onward, 
from  ^10  to  ^15  (sec.  10).  Lastly,  at  the  very  end 
came  a  section  threatening  high  constables  and  con- 
stables, as  well  as  adjutants  or  non-commissioned  officers, 
with  a  fine  of  ^^50  if  they  should  insure,  or  in  any  way 
be  concerned  in  insuring,  any  persons  for  the  provision 
of  substitutes — a  very  significant  matter  which  shall  be 
duly  explained  in  its  place. 

So  much  for  the  Militia ;  it  is  now  necessary  to  turn 
for  a  moment  to  the  Volunteers.  On  the  3  ist  of  March 
the  Government  issued  circulars  inviting  the  services 
of  more  Volunteers  under  the  Volunteer  Act  of  1802, 
setting  forth  the  pay  and  allowances  which  they  were 
prepared  to  grant  to  them  as  well  as  the  number  of 
days'  training  required  of  them,  and  promising  exemption 
from  the  Militia  ballot  to  those  who  fulfilled  these 
conditions.  This,  as  shall  be  told  later,  caused 
some  increase  in  the  number  of  Volunteers  ;  and  the 
Government  followed  this  up  by  producing  an  Act  to 
provide  more  effectually  for  the  defence  and  security  of 
the  realm  (43  Geo.  III.  cap.  55,  nth  June  1803),  a 
measure  which  I  shall  call  by  the  name  of  the  First 
Defence  Act. 