

^  A  similar  Act  for  Ireland  (43  Geo.  III.  cap.  76)  was  passed  on 
4th  July  1803. 


26  FURTHER  MILITIA  ACTS  chap. 

1803.  privates  In  any  regiment  were  so  discharged  at  any  one 
time.  The  men  on  being  taken  into  the  Navy  were  to 
receive  the  usual  bounty  granted  to  seamen,  and  were 
bound  to  serve  till  the  end  of  the  war  and  until  three 
months  after  the  ratification  of  a  definitive  treaty  of 
peace.  Their  late  colonels  were  authorised  to  fill  their 
places  by  the  enlistment  of  voluntary  recruits,^  by  beat 
of  drum  or  otherwise,  and  were  to  receive  ten  guineas 
a  man  for  the  purpose,  which  sum  was  to  be  ultimately 
charged  to  the  account  of  the  Navy.  Thus  to  the  three 
different  descriptions  of  recruits  already  supplied  to  the 
Militia  under  the  Militia  Act,  viz.  lotmen,  personal 
substitutes,  and  parochial  substitutes,  there  was  added  a 
fourth — voluntary  enlisters  for  an  increased  bounty. 
Moreover,  as  the  Militiamen  transferred  to  the  Navy 
were  not  required  to  disgorge  the  bounty  which  they 
had  received  upon  entering  the  Militia,  the  country  was 
put  to  the  expense  of  paying  twice  over  for  their  services. 
It  will  be  remembered  that  seamen  and  seafaring  men 
were  exempted  from  the  Militia  ballot  under  section  43 
of  the  Militia  Act  of  1802  ;  but  there  was  no  provision 
to  prevent  them  from  being  enrolled  either  as  principals 
or  as  substitutes. 

Yet  another  little  Act  was  rendered  necessary  by 
the  fact  that,  though  the  Militia  Act  of  1802  duly 
provided  for  raising  the  Supplementary  Militia,  it  had 
omitted  the  means  of  supplying  the  increased  numbers 
with  a  due  proportion  of  officers.  This  defect  was 
accordingly  made  good  by  an  Act  for  Augmenting  the 
Number  of  Field  Officers  and  other  Officers  of  Militia 
within  Great  Britain  (43  Geo.  III.  cap.  71,  8th  July 
1803. 

Ill 

Meanwhile  the  Government  had  decided,  or  thought 
that  it  had  decided,  upon  a  definite  plan  for  Volunteers. 
The  Secretary  of  State  accordingly  informed  the  Lords- 

^  They  are  called  volunteers  under  the  Act,  but  I  have  avoided 
the  word  to  save  confusion. 


II  ARMY  OF  RESERVE  ACT  27 

Lieutenant  of  the  fact  in  a  circular  of  the  20th  of  June,  1803. 
intimating  at  the  same  time  that  no  Volunteers  accepted 
after  the  i6th  of  June  should  be  exempt  from  the  ballot 
for  a  new  force,  which  was  about  to  be  called  into  exist- 
ence. On  that  same  day,  the  20th  of  June,  Mr.  Yorke 
introduced  the  measures  for  the  creation  of  this  new 
force.  These,  though  entitled  the  Additional  Force 
Acts,  became  better  known  as  the  Army  of  Reserve 
Acts  (England,  43  Geo.  III.  cap.  82  ;  Scotland, 
cap.  83  ;  Ireland,  cap.  85  ;  6th  July  1803).  The  Acts 
ordained  that  there  should  be  raised  by  ballot,  under 
the  Militia  laws,  34,000  men  for  England,  6000  for 
Scotland,  and  10,000  for  Ireland.-'  Exemption,  over 
and  above  the  exemptions  granted  by  the  Militia  Acts 
of  1802,  was  given  to  poor  men  who  had  more  than 
one  child  born  in  lawful  wedlock  under  ten  years  of 
age,  or  who  were  infirm  ;  and  the  Deputy-Lieutenants 
were  further  empowered  to  discharge  any  ballotted  man 
who  was  unfit  for  service  through  infirmity  or  otherwise, 
if  his  worldly  possessions  did  not  amount  to  the  value 
of  ^100  (sees.  6,  13).^  Exemption  was  also  granted  to 
any  who  had  served  personally  or  by  substitute  in  the 
Militia  (unless  their  turn  to  be  ballotted  should  in  rota- 
tion have  come  round  again),  and  to  all  Volunteers  and 
Yeomanry  who  had  been  enrolled  and  had  entered  their 
names  on  the  muster-roll  before  the  22nd  of  June  1803  ; 
provided  that,  in  the  case  of  country  corps,  their  offer 
of  service  extended,  in  event  of  invasion,  to  the  whole 
of  their  military  district,  or  in  the  case  of  London, 
Bristol,  Exeter,  Liverpool,  Chester,  Manchester,  Hull, 
Norwich,  Leeds,  York,  Sheffield  and  Birmingham, 
Edinburgh  and  Glasgow,  to  the  defence  of  these  cities 
and  their  respective  vicinities.  Men  who  had  served  in 
the  Army,  or  as  substitutes,  personal  or  parochial,^  in 