

If  any  county  failed  to  produce  its  quota  of  men 
within  six  months  after  the  passing  of  the  Act,  or  within 
three  months  of  notice  given  by  the  officer  commanding 
the  Militia  regiments  of  the  county,  it  was  liable  to  a 
fine  of  £10  annually  for  every  man  deficient.  For  the 
payment  of  this  sum  Quarter  Sessions  were  required  to 
make  an  assessment  upon  parishes  at  large  or  upon  the 
particular  parishes  that  were  responsible  for  the  defici- 
encies. The  money  thus  raised  was  retained  in  the 
hands  of  the  County  Treasurers  for  three  months, 
during  which  time  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  were  per- 
mitted to  agree  with  men  to  enlist  voluntarily  in  the 
Militia  for  a  bounty  not  exceeding  ^10.  The  balance 
of  the  money  was  then  paid  to  the  Receiver-General  of 
the  county,  and  by  him  to  the  Imperial  Exchequer  ;  and 
after  the  Receiver-General's  receipt  for  the  same  the 
county  was  acquitted  of  its  default  for  that  year  (sees. 
158-166).     If   any  county  failed    to    raise    the    fines 


II  THE  SCOTTISH  MILITIA,   1802  21 

thus  imposed,  the  Solicitor  to  the  Treasury  was  required       '802. 
to  put  the  law  into  force  against  it  (sec.  169). 

Thus,  outside  the  cost  of  pay  and  equipment,  the 
Imperial  Treasury  was  not  concerned  with  the  Militia 
save  by  the  acceptance,  in  the  last  resort,  of  money  in 
lieu  of  men. 

A  second  Act  (42  Geo.  III.  cap.  91)  applied  the  same 
principle  mutatis  mutandis  to  Scotland,  at  the  same  time 
increasing  its  quota  of  Militia  from  6000  to  nearly  8000 
men.  Its  ten  regiments,  which  had  been  raised  in  1797 
for  the  duration  of  the  last  war  only,  were  grouped  anew 
and  reorganised  into  fifteen  battalions.^ 

1  Old  Organisation  of  the  Scottish  Militia: — 

1st  or  Argyll  i.e.  Argyll,  Dumbarton,  Bute,  Inverness. 

2nd  or  Ross-shire      i.e.  Ross,  Elgin,  Nairn,  Cromarty,  Sutherland, 

Caithness. 
3rd  or  Lanark  i.e.  Lanark. 

4th  or  Dumfries        i.e.  Dumfries,    Selkirk,   Peebles,    Roxburgh, 

Kirkcudbright,  Wigtown. 
5th  or  Fife  i.e.  Fife,  Stirling,  Kinross,  Clackmannan. 

6th  or  Aberdeen       i.e.  Aberdeen,  Banff. 
7th  or  Ayr  i.e.  Ayr,  Renfrew. 

8th  or  Forfar  i.e.  Forfar,  Kincardine. 

9th  or  Perth  i.e.  Perth. 

I  oth  or  Edinburgh    />.  Edinburgh,     Linlithgow,      Haddington, 

Berwick. 

New  Organisation  of  the  Scottish  Militia  : — 
No.  Regiment.  Colonel. 

1.  Aberdeen.  Lord  Aboyne. 

2.  Ayr.  Lord  Montgomerie. 

3.  Fife.  Lord  Crauford. 

4.  Lanark.  Marquis  of  Douglass. 

5.  Perth.  DukeofAthol. 

6.  Renfrew.  Earl  of  Glasgow. 

7.  Argyll  and  Bute.  John  Campbell. 

8.  Berwick,  Haddington,      Linlithgow,  )  g^^j  ^^  ^^^^^ 

Peebles.  J 

9.  Ross,  Caithness,  Sutherland,  Cromarty.     Lord  Seaforth. 