

The  only  form  of  evasion  against  which  the  Act 
pretended  to  guard  was  that  of  persons  who  fraudulently 
bound  themselves  apprentices  to  qualify  themselves  for 
exemption.  Such  persons  could  be  compelled  to  serve, 
if  detected,  and  the  masters  to  whom  they  bound  them- 
selves were  liable  to  a  fine  of  ^^lo  (sec.  49). 

To  provide  against  malingering,  it  was  enacted  that 
though  men  who  became  physically  unfit  might  be  dis- 
charged, yet  such  discharge  must  be  confirmed  by  two 
Deputy-Lieutenants  (sec.  55).  Vacancies  by  death  or 
discharge  were  filled  up  by  a  fresh  ballot  from  the  sub- 
division, and  presumably  (though  it  was  not  laid  down  by 
the  Act)  within  the  parish  from  which  the  dead  or 
discharged  man  had  been  originally  drawn  (sec.  56). 

Vacancies  through  the  promotion  of  privates  to  be 
non-commissioned  officers  were,  however,  not  filled  up 
by  ballot,  the  parish  being  conceived  to  have  fulfilled  its 
duty  by  producing  a  non-commissioned  officer  (sec.  57). 
The  point  is  worth  noting,  for  the  position  of  non-com- 
missioned officers  and  drummers  of  Militia  was  peculiar. 
They  were  sworn  in  to  serve  until  legally  discharged  by 
their  colonel,  that  is  to  say,  practically  for  life,  though 
after  twenty  years'  service  in  the  Militia  they  were 
qualified  for  a  Chelsea  pension  (sec.  86).  If  reduced 
to  the  ranks  by  a  court-martial,  non-commissioned 
officers  and  drummers  were  liable  to  serve  as  privates 
for  fifteen  months  at  ordinary  times  ;  but  if  the  Militia 
was  embodied  they  were  not  entitled  to  discharge  until 
its  disembodiment  (sec.  105).  In  the  event  of  the 
death  or  discharge  of  any  one  of  them,  the  Deputy- 
Lieutenants  for  the  subdivision  from  which  they  were 
drawn  might  apply  to  Quarter  Sessions  for  the  average 
price  of  a  substitute  in  the  parish  concerned,  and  so 
provide  a  man  to  take  his  place  (sec.  58). 

^  Clode,  i.  289,     But  Clode's  analysis  and  comprehension  of  the 
Militia  Acts  are  extremely  imperfect. 


20  DEFICIENCIES  IN  COUNTY  QUOTAS  chap. 

1802.  Privates  whose  time  was  within   four   months    of 

expiring  could  give  notice  if  they  were  willing  to 
prolong  their  service,  stating  the  bounty  for  which  they 
asked.  If  accepted,  they  were  treated  as  parochial  sub- 
stitutes, and  their  bounties  were  raised  by  a  parochial 
rate  (sees.  1 23,  1 24).  A  guinea  was  also  allowed  to  them 
for  renewal  of  their  necessaries  at  the  close  of  their  five 
years,  part  of  which  was  expended  by  their  captain  for 
their  benefit,  and  the  rest — by  custom  one  moiety — 
handed  over  to  them.  This  was  known  as  renewal 
money.  The  like  sum  was  paid  also  to  substitutes  at 
the  end  of  their  first  five  years'  service,  and  also  at  the 
end  of  every  three  years  over  and  above  the  original 
five  years  (sec.  126).  Substitutes  who  deserted  or 
absented  themselves  from  duty  could  be  sentenced  by 
court-martial  to  serve  in  the  Militia  for  a  limited  period, 
or  in  the  Regular  Army  for  life  (sec.  127).  Militiamen 
generally,  who  absented  themselves  or  deserted,  were 
liable  to  a  fine  of  £20  upon  conviction  before  a  Justice 
of  the  Peace,  or  six  months'  imprisonment  in  default 
(sec.  99). 