

Thus  it  has  been  made  sufficiently  plain  that  all  the 
energy  and  intelligence  of  the  nation,  not  wholly  with- 
out countenance  by  the  Legislature,  was  directed  from 
the  very  first  to  evasion  of  personal  service  in  the 
Militia.  The  result  was  to  stultify  all  legislative  pro- 
vision for  making  the  Militia  a  strictly  local  force.  In 
the  first  place,  the  Act,  as  has  been  seen,  did  not  enact 
that  the  parochial  substitutes,  to  be  provided  by  the 
Deputy-Lieutenants  out  of  the  fines  for  exemption, 
should  be  of  the  same  or  the  adjoining  county.  In  the 
second  place,  the  main  object  of  the  Deputy-Lieutenants, 
who  were  but  human,  was  to  produce  the  men  required 
of  them  and  to  free  themselves  from  the  heavy,  irksome, 
and  often  distressing  duty  imposed  upon  them  by  the 
Act.  Men  did  not  travel  far  afield  in  those  days,  and 
the  squires,  great  and  small,  knowing  all  that  was  to 
be  known  about  every  family  in  their  parishes,  could 
appreciate  how  hardly  the  ballot  would  bear  upon  this 
man  or  that.  Moreover,  the  ballottable  men  were  often 
their  own  workmen,  whom,  for  their  own  sakes,  they 
would  naturally  be  unwilling  to  lose.  Hence  it  is  hardly 
matter  of  surprise  if,  after  harrowing  interviews  with 

1   I.D.  vol.  cli.  C.G.M.  Warwick,  to  S.S.  23rd  Jan.  1808. 
2  Ibid.  vol.  cH.  J.  Bugby  to  S.S.  i8th  Feb.  1808. 


46     MILITIA  CEASES  TO  BE  LOCAL        chap. 

1803.  tearful  mothers,  wives,  and  daughters,  they  should  have 
listened  to  plausible  persons  who  offered  to  provide 
any  number  of  substitutes  at  a  moderate  charge,  without 
ascertaining  too  particularly  whether  the  said  substitutes 
really  came  from  the  same  or  an  adjoining  county.  It 
was  always  easy  for  a  crimp  or  an  insurance  agent  to  say 
that  they  were  from  the  county  town,  and  very  difficult 
to  prove  that  they  were  not.  The  wording  of  the  Act 
also  permitted  much  laxity  of  interpretation,  for  it  did 
not  provide  that  substitutes  should  be  men  on  the  ballot- 
lists  of  the  same  or  an  adjoining  county,  which  they 
certainly  ought  to  have  been  if  they  were  to  be  properly 
qualified.  The  desire,  then,  for  a  quiet  life  and  for  the 
sight  of  happy  faces  about  them  did  much  to  make 
Deputy-Lieutenants  disregard  the  enactments  for  making 
the  Militia  a  local  force. 

In  the  large  towns  a  different  set  of  causes  produced 
precisely  the  same  effect.  About  London  the  five 
Militia  battalions  of  Middlesex  and  Surrey,  after  many 
ballots  and  many  disappointments,  abandoned  in  despair 
the  task  of  raising  men  upon  the  spot  and  sought  them 
elsewhere.  Any  number  of  men  were  forthcoming  in 
London  itself,  but  they  disappeared  with  amazing  speed 
as  soon  as  their  bounty  was  in  their  pockets.  The 
Lord-Lieutenant  did  his  best  to  meet  this  evil  by 
marching  the  men  out  of  the  county  as  soon  as  they 
were  enrolled,  so  as  to  make  desertion  more  difficult ; 
and  he  actually  suspended  the  ballot  until  he  could 
obtain  permission  to  do  so.  But  even  so,  his  success 
was  small.^  In  September  1803,  after  eight  or  nine 
months  of  effort,  the  West  Middlesex  and  Westminster 
battalions  had  not  yet  made  up  the  numbers  of  their 
original  establishment,  and  had  not  raised  a  man  of  their 
Supplementary  Militia.^  The  East  Middlesex  battalion 
was  stronger,  but  this  was  because  the  commanding 
officer  had  early  sent  recruiting  parties  to  Norwich  to 