

1  I.D.  vol.  cliv..  Twelve  Liverpool  men  to  S.S.  4th  March  ; 
Mr.  W.  Carr  to  C.G.M.  Lanes,  28th  Jan.  1804. 


44  INSURANCE  SOCIETIES  chap. 

1803.  The  above  is  the  only  instance  which  I  have  dis- 

interred of  men  actually  making  money  out  of  the 
evasion  of  service  in  the  Militia  ;  but  it  is  in  other 
ways  instructive,  since  it  shows  that  a  subscription  club 
was  the  ordinary  method  of  raising  parochial  substitutes, 
and  that  it  was  not  only  countenanced  but  actually 
administered  by  the  Deputy -Lieutenants,  the  very 
persons  who  were  responsible  for  the  execution  of  the 
Act.  There  can  be  little  doubt  but  that  the  same 
practice  obtained,  with  superficial  differences,  in  the 
majority  of  the  parishes  in  Great  Britain.  The  people 
made  a  law  for  themselves  for  the  conduct  of  the 
ballot ;  and  when  that  law  was  transgressed,  they  did 
not  hesitate  to  invoke  the  aid  of  the  Secretary  of  State 
to  enforce  it.  It  seems  never  to  have  occurred  to  them 
that  their  local  customs,  erected  as  it  were  behind  the 
back  of  the  law,  could  have  less  force  than  the  law 
itself.  Nor  indeed  apparently  did  the  Secretary  of  State 
attempt  to  override  local  custom,  unless  his  authority 
was  called  in  actually  to  defy  the  law.  Any  attempt  to 
do  so  would  probably  have  made  the  ballot  impossible. 
But  the  petty  local  insurance  clubs  and  societies 
were  a  small  matter  compared  with  the  much  more 
important  institutions  which  already  existed  in  1802,  and 
which  were  destined  to  extend  their  operations  enormously 
as  ballot  succeeded  ballot  in  the  years  that  followed. 
Their  agents  were  ubiquitous  and  vigilant.  Even  in 
1802  three  men  who  were  travelling  north  with  the 
certainty  of  being  appointed  sergeants  of  Militia,  were 
intercepted  on  their  way  by  the  emissaries  of  an  insurance 
society  and  tempted  by  large  bounties  to  end  their 
journey  and  to  enlist  as  substitutes  and  privates.^  The 
great  centre  of  insurance  was,  of  course,  London ;  and 
there  were  bitter  complaints  from  all  counties  around 
the  metropolis  that  its  societies  offered  their  policy- 
holders either  the  amount  of  the  fine  for  exemption  or 
a  substitute  who  invariably  deserted."   These  institutions 

1   W.O.  Mi/a.Books,Sec.  at  War  to  Lord  Galloway,  19th  Jan.  1803. 
-  I.D.  vol.  cvi.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  23rd  Oct.  1807. 


II  MILITIA  CEASES  TO  BE  LOCAL         45 

extended  their  branches  as  far  as  Warwick,  probably  1803. 
indeed  further,  and  it  seems  that  they  made  enormous 
profits.^  Sometimes  the  insurance  society  consisted  of  a 
single  enterprising  individual,  who  openly  advertised  his 
readiness  to  provide  substitutes  at  a  figure  which  seemed 
extravagantly  low  but  beyond  question  brought  him  a 
very  handsome  income.  A  Mr.  Pearce  of  Hackney 
thus  filled  the  ranks  of  the  Tower  Hamlets  Militia  for 
twelve  years,  until  in  1 808  the  parish  officers,  finding 
that  they  received  no  share  of  his  gains,  decided  to  reject 
every  man  that  he  offered,  and  so  ruined  his  business. 
Pearce  was,  of  course,  hardly,  if  at  all,  other  than  a 
crimp ;  yet,  amazing  as  it  may  seem,  his  friends  appealed 
to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  support  him  against  the 
parish  officers.^ 