

The  meaning  of  these  two  last  provisions  shall  in 
its  place  be  more  fully  explained.  For  the  present  it  is 
enough  to  draw  the  reader's  attention  to  them,  and  to 
point  out  that  section    14  gave  the  only  power  that 


II  THE  LORDS-LIEUTENANT  35 

existed,  so  far,  for  enforcing  discipline  among  Volun-       1803. 
teers  until  called  out  to  repel  invasion. 

Yet  another  Act  of  the  same  date  (43  Geo.  III. 
England,  cap.  123  ;  Scotland,  cap.  124;  nth  Aug. 
1803)  rectified  a  mistake  in  section  5  of  the  Army  of 
Reserve  Acts,  and  exempted  men  who  were  serving 
personally  or  by  substitute  in  the  Militia  from  being 
ballotted  for  the  Army  of  Reserve,  unless  their  turn  to 
be  ballotted  had  come  back  in  rotation,  and  conversely 
delivered  those  who  were  serving  personally  or  by  sub- 
stitute in  the  Army  of  Reserve  from  the  ballot  for  the 
Militia. 

With  this  enactment  the  session  closed ;  and  the 
wearisome  statement  of  the  Acts  of  Parliament  being 
for  the  present  complete,  we  must  look  next  to  the  men 
who  were  required  to  enforce  them. 

IV 

The  execution  of  the  Militia  Act  and  its  affiliated 
Acts  was  committed,  as  we  have  seen,  to  the  Lords- 
Lieutenant  of  Counties.  Necessarily,  therefore,  much 
depended  upon  their  goodwill,  their  zeal,  and  their 
capacity.  Speaking  generally,  it  may  be  said  that  they 
performed  their  duties  with  admirable  intelligence, 
energy,  and  tact.  There  were,  of  course,  men  of  all 
descriptions  among  them.  A  few  like  Lord  Eglinton, 
Lord  Townsend,  the  Duke  of  Northumberland,  and 
the  Duke  of  Richmond  were  military  officers  of  wide 
experience,  considerable  technical  knowledge,  and 
original  ideas  ;  but  the  majority  were  simply  sensible, 
industrious,  and  capable  country  gentlemen,  whose  rank 
and  character  gave  them  deserved  influence  among  their 
peers,  and  whose  weight  was  sufficient  to  bear  down 
anything  like  captious  criticism  or  opposition  among 
their  subordinates.  A  certain  number  were  of  course 
fussy,  self-important,  and  inclined  to  multiply  hard 
questions  and  to  lengthen  out  correspondence  ;  but 
these  were  not  many  nor,  for  all  their  defects,  the  least 


36        LIEUTENANTS'  DIFFICULTIES       chap. 

1803.  patriotic  or  efficient.  Three  only  in  the  whole  of  the 
United  Kingdom  seem  to  have  been  thoroughly  unfit 
for  their  place  ;  and  of  these  one  was  a  sensitive  mag- 
nate of  slender  intellect,  who  delighted  in  raising 
difficulties,  the  second  was  disabled  by  age  and  infirmity, 
and  the  third  was  accused  of  giving  commissions  in  the 
Volunteers  to  uncertificated  bankrupts  in  order  to  annoy 
a  brother  landlord  who  was  politically  opposed  to  him.^ 
In  Scotland,  where  Lords-Lieutenant  and  Militia  were 
new  things,  the  jealousies  of  county  against  county 
often  found  expression  through  their  administrative 
chiefs,  but  this  fault  really  lay  rather  in  the  body  of 
the  Scottish  people  than  in  the  individuals  directly 
concerned. 