

On  the  same  day  (27th  July)  there  was  passed 
another  Act  for  the  more  speedy  completion  of  the 
Militia  and  the  Army  of  Reserve  (43  Geo.  III.  cap.  lOo), 
making  men  who  refused  to  be  examined  for  their  fit- 
ness for  the  Militia  liable  to  compulsory  service,  if 
found  physically  able,  and  lowering  the  standard  of 
substitutes  for  the  Militia  to  the  height  of  five  feet  two 
inches.  Both  provisions  showed  clearly  enough  that 
men  were  difficult  to  obtain. 

Then,  though  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act  was  the 
second  of  its  kind,  it  had  hardly  been  passed  before  it 
was  found  to  need  amendment.  No  provision  had 
been  made  for  exonerating  persons  who  changed  their 
parish,  or  who  went  abroad,  from  the  penalties  imposed 
by  the  Act.  The  King  had  been  empowered  to 
remove  officers  appointed  by  the  Lords-Lieutenant, 
but  no  power  had  been  given  to  the  Lords-Lieutenant 
to  supply  the  vacancy  by  a  fresh  appointment.  The 
number  of  non-commissioned  officers  allowed  under 
the  Act  was  insufficient,  and,  finally,  section  32  forbade 
the  Deputy-Lieutenants  to  hire  any  sergeant-instructors 
except  out-pensioners  of  Chelsea.  All  these  matters 
were  set  right  by  the  Levy  en  Masse  Amendment  Act 
(43  Geo.  III.  cap.  120;  nth  Aug.  1803).  One  im- 
portant alteration  was  also  added,  namely,  that  if  the 

D 


34  THE  BILLETING  ACT  chap. 

1803.  number  of  Volunteers  in  any  county  were  satisfactory 
to  the  King,  he  could  suspend  the  operation  of  the 
Levy  en  Masse  Act,  even  though  they  did  not  amount 
to  the  prescribed  tale  of  three-fourths  of  the  first  class 
(sec.  i). 

On  the  same  day,  however,  the  nth  of  August, 
yet  another  Act  was  passed,  which  was  fraught  with 
consequences  far  more  serious.  This  bore  the  innocent 
appellation  of  an  Act  to  authorise  the  billeting  of 
Yeomanry  and  Volunteers  when  assembled  for  training, 
and  was  known  as  the  Billeting  Act  (43  Geo.  III.  cap. 
121).  The  measure  certainly  contained  provisions  to 
justify  its  title  ;  but  it  contained  also  much  more.  For  it 
ordained  the  qualification  of  an  effective  Yeoman  to 
be  twelve  days'  exercise,  and  of  an  effective  Infantry 
Volunteer  to  be  twenty-four  days'  exercise  in  the  year  ; 
and  it  exempted  all  such  effective  men  from  the  ballot 
not  only  under  the  Army  Reserve  Act,  but  under  any 
future  Act  to  raise  an  Additional  Force  (sees,  i  and  2). 
The  measure  contained  also  two  important  provisions  of 
another  kind.  Section  9  subjected  the  Yeomanry  and 
Volunteers  to  the  Mutiny  Act,  when  called  out  to  repel 
invasion ;  while  section  1 1  removed  them  from  the 
control  of  the  Lords  -  Lieutenant  in  the  same  emer- 
gency, and  placed  them  under  the  Generals  command- 
ing districts.  Section  13  vested  funds  subscribed  for 
Volunteer  and  Yeomanry  corps,  as  well  as  arms 
and  stores  purchased  therewith,  in  the  officers  com- 
manding those  corps  ;  and  section  14  made  it  lawful 
for  such  Volunteers  as  refused  to  pay  sums  required 
from  them  under  the  rules  of  their  corps  to  be  haled 
before  a  Justice  of  the  Peace,  who  had  power  to  cause 
the  same,  together  with  a  fine  of  double  the  amount,  to 
be  levied  by  distress,  if  necessary,  and  to  be  paid  to  the 
general  stock  of  the  corps. 