

More  commonly,  however,  precisely  the  same  end 


42  INSURANCE  SOCIETIES  chap. 

1802-3.  ^^^  attained  by  different  means,  namely  insurance.  In 
Scotland  the  practice  was  "  carried  to  a  great  height "  ; 
but  the  Militia  was  so  new  a  thing  in  North  Britain 
that  the  country  had  not  learned  the  higher  application 
of  insurance.  The  policy  of  a  Scottish  society  insured 
men  only  for  the  price  of  the  exemption  fine.  The 
English  institutions  provided  their  clients  with  a 
substitute  or  the  price  of  a  substitute.  In  their  incep- 
tion these  insurance  societies  arose  in  the  most  natural 
manner  possible.  In  any  given  parish  or  town  there 
was  a  given  number  of  men  liable  to  be  ballotted,  of 
whom  in  normal  times  only  a  small  fraction — probably 
less  than  one- tenth — was  required  at  one  time  for 
service.  So  many  of  these  as  could  afford  a  small 
outlay  met  together  and  agreed  to  subscribe  so  much 
apiece  to  purchase  substitutes  for  such  of  their  number 
as  might  be  drawn  for  service.  This  was  the  simplest 
form  of  insurance  ;  and  hence  in  the  Parliamentary 
debates  the  words  subscription  society  and  insurance 
society  are  used  synonymously.  In  many  cases  the 
parochial  authorities  took  the  lead  in  the  management 
of  these  societies,  made  the  necessary  calculations, 
collected  the  subscriptions,  transacted  the  whole  of  the 
necessary  business,  and  doubtless  remunerated  them- 
selves, with  the  full  consent  of  their  subscribers,  with  a 
small  commission  for  their  pains.  In  Lichfield  we  learn 
that  at  ordinary  times  the  subscription  for  substitutes 
was  no  more  than  five  shillings,^  though  for  reasons 
presently  to  be  shown,  it  rose  to  four  times  that  amount 
before  the  end  of  1803. 

In  Blackburn,  later  on  in  the  same  year,  a  still 
more  curious  instance  came  to  light  which,  though  it 
deals  with  a  later  phase  of  affairs,  enables  us  to  study 
the  question  of  insurance  in  closer  detail.  After  the 
ballot-list  had  been  published,  but  before  the  ballot  had 
taken  place,  a  subscription  was  set  on  foot  in  the  town 
which  was  open  to  all  whose  name  appeared  on  that 

1  I.D.  vol.  xxix.  Magistrates  of  Lichfield  to  L.L.  19th  Nov. 
1803. 


II  INSURANCE  SOCIETIES  43 

list.  The  men  to  be  supplied  numbered  36  ;  the  1803. 
subscribers  amounted  to  512.  A  contribution  of  ^^i 
a  head  was  reckoned  to  be  sufficient  to  enable  the 
subscribers  to  hire  parochial  substitutes  for  the  bene- 
ficiaries of  the  society  at  large,  and  to  pay  bounties  to 
men  who  provided  substitutes  for  themselves.  The 
sum  of  ;^i89  :  los.  was  thus  paid  out  on  account  of 
ten  of  the  subscribers,  in  bounties  varying  from  j^i6  to 
£20.  As  these  amounts  were  equal  to  the  full  current 
price  of  substitutes,  and  any  additional  expenditure  on 
the  part  of  the  ballotted  men  was  therefore  voluntary 
and  unnecessary,  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  considered 
that  any  surplus,  remaining  after  repayment  to  them  of 
their  subscription  of  ^i  and  of  any  little  additional 
expenses,  should  go  to  the  general  fund  for  the  benefit 
of  all  the  subscribers.  The  ten  men,  however,  thought 
differently.  Under  section  122  of  the  Militia  Act 
of  1802  ballotted  men,  worth  less  than  ^^500,  were 
entitled  to  receive  half  the  current  price  of  a  parochial 
substitute  ;  and  this  they  claimed  as  their  right.  The 
Deputy-Lieutenants  flatly  refused  to  pay  it.  The  men 
had  found  their  substitutes  at  a  trifling  cost,  they  had 
also  gained  exemption  from  the  parish  rate  levied  for 
the  payment  of  bounties,  and  the  Deputies  were  furious 
at  the  idea  of  their  making  also  ^7  or  ^^8  out  of  the 
transaction.  It  was  contrary  to  all  precedent  in  Lich- 
field, where  the  rule  was  that  men  who  served  person- 
ally should  alone  receive  back  their  subscription  and 
half  the  current  price  of  a  substitute.  Thereupon  the 
ten  men  concerned  carried  their  appeal  to  the  Secretary 
of  State,  and  demanded  their  half  bounty  as  a  right. 
The  matter  was  referred  to  the  law  officers,  who  were 
fain  to  confess  that  the  law  was  on  the  side  of  the 
claimants,  and  that  the  money  must  be  paid.^  The 
Secretary  of  State  gave  orders  accordingly,  and  the 
Deputy-Lieutenants  were  left  to  take  such  satisfaction 
as  they  might  from  these  very  ingenious  men. 