

It  must  be  said  at  once  that,  even  before  war  broke 
out,  the  bare  allowance  of  the  principle  of  substitution 
sufficed  to  nullify  these  particular  provisions  of  the 
Militia  Act  completely.  This  was  due  to  two  principal 
causes  ;  first,  to  the  want  of  uniformity  in  the  method 
of  conducting  the  ballot,  and,  secondly,  to  the  practice 
of  insurance. 

The  ballot  has  been  for  so  long  obsolete  that  the 
traditions  concerning  it  have  utterly  perished  ;  and  it  is 
now  exceedingly  difficult  to  discover  anything  about  it. 
The  one  thing  that  appears  certain  is  that  the  Deputy- 
Lieutenants  of  every  subdivision  were  at  liberty,  so  far 
as  the  Act  was  concerned,  to  arrange  matters  as  they 
found  most  convenient,  and  that  they  availed  themselves 
of  that  liberty  with  edifying  readiness.  It  is,  indeed, 
probable  that  there  were  almost  as  many  methods  as 
counties. 

It  should  seem,  however,  that  the  commonest  pro- 
cedure was  as  follows.  First  the  lots  were  drawn,^  and 
the  men  upon  whom  they  fell  furnished  their  substitutes 
or  paid  the  fine  which  entitled  them  to  five  years' 
exemption.  A  second  ballot  was  then  held,  in  which 
the  names  of  the  men  who  had  been  chosen  by  the  first 
ballot  were  omitted  ;  and  the  victims  of  the  second 
ballot,  upon  enrolling  themselves  or[finding  a  substitute, 
received  the  proceeds  of  the  fines  paid  by  the  men  of 
the  first  ballot.^     The  method  was  curious,  and  though 

1  The  approved  method  was  to  write  the  names  of  ballottable 
men  on  slips  of  paper,  place  the  slips,  folded,  in  a  bag  or  box,  and 
draw  them  out  one  by  one  in  public. 

2  IF.O.  Mila.  Book,  S.W.  to  C.G.M.  Yorks,  26th  July  1803. 


40  THE  BALLOT  IN  PRACTICE       chap. 

1802-3.  it  was  apparently  recognised  and  approved  for  a  time 
at  headquarters,^  it  is  easy  to  see  that  it  was  unfair  to 
poor  men  and  tended  of  itself  to  raise  the  price  of 
substitutes.  Thus  if  a  really  poor  man  were  drawn  by 
the  first  ballot,  he  had  practically  no  choice  but  to 
accept  six  guineas  and  serve.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
he  escaped  the  first  ballot,  he  could  be  sure  of  at  least 
ten  pounds  on  being  drawn  for  the  second  ;  and  if,  on 
the  second  ballot,  additional  men  paid  the  fine,  and  it 
was  necessary  to  proceed  to  a  third  ballot  upon  the 
same  principle,  the  men  then  drawn  might  well  receive 
^15  or  ^20.2 

But  throughout  the  whole  of  the  vast  correspond- 
ence upon  the  subject  the  most  remarkable  point  is, 
that  no  one,  from  the  parish  overseer  to  the  Secretary 
of  State,  ever  expected  a  principal  to  accept  service  in 
the  Militia.  It  was  assumed  in  every  quarter  that 
substitutes  would  be  provided  practically  in  every  case  ; 
and,  in  fact,  in  1803-5,  ^^^  ballot  was  simply  an 
instrument  for  compelling  the  parishes  to  organise  at 
their  own  expense  recruiting  depots  for  the  Militia. 
The  means  contrived  to  attain  this  end  were  various. 
The  Act  itself  prescribed  one  by  allowing  parishes  to 
produce  their  quota  of  so-called  volunteers  in  anticipa- 
tion of  the  ballot.  In  Carnarvonshire'  the  practice 
was  as  follows.  The  Deputy-Lieutenants  grouped  the 
parishes  together  by  twos  and  threes  "  to  make  the 
choice  of  men  as  equal  as  possible "  ;  and  the  ballot 
was  duly  held.     But  before  the  ballot  it  was  customary 