

Probably  the  greatest  trouble  of  the  Lords-Lieu- 
tenant all  over  Great  Britain  lay  with  brother  magnates 
of  as  high  position  as  themselves  who,  though  to  the 
last  degree  loyal,  patriotic,  and  generous,  often  wanted 
to  conduct  matters  according  to  their  own  ideas,  to 
erect  the  corps  which  they  had  raised,  and  which  no 
one  but  themselves  could  have  raised,  into  independent 
units,  and  to  employ  them  only  upon  such  service  as 
they  themselves  considered  appropriate.  Such  men 
required  to  be  handled  with  much  delicacy  and  tact. 
If  their  political  opinions  differed  from  those  of  the 
Lieutenant,  they  scented  a  job  in  every  order  and  every 
appointment ;  and  it  was  only  by  timely  concessions 
and  judicious  flattery  that  they  were  kept  in  compara- 
tive subordination  and  good-humour.  One  of  their 
worst  failings  was  their  preference  for  addressing  the 
Secretary  of  State  direct,  instead  of  through  the  Lord- 
Lieutenant,  a  fault  which  it  was  not  always  easy  for 
the  latter,  if  he  happened  to  be  a  personal  friend,  to 
correct  or  reprove. 

The  work  thrown  upon  the  Lords-Lieutenant  was 
in  many  cases  extremely  heavy.  Devon,  Lancashire, 
Hampshire,  and  the  West   Riding  of  Yorkshire  were 

*  I.D.  vol.  ii.  Berks,  passim  ;  vol.  xxxiv.  Worcestershire^ 
passim  j  vol.  xii.  Edinburgh,  C.  Hope  to  S.S.  25th  Aug.  1803. 


II       INDUSTRY  OF  THE  LIEUTENANTS     37 

the  counties  in  which,  owing  to  density  of  population,  1803. 
or  extent  of  territory,  or  difficulty  of  communication, 
or  to  all  three  combined,  the  demands  upon  them  were 
greatest ;  but  in  none  of  the  maritime  counties  were 
their  duties  light.  Curiously  enough,  nearly  all  of  them 
— even  such  great  men  as  the  Duke  of  Portland  and 
Lord  Fitzwilliam — wrote  the  whole  of  their  numerous 
letters  with  their  own  hands.  A  very  few  always 
employed  a  clerk,  either  because  they  were  crippled  by 
gout  or,  in  at  least  one  case,  because  the  Lieutenant's 
own  handwriting  was  illegible.  The  Lieutenant  of 
Devon  frequently  used  his  wife  as  his  amanuensis,  and 
it  is  probable  that  others  did  the  same. 

Apart  from  their  correspondence,  the  Lords-Lieu- 
tenant of  necessity  were  constantly  making  journeys  to 
their  provincial  capitals,  to  other  centres  of  population, 
and  to  the  most  important  of  their  neighbours  and 
friends,  either  to  consult  them  or  to  reconcile  differ- 
ences and  put  an  end  to  quarrels.  In  many  counties, 
where  the  roads  followed  the  old  tracks  chosen  to  suit 
the  peculiar  requirements  of  pack-horses,  riding  was 
practically  the  only  means  of  travelling  from  place  to 
place  ;  and  it  must  have  been  no  uncommon  thing  for 
the  Lieutenants  to  be  in  the  saddle  at  dawn  in  order 
to  ride  thirty  or  forty  miles  to  a  county  meeting  and 
return  before  dark.^  The  postal  arrangements  were 
very  primitive,  and  the  Post  Office,  strangled  in  red- 
tape,  was  often  a  hindrance  rather  than  an  aid  to  the 
practical  transmission  of  correspondence.  It  will  hardly 
be  believed  that  as  late  as  November  1803  Lieutenants 
and  Deputy -Lieutenants  were  called  upon  to  pay 
postage-fees  for  letters  delivered  on  the  business  of 
the  State.  Complaints  to  the  Secretary  of  State  brought 
no  relief,  until  a  Deputy-Lieutenant  of  Sussex  wrote  to 