

1  W.O.  Mila.  Books,  Mr.  Lewis  to  Col.  Matthew,  28th  Oct. ; 
S.W.  to  Captain  Hardwicke,  13th  June  ;  to  F.  Davies,  28th  June 
J803. 


52      UNFAIRNESS  OF  EXEMPTIONS        chap. 

1803.  a  weak  point  throughout  the  Act  that  it  conferred  no 
advantages  for  previous  good  service  to  the  State. 
There  was  a  case  in  which  the  last  remaining  son  of  a 
poor  old  couple  in  Northamptonshire  was  ballotted. 
They  had  given  two  sons  to  the  Guards,  and  had  lost 
them  both  on  active  service,  and  they  had  at  the 
moment  three  more  sons  serving  in  the  Militia.  Yet 
it  was  only  by  appeal  of  the  Lord-Lieutenant  to  the 
Secretary  of  State  that  any  consideration  could  be 
obtained  for  them  ;  and  meanwhile  they  were  unavoid- 
ably kept  for  many  days  in  miserable  suspense.* 

Another  most  amazing  fact  is  that  though  parish 
officers,  being  concerned  with  the  ballot,  were  exempt 
from  it,  Deputy-Lieutenants  were  not.  The  question 
was  actually  raised  through  the  ballotting  of  a  Deputy- 
Lieutenant  by  his  brethren,  and  the  matter  was  referred 
to  the  Secretary  of  State.  His  answer  was  that  he 
would  make  inquiry  as  to  the  general  practice  in  the 
kingdom  ;  to  which  the  Lord-Lieutenant  rejoined  that 
the  practice  varied,  and  that  the  Law-Officers  of  the 
Crown  ought  to  settle  the  question  once  for  all  without 
loss  of  time.  The  Law-Officers  opined  that  Deputy- 
Lieutenants  were  not  exempt  from  the  Militia  ballot. 
To  this  the  Deputy-Lieutenant  concerned  made  answer 
that  in  that  case  he  would  resign.  If,  he  said,  there 
were  no  exemption  at  all,  he  would  not  complain,  but 
if  peers  were  exempted,  why  not  Deputy-Lieutenants  } 
Officers  of  Militia  were  required  and  bound  to  obey  the 
orders  of  the  Deputy-Lieutenants ;  and  any  three  Deputy- 
Lieutenants,  commissioned  to  act  as  the  Lord-Lieu- 
tenant, could  review  the  Militia.  How  could  ballotted 
privates  give  commands  to  their  own  officers  ?  The 
Secretary  of  State  wisely  made  no  attempt  to  meet 
these  unanswerable  arguments,  but  replied  in  true 
official  style,  that  the  Government  would  not  submit 
to  Parliament  any  bill  to  exempt  Deputy-Lieutenants 
from  the  ballot  ;  and  there  the  matter  ended.     There 

1  I.D.  vol.  XXV.  Mr.  de  C.  Brooke  to  L.L.  Northants,  28th 
Sept.  1804. 


II  UNFAIRNESS  OF  EXEMPTIONS  ^2 

can  be  little  doubt  as  to  who  was  in  the  right  of  the       1803. 
question.^ 

It  was  unfair,  again,  that  such  a  misfortune  as 
physical  infirmity  should  in  no  case  have  given  relief 
from  the  Militia  ballot  unless  a  man  were  worth  less 
than  ;^ioo.  Of  course,  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  could 
always  reject  a  man  for  the  Militia  if  he  were  below 
five  feet  four  inches  in  height ;  and  no  doubt  this  rule 
was  frequently  stretched  in  the  interests  of  humanity  to 
give  deliverance  in  many  hard  cases.  But  it  is  to  be 
noted  that  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  were  not  bound  to 
reject  men  who  fell  below  that  stature  ;  and  that  the 
deficiency  of  inchesof  itself  gave  no  immunity  from  the 
ballot  and  its  consequences,^  By  the  letter  of  the  law, 
therefore,  a  hunchback  from  three  to  four  feet  in  height, 
under  forty-five  years  of  age,  and  worth  ;^ioi,  was 
liable  to  pay  a  fine  of  j^io  for  five  years'  exemption, 
provide  a  substitute,  or  serve  in  person  ;  and  the  fine 
could  be  extorted  from  him  by  distraint  upon  his 
goods. ^  It  is  noticeable  too,  in  reference  to  the  posi- 
tion of  the  sick  and  infirm  under  the  Militia  Act,  that 
not  a  word  was  said  as  to  the  exemption  of  practis- 
ing doctors,  an  omission  which  was  resented  in  those 
days,  and  would  be  still  more  resented  in  these,  from  the 
hardship  which  it  meted  out  both  to  members  of  a 
singularly  self-denying  profession  and  to  their  unfor- 
tunate patients. 