

Such  new  enactments,  as  we  have  seen,  were  not 
long  in  coming.  Before  the  Lieutenancies  had  well 
digested  the  proclamation  for  the  Supplementary  Militia 
and  the  Militia  Completion  Act,  they  were  required  to 
swallow  the  Army  of  Reserve  Act,  bidding  them  levy 
before  Michaelmas  yet  another  forty  thousand  men  by 
ballot  in  Great  Britain,  on  pain  of  a  cumulative 
quarterly  fine  of  £20  for  every  man  deficient.  This 
brought  up  the  total  of  men  to  be  raised  in  Great 
Britain  within  less  than  twelve  months  to  117,000. 
Moreover,  by  comparison  of  the  Acts  of  Parliament  it 
will  be  seen  that  the  Lieutenants  had  practically  to 
collect  this  number  under  three  different  sets  of  condi- 
tions. Men  ballotted  for  the  Militia  before  the  28th  of 
May  (the  date  of  summons  to  the  Supplementary 
Militia)  were  exempt  for  five  years  on  payment  of 
^10  ;  men  ballotted  after  that  date  could  not  gain  the 

Fina/  Ballot 

Total    enrolled  for  County  of    Forfar,  Principals,  12  ;    Sub- 
stitutes, 76 88 

Unfit  or  exempt,  for  whom  others  were  ballotted   •         .         .88 

Paid  the  j^  1 5  penalty 60 

Allowed  time  to  find  Substitutes    .         .         .         .         .         .        2 

Failed  to  appear  (warrants  issued)  .         .         .         .         .18 

Total 256 

(7.2).  vol.  xiv.  Forfar,  4th  July  1803). 

^  l.D.  vol.  xiii.  Essex,  Mr.  Bosanquet  to  L.L.  3rd  July  1803. 
But  the  clause,  or  rather  the  oath,  as  to  rupture  and  fits  was 
never  abrogated. 


) 


II  CONFUSION  CAUSED  BY  IT  57 

same  exemption  for  less  than  ;^I5  ;  men  drawn  for  1803. 
the  Army  of  Reserve  could  purchase  only  one  year's 
exemption  from  that  particular  ballot  by  payment  of 
j^20.  Again,  the  payment  of  fines  for  exemption  from 
the  Militia  gave  no  immunity  from  the  Army  of 
Reserve,  though  service  in  person  or  by  substitute  in 
either  force  gave  exemption  from  service  in  the  other. 
Also,  the  exemption  fines  of  the  Militia  were  given 
complete  to  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  for  the  purchase  of 
substitutes  ;  but  those  of  the  Army  of  Reserve  were,  in 
England,  divided  between  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  and 
the  Paymaster-General.  Next,  the  standard  for  the 
Militia  was  five  feet  four  inches  until  the  27  th  of  July, 
when  the  Act  43  Geo.  III.  cap.  100,  lowered  the 
height  required  for  substitutes  to  five  feet  two  inches, 
leaving  that  for  principals  untouched ;  while  the 
standard  for  the  Army  of  Reserve  was  five  feet  two  inches 
for  all.  Lastly,  Volunteers  enrolled  before  the  22nd  of 
June  alone  were  exempted  as  such  from  the  Army  of 
Reserve  ;  a  simple  matter  which  is  repeated  here  because 
it  presently  became  complicated  to  the  last  degree. 