

1  I.D.    vol.  xxiii.  L.L.  Middlesex,  to   S.S.  6th  and   9th  July 
1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  xxiii.  L.L.  Middlesex,  to  S.S.  15th  Sept.  1803. 


II     MIDDLESEX  AND  SURREY  MILITIA      47 

collect  men.  The  Westminster  battalion  followed  his  1803. 
example  by  sending  a  party  to  Birmingham,  nominally 
to  arrest  deserters,  but  really  to  enlist  recruits.  The 
practice  was  plainly  illegal,  and  the  Secretary  at  War 
repeatedly  pointed  out  that  it  was  so  ;  but  Colonel 
Wood  of  the  East  Middlesex  let  the  letters  from  the 
War  Office  pass  unheeded  and  went  his  own  way, 
knowing  that  if  he  were  to  conform  to  the  law  he  would 
have  not  a  man  in  his  battalion.-'  Moreover,  as  the 
Secretary  at  War  was  fain  to  confess,  there  was  no 
penalty  provided  in  any  Act  to  check  this  particular 
breach  of  the  law,  which  meant  that  there  was  no  pro- 
tection for  any  district  against  any  other  district  which 
chose  to  steal  its  men.  It  is  an  actual  fact  that  in  the 
ranks  of  the  Middlesex  Militia,  whose  quota  (including 
the  Supplementary  Militia)  was  over  4500  men,  there 
was  but  one  principal  to  be  found  ;  and  when  his  time 
of  service  expired  in  1808,  the  Lord-Lieutenant  begged 
to  be  allowed  to  keep  him  as  a  curiosity.^ 

On  the  south  side  of  the  Thames  the  case  was  pre- 
cisely the  same.  Substitutes  were  presented  as  fast  as 
they  were  called  for,  only  to  disappear  beyond  hope  of 
recall  within  forty-eight  hours.  At  the  beginning  of 
April  1803,  after  endless  ballotting,  the  southward  dis- 
trict of  Surrey  had  produced  only  22  men  out  of  its  quota 
of  288  ;  and  the  Clerk  of  the  General  Meeting  declared 
the  task  of  raising  the  rest  to  be  hopeless  unless  the 
substitutes  could  be  at  once  carried  off  to  headquarters, 
dressed,  powdered,  and  furnished  with  queues,  so  as  to 
make  them  easily  recognisable.^  It  is  not  recorded  that 
the  difficulty  was  overcome  in  the  same  way  as  in 
Middlesex,  but  it  is  reasonable  to  assume  so  ;  and  with 
all  London  open  to  them  for  substitutes,  it  is  impossible 

^  W.O.  Mila.  Entry  Books,  Sec.  at  War  to  T.  Kerrison,  Esq., 
1st  June,  to  O.C.,  E.  Middlesex  Mila.  15th  June,  3rd  Oct.  1803  ; 
6th  Jan.,  22nd  June  1804  ;  14th  Feb.  1805  ;  to  O.C.,  Westminster 
Mila.  28th  June  1803;  to  O.C,  E.  Middlesex  Mila.  nth  Feb. 
1808. 

2  I.D.  vol.  cxlii.  L.L.  Middlesex,  to  S.S.  24th  March  1808. 

8  Ibid.  vol.  xxxi.  C.G.M.  Surrey,  to  L.L.  4th  April  1803. 


48       MILITIA  HATED  IN  SCOTLAND     chap. 

1803.      to  suppose  that  the  Surrey  Militia  can  have  included 
many  Surrey  men. 

VI 

The  reader  will  naturally  ask  whether  the  reluctance 
to  serve  in  the  Militia  was  so  general  as  the  foregoing 
narrative  would  lead  one  to  suppose.  The  answer  is 
certainly  in  the  affirmative  ;  and  the  prime  reasons 
undoubtedly  were  that,  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the 
elder  Pitt's  original  Act,  personal  service  was  not  insisted 
upon  and  the  Militia  was  not  made  a  truly  national 
force.  There  was,  however,  far  less  reluctance  in 
England  than  in  Scotland,  where  the  Militia  had  been 
unknown  until  1797.  From  almost  every  county  in 
Scotland,  even  before  the  war  broke  out,  came  the  same 
tale  of  difficulty  in  obtaining  not  only  men  but  officers, 
and  of  perfunctory  conduct,  or  worse,  on  the  part  of 
Deputy-Lieutenants.  In  Aberdeen  ballotted  men  invari- 
ably paid  the  fine  for  exemption,  and  no  gentleman 
would  accept  even  a  captain's  commission  when  offered 
to  him.^  In  Banff,  again,  only  one  duly  qualified 
gentleman  could  be  persuaded  to  become  a  captain.^  In 
Haddington  there  was  the  like  dearth  of  officers,  and  in 
Peebles  the  like  unwillingness  of  men.^  In  Bute  there 
were  only  five  men  in  the  Militia  who  had  not  been 
drawn  from  other  counties,  and  not  one  single  ballotted 
man  had  been  enrolled.*  From  Ross  came  the  report 
that  the  Highlanders  would  have  nothing  to  do  with 
the  Militia  ;  that  the  most  mountainous  district  had  not 
produced  a  man  ;  that  the  Militia  laws  were  ill  under- 
stood by  magistrates  and  Deputy-Lieutenants,  and  that, 
being  an  innovation,  they  were  detested  by  the  High- 
landers as   an   intolerable   grievance.^      In   Stirling  the 