

1  fF.O.  Mi/a.  Books,  S.S.  to  Sir  A.  Duckenfield,  1st  July;  to 
W.  Walcot,  20th  July  1803  ;  I.D.  vol.  i.  L.L.  Beds,  to  S.S.  2nd 
July  1803. 

2  Hi  J.  S.W.  to  Messrs.  Edwards  and  Hughes,  1 1  th  July ;  to 
Sir  H.  Hanley,  22nd  July  1803. 

3  Il>id.  S.W.  to  High-SherifF  of  Cardigan,  1st  Aug.  1803. 


11  THE  VOLUNTEERS  59 

VIII 

So  far  the  subject  of  the  Volunteers  has  been  but  ^803. 
lightly  touched  ;  and  it  is  now  necessary  to  enter  into  it 
more  deeply.  They  were  reconstituted,  it  will  be 
remembered,  under  the  Volunteer  Act  of  1802,  which 
granted  to  them  and  to  the  Yeomanry  (who  at  that  time 
were  ranked  as  Volunteers)  exemption  from  the  Militia 
ballot  in  consideration  of  their  attendance  at  five  days' 
exercise  in  the  year.  Their  allowances  were  also  fixed 
at  j^2  a  man  to  every  Volunteer  for  his  clothing  and 
appointments,  and  ;^6o  a  year  for  every  troop  of 
Yeomanry  which  numbered  at  least  forty  rank  and  file. 
As  the  prospects  of  continued  peace  became  more  dubious, 
the  Government,  on  the  31st  of  March  1803,  invited 
offers  from  additional  Volunteers,  and  gave  an  outline 
of  the  plan  on  which  it  intended  to  act,  adding  that 
"  it  must  be  considered  with  reference  to  a  permanent 
system  rather  than  to  a  situation  of  emergency,"  and 
that  the  extent  of  its  application  must  be  determined  by 
circumstances.  Finally,  it  directed  that  all  offers  of 
service  should  be  communicated  to  the  Secretary  of  State, 
in  order  that  a  selection  might  be  made.  As  to  the  pro- 
posed regulations  (which  were  presently  to  be  slightly 
modified)  it  will  suffice  to  say  at  present  that  they  pro- 
vided for  paying  the  men  for  two  days'  exercise  in  every 
week  from  Lady  Day  to  Michaelmas,  and  granted  them 
exemption  from  the  Militia  ballot  during  their  term  of 
service.  But  the  point  that  calls  for  notice  is  that  a 
Government  which  talked  about  erecting  a  permanent 
system,  and  added  in  the  same  breath  that  "  the  extent 
of  its  application  must  be  determined  by  circumstances," 
could  not  be  considered  to  be  clear  as  to  its  own 
intentions. 

The  new  regulations  remained  under  consideration 
for  two  months,  in  the  course  of  which  they  were  sub- 
mitted to  Colonel  Vyse,  an  officer  who  had  gained 
considerable  experience  of  Volunteers  in  Scotland 
during  the  late  war.      His  advice  may  be  summed  up 


6o  COLONEL  VYSE'S  ADVICE         chap. 

1803.  as  follows:  —  (i)  Do  not  be  too  hard  in  grudging 
pay  to  officers  ;  they  throw  it  into  a  general  fund  to 
make  good  deficient  allowances.  (2)  Make  every 
corps  swear  to  serve  in  any  part  of  Great  Britain  in  case 
of  invasion  ;  and  (3)  to  obey  the  orders  of  the  King  and 
of  the  Generals  appointed  by  him.  (4)  Form  regular 
regiments  in  the  great  towns  only  ;  ^  encourage  inde- 
pendent companies  in  the  coast  towns  only,  and  possibly 
a  few  in  the  north,  but  not  so  as  to  incur  the  heavy  and 
useless  expense  of  the  last  war.  Seventy-five  corps, 
with  12,560  men,  will  be  ample  for  Scotland  ;  in  the 
last  war  you  had  228  corps  with  30,000  men.  You 
might  add  a  few  more  men  on  the  coast,  but  always  as 
parts  of  battalions.  (5)  The  great  defect  of  our  last 
Volunteers  was  the  confused  and  unmilitary  conditions 
under  which  they  were  formed.  Establish  one  system 
for  all  for  clothing,  interior  economy  and  discipline,  and 
we  shall  hear  no  more  of  committees,  quarrels,  and  insub- 
ordination. (6)  Men  should  be  required  to  give  so 
many  days'  notice  of  resignation.  (7)  The  Govern- 
ment should  have  arms  ready  to  give  to  every  accepted 
corps. 