


II        RISE  IN  PRICE  OF  SUBSTITUTES         SS 

Lords-Lieutenant  had  had  time  to  set  the  necessary  1803. 
machinery  in  motion,  the  Act  for  completing  the 
Militia  (43  Geo.  III.  cap.  50)  became  law,  which 
raised  the  fine  for  exemption  to  ^^15,  and  inflicted  on 
the  counties  a  cumulative  penalty  of  ^10  quarterly  for 
every  man  deficient  of  their  quota. 

This  augmentation  naturally  increased  the  demands 
for  substitutes  ;  for  the  provision  of  a  substitute,  it 
must  be  remembered,  entitled  a  ballotted  man  to  exemp- 
tion for  life,  whereas  a  fine  gave  him  immunity  only  for 
a  term  of  years.  Naturally  the  price  of  the  article  rose 
rapidly  in  the  market,  with  all  other  prices  that  were 
dependent  on  it.  In  Anglesey  in  May  1 803  substitutes 
cost  from  ^^12  to  ^^13.  In  Denbigh  not  one  could  be 
bought  in  June  for  less  than  ^20.  In  Berkshire  during 
the  same  month  they  received  from  ^^15  :  15s.  to 
j^2 1  :  los  ,  and  were  difficult  to  obtain  even  at  that  price.^ 
In  Middlesex  the  Lord-Lieutenant,  by  throwing  all  his 
Supplementary  Militia  into  one  of  his  three  battalions, 
was  able  to  complete  that  one  to  its  ordinary  establish- 
ment, and  was  obliged  to  leave  the  remaining  two  far 
below  theirs.2  In  fact,  the  Supplementary  Militia  in 
the  metropolis  was  merely  a  name,  for  the  Old  Militia 
was  still  far  below  its  strength.  In  Scotland  the  raising 
of  additional  Militiamen  was  almost  as  great  a  farce  as 
in  London. 3      In  Essex,  and  possibly  in  other  counties, 

1  I.D.  vol.  i.  L.L.  Anglesey,  to  S.S.  21st  May;  vol.  ii. 
L.L.  Berks,  to  S.S.  2  3rcl  June  ;  vol.  ix.  L.L.  Denbigh,  to  S.S. 
31st  July  1803. 

2  /^/V.  vol.  xxii.  L.L.  Middlesex,  to  S.S.  15th  Sept.  1803. 

3  I  subjoin  a  return,  probably  more  favourable  than  the 
ordinary,  of  the  progress  of  the  ballot  in  Forfar.  It  shows  how 
many  men  had  to  be  ballotted  to  produce  a  small  quota.  Unfortu- 
nately such  returns  are  all  too  rare  in  the  correspondence. 

Men  ballotted  for  Supplementary  Militia  on  13th  June,  88 

Of  which  enrolled.  Principals,  3  ;  Substitutes,  33  .         •     36 

Paid  the  j^  1 5  penalty  .         .  .         .  .  .         '17 

Unfit  or  exempt,  for  which  others  were  ballotted    .         .         -33 
Failed  to  attend    .........       2 

Total 88 


S6  ARMY  OF  RESERVE  BALLOT       chap. 

'803,  a  new  method  of  evasion  was  discovered.  Some 
ingenious  person  on  studying  the  Act  found  out  that 
if  he  refused  to  swear  that  he  was  not  ruptured,  nor 
subject  to  fits,  nor  physically  disabled,  the  Deputy- 
Lieutenants  had  no  power  to  enrol  him  even  if  they 
knew  his  objection  to  be  false.  Instantly  the  epileptic 
and  the  afflicted  with  hernia  were  multiplied  manifold  in 
Essex,  and  the  Secretary  of  State  could  only  make  a 
memorandum  to  omit  this  clause  from  future  enact- 
ments.^ 