

The  unhappy  Lieutenancies  bent  themselves  once 
more  to  the  eternal  round  of  ballots  amid  ever-increasing 
difficulties,  for  the  Army  of  Reserve  Act  was  loathed 
as  alike  oppressive  and  unfair.  Men  who  had  paid  ^^lo 
or  ^^15,  sometimes  indeed  both  sums  in  succession,  in 
purchasing  exemption  from  the  Militia,  complained  that 
the  Government  should  have  warned  them  that  this 
penalty  would  not  avail  them  against  the  Army  of 
Reserve,  so  that  they  might  have  spent  their  money  on 
a  substitute.  "  The  people,"  wrote  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond fi-om  Goodwood,  ".  .  .  have  become  suspicious  of 
the  magistrates.  They  cannot  understand  how  a  new  Act 
can  violate  the  engagement  of  the  old.  A  ballot  is  a 
ballot  with  them,  and  when  they  have  bought  exemp- 
tion from  one,  they  cannot  understand  how  they  are 
liable  to  another.  I  warned  Addington  of  this,  and 
hoped  Parliament  would  make  some  remedy."  ^  It  was 
^  I.D.  vol.  xxxii.  L.L.  Sussex,  to  S.S,  23rd  Aug.  1803. 


58  NEW  SCRAMBLE  FOR  SUBSTITUTES  chap. 

1803.  useless  for  men  to  chafe.  The  question  was  raised  more 
than  once,  but  the  Secretary  of  State  was  inexorable — 
fines  paid  in  composition  for  service  in  the  Mihtia  were 
not  valid  as  against  the  Army  of  Reserve  ;  nor  fines 
paid  for  the  Army  of  Reserve  against  the  Militia.^ 

If  there  had  been  a  rush  for  substitutes  before, 
there  was  now  a  headlong  scramble.  Their  price,  in 
spite  of  the  relaxation  of  the  rules  concerning  them, 
flew  up  by  leaps  and  bounds  to  an  extravagant 
height.  The  Secretary  of  State  himself  recognised 
that  it  was  hard  to  expect  the  ranks  to  be  filled 
while  recruits  were  so  dear,  but  he  made  no  sign  of 
relaxing  the  fines  upon  the  parishes  for  men  deficient. 
As  to  the  Deputy-Lieutenants,  they  were  driven  in 
desperation  to  hoard  the  exemption -fines  which  were 
paid  to  them  against  the  happy  day  when  recruits  should 
be  cheaper,  or  when  a  lucky  windfall  should  deliver  into 
their  hands  poachers  or  other  criminals  who  would  be 
glad  to  serve  in  order  to  escape  the  gaol.^  They 
suffered  a  sad  shock  when  the  Law-Officers  of  the  Crown 
pronounced  in  July  that,  though  the  payment  of  a  fine 
exonerated  an  individual  from  serving  in  person  or  by 
substitute  in  the  Militia  or  Reserve,  it  did  not  exonerate 
the  parish  from  fulfilling  the  vacancy.^  Since  the  price 
of  a  substitute  exceeded  twice  the  amount  of  the  fine, 
this  decision  practically  required  them,  to  put  matters 
crudely,  to  make  one  sovereign  purchase  as  much  as  two. 
But  even  so  their  cup  was  not  yet  full,  for  over  and 
above  three  separate  levies  and  the  voluminous  returns 
required  by  the  first  Defence  Act,  there  fell  upon 
them  in  August  the  heaviest  blow  of  all,  namely,  the 
wholesale  and  unexpected  exemption  fi-om  the  ballot 
of  some  hundreds  of  thousands  of  Volunteers. 