

1803.  remembered  that  flogging  formed  as  essential  a  part  of 
civil  as  of  military  punishment  at  that  period.  The 
officers  of  the  Militia,  especially  in  the  higher  ranks, 
bore  some  of  the  greatest  names  in  England  ;  and  even 
if  occasionally  petty  squires  and  their  sons  were  disposed 
to  be  tyrannical,  there  were  probably  always  men  of 
higher  social  position  in  the  same  battalion  to  keep  them 
in  restraint.  But  when  the  ranks  of  the  Militia  were 
filled  with  men  who,  if  they  had  not  become  substitutes, 
would  have  enlisted  in  the  Army,  the  case  was  completely 
changed.  The  lash  was  absolutely  necessary  for  the 
enforcement  of  discipline;  and  flogging,  though  unknown 
in  some  battalions,  was  certainly  not  unknown  in  others. 
The  waged  class  in  those  days,  it  must  also  be  remem- 
bered, was  far  more  lawless,  violent,  and  reckless  than 
in  these,  and,  unless  subjected  to  some  born  leader  of 
men,  did  not  understand  gentle  measures. 

But,  in  the  writer's  opinion,  the  prevailing  prejudice 
and  contempt  towards  the  Militia,  which  is  as  strong 
to-day  as  it  was  then,  was  only  a  part  of  the  general 
dislike  and  distrust  which  Englishmen  had  for  generations 
been  trained  to  cherish  against  a  Standing  Army.  Before 
the  elder  Pitt  took  the  Militia  in  hand  in  1757,  the 
force  was  popular  but  utterly  useless.  When  it  was 
founded  upon  an  effective  basis  its  popularity  rapidly 
waned  ;  and  when,  after  long  years  of  disuse,  the  ballot 
was  applied  to  it,  it  became  hateful.  The  truth  is  that 
the  ballot  hit  the  class  which  has  always  been  most 
averse  from  military  service,  and  loves  nothing  of  war 
except  its  trappings,  because  it  may  possibly  gain  money 
by  them.  It  was  this  class  that,  by  its  superiority  of 
education  and  its  greater  power  and  facility  of  self- 
protection,  formed  subscription  societies  and  insurance 
companies,  and  made  the  largest  fortunes  by  crimping. 
Its  members,  which  could  have  best  afl?brded  to  pay 
dearly  for  substitutes,  obtained  the  first  call  upon  them 
and  bought  them  at  the  cheapest  rate.  Even  failing  a 
substitute,  the  purchase  of  five  years'  exemption  for  ^^  10, 
which  was  prohibitive  to  a  labouring  man,  was  well 


II  INEQUITY  OF  THE  BURDEN  51 

within  their  means.     Had  the  fine  been  ;Cioo  instead       1803. 
of  ;^io,  the  distribution  of  the  burden  would  have  been 
infinitely  more  equitable. 

Yet  another  cause  which  brought  the  Militia  into 
general  dislike  was  the  principle  of  paying  for  a 
national  object  out  of  strictly  local  taxation.  To  take 
the  simplest  instance  of  its  injustice,  a  battalion  of  Militia 
stationed  in  an  unhealthy  quarter,  or  detailed  for  duty 
in  exposed  situations,  necessarily  suffered  greater  losses 
from  sickness  and  death  than  others  in  more  favourable 
circumstances.  Yet  the  burden  of  making  good  the 
casualties  was  thrown  upon  the  unfortunate  county,  and 
in  that  county  upon  the  unfortunate  parishes,  which  had 
provided  the  dead  or  disabled  men.  And  closely  bound 
up  with  the  inequality  of  this  taxation  was  the  extreme 
crudity  of  the  system  of  exemptions.  To  give  but 
one  example,  any  man  who  had  served  for  four  years 
as  an  officer  in  the  Militia  was  exempt.  But  a  man  who 
had  served  for  twenty  years  in  the  Regular  Army  and 
had,  it  might  be,  sold  his  commission  and  retired  to  the 
country  broken  down  by  wounds  or  disease  after  active 
service  in  pestilent  climates,  was  still  liable  to  enter  the 
ranks,  pay  a  fine,  or  purchase  a  substitute,  provided  that 
he  was,  as  he  very  well  might  be,  under  forty-five  years  of 
age.  There  was  no  point  upon  which  the  Secretary  of 
State  insisted  more  strongly  than  that  neither  officers 
nor  men  who  had  served  in  the  Regular  Army  were, 
or  ever  had  been,  exempt  from  the  Militia  ballot 
solely  on  that  account.^  It  is  easy  to  conceive  of  cases 
in  which  this  decision  was  perfectly  just ;  but  it  is  not 
less  easy  to  see  that  it  might  be  both  unfair  and  oppres- 
sive. Moreover,  it  was  false  policy  to  put  a  soldier, 
who  might  have  given  the  best  years  of  his  life  to  his 
country's  service,  on  the  same  level  with  petty  attorneys 
and  tradesmen,  who  had  never  worked  for  any  interest 
except  their  own,  and  never  intended  to  do  so.     It  was 