

1  I.D.  vol.  xxxvii.  V.L.  Argyll  and  Bute,  to  S.S.  5th  Sept. 
1804;  vol.  xxxix.  V.L.  Berwick,  to  S.S.  lith  Feb.  1804;  vol. 
xl.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  26th  Dec.  1803  ;  vol.  xlvi.  C.G.M. 
Dorset,  to  S.S.  28th  Feb.  1804  ;  vol.  xxii.  Vestry  Clerks  of  Spital- 
fields  to  S.S.  13th  Oct.  1803  ;  vol.  xxiii,  {adjin^  undated,  1804  ;  vol. 
XXV.  C.G.M.  Northumberland,  to  S.S.  25th  Sept.  1803  ;  vol.  xxxii. 
L.L.  Sussex,  to  S.S.  9th  Sept.  1803.     Military  Transactions,  i.  61. 

2  I.D.  vol.  xxxviii.  L.L.  Nairn,  to  S.S.  9th  Feb.  1804. 
^  42  George  III.  cap.  91,  section  58. 

*  I.D.  vol.  xl.  Mr.  Donald  M'Leod  (Ross)  to  S.S.  28th  Feb. 
1804. 

^  Ibid.  vol.  xxix.  L.L.  Staffs,  to  S.S.  12th  Sept.  1803. 


II  LIEUTENANCIES  AND  ARMY  71 

passed  by  the  medical  authorities  of  the  county  1803. 
were  rejected  by  the  doctors  of  the  Army.^  But 
the  most  fruitful  source  of  dispute  lay  in  the  dis- 
crepancies between  the  county  returns  of  the  men 
who  had  been  produced  and  the  regimental  returns  of 
the  men  who  had  been  received.  It  had  been  wisely 
arranged  by  the  Government  to  draft  the  Army  of 
Reserve  into  fifty  battalions,  numbered  as  the  second 
battalions  of  as  many  regiments  of  the  Line  ;  and 
England,  for  the  purposes  of  the  Act,  was  divided  into 
sixteen  districts,  to  each  of  which  sufficient  officers  were 
furnished  to  form  young,  sickly,  or  worn-out  recruits 
into  distinct  Reserve  battalions.  Between  these  two 
separate  sets  of  regular  officers  the  Lieutenancies  some- 
times suffered  severely.  In  innumerable  cases  counties 
were  summoned  to  make  good  deficiencies  in  their 
quota  upon  the  showing  of  the  Inspector-General  of  the 
Reserve,  and  made  answer  by  indignantly  producing 
their  own  figures,  and  showing  that  no  deficiency 
existed. 

Again,  Ministers  had  never  made  any  secret  of 
the  fact  that  they  hoped  by  means  of  bounties  to  pass 
most  of  the  Army  of  Reserve  as  Volunteers  into  the 
Line  ;  and  very  soon  rumours  were  current  that  the 
officers  were  putting  the  largest  clothes  upon  the  smallest 
men,  giving  them  misfitting  shoes,  and  applying  other 
such  methods  of  petty  tyranny  in  order  to  force  them 
to  take  service  at  once  with  the  Regulars.^ 

This,  of  course,  did  not  promote  good-will  between 
the  two  parties,  and  sometimes  an  unfortunate  mistake 
made  the  relations  between  them  very  bitter.  In  Bute 
the  local  battalion  of  the  Army  of  Reserve  reported  one 
man  to  be  wanting,  and  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  held  a 
ballot  to  fill  the  vacancy.  The  lot  fell  upon  a  thrifity 
and  industrious  shepherd  who  had  contrived  to  buy  and 
breed  a  few  sheep  of  his  own.  In  despair  he  sold  all 
that  he  had,  bought  a  substitute  for  £26 ^  and  was  left 