

"Under  section  29  (such  was  the  purport  of  the 
Secretary  of  State's  circular)  provision  is  made  for  the 
training  of  a  certain  number  of  men  in  the  first  instance, 
to  avoid  the  delay  if  all  training  be  deferred  until  the 
returns  of  the  classes  required  by  the  Act  are  made. 
This  proportion  should  be  not  less  than  six  times  the 
number  of  Militia  named  by  the  Militia  Act  of  1802,^ 
exclusive  of  the  Supplementary  Militia  quota.  It  is 
the  decided  opinion  of  Ministers  that  in  all  places  where 
Volunteer  corps  can  be  formed,  upon  such  conditions 
as  the  King  shall  approve,  it  would  be  advisable  to  give 
every  encouragement  for  that  purpose  ;  such  an  arrange- 
ment being  calculated  to  concentrate  the  force,  in  order 
to  promote  the  convenience  of  the  public,  and  to  render 
it  unnecessary  to  have  recourse  to  the  compulsory 
clauses  of  the  Act.  I  need  not  point  out  the  difficulty 
of  issuing   arms  for  the   extensive   training   required 

^  I  can  nowhere  find  this  Circular,  but  I  deduce  its  existence 
and  its  date  from  a  letter  of  L.L.BanfF,  to  S.S.  25th  June,  I.D.  vol.iii. 

2  I  judge  this  from  statements  in  the  Commons'  debates  and  from 
the  Entry  Book,  which  contains  the  letters  as  to  the  offers  of  Volun- 
teers at  this  period  {H.O.M.E.B.  vol.  ciii.)  but  it  is  impossible  to 
say  whether  these  entries  are  complete. 

'  That  number  was,  for  Great  Britain,  51,489;  therefore  the 
number  of  men  to  be  trained  in  the  first  instance  under  the  Levy 
en  Masse  Act  would  be  308,934,  distributed  according  to  the 
quota  of  Militia  in  each  county. 


64  THE  AUGUST  ALLOWANCES        chap. 

1803.  under  the  Act.  I  recommend  an  appeal  to  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  country  to  procure  a  return  of  the  arms  in 
their  possession  in  order  that  they  may  for  a  time  be 
appHed  to  the  service  of  the  country,  and  to  take 
measures  for  distributing  them.  Twenty-five  firelocks 
is  considered  enough  for  the  training  of  one  hundred 
men.  The  information  given  by  these  returns  will  aid 
the  Government  much  in  arranging  for  the  distribution 
of  arms. 

"  The  object  of  the  Act  is  to  obtain  such  a  force,  in 
addition  to  that  which  has  been  already  provided,  as 
may  enable  any  attack  on  the  country  to  be  frustrated, 
and  by  combining  economy  and  vigour  to  continue  the 
contest  as  long  as  may  be  necessary  for  the  honour  and 
security  of  the  empire.  This  communication  is  made 
under  the  impression  of  the  inexpediency  of  establishing 
a  voluntary  force  to  the  extent  now  proposed  upon  the 
allowances  already  transmitted  to  you  [/.<?.  the  June 
Allowances],  and  I  am  persuaded  that  in  the  offers  of 
service  made  to  you  greater  proofs  will  be  afforded  of 
the  liberality  and  public  spirit  which  have  been  so  justly 
excited  by  the  inordinate  ambition  and  avowed  inten- 
tions of  the  enemy." 