

have  been  undiscoverable  had  not  a  Lieutenant  fortunately  sent  his 
own  copy  back  to  the  Home  Office  to  emphasise  his  views  as  to  their 
meaning.  Indeed,  if  a  paper  were  printed  at  that  time,  the  chances 
are  that  not  a  copy  of  it  is  to  be  found.  The  clerks  appear  to  have 
kept  loose  copies  for  their  own  use,  but  only  occasionally  to  have 
stuck  one  into  the  Entry  Book  for  record.  This  is  all  of  a  piece 
with  the  general  slovenliness  of  their  conduct  of  business. 


62  THE  JUNE  ALLOWANCES         chap. 

1803.  men  are  to  receive  pay  at  the  same  rate  as  the  disem- 
bodied Militia  for  two  days  in  every  week  from  the 
25th  of  February  to  the  24th  of  October,  and  for  one 
day  a  week  from  the  25th  of  October  to  the  24th  of 
February,  making  in  all  eighty-five  days'  pay  for  effec- 
tives under  arms  on  each  day. 

(9)  Corps  called  out  to  suppress  riots  will  receive 
pay  as  disembodied  Militia  ;  ^  if  called  out  to  repel 
invasion  they  will  receive  the  same  pay  as  the  Regular 
Army. 

(10)  Clothing  for  infantry  is  to  be  red  ;  for  artillery 
blue  ;  for  rifles,  green  with  black  belts. 

Clothing  Allowances 


For  each  Sergeant 

'     IZ     3     9" 

„        Corporal 

I    12     0 

Once  in 

„        Drummer    . 

•       236 

three  years 

„        Private 

I    10     0 

For  permanent  non-commissioned  officers  the  like 
allowance  will  be  made  annually. 

Allowance  for  Contingencies 

£2^  per  annum  for  every  company  of  fifty  men. 
^5  for  every  ten  men  over. 

(12)  Field  officers  and  Adjutants  will  be  excused  the 
horse  tax  for  one  horse. 

The  proposed  regulations  of  March  had  added  that 
all  officers  and  men  would  be  exempt  from  the  Militia 
Ballot  during  their  period  of  service  ;  but  this  was  a 
matter  already  regulated  by  the  Volunteer  Act  of  1802. 
The  June  Allowances,  in  fact,  were  purely  a  financial 
matter,  which  incidentally  tempted  Volunteers  to  undergo 
training  for  eighty-five  days  in  the  year.  For  their  pur- 
pose they  were  liberal ;  and,  attracted  by  them  and 
stimulated  by  the  First  Defence  Act,  the  Volunteers 
began  to  come  forward  very  rapidly.     It  seems,  how- 

^  Sergeants,  is.  6d.  ;  Corporals,  is.  2d.  ;  Privates,  is.  a  day. 


II    LIMITATION  OF  THE  VOLUNTEERS      63 

ever,  that  early  in  the  day  Ministers  became  alarmed  as  1803. 
to  the  effect  of  the  exemptions  of  Volunteers  upon  the 
ballot  ;  and  that  early  in  June  they  circulated  an  inti- 
mation that  no  further  oifers  of  Volunteers  would  be 
accepted  until  the  ballots  for  the  Supplementary  Militia 
were  ended.-'  Certain  it  is  that,  in  spite  of  the  Govern- 
ment's invitation  to  Volunteers  to  come  forward,  few 
corps  were  accepted  in  June  and  July,^  and  that  there 
were  loud  complaints  that  the  Government  was  damping 
the  ardour  of  the  people.  However,  the  Levy  en  Masse 
Act  was  passed  on  the  27th  of  July,  and  circulated  on 
the  30th,  with  a  letter  which  sought  with  indifferent 
success  to  make  matters  clear. 