


II 


THE  VOLUNTEERS 


75 


of  service,  and  granted  them  exemption  from  the  Militia 
ballot  in  return  for  five  days'  exercise  annually,  together 
with  certain  allowances. 

On  the  31st  of  March  1803  they  called  for  more 
Volunteers,  and  proposed  to  give  them  what  were  after- 
wards known  as  the  June  Allowances. 

Having  called  for  them,  they  became  nervous  lest 
the  exemption  of  a  number  of  Volunteers  should  interfere 
with  the  various  ballots,  and  left  many  of  their  offers 
of  service  unanswered. 

On  the  nth  of  June  they  passed  the  First  Defence 
Act  for  general  training  of  the  people,  and  exempted 
the  Volunteers  from  its  operation. 

A  few  days  later  they  issued  the  June  Allowances, 
which  offered  pay  to  the  men  for  eighty-five  days' 
exercise  in  the  year,  and  required  of  them  an  agreement 
to  serve  within  their  Military  District,  in  return  for  which 
pay  was  granted  to  a  limited  number  of  officers  and  to 
a  permanent  staff.  A  list  of  the  said  Military  Districts 
was  issued  at  the  same  time.^ 


1803. 


^  Scheme  of  Districts  for  Home  Defence  ordered  by  the 
Duke  of  York 


District.  Contents. 

Southern.  Kent,  Surrey,  Sussex  (ex- 
clusive of  London). 

Eastern.  Norfolk,   Suffolk,   Cambs, 

Hants,  Essex. 

London.  (Including  Surrey  within 

the  bills  of  mortality). 

South- West.    Hants,  Wilts,  Dorset. 

Western.  Devon,  Cornwall,  Somer- 

set (exclusive  of  Bristol, 
Bath,  Troubridge,  Ux- 
bridge,  or  other  places 
garrisoned  from  Bristol). 

N.  Western,  Cheshire,  Salop,  Lanes, 
N.  Wales. 

Northern.  Northumberland,  Cumber- 
land, Westmoreland, 
Durham. 

Yorkshire.       Yorkshire,  Lines. 


G.O.C. 
Gen.  Sir  D.  Dundas. 

Lt.-Gen.  Sir  J.  Craig. 

Lt.-Gen.  Gwyn. 

Lt.-Gen.  Gardiner. 
Lt.-Gen.  Simcoe. 


Lt.-Gen.  Prince  William. 
Lt.-Gen.Sir  H.Dalrymple. 

Lt.-Gen.  Lord  Mulgrave. 


76  THE  VOLUNTEERS  chap. 

1803.  While  circulating  these  allowances  the  Secretary  of  State 
announced  that  corps  accepted  after  the  i6th  of  June 
would  not  be  exempt  from  the  ballot  for  the  Army  of 
Reserve.^ 

Ministers  then  again  became  nervous  as  to  the 
expense  of  raising  Volunteers  upon  the  June  Allowances, 
and  delayed  the  acceptance  of  offers  of  service. 

They  then  passed  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act  on  the 
27th  of  July  for  the  compulsory  training  of  all  able- 
bodied  men,  with  a  clause  to  suspend  the  operation  of 
the  measure  if  a  sufficient  proportion  of  Volunteers 
should  be  produced  for  each  county,  which  Volunteers 
should  be  bound  to  serve  in  any  part  of  Great  Britain. 
A  circular  of  the  30th  of  July  directed  that  immediate 
training  should  be  given  to  a  number  of  men  equal  at 
least  to  six  times  the  quota  of  the  Ordinary  Militia. 