

1  E.g.   I.D.  vol.  i.    L.L.  Beds,   to    S.S.   13th    Sept.;    vol.  iv. 
Brecon,  C.  Morgan  to  S.S.  24th  Oct. 


II        NUMBERS  OF  THE  VOLUNTEERS      69 

greatly  dismayed  by  it,  referred  its  interpretation  in  1803. 
despair  to  the  Attorney-General,  who  could  not  but 
pronounce  that  Volunteers  who  fulfilled  the  require- 
ments of  that  Act  were  indeed  exempt  from  the  ballot 
for  the  Army  of  Reserve.  There  was  nothing  for  them 
but  to  give  in,  to  circulate  this  unwelcome  construc- 
tion^ of  their  own  Act  and  submit  to  the  consequences. 
It  may  be  added  that  this  decision  was  by  no  means 
received  with  deference  in  all  quarters.  The  Lieu- 
tenant of  Roxburgh  announced  boldly  that  he  differed 
from  the  Law-Officers;  and  many  magistrates  of  the 
West  Riding  of  Yorkshire  equally  declared  themselves 
unconvinced.  They  could  not  believe  that  the  old 
Volunteers,  who  had  come  forward  from  patriotic 
motives,  were  to  be  put  on  the  same  footing  with  the 
new,  who,  as  the  Lieutenant  put  it,  were  only  Volun- 
teers under  compulsion.^  In  counties  where  there  had 
hitherto  been  hesitation  on  the  part  of  Volunteers  to 
present  themselves,  there  was  now  great  eagerness  to 
form  corps,  for  the  sake  of  the  exemption  ;  and  thus 
the  Government  found  its  scheme  for  the  Volunteers 
legally  defined  in  a  form  which  was  exactly  contrary 
to  its  own  intentions. 

IX 

The  result  of  the  withdrawal  of  some  hundreds  or 
thousands  of  men  from  the  ballot  was  immediate.  By 
December  1803  the  effective  Volunteers  of  all  ranks 
in  Great  Britain  were  returned  at  380,000,  which,  added 
to  70,000  in  Ireland,  made  a  round  total  of  450,000. 

1  The  circular  appears  to  have  been  dated  the  7th  of  October, 
but  the  Lieutenant  of  Roxburgh  was  evidently  aware  of  it  several 
days  earlier,  so  possibly  it  may  have  been  circulated  on  an  earlier 
date.  The  circular  of  7th  October  purports  to  enclose  two  im- 
portant decisions  of  the  Law-Officers ;  but  the  Entry  Clerks,  with 
their  usual  intelligence,  give  no  clue  to  the  nature  and  date  of 
the  enclosures. 

2  I.D.  vol.  xi.  L.L.  Roxburgh,  to  S.S.  28th  Sept.  1803; 
vol.  XXXV.  L.L.  Yorks  W.R.  to  S.S.  2nd  Oct.  1803. 


70  PRICE  OF  SUBSTITUTES  RISES     chap. 

1803.  The  price  of  substitutes  rose  higher  and  higher,  and  their 
quality  sank  lower  and  lower  as  the  autumn  of  1 803  gave 
place  to  the  winter,  and  to  the  spring  of  1 804.  Never- 
theless, the  figure  varied  greatly  in  different  localities.  In 
Aberdeen  the  cost  of  a  substitute  was  ^^20  ;  in  Argyll 
and  Bute  it  was  ^24  ;  in  Berwick  men  were  hardly  to 
be  obtained  on  any  terms.  In  Buckinghamshire  sub- 
stitutes commanded  from  ^^30  to  ^^40  ;  in  Dorset,  £i^\ 
in  Middlesex,  ;^3o  to  ^^60  ;  in  Northumberland  some- 
thing over  £27  i  ^^  Sussex,  £so.  Cases  were  also 
known  where  the  figure  had  reached  £'jOy  ;C8o>  ^^^ 
;^ioo.^  Yet  with  all  this  the  levy  did  not  prosper. 
The  Army  of  Reserve  grew  more  and  more  unpopular, 
insomuch  that  even  in  Scotland  the  Militia,  which  all  the 
while  was  of  course  competing  with  it  for  men,  was 
welcomed  as  a  refuge  from  it.^  To  obtain  recruits  at 
all  in  North  Britain  it  was  necessary  to  violate  the  law  * 
and  to  pay  them  the  entire  bounty  due  to  them,  instead  of 
withholding  one-half  until  they  should  have  joined  their 
battalions.*  In  Staffbrdshire  the  people,  who  had  come 
forward  generally  with  enthusiasm  as  Volunteers,  sus- 
pected the  limitation  of  their  numbers  to  be  due  to  a 
desire  to  complete  the  Army  of  Reserve,  and  declared 
"  that  they  would  sooner  die  on  the  spot  than  submit 
to  it."  ^  Nor  was  the  Army  of  Reserve  distasteful  only 
to  the  people  at  large  ;  it  was  also  intensely  disliked  by 
the  Lieutenancies.  The  principal  reason  for  this  was 
the  friction  to  which  it  gave  rise  with  the  military  authori- 
ties ;    for  not  unfrequently  substitutes  who  had  been 