

^  This  item  does  not  appear  in  the  circular  of  3rd  August,  but 
in  a  later  circular  of  28th  Sept.  1803. 

2  /r.O.  Mi/a.  Books,  S.W.  to  C.G.M.  Argyll,  30th  July  1803 
^  Sir  W.  Yonge's  speech,  14th  Dec.  1803,  H.D.  Commons. 

F 


66  READINESS  TO  VOLUNTEER        chap. 

1803.  probable  that  they  really  aimed  at  increasing  the 
number  of  days  prescribed  by  the  Volunteer  Act  of 
1802  to  qualify  Volunteers  for  exemption  from  the 
Mi/ilia,  znd  that  by  some  mistake  or  conspiracy  the 
term  Army  of  Reserve  was  inserted  in  its  place.  Be 
that  as  it  may,  the  thing  was  done,  and  the  country  had 
to  take  the  consequences. 

Meanwhile,  quite  apart  from  this  particular  question 
of  exemption,  it  may  be  said  that  the  entire  nation  had 
sprung  to  arms,  and  was  anxious  to  form  itself  into 
Volunteer  corps.  Though,  on  the  one  hand,  Volunteer- 
ing brought  with  it  immunity  from  the  Militia  ballot, 
and,  on  the  other,  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act  threatened  to 
drill  every  able-bodied  man  whether  he  liked  it  or  not, 
there  was  much  sound  patriotic  feeling  in  the  movement. 
The  people  were  zealous  to  defend  their  country,  and 
though  they  decidedly  preferred  to  do  so  in  the  way 
which  they  thought  best,  chiefly  because  it  was  easiest, 
yet  they  asked  above  all  for  guidance.  The  Secretary 
of  State  had  called  for  more  Volunteers  in  March,  and 
his  appeal  had  met  with  a  willing  response.  The 
Lieutenants,  seeing  that  the  Government  had  committed 
itself  to  the  policy  of  Volunteers,  backed  it  with  loyal 
energy  and  good-will,  albeit  there  were  not  wanting 
men  among  them  who,  in  their  hearts,  considered  that 
policy  fallacious.  Even  after  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act 
had  been  passed,  they  abated  none  of  their  energy, 
since  Ministers  evidently  wished  the  people  to  come 
forward  of  themselves  without  compulsion.  But  the 
Government,  despite  of  loud  murmurs,  had  checked 
the  patriotic  movement  by  delaying  the  acceptance  of 
offers  during  the  best  part  of  two  months,  and  seemed 
about  to  pin  its  faith  to  the  ballot  ;  and  hence  when 
it  backed  once  more,  like  an  unstable  wind,  to  the 
voluntary  principle,  there  was  a  sigh  of  relief  and  a 
rush  to  be  enrolled.  But  then  came  another  disappoint- 
ment. The  Government  limited  the  number  of  Volun- 
teers, as  has  been  seen,  by  its  circular  of  the  30th  of 
July.     Many  willing  men  who  aspired  to  shoulder  a 


II     LIMITATION  OF  THE  VOLUNTEERS      67 

musket  were  excluded  ;  so  also  were  a  certain  number       1803. 
more  who  had  apprehended  the  meaning  of  the  Billet- 
ing Act ;  and  there  was  a  fresh  cry  of  discontent. 

By  the  1 8  th  of  August  the  War  Office  was  so  heavily 
inundated  with  offers  of  voluntary  service  that  the 
Secretary  of  State  on  that  day  issued  a  circular  to  the 
Lieutenants  suspending  the  compulsory  training  of 
the  classes  under  the  provisions  of  the  53rd  section 
of  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act,  but  insisting  none  the  less 
upon  the  enrolment  of  men  in  the  districts  and  parishes 
and  the  furnishing  of  the  returns  required  by  the  Act. 
Also  he  made  another  effort,  by  a  new  circular  to  the 
Lieutenants,  to  keep  the  numbers  of  the  Volunteers 
within  bounds.  "  The  inconveniences  which  must  un- 
avoidably attend  the  carrying  of  the  Volunteer  system  to 
an  unlimited  extent  has  determined  the  King  at  present 
not  to  authorise  the  formation  of  any  additional  Volun- 
teer corps  to  be  raised  in  any  county  where  the  number 
of  effectives  in  their  corps  (including  the  Yeomanry) 
shall  exceed  the  amount  of  six  times  the  Militia,  ex- 
clusive of  the  Supplementary  quota.  In  providing  that 
number  you  will  use  your  judgment  in  selecting  such 
as  shall  be  best  suited  to  local  considerations  ;  but  if 
the  effective  numbers  of  the  corps  recommended  by 
you  have  arrived  at  the  figure  laid  down  above,  you 
will  postpone  the  communication  of  any  further  offers 
of  service  until  the  King  determines  to  increase  the 
Volunteer  corps  in  your  county." 