

This  last  sentence  hinted  unmistakably  that  the 
June  Allowances  were  to  be  discontinued  for  future 
corps  of  Volunteers  ;  and  a  new  circular  of  the  3rd  of 
August  set  all  doubts  at  rest.  "Although  in  many 
instances  the  persons  forming  new  corps  have  offered 
to  put  the  Government  to  no  expense,  yet  it  could  not 
be  expected,  no  matter  how  great  the  public  spirit  of 
individuals,  that  such  an  arrangement  should  become 
general."  And  therewith  were  promulgated  the  new 
allowances,  known  thenceforth  as  the  August  Allow- 
ances, for  the  Volunteers  accepted  after  the  22  nd  of  June. 

They  were  as  follows  : — 

In  the  case  of  Infantry  ;^  i  a  man  was  to  be  granted 
for  clothing  once  in  three  years,  and  a  shilling  a  day 
per  man  was  to  be  given  for  twenty  days'  exercise  in 
the  year. 


II  EFFECT  OF  BILLETING  ACT  6s 

In  the  case  of  cavalry  ;^I20  a  year,  payable  half-       1803. 
yearly,  was  to  be  allowed  for  every  troop.^ 

This  arrangement,  it  was  added,  was  to  be  final, 
unless  it  could  be  so  altered  as  to  produce  no  increase 
of  expense  to  the  public.  Notice,  therefore,  must  be 
given  to  corps  which  had  tendered  their  services  but 
had  not  been  accepted,  in  order  that  they  might  re- 
consider the  matter  before  renewing  their  offer  under 
altered  conditions. 

Here,  then,  was  another  vast  burden  of  work,  both 
difficult  and  complicated,  laid  upon  the  Lieutenancies, 
a  full  examination  of  which  shall  presently  follow.  But 
within  a  little  more  than  a  week  the  Billeting  Act  was 
passed  which,  it  will  be  remembered,  exempted  all 
Yeomen  who  attended  twelve  days'  exercise,  and  all 
Volunteers  who  attended  twenty-four  days'  exercise  in 
the  year  from  the  ballot  for  the  Army  of  Reserve  and 
for  any  other  Additional  Force  that  might  be  raised  in 
the  future.  How  Ministers  contrived  to  commit  this 
extraordinary  blunder  is  a  mystery.  It  is  certain  from 
sec.  8  of  the  Army  of  Reserve  Act,  and  indeed  from 
their  own  admissions,  that  they  had  no  intention  of 
granting  this  exemption  ;  and  for  some  time  they  would 
not  confess  that  they  had  granted  it.  But  indeed  they 
were  so  ignorant  of  the  effect  of  their  own  enactments 
that  the  Secretary  at  War  actually  thought  that  no 
Volunteers,  saving  those  whose  offer  of  service  had  been 
accepted  before  the  22nd  of  June  1803,  were  exempt 
from  service  in  the  Militia.^  According  to  one 
Member  of  Parliament,  the  clause  which  did  the 
mischief  was  smuggled  through  the  Commons  after 
most  of  the  country  members  had  left  London  in  order 
to  drill  their  Yeomanry  and  Militia  at  home.^  But  the 
insertion  of  the  fatal  words,  however  surreptitious,  can 
hardly   have   been   unknown  to   Ministers.     It  seems 