

Evidently  Ministers  were  terrified  at  the  monster 
which  it  had  called  into  being  ;  and  they  were  not 
encouraged  by  the  fresh  outburst  of  murmurs  which 
greeted  this  new  attempt  to  keep  it  within  reasonable 
limits.  At  this  crisis  the  direction  of  the  Volunteers, 
which,  contrary  to  all  precedent,  had  been  so  far  con- 
ducted by  Lord  Hobart,  the  Secretary  of  State  for  War, 
was  transferred  to  its  old  place,  the  Home  Office,  under 
Mr.  Charles  Yorke.  That  unhappy  man,  confronted 
with  mountains  of  unanswered  letters  containing  offers 
of  Volunteer  corps,  took  perhaps  the  only  course  that 


68  VOLUNTEER  SYSTEM  ANOMALIES  chap. 

1803.      was  open  to  him,  and  issued  another  circular  of  31st 
August  to  settle  matters  once  for  all. 

*'  All  the  offers  are  accepted,"  he  said,  "  provided 
that  they  do  not  militate  against  the  regulations  of  the 
Defence  Act  and  Levy  en  Masse  Act,  or  against  the 
general  rules  adopted  or  to  be  adopted.  The  limit  of 
six  times  the  Militia  must  be  preserved,  but  Volunteers 
exceeding  that  proportion  may  be  attached  to  established 
corps,  though  without  any  allowance  for  pay,  arms,  or 
clothing,  and  without  claim  to  exemption  from  any 
ballot.  Further,  all  corps  accepted  since  the  passing  of 
the  two  Acts  above  named  must  be  formed  with  refer- 
ence to  the  general  Militia  system,  that  is  to  say,  com- 
panies of  infantry  must  be  at  least  sixty,  and  troops  of 
cavalry  at  least  forty  men  strong  ;  and  no  infantry  of 
fewer  than  three  companies,  or  cavalry  of  fewer  than 
two  troops,  will  be  reckoned  a  corps." 

Thus  the  question  was  at  last  decided,  so  far  as 
rules  could  decide  it ;  and  the  country  was  finally 
committed  to  the  maintenance  of  a  huge  amorphous 
mass  of  undisciplined  men,  subject  to  two  different 
Acts  of  Parliament,  two  different  sets  of  regulations, 
and  two  different  spheres  of  service,  namely  the 
Military  District  and  Great  Britain  at  large  ;  the  whole 
of  them  immune  from  the  Militia  ballot  under  one  set 
of  conditions  prescribed  by  the  Militia  Act  of  1802, 
and  from  the  Army  of  Reserve  under  a  second  set 
ordained  by  the  Billeting  Act  of  1803. 

Meanwhile  for  some  weeks  there  was  great  un- 
certainty as  to  the  true  state  of  the  law  respecting 
exemptions.  It  is  demonstrable  that  many  men  knew 
the  purport  of  the  Billeting  Act  long  before  the  Lieu- 
tenants ;  and  Yorke  was  bombarded  with  queries  as  to 
its  legal  bearing  upon  the  question,-^  for  in  all  quarters 
the  Magistrates  held  different  opinions,  and  framed 
their  conduct  of  the  ballot  accordingly.  Ministers, 
alive  by  this  time  to  the  effect  of  the  Billeting  Act,  and 