

1  I.D.  vol.  i.  V.L.  Argyll,  to  S.S.  nth  Sept.  1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  i.  L.L.  Ayr,  to  S.S.  9th  Nov.  1803. 

^  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  L.L.  Berks,  to  S.S.  19th  Sept.  1803  ;  J.  Weyland 
to  S.S.  24th  Oct.  1803. 

*  Ibid.  vol.  iii.  L.L.  Nairn,  to  S.S.  6th  Sept.  1803. 


II  DIFFICULTIES  AS  TO  ARMS  85 

mander  reported  late  in  October  that  he  had  had  11 20  1 803. 
men  enrolled  in  his  two  battalions  for  some  months  but 
had  no  weapons  for  them.^  In  Dumfries,  at  about  the  same 
time,  only  106  firelocks  had  been  supplied  for  1200 
men.2  The  Lieutenant  of  Buckinghamshire  protested 
at  the  end  of  October  that  so  far  the  county  had  not 
received  a  single  musket  or  pike.^  In  Cornwall  the 
Lieutenant,  after  war  had  been  declared  fifteen  months, 
went  near  to  lose  his  temper.  "No  new  corps,"  he 
wrote,  "  will  ever  be  effective  unless  the  Ordnance 
supply  arms.  I  lately  applied  for  some,  and  was  told 
that  Cornwall  had  a  thousand  more  than  she  was 
entitled  to.  If  you  continue  to  accept  corps,  pray 
order  the  Ordnance  to  arm  them,  or  acceptance  is  a 
farce."  *  From  Denbigh,  towards  Christmas  time,  the 
Lieutenant,  having  with  reason  lost  patience,  wrote 
likewise  with  unusual  warmth  :  '*  I  cannot  get  from 
the  Ordnance  a  single  musket,  nor  a  word  as  to  the 
price  that  they  will  allow  to  those  who  provide  themselves 
with  arms.  Unless  something  is  done  soon,  the  Volun- 
teer corps  will  disperse."  ^  In  Derbyshire  the  lack  of 
arms  was  lamented  as  a  grievous  misfortune,^  In 
Durham  the  Lieutenant  took  a  higher  tone  :  "  If  only 
half  the  Volunteer  force  is  to  be  armed,  and  if  that  half 
is  to  depend  on  the  arms  issued  during  the  last  war,  it 
will  damp  the  spirit  and  energy  of  the  people,  who  are 
already  in  some  degree  hurt  and  disgusted  by  all  the 
changes  in  the  arrangements  for  the  Volunteers."  "  .  .  . 
From  Flint,  in  July  1804,  a  gentleman  who  had  offered 
to  raise  and  clothe  a  corps  if  the  Government  would 
arm  it,  reported  that  he  had  been  obliged  to  exceed  his 
contract  and  purchase  weapons  as  well  as  clothes,  and 
would  therefore  be  obliged  by  the  grant  of  the  usual 

1   I.D.  vol.  vi.  Sutherland,  David  Campbell  to  S.S.  2 1st  Oct.  1803. 
2  Ibid.  vol.  xi.  V.L.  Dumfries,  to  S.S.  22nd  Oct.  1803. 

3  ji,jj^  voi_  v.L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  28th  Oct.  1803. 

*  Ibid.  vol.  xliv.  L.L.  Cornwall,  to  S.S.  25th  Oct.  1804. 

5  Ibid.  vol.  ix.   L.L.  Denbigh,  to  S.S.  24th  Dec.  1803. 

*  Ibid.  vol.  ix.  Joshua  Strutt  to  S.S.  17th  Nov.  1803. 

'  Ibid.  vol.  xii.  L.L.  Durham,  to  S.S.  loth  Sept.  1803. 


86  DIFFICULTIES  AS  TO  ARMS      chap. 

1803.  clothing  allowance.^  The  Mayor  of  Bristol  brought 
forward  a  new  difficulty.  He  had  1400  Volunteers 
who,  in  rotation,  were  finding  a  guard  for  French 
prisoners.  There  being  but  500  stand  of  arms  between 
the  1400,  the  muskets  were  necessarily  passed  from 
hand  to  hand,  which  led  to  disputes  as  to  who  should 
keep  them  clean,  and  to  much  discontent.^  In  Hamp- 
shire, a  county  in  which  every  man  should  have  been 
trained,  several  Volunteers  resigned  from  impatience  at 
being  left  without  arms.^  From  Lancashire  the  Lieu- 
tenant, most  loyal  and  zealous  of  men,  week  after 
week  in  vain  repeated  his  remonstrances  against  the 
Ordnance  for  leaving  his  county  unarmed.*  In 
Northumberland  the  Duke  had  raised  and  clothed 
1300  men  at  his  own  expense,  asking  no  allowance  for 
them  but  only  arms  and  belts ;  yet  the  General 
commanding  the  district  reported  that  the  Volunteers 
were  "  likely  in  point  of  discipline  to  be  no  more  than 
a  name,  as  the  greater  number  were  without  any  arms 
whatever."  ^  FromlPembrokeshire  the  Lieutenant  sent 
word  in  September  that  he  had  written  to  the  Ordnance 
repeatedly,  but  had  failed  to  obtain  half  the  arms  neces- 
sary for  his  Volunteers  :  "  Their  zeal  is  cooling,"  he 
added,  "and  I  firmly  believe  that  in  the  course  of 
a  month  the  greater  part  or  the  whole  will  go  to 
the  right  "about."  ^  In  Staffordshire,  as  Lord  G. 
Leveson  Gower  declared  in  debate,  not  a  firelock  had 
been  received  up  to  the  middle  of  December.^  In 
Shropshire,  by  February  1804,  only  600  arms  had  been 
obtained  out]  of  1 300  due  to  the  county  ;  and  it  was 
only  by  general  patriotic  exertion  that  4000  out  of 
5000  Volunteers  were  provided  with  weapons.^    Lastly, 