

1803.  arose  from  the  action  of  the  Lieutenant  himself.  The 
Board  of  Ordnance  sent  590  stand  of  arms,  being  the 
due  number  for  a  quarter  of  the  county's  Volunteers  ; 
but  the  Lieutenant,  who  was  interested  personally  in 
the  First  Regiment,  seized  480  of  them  for  behoof  of  the 
favoured  corps,  and  left  the  rest  to  *'  scramble  as  they 
could  "  for  the  remaining  1 10.^ 

Even  this  did  not  exhaust  the  troubles  that  arose 
from  the  Government's  want  of  foresight  in  the  matter 
of  weapons.  It  was  ordained  by  Act  of  Parliament  that, 
to  gain  their  exemption.  Volunteers  must  appear  at 
exercise  "  properly  armed  and  equipped."  This  of 
course  brought  up  the  question  whether  such  a  regulation 
could  be  enforced  when  the  Government  had  failed  to 
provide  arms.  As  usually  happened,  the  Deputy- Lieu- 
tenants took  different  views  in  different  parts  of  the 
country.  In  Shropshire  they  chose  the  strictly  logical, 
though  very  unfair,  method  of  exempting  the  officers, 
who  of  course  had  provided  themselves  with  swords, 
and  not  exempting  the  men  ;  a  decision  against  which 
the  Colonel  protested  with  justifiable  indignation. 
"  Surely,"  he  wrote,  "  arms  and  clothing  are  not 
necessary,  besides  twenty- four  days'  drill,  to  give 
exemption  ?  "  ^  In  Plymouth  a  Deputy-Lieutenant  like- 
wise tried  to  deny  the  exemption,  but  finding  that  he 
was  rousing  serious  agitation,  and  that  his  colleagues 
in  other  parts  of  the  country  were  divided  in  opinion 
upon  the  subject,  wrote  to  the  Home  Office  to  ask  for 
instructions.^  The  answer  was  given  in  a  Circular  of 
the  23rd  of  November  :  "  It  is  the  opinion  of  the  Law- 
Officers  that  a  commandant  of  Volunteers  cannot  return 
as  effective  men  who  for  want  of  discipline  are  unfit  to 
have  arms  in  their  hands  or  who,  even  from  no  fault  of 
their  own,  have  had  no  opportunity  of  learning  the  use 
of  arms.     Such  men,  therefore,  cannot  be  exempted."* 

^  I.D.  vol.  xvii.  W.  Baker  to  S.S.  24th  Oct.,  loth  Nov.  1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  xxviii.  Lord  Kenyon  to  S.S,  17th  Oct.  1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  X.  Jonathan  Elford  to  S.S.  15th  Nov.  1803. 

*  Circular  of  S.S.  to  L.Ls.  of  counties  where  any  officers  are  on 


II  AVERSION  FROM  PIKES  89 

The  whole  question  was  complicated  by  the  fact  1803. 
that  some  officers,  from  natural  and  proper  un- 
willingness to  use  up  the  whole  of  the  twenty  days' 
drill  without  a  day's  instruction  in  the  use  of  arms, 
reserved  a  certain  number  of  drills  against  the  happy 
moment  when  the  long-expected  weapons  should  be 
delivered.  By  so  doing  they  prevented  their  men  from 
earning  their  exemption  in  time  ;  and  up  came  a  fresh 
crop  of  indignant  letters  to  the  Secretary  of  State. ^ 