

Next,  on  the  3rd  of  August,  were  produced  the  new 
regulations  known  as  the  August  Allowances,  making 
the  third  set  of  such  regulations  issued  within  twelve 
months,  for  the  government  of  the  new  Volunteers  to 
be  created  under  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act. 

Then  on  the  1 1  th  of  August  they  passed  two 
Acts,  the  one  to  cancel  the  rigid  rule  as  to  the  pro- 
portion of  Volunteers  to  be  raised  under  the  Levy  en 
Masse  Act ;  the  other  to  grant  Volunteers  exemption 
from  the  ballot  for  the  Army  of  Reserve,  on  condition 
that  the  infantry  underwent  twenty-four  days'  and  the 
Cavalry  twelve  days'  training  within  the  year. 

Finally,  on  the  31st  of  August  Ministers  accepted  the 


I.  of  Wight.                          ...  Maj.-Gen.  Hewett. 

Severn.              Glos.,  Worcester,    Here-  Lt.-Gen.    the    Duke   of 

ford,      Monmouth,      S.  Cumberland. 

Wales. 

Home.              Middlesex,   Herts,   Berks.  Lt.-Gen.  Lord  Cathcart. 

North  Inland.  Derby,  Notts,  Staffs,  Leic,  Lt.-Gen.  Gardiner. 

Warwick,  Rutland, 

South  Inland.  Beds.,      Oxon,        Bucks,  Lt.-Gen.  Gvvynn. 

Northants. 


^  W.O.  6/193.     Circular  of  20th  June  1803. 


II     DIFFICULTIES  OF  LIEUTENANCIES      77 

offers  of  all  Volunteer  corps,  only  stipulating  that  any       1803. 
men  over  and  above  the  quota  of   six  times  the  old 
Militia  should  be  supernumeraries  and  not  entitled  to 
exemption  of  any  kind. 

It  is  hardly  surprising  that  the  Lord-Lieutenants 
should  have  been  puzzled  by  the  amazing  confusion  of 
these  successive  measures.  "  I  wish,"  wrote  the  Lieu- 
tenant of  Devon,^  plaintively  on  the  29th  of  August, 
•*  that  the  Acts  of  Parliament  and  instructions  framed 
upon  them  were  clearer.  The  general  idea  is  that 
Volunteers  to  any  extent  are  to  be  accepted,  and  there 
is  disappointment  owing  to  the  corps  being  refused. 
Refusals  also  spread  a  false  notion  that  the  danger  is 
abated."  And  this  is  but  one  example  out  of  many. 
Much  trouble  also  was  caused  by  the  carelessness  of  the 
Home  Office  in  omitting  to  forward  copies  of  Acts  of 
Parliament  to  the  Lieutenancies,  but  communicating  them 
to  the  newspapers.  **  I  never  heard,"  wrote  the  Vice- 
Lieutenant  of  the  West  Riding  of  Yorkshire  on  the  2nd 
of  May  1804,  "  of  the  Act  of  27th  July  1803  for  com- 
pleting the  Militia  until  yesterday,  nor  had  another  very 
active  magistrate  of  this  county."  ^  The  Lieutenant  of 
Bedford,  a  peer  of  the  realm,  complained  bitterly  that 
the  Acts  were  not  forwarded  to  him ;  but  he  was  obliged 
to  write  twice  before  he  could  obtain  a  copy  of  the 
Billeting  Act.^  "  Your  last  circular,"  wrote  the  Lieu- 
tenant of  Cornwall,  "  I  read  complete  in  the  Sun  news- 
paper before  I  received  it.  In  the  newspaper  it  was 
dated  the  22  nd  of  September  ;  in  the  official  copy  it 
is  dated  the  28  th."  '^ 