

Complaints  such  as  this  could  hardly  be  passed 
over ;  and  the  Government  presently  receded  once  more, 
granting  in  January  both  adjutants  and  sergeant- 
majors  on  easier  terms,  and  adding  in  February  that 
Volunteers  who  attended  inspections  should  receive  pay 
for  the  same,  provided  such  inspections  did  not  recur 
more  frequently  than  once  in  two  months.  Thus,  under 
the  pretext  of  anxiety  for  frequent  musters  of  Volunteers, 
Government  doled  them  out  pay  for  six  additional  days 
in  the  year.^  These  concessions,  having  been  wrung  from 
Ministers  against  their  will,  were,  of  course,  received  with 
a  growl  instead  of  with  thanks  ;  but  this  was  always  the 
fate  of  Addington  and  his  colleagues.  Having  by  sheer 
ignorance  and  carelessness  called  the  Volunteers  into  being 
on  easy  terms,  they  tried  to  impose  harder  conditions  by 
a  side  wind,  and  were  invariably  beaten  in  the  attempt. 

XI 

The  most  serious  trouble  of  all  arose  out  of  the 
lack  of  arms.  Colonel  Vyse,  it  will  be  remembered, 
had  particularly  cautioned   Ministers  against   creating 

^  I.D.  vol.  xxvii.  Sir  John  Murray  to  S.S.  14th  Dec.  1803. 
2  Circular  of  1 5th  Jan.  1804. 


84  DIFFICULTIES  AS  TO  ARMS         chap. 

1803.  corps  which  they  could  not  arm  ;  but  they  boldly 
enrolled  hundreds  of  thousands  of  men  on  the  under- 
standing that  twenty-five  muskets  for  every  hundred  men 
would  be  sufficient  for  purposes  of  instruction,  and  that 
pikes  would  be  cheerfully  accepted  by  the  remaining 
seventy-five.  Never  were  the  authorities  more  pitifully 
deceived.  It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  the  clerks 
in  Downing  Street  were  extremely  casual  as  to  the  gazet- 
ting of  officers  ;  and  as  no  corps  could  receive  arms  until 
gazetted,  this  formed  an  initial  source  of  discontent. 
There  was  one  case  of  twenty-four  companies,  which 
were  offered  in  May,  accepted  in  June,  and  still  waiting 
to  be  gazetted  in  September.^  But  the  majority  of  the 
complaints  upon  this  head  arose  from  actual  failure  in  the 
supply  of  arms.  Such  complaints  are  very  numerous, 
but  the  selection  of  a  certain  number  will  show  how 
serious  would  have  been  the  danger  of  an  invasion,  had 
Napoleon  attempted  it  in  the  autumn  of  1803.  From 
Ayr  it  was  reported  in  November  that  many  of  the 
Volunteer  corps  were  still  incomplete,  want  of  arms 
having  checked  the  spirit  of  the  people.^  The  Lieu- 
tenant of  Berkshire  asked  plaintively  how  he  was  to 
distribute  603  muskets  among  2763  men  ;  and  one  of  his 
commanders  complained  in  October  that  his  men  had  been 
clothed  and  drilled  for  weeks,  but  that  unless  weapons 
were  given  to  them  at  once  they  would  learn  nothing 
about  them  till  next  summer,^  From  Nairn  came  in 
September  a  wail  that  was  distressing.  "  The  situation 
of  the  North  of  Scotland  is  truly  deplorable,  left  with- 
out arms  of  any  description.  .  .  .  All  efforts  to  get  arms 
for  the  Volunteers  so  far  useless.  .  .  .  Not  a  man  in 
arms  (though  many  are  willing)  to  north  of  Aberdeen, 
except  two  companies  at  Elgin.  .  .  .  We  are  all  at  the 
mercy  of  any  petty  privateer."  *    From  Sutherland  a  com- 