

The  Government  feebly  endeavoured  to  right  itself 
by  averring  that  pikes  to  any  number  would  be  fur- 
nished, if  only  officers  would  apply  for  them.  But  the 
Volunteers  would  not  be  content  with  pikes.  In  Scot- 
land the  people  entertained  not  only  material  but  senti- 
mental objections  to  them  ;  the  weapon  of  rebel  Ireland 
being  in  their  judgment  unfit  for  a  loyal  Scot.**  In 
Flintshire  the  Volunteers  would  hardly  take  pikes  into 
their  hands,  except  on  the  assurance  that  they  would 
be  speedily  exchanged  for  muskets.^  The  Duke  of 
Richmond,  a  soldier  of  experience,  declined  to  receive 
pikes  for  the  Volunteers  of  Sussex,  declaring  them  to 
be  useless  except  in  the  hands  of  perfectly  trained  men 
and  yet  capable  of  being  turned  to  dangerous  account 
by  a  mob.*  In  Berkshire  one  officer  concentrated  his 
objections  to  the  weapon  into  a  single  enthymeme. 
"  The  pikes  issued  by  the  Ordnance  are  eight  feet  long  ; 
the  French  ones  taken  last  week  were  thirteen  feet  long ; 
therefore  an  English  regiment  so  armed  could  not 
attack  and  beat  a  French  one."*  Finally,  in  Somerset 
a  Major  of  Volunteers,  who  disliked  pikes  as  much  as 
did  his  men,  gave  his  company  orders  to  leave  their 
pikes   at   home   when  they  came  to  drill,  and  being 

permanent  duty.     The  hardship  was  redressed,  as  shall  presently 
be  seen,  at  the  first  possible  moment  by  Act  of  Parliament. 

1  I.D.  vol.  V.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  6th  Nov.  1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  iii.  L.L.  Inverness,  to  S.S.  loth  March  1804  ;   vol, 
viii.  L.L.  Kinross,  to  S.S.  i6th  Sept.  1803. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  xiv.  L.L.  Flint,  to  S.S.  7th  Nov.  1803. 

*  Ibid.  vol.  xxxii.  L.L.  Sussex,  to  S.S.  23rd  Aug.  1803. 
5  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  Sir  I.  Pocock  to  S.S.  i6th  Nov.  1803. 


90  VOLUNTEERS  IN  SCOTLAND      chap. 

1803.  rebuked  by  his  Colonel,  resigned  his  commission.^ 
Such  were  the  consequences  of  neglecting  the  advice, 
deliberately  sought,  of  an  experienced  officer  like 
Colonel  Vyse. 

XII 

Passing  from  these  lengthy,  though  preliminary, 
details  as  to  the  administrative  difficulties  which  were 
thrown  in  the  way  of  the  Volunteers,  let  us  now 
examine  more  closely  their  composition  and  their 
discipline.  And  first  let  us  make  a  brief  survey  of 
Britain,  noting  the  quarters  in  which  the  patriotic  spirit 
was  lively  or  the  reverse. 

It  must  be  premised  that  among  the  Volunteers 
were  certain  corps  in  various  parts  of  the  country  who, 
upon  enrolment,  expressly  disclaimed  their  title  to  any 
exemptions  whatever.  They  numbered  in  all  about 
7000  men,^  of  which  the  city  of  Edinburgh  furnished 
1 162,  the  county  of  Devon  S77,  and  the  city  of 
Westminster  508.  The  remaining  counties  and  cities 
furnished  only  small  contingents  to  this  body  of  really 
self-denying  men,  whose  public  spirit  is  worthy  of 
record. 