

^  selves  to  another  regiment  on  the  June  Allowances.    The 

distinction  between  the  two  conditions  was  felt  the 
more  acutely  because  in  many  instances  volunteers  had 
sent  in  their  offers  of  service  in  good  time  to  be 
accepted  before  the  22nd  of  June,  but,  receiving  no 
answer  until  after  that  day,  were  reduced  to  the  level  of 
men  who  had  only  become  Volunteers  under  pressure  of 
the  Levy  en  Masse  Act.  This  trick,  for  it  cannot  be 
dignified  by  a  higher  name,  was  very  much  resented  ; 
and  it  need  hardly  be  added  that  the  burden  of  making 
good  the  shortcomings  of  the  Government  fell  upon  a 
few  patriotic  gentlemen.  One  such,  who  had  raised 
two  companies  in  Gloucestershire,  counting  upon  the 
June  Allowances,  and  had  already  spent  ^^  7  a  man  in 
clothing,  equipping,  and  arming  them,  found  himself 
saddled  with  a  further  expense  of  ^^  1 00  for  the  pur- 
chase of  substitutes  for  some  of  his  men.  The  Duke 
of  Atholl  wrote  that  the  pernicious  results  of  two  con- 
current rates  of  allowance  could  only  be  averted  in 
Perthshire  by  private  subscriptions,  which  would  raise 
the  August  Allowances  to  the  level  of  the  June  Allow- 
ances. He  reckoned  the  cost  to  himself  and  his  col- 
leagues at  j^  1 0,000  annually,  and  added  that  in  many 
instances  landlords  would  have  to  pay  more  than  their 
annual  rental.  *'  Had  the  August  Allowances  been  the 
only  allowances,"  he  wrote,  '*  we  might  have  carried  the 
measure  into  effect,  though  so  small  proportion  of  dis- 
cipline [twenty  days'  exercise]  would  have  formed  little 
better  than  an  armed  rabble  ;  but  to  call  on  them  [the 
recipients  of  August  Allowances]  for  more  extensive 
service  [in  any  part  of  Great  Britain]  when  the  June 
Volunteers  were  called  on  for  service  in  the  district  only, 


II      CONFLICTING  VOLUNTEER  ACTS        8i 

makes  it  impossible."  However,  the  Duke  called  a  1803. 
meeting  to  collect  subscriptions  ;  and  by  the  generosity 
of  himself  and  of  his  brother  landlords  the  full  proportion 
of  Volunteers  for  the  county  was  completed.  None  the 
less  it  was  iniquitous  that  these  gentlemen  should  have 
been  subjected  to  an  extraordinary  tax,  simply  to  make 
good  the  mismanagement  of  the  Government.^ 

Another  miserable  complication  was  that  no  one  knew 
whether  Volunteers  receiving  the  August  Allowances 
were  governed  wholly  by  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act,  or  in 
part  also  by  the  Volunteer  Act  of  1802.  Under  the 
Volunteer  Act  all  claims  for  exemption  from  the  ballot 
had  to  be  furnished  by  the  21st  of  September  in  every 
year,  so  that  the  days  of  exercise  necessary  to  qualify 
for  exemption  had  to  be  accomplished  before  that  day. 
The  magistrates  in  various  parts,  possibly  indeed  in  the 
whole  of  England,  very  naturally  and  sensibly  took  the 
Volunteer  Act  of  1 802  as  their  principal  guide  in  dealing 
with  that  particular  force  ;  and  finding  that  few  of  the 
new  corps  had  performed  the  necessary  number  of  drills, 
promptly  declined  to  allow  them  exemption.  The  case 
was  hard,  because  the  Government  had  so  long  delayed 
the  acceptance  of  Volunteers,  and  the  clerks,  moreover, 
were  so  dilatory  in  giving  them  official  recognition  in  the 
GazettCy  that  many  corps,  with  the  best  of  good  will, 
could  not  possibly  have  fulfilled  the  necessary  days  of 
training.  They  went  out,  however,  as  often  as  they 
could  ;  and  their  commanders  appealed  to  the  Secretary 
of  State  to  be  indulgent.  In  Surrey  the  magistrates, 
perceiving  the  hardships  that  might  be  involved  in  the 
question,  suspended  the  ballot  until  all  doubts  should  be 
resolved  by  the  Law-Officers,  lest  men  who  had  really 
earned  their  exemption  should  be  drawn.  The  Secretary 
of  State's  answer,  however,  was  short — he  could  not 
interfere  with  the  working  of  Acts  of  Parliament — and 
there  arose  new  causes  of  discontent  among  the  Volun- 