

^  I.D.  vol.  XV.  Gloucestershire,  Capt.  Bricknell  to  S.S.  27th 
Feb.  1804;  vol.  xxvii.  L.L.  Perth,  to  S.S.  14th,  27th  Aug.,  8th 
Oct.  1803. 

G 


82  DIFFICULTIES  AS  TO  EXEMPTIONS  chap. 

1803.      teers,  and    new    confusion    as    to    the    enactments   by 
which  they  were  governed.^ 

Yet  another  trouble  arose  from  the  action  of  the 
Government  in  combining  the  requirements  of  the  June 
with  the  pay  of  the  August  Allowances.  The  new  Volun- 
teers of  course  needed  adjutants  and  sergeant-majors  as 
much  as  the  old,  but  were  informed  first  that  no  pay  would 
be  allowed  for  a  permanent  staff,  except  in  very  special 
circumstances,  in  corps  raised  after  the  3rd  of  August.2 
This  position  proving  untenable,  Ministers  in  November 
offered  pay  for  an  adjutant  to  every  infantry  corps  of 
500,  and  every  cavalry  corps  of  300  ;  for  a  sergeant- 
major  to  every  infantry  corps  of  200,  and  every  cavalry 
corps  of  120  ;  and  both  adjutant  and  sergeant-major  to 
every  infantry  corps  of  1000  and  every  cavalry  corps 
of  600  effective  rank  and  file,  provided  that  they  agreed 
to  undergo  eighty-five  days'  exercise  in  the  year.  This 
roused  much  indignation  in  the  parties  concerned,  for 
whereas  the  corps  under  the  June  Allowances  received 
pay  for  the  whole  of  the  eighty-five  days,  those  under 
the  August  Allowances  received  pay  for  but  twenty. 
The  theory  seems  to  have  been  that  fifty-two  out  of 
the  eighty-five  drills  were  to  be  held  on  Sundays,  on 
which  day  no  man  received  wages  ;  that  twenty  days' 
payment  made  up  the  fifty-two  to  seventy-two,  and 
that  each  corps  must  make  its  own  shift  to  eke  out  the 
remaining  thirteen  days,  or,  in  other  words,  must  be  in- 
demnified by  the  officers.  The  complaints  against  such 
treatment  were  bitter,  especially  in  Scotland.  "  We 
enlisted  our  Volunteers  for  twenty  days'  drill,"  wrote 
Lord  Dalkeith  ;  "  we  cannot  now  call  on  them  for 
sixty-five  days  more  ;  and  yet  on  that  account  we  must 
lose  our  adjutant."  ^  The  Secretary  of  State  then  fell 
back  on  the  excuse  that  twenty  days*  pay  was  enough 
for  eighty-five  days'   drill  of  only  two  hours  a  day. 

^  I.D.  vol.  iv.  Brecon,  Charles  Morgan  of  Tredegar  to  S.S.  24.1!! 
Oct.  ;  vol.  xviii.  Kent,  Capt.  Powis  to  S.S.  25th  Nov.;  vol.xxxi.  V.L. 
Surrey,  to  S.S.  8th  Dec.  1803.  2  Circular  of  28th  Sept. 

3  J  D  yoi^  y.\   L  L_  Dumfries,  to  S.S.  3rd  Nov.  1803. 


II  CONCESSIONS  TO  VOLUNTEERS        83 

"But  this,"  wrote  Sir  John  Murray,  from  Perthshire,  1803. 
*'  makes  no  allowance  for  time  consumed  in  dressing 
and  coming  to  parade,  in  these  parts  often  six  or  eight 
miles.  Moreover,  two  hours  a  day  is  not  training 
enough  for  recruits.  Men  cannot  be  disciplined  as 
soldiers  in  1 70  hours,  much  less  in  40  hours.  Again, 
it  is  urged  that  the  men  have  the  advantage  of  clothing. 
This  is  no  advantage.  The  men  have  only  the  trouble 
of  cleaning  it,  and  the  Government  pays  not  one-third 
of  the  cost.  .  .  .  The  eighty-five  days'  drill  was 
claimed  in  return  for  the  use  of  an  adjutant,  as  if  it 
were  a  personal  advantage  to  the  Volunteers.  But  the 
Government  will  not  get  the  value  even  of  its  trifling 
twenty  shillings  [twenty  days'  pay  for  one  man]  unless 
it  provides  proper  instructors."^ 