

1  /.Z>.  vol.  iv.  L.L.  Brecon  and  Monmouth,  to  S.S.  2nd  Jan.  1804. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  vi.  Cambridge,  Owen  Gray  to  S.S.   30th  July  1803. 
8  Ibid.  vol.  xviii.  Kent,  Regulations  dated  24th  July  1803. 

^  Ibid.  vol.  xxxi.  Surrey,  21st  July  and  ist  Aug.  1803. 

H 


98  PERMANENT  DUTY  chap. 

1803.  efficiency,  such  was  not  the  case  when  the  direction 
of  affairs  lay  in  the  hands  of  the  great  middle  class, 
which,  with  all  its  merits  and  all  its  virtues,  seems 
unable  to  crush  down  its  imperious  instinct  to  give 
nothing  without  expecting  something  in  return.  Under 
its  guidance  the  associations  broke  down  in  all  direc- 
tions, and  there  was  not  only  insubordination  but 
occasionally  sheer  chaos. 

To  understand  the  story  thoroughly  it  is  necessary 
briefly  to  mention  a  further  proceeding  of  the  Govern- 
ment towards  the  Volunteers  in  1803,  after  its  decision 
to  accept  the  whole  of  the  corps  that  had  been  offered. 
Its  first  step  was,  in  the  circumstances,  eminently  wise 
and  prudent.  Napoleon's  preparations,  though  as  a 
matter  of  fact  hopelessly  backward  and  misdirected, 
were  reported  to  be  far  advanced  ;  and  there  was  reason 
to  fear  that  the  local  forces  in  the  maritime  counties 
might  at  any  time  during  the  winter  be  called  into  the 
field.  Preference  had  rightly  been  given  to  these 
counties  in  the  distribution  of  arms ;  and  early  in 
October  Ministers  determined  to  invite  such  corps  in 
England  as  were  ready  and  willing  to  come  out  on 
permanent  pay  and  duty  within  their  own  counties  and 
districts.  The  defence  of  Newcastle  in  particular  was 
recommended  for  special  attention,  and  the  Lieutenant 
was  asked  to  ascertain  if  any  of  the  corps  within  reason- 
able distance  of  that  city  were  prepared  to  assemble 
there,  relieving  each  other  successively  either  in  fractions 
or  as  complete  battalions  after  a  fortnight's  duty.  "  The 
King,"  added  the  Circular,  "  can  invite  the  Volunteers  to 
do  so ;  he  cannot  compel  th.Qm  except  in  case  of  invasion,  or 
appearance  of  invasion  on  the  coast."  -^  The  response 
to  the  invitation  was  for  the  most  part  hearty  ;  and  in 
the  winter  of  1803  the  Volunteers  had  a  chance  of 
showing  their  quality. 

The  signs  of  indiscipline  in  that  year  were  relatively 
unimportant,  though  they  brought  into  glaring  relief  the 
defects  of  the  Government's  measures.     Thus,  under  the 

1  Circular  to  L.Ls.  12th  Oct.  1803. 


II        INDISCIPLINE  OF  VOLUNTEERS  99 

Levy  en  Masse  Act,  provision  had  been  made  for  fining  1803. 
men  who  neglected  to  attend  their  drills,  but  none  for 
imprisoning  them  in  default  of  payment.  The  result 
was  that  early  in  the  day  a  Volunteer  in  Hampshire 
attended  the  first  day's  drill,  for  which  his  Commanding 
Officer  had  provided  a  dinner,  and  refused  to  come  out 
again.  He  was  fined  to  the  extent  of  thirty-six  shillings, 
but,  having  no  property,snapped  his  fingers  at  the  penalty 
and  remained  master  of  the  situation.^  The  Lieutenant 
of  Gloucestershire  was  confronted  with  exactly  the  same 
difficulty,  and  complained  that  men  with  no  property 
to  distrain  upon  were  uncontrollable.  "A  force,"  he 
said,  *'  which  depends  upon  the  good-humour  of  several 
hundred  illiterate  persons  cannot  last  long."  ^  The 
other  cases  recorded  in  1 803  seem  to  have  arisen  out  of 
the  changes  which  distinguished  the  system  initiated  in 
1802  from  that  which  obtained  between  1794  and  1801. 
In  Devon  during  the  month  of  July  a  battalion  refused  to 
work,  except  in  separate  companies  under  sergeants  of 
their  own  election,  as  in  the  last  war.  They  repented 
very  speedily,  for  the  Lieutenant  disbanded  them  on  the 
spot,  and  swept  every  man  into  the  ballot  for  the  Army 
of  Reserve  ;  but  this  salutary  example  was  of  course 
unknown  except  in  the  immediate  district,  and  insubordi- 
nation was  not  always  so  well-timed  as  to  bring  on  itself 
immediate  punishment.^  In  another  case,  in  Hereford- 
shire, it  was  the  officers  who  showed  a  mutinous  spirit  ; 
a  number  of  subalterns  protesting  very  discourteously  to 
the  Vice-Lieutenant  against  the  action  of  the  Command- 
ing Officer  who  had  recommended  a  stranger  to  be  his 
Major,  instead  of  allowing  promotion  to  go  by  seniority 
within  the  battalion.  The  real  grievance  was  that  the 
Colonel  had  hitherto  consulted  his  officers  before  making 
any  such  appointments,  and  on  this  occasion  had  omitted 
to  do  so.     The  Vice-Lieutenant,  instead  of  ordering  the 