

1  I.D.  vol.  viii.  Cornwall  (misplaced  letter),  Lawrence  Reynolds 
toV.L.  Hants,  13th  Nov.  1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  1.  L.L.  Gloucester,  to  S.S.  15th  Jan.  1804. 
8  Ibid.  vol.  X.  L.L.  Devon,  to  S.S.  i6th  July  1803. 


loo  VOLUNTEERS'  RIGHT  TO  RESIGN  chap. 

1803.  subalterns  to  withdraw  their  letter,  under  pain  of  instant 
dismissal,  forwarded  it  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  who 
likewise  contented  himself  with  rebuking  the  writers 
severely.  Thereupon  twelve  officers  of  the  corps 
resigned  on  the  spot,  and  doubtless  made  the  county  ring 
with  the  fame  of  their  spirited  behaviour.^  In  yet  another 
case  a  sergeant  of  Volunteers  refused  to  collect  the  fines 
imposed  on  privates  by  the  rules  of  the  corps,  abused  his 
officers,  and  even  threatened  them  with  his  pike.  He 
was  brought  up  before  a  Justice  and  fined  five  shillings 
in  pursuance  of  the  Act ;  after  which  he  calmly  sent  in 
his  kit  and  retired  into  private  life.^  "  Discipline  will 
be  injured  if  every  discontented  man  can  thus  discharge 
himself,"  commented  the  writer  of  this  memorandum  ; 
and  his  opinion  was  shared  by  many  other  officers. 

There  was,  indeed,  a  sharp  controversy  as  to  this  same 
right  of  Volunteers  to  quit  the  service  at  their  pleasure 
before  the  conclusion  of  peace,  which,  until  decided,  led 
to  much  trouble.  The  question  was  one  which  had  not 
been  anticipated  by  Ministers,  otherwise  they  would 
undoubtedly  have  settled  it  by  Act  of  Parliament,  and 
settled  it,  moreover,  in  the  negative.  They  referred  it, 
however,  to  the  Law-Officers  of  the  Crown,  Spencer 
Perceval  and  Manners-Sutton,  who  decided  against  the 
right  of  resignation.  "  If,"  said  Perceval  afterwards  in 
the  House  of  Commons,  "  Volunteers  enter  into  an 
engagement,  as  undoubtedly  they  do,  they  ought  not  to 
be  able  to  renounce  it  at  all  times  except  at  the  period  of 
actual  invasion."  ^  This,  on  the  face  of  it,  appeared  to  be 
common  sense  ;  and  the  opinion  was  at  once  circulated  * 
to  the  Lieutenants  without  a  doubt  that  it  would  be 
final.  But  a  champion  of  the  right  of  resignation 
arose  in  the  person  of  Thomas  Erskine,  the  future 
Chancellor,  who  being  at  the  time  Colonel  of  the  Law 

1  I.D.  vol.  1.  V.L.  Hereford,   to    S.S.  28th   Jan.;  Colonel    J.. 
Matthews  to  S.S.  6th  April  1804. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  xviii.  Kent,  Memo,  of  27th  Dec.  1803. 

3  H.D.  Perceval's  speech,  8th  Feb.  1804. 
*  Circular  of  7th  Oct.  1803. 


II        VOLUNTEERS'  RIGHT  TO  RESIGN     loi 

Association  Volunteers,  or  "  Devil's  Own,"  immediately  1803. 
took  the  field  against  the  Law-Officers,  and  in  a  public 
letter  to  the  newspapers  upheld  precisely  the  opposite 
contention.  This  letter,  with  marvellous  rapidity,  made 
its  way  all  over  England,  and  put  new  heart  into  the 
insubordinate.  In  Devon  it  caused  great  agitation  ; 
and  in  two  different  corps  men  who  under  their  regi- 
mental rules  had  been  summoned  for  absenting  them- 
selves from  exercise,  pleaded  that  they  meant  to  resign. 
In  Yorkshire  likewise  Erskine's  flowery  speeches  and 
letters  were  read  with  avidity,  so  pleased  were  the 
Volunteers  to  find  yet  one  more  opening  for  the  evasion 
of  discipline.^  Meanwhile,  however,  the  Secretary  of 
State's  faith  in  the  Law-Officers  was  beginning  to  totter  ; 
and  he  actually  wrote  to  one  of  the  Devonian  com- 
mandants that  he  had  better  allow  all  men  who  did  not 
choose  to  stay  in  his  corps  to  go  about  their  business, 
"  If  there  are  not  Volunteers  enough,  the  classes  will  be 
called  up,"  he  added,  doubtless  wishing  in  vain  that  he 
had  never  allowed  the  nation  to  be  trained  to  arms  at  all 
except  under  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act.  But  it  was  too 
late.  The  question  was  presently  brought  before  the 
Court  of  King's  Bench,  which  decided  that  Volunteers 
had  undoubtedly  the  right  in  law  to  resign  whenever 
they  chose,  though  not  to  the  prejudice  of  regimental 
regulations  to  the  contrary. 