

Speaking  generally,  Scotland  responded  remarkably 
well  to  the  call  for  Volunteers,  the  unpopularity  of 
the  Militia  making  this  alternative  service  extremely 
welcome.  In  Aberdeen  by  the  beginning  of  September 
12,000  men  had  offered  themselves  against  a  quota  of 
3840 ;  in  Bute  598  men  came  forward  to  fill  366 
places  ;  in  Berwick  there  were  almost  immediately  1350 
offers  to  fill  a  quota  of  930  ;  at  Haddington  the  figures 
were  1500  and  634.  So  too  Kinross  covered  her  quota 
of  Volunteers  three  times  over  within  August  and  Sep- 
tember ;  Dumfries  immediately  offered  more  than  twice 
the  number  required  from  her,  and  Edinburgh,  by  the 
first  week  in  August,  also  had  more  than  double  her 

1   I.D.  vol.  XXX.  L.L.  Somerset,  to  S.S.  13th  Nov.  1803. 
'  The  return  shows  6620,  but  it  is  admitted  to  be  incomplete. 
I.D.  vol.  Ixviii.  Miscellaneous,  31st  March  1804. 


II  VOLUNTEERS  IN  SCOTLAND  91 

quota  on  foot  and  effective.  In  Argyll  more  than  half  1803. 
the  quota  was  already  enrolled  in  June  ;  Banff  supplied 
nearly  its  full  contingent  before  the  introduction  of  the 
Levy  en  Masse  Act ;  Elgin  in  the  same  time  had 
furnished  480  out  of  the  780  assigned  to  her,  and 
Inverness  2540  out  of  3320.  Dumbarton  produced 
two-thirds  of  her  men  in  May  and  June,  and  had  small 
difficulty  in  enrolling  the  rest;  Fife,  Forfar,  and  Kincardine 
could  show  half,  or  more  than  half,  of  their  respective 
quotas  early  in  June.  In  Ayr  voluntary  enrolment  soon 
exceeded  the  demands  of  the  Government ;  though  certain 
parishes  stood  aloof,  and  a  few  positively  refused  any 
service.  Ross  also  found  few  men  before  the  Levy  en 
Masse  Act  compelled  her  to  do  so,  and  in  Stirling 
there  was  less  forwardness  than  usual,  some  difficulty 
being  found  in  raising  the  allotted  number  before 
the  end  of  October.  In  Linlithgow  two-thirds  of 
the  quota  had  been  enrolled  before  the  26th  of  July; 
and  Nairn,  Caithness,  Peebles,  Cromarty,  and  Suther- 
land had  furnished  their  full  contingent  before  the  end 
of  June.  So  it  was  also  in  Selkirk  and  in  Roxburgh, 
even  though  the  Lieutenant  gave  preference  to  the 
men  who  were  less  likely  to  be  drawn  for  the  Army  of 
Reserve.  In  Clackmannan  no  corps  were  accepted  until 
September,  but  on  the  other  hand  the  whole  contingent 
was  self-supporting,  receiving  no  allowance  whatever 
from  Government.  Lanark  added  300  Supernumeraries 
to  the  4473  privates  which  were  due  from  her.  The 
difficulties  in  Perth  have  already  been  mentioned,  but 
they  did  not  prevent  her  from  doing  even  more  than 
her  duty,  half  of  her  Volunteers  having  come  forward 
in  time  to  receive  the  June  Allowances.  Lastly,  Renfrew 
had  over  four  thousand  offers  from  which  to  choose 
her  quota  of  2424.  Altogether  the  record  would  be 
creditable  to  North  Britain,  were  we  not  compelled 
to  bear  in  mind  that  she  was  extremely  backward  in 
producing  any  Militia.^ 