

1  I.D.  vol.  V.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  31st  July,  6th  Oct.    1803  ; 
vol.  xxi.  Lt.-Gov.  of  Man  to  S.S.  26th  April  1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  xxxiii.  L.L.  Warwick,  to  S.S.  12th,  22nd,  25th  Aug. 
1803. 

3  Ibid,  vol.  xxviii.  Salop,  J.  Kynaston  Powell  to  S.S.  17th  July 
1803. 


II         COMPOSITION  OF  VOLUNTEERS        95 

The  careful  publication  of  this  clause  was  of  course  the  »8o3. 
work  of  mischief-makers  ;  and  one  of  the  Deputy-Lieu- 
tenants drafted  a  short  bill  to  declare  such  rules  of 
such  Societies  to  be  null  and  void.  But  it  would  need 
a  very  long  bill  to  guard  against  all  the  contrivances 
imaginable  by  men  who  wish  to  shirk  their  duty  towards 
their  country. 

I  pass  next  to  the  composition  of  the  Volunteer 
corps.  This  of  course  varied  greatly  according  to 
locality.  When  powerful  magnates,  such  as  the  Duke  of 
Northumberland  or  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  enrolled  their 
tenants  into  one  or  more  corps  and  provided  them  with 
everything  but  arms,  the  procedure  was  simple.  The 
great  man  summoned  his  people,  and  called  upon  all 
who  were  able  and  willing  to  take  service  with  him  for 
the  King,  under  command  of  himself  or  of  one  of  his 
family.  Such  a  lead  was  readily  followed,  feudal 
feeling  and  the  example  of  the  landlord  being  sufficiently 
strong  to  rally  every  able-bodied  man  on  the  estate  to 
the  ranks.  Lesser  magnates  in  like  fashion  formed 
their  tenants  into  troops,  companies,  and  squadrons,  and 
sometimes  (but  by  no  means  always)  amalgamated  them 
under  the  command  of  one  of  themselves  into  regiments 
or  battalions.  From  the  relative  position  of  officers 
and  privates  in  these  corps,  there  was  comparatively 
little  difficulty  in  enforcing  discipline.  In  the  first 
place  the  men  were  often  of  superior  station  and  intelli- 
gence. In  the  second  every  one  of  them  wished  to 
stand  well  with  his  landlord  ;  and  even  if  the  landlord 
refrained  from  using  the  enormous  powers  which  he 
then  enjoyed  over  his  tenant,  yet  expulsion  and  liability 
to  be  ballotted  as  a  Militiaman,  meaning  as  they  did  not 
only  personal  inconvenience  but  social  degradation, 
were  sufficient  deterrents  from  insubordination. 

But  in  cases  where  no  individual's  station  marked  him 
out  from  among  his  fellows  as  the  natural  leader,  and  most 
notably  in  the  towns,  the  proceedings  were  uniformly  as 
follows  : — A  meeting  of  the  citizens  or  parishioners  was 
summoned,  an  individual  was  called  to  the  chair,  and 


96  VOLUNTEER  ASSOCIATIONS        chap. 

1803.  after  a  solemn  preamble  setting  forth  the  ambition  and 
the  vices  of  the  hated  Bonaparte,  a  series  of  resolutions 
was  passed  that  an  Association  for  the  defence  of  the 
locality  should  be  formed,  that  subscriptions  should  be 
invited,  and  that  a  committee  should  be  organised  for 
the  general  direction  of  its  affairs.  Then  followed  the 
rules  of  the  Association,  which  included  the  conditions 
of  service  and  the  regulations  for  internal  economy  and 
discipline.  The  Committee  did  not  necessarily  include 
none  but  officers  of  the  corps.  On  the  contrary,  it 
consisted  commonly  of  the  largest  subscribers  who,  with 
sound  commercial  instinct,  claimed  an  influence  propor- 
tioned to  their  contribution.  It  was  the  great  ambition 
of  every  Association  to  be,  if  possible,  self-supporting, 
to  the  end  that  it  might  be  self-controlled.  In  fact  the 
Associations  were,  or  aspired  to  be,  simply  clubs  formed 
for  purposes  of  defence,  on  the  principles  of  equality 
that  govern  social  clubs  ;  that  is  to  say,  that  the  Com- 
mittee was  elected  ;  that  the  officers  also  were  either 
elected  or  chosen  by  the  Committee;  and  that  the 
general  proceedings  of  the  Committee,  together  with 
any  matters  of  extraordinary  importance,  were  subjected 
to  the  criticism  of  General  Meetings,  ordinary  and 
extraordinary. 