

Later  in  the  same  year  a  company  of  Camberwell 
Volunteers,  with  the  connivance  of  their  officers,  held  a 
mutinous  and  disorderly  meeting,  subversive  of  all 
discipline.  It  was  at  once  disbanded  by  the  Vice- 
Lieutenant,  when  the  men  offered  themselves  to  a 
South wark  corps  and  were  readily  accepted. ^ 

But  such  occurrences  were  by  no  means  confined 
to  London  and  its  vicinity.  Major-General  Jeffery 
Amherst,  after  thirty  years'  service  in  the  Army,  in  an 
evil  moment  for  himself,  yielded  to  patriotic  enthusiasm 
and  took  command,  as  Major,  of  the  Evesham  Volun- 

1  I.D.  vol.  Ixiv.  V.L.  Surrey,  to  S.S.  26th  Jan.  1804. 
2  Ibid.  vol.  Ixiv.  V.L.  Surrey,  to  S.S.  nth  Aug.  1804. 


II  INDISCIPLINE  OF  VOLUNTEERS      105 

teers.  Unfortunately  there  was  another  old  soldier  in  1803-4. 
the  corps,  a  very  remarkable  man.  He  had  begun 
life  as  a  private  in  the  cavalry,  had  been  employed  in 
the  recruiting  service,  and  had  made  sufficient  profit 
out  of  it  to  purchase  a  commission,  which  he  had  finally 
laid  down  in  order  to  keep  a  pot-house  at  Evesham. 
Owing  to  his  military  experience  he  was  appointed  an 
officer  in  Amherst's  corps,  and  his  first  quarrel  with  the 
latter  arose  from  the  fact  that  Amherst  forbade  him  to 
parade  his  men  in  front  of  the  pot-house's  door,  thereby 
depriving  him  of  the  profits  of  selling  ale  to  them.  He 
then  insulted  the  Adjutant,  a  veteran  of  fifty-two  years* 
service,  during  exercise,  and  challenged  him  to  a  duel 
while  in  the  execution  of  his  duty.  Upon  this  the 
officers  sent  a  deputation  to  him  to  ask  him  to  resign ; 
but  he  took  one  of  them,  the  son  of  a  shoemaker, 
into  his  councils,  and  the  two  between  them  contrived 
to  excite  a  mutiny  of  the  corps  on  parade.  The  affair 
caused  such  disturbance  and  scandal  that  the  Magistrates 
took  it  up,  and  appealed  to  the  Lieutenant  to  dismiss 
this  precious  pair  ;  whereupon  the  culprits  went  to  the 
Justices  with  tears  in  their  eyes,  and  promised  not  to 
interfere  further  with  the  corps  if  the  matter  were 
allowed  to  drop.  However,  they  made  false  represen- 
tations of  their  conduct  to  the  Home  Office,  and 
managed  to  extract  from  the  Under-Secretary  a 
letter  which  spoke  of  the  "honourable  motives 
which  induced  them  to  resign."  This  they  published 
in  Evesham,  of  course  filling  the  inhabitants  with 
disgust,  and  reducing  poor  Amherst  to  speechless 
indignation.  No  better  example  could  be  found 
than  this  to  show  the  essential  defects  of  the  Volunteer 
system.-^ 

In  Somerset  a  private  of  the  Loyal  Bath  Volunteers 
appeared  on  parade  in  liquor,  and  fell  to  quarrelling 
with  the  officer  of  another  company.  He  was  ordered 
by  the  Colonel  to  apologise  to  the  officer,  and  as  he 