


II         INDISCIPLINE  OF  VOLUNTEERS       103 

left  the  dismissal  of  the  ringleaders  to  the  Adjutant.  1803-4. 
Both  parties  then  appealed  with  much  mutual  recrimi- 
nation to  the  Lord-Lieutenant  and  the  Secretary  of 
State ;  to  which  the  Lieutenant,  being  a  sensible  man, 
replied  by  recommending  that  the  corps  should  be 
disbanded.^ 

The  Royal  Southwark  Volunteers,  commanded  by 
Tierney,  the  politician,  distinguished  itself  in  somewhat 
sinilar  fashion.  The  Colonel  had  rejected  a  sergeant 
chosen  by  the  men  of  one  company  in  favour  of  a 
candidate  selected  by  himself;  and  against  this  the 
company  handed  in  resolutions  of  protest,  as  also  against 
his  appointment  of  an  officer  without  first  consulting 
then.  Tierney  at  once  paraded  the  company  and 
ordered  it  to  deliver  up  its  arms,  which  the  men  did 
without  a  murmur,  being  ignorant  of  the  meaning  of 
subordination  rather  than  insubordinate.^ 

In  another  London  corps,  the  North  Britons,  a 
corporal  refused  to  be  silent  on  parade,  or  to  obey  an 
officer  who  bade  him  hold  his  tongue,  on  the  ground 
that  the  officer  in  question  belonged  to  a  different 
company.  The  corporal  then  addressed  the  following 
letter  to  his  Commanding  Officer : — 

Sir — I  am  desired  by  several  privates  in  my  company  to 
acquaint  you  it  is  their  determination  to  withdraw  themselves 
unless  you  immediately  order  Leake  ^  to  resign.  I  think  he 
ought  to  bless  his  stars  I  did  not  bayonet  him — but,  damn  him, 
I  have  done  with  him — Yours,  etc.  P.  Wood. 

And  the  Commanding  Officer,  instead  of  turning 
Mr.  Wood  out  of  the  corps  and  taking  measures  to 
have  him  drawn  by  the  ballot,  reported  the  case  to  the 
Secretary  of  State  in  utter  helplessness  and  despair.* 

1  I.D.  vol.  Ivi.  Middlesex,  Report  of  5th  Jan.;  CO.  St.  Pancras 
Vol.  to  S.S.  30th  Jan.  ;  L.L.  Middlesex,  to  S.S.  30th  Jan.;  CO.  St. 
Pancras  Vol.  to  R.  Pole-Carew,  19th  March  1804. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  Ivi.  Tierney  to  S.S.  loth  Jan.  1804. 

^  I  take  Leake  to  have  been  the  officer  who  ordered  the 
writer  of  the  letter  to  be  silent. 

*  I.D.  vol.  Ivi.  Lt.-Col.  Alex.  Davison  to  S.S.  Jan.  27th. 


I04      INDISCIPLINE  OF  VOLUNTEERS    chap. 

1803-4.  In  Lambeth   there  was  a  Loyal  Lambeth  Corps, 

wherein  the  right  of  electing  officers  was  supposed  to  be 
vested  in  such  members  as  had  clothed  and  equipped 
themselves.  The  original  officers  had  been  nominated 
by  a  Civil  Committee,  whose  members,  no  doubt,  had 
given  liberal  subscriptions  ;  but  the  Commanding  Officer 
presently  appointed  a  Military  Committee,  consisting  of 
officers,  non-commissioned  officers  and  privates,  for  the 
regulation  of  military,  as  distinguished  from  financial, 
affairs.  A  vacancy  for  a  Lieutenant  occurred,  and  the 
Civil  Committee  recommended  several  persons  for  elec- 
tion. The  corps,  ignoring  the  recommendations,  elected 
a  man  not  mentioned  by  the  Civil  Committee,  whose 
name  was  then  submitted,  without  any  details  of  the 
circumstances,  to  the  Lord-Lieutenant.  Five  ensigns, 
feeling  themselves  aggrieved,  thereupon  addressed  a 
remonstrance  to  both  committees  through  the  Com- 
manding Officer,  who,  after  expostulating  with  them  in 
vain,  laid  the  letter  before  the  Military  Committee, 
which  decided  against  them.  The  ensigns  then 
threatened  to  appeal  to  the  parish,  when  the  Command- 
ing Officer  invoked  the  Lieutenant's  authority  to 
prohibit  publication  of  the  appeal ;  and  the  whole  body 
of  the  officers  was  appointed  a  court  to  inquire  into  the 
matter.  Unfortunately,  I  have  been  unable  to  trace  the 
further  career  of  this  interesting  corps.^ 