

In  Norfolk  the  effect  of  this  decision  was  startling. 
Men  sent  in  their  kits  and  arms  from  all  quarters,  without 
taking  the  trouble  to  obtain  a  proper  discharge  ;  and 
the  officers,  to  check  the  evil,  begged  that  the  seceders 
might  be  called  out  under  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act.^  But 
the  mischief  was  by  no  means  confined  to  displays  of 
this  kind.  Such  a  defeat  of  Government  by  a  popular 
hero  of  Erskine's  type  was  in  principle  extremely  bad 
for  discipline  ;  for  with  all  his  ability  as  an  advocate, 

1  I.D.  vol.  xlv.  Devon,  Lord  Rolle  to  S.S.  24th  Jan.;  Lt.-Gen. 
Simcoe  to  S.S.,  4th  Feb.  1804 ;  vol.  Ixvii.  V.L.  Yorks,  to  S.S.  3rd 
Feb.   1804. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  Iviii.  Norfolk,  P.  L.  Powell  to  S.S.  24th  March  1804. 


102    INDISCIPLINE  OF  VOLUNTEERS      chap. 

1803.  he  was  compounded  chiefly  of  vanity  and  egoism.^ 
The  triumph  of  such  a  man  upon  such  a  question  was 
the  worst  possible  example  for  self-governing  corps  ; 
and  in  the  winter  and  spring  of  1803-4  there  was  a 
succession  of  very  discreditable  incidents. 

The  St.  Pancras  Volunteer  Association  was  governed 
by  a  *'  Military  Committee "  with  undefined  powers, 
the  said  Committee  consisting  of  three  officers  and 
twelve  privates,  with  a  private  for  president.  An 
inferior  mechanic  and  a  disreputable  attorney,  by  fre- 
quenting night  clubs  and  public-houses  in  company 
with  the  lowest  class  of  privates,  obtained  election  as 
officers,  and  therewith  demanded  for  the  Committee  the 
control  of  the  subscriptions,  which  by  law  were  vested 
in  the  Commanding  Officer.  The  Attorney-General, 
being  consulted  upon  the  point,  declared  that  beyond 
all  question  the  control  of  the  subscriptions  lay  with  the 
Commanding  Officer,  and  that  the  legality  of  the  Mili- 
tary Committee  was  very  doubtful.  Upon  this,  without 
consulting  the  Colonel,  the  malcontents  summoned  a 
general  meeting  of  the  corps,  and  after  a  scene  of 
scandalous  indeceny  persuaded  forty-five  members  to 
sign  a  protest  denying,  in  the  face  of  the  law,  that  the 
funds  were  vested  in  the  Colonel.  The  case  was 
examined  by  the  Deputy-Lieutenants,  who  recom- 
mended the  expulsion  of  the  offenders,  but  blamed  the 
Colonel  also  for  his  unconciliatory  bearing.  On  receipt  of 
this  report  the  Secretary  of  State  wrote  a  letter  annulling 
the  appointment  of  the  Military  Committee,  and  the 
rules  as  to  election  of  officers  by  the  corps.  This  letter 
the  Colonel  read  on  parade,  and  at  the  close  called  upon 
the  five  ringleaders  to  fall  out.  Several  voices  from  the 
ranks  answered,  *'  One  and  all,  one  and  all,"  and  the 
Colonel,  after  manoeuvring  the  regiment  for  an  hour, 

^  As  a  Colonel  of  Volunteers  he  was  helpless  without  a 
card  to  recall  to  him  his  words  of  command,  and  very  inefficient 
with  one.  But  Lord  Ellenborough,  afterwards  Lord  Chief  Justice, 
even,  with  the  aid  of  chalked  marks  upon  his  boots,  could  never 
remember  to  step  off  with  the  appointed  foot.  Campbell's  Lives  of 
the  Chancellors^  vi.  547. 