

In  Buckinghamshire  the  failure  in  Volunteers  seems 
to  have  been  due  mainly  to  lack  of  men,  for  the  county 
had  always  done  its  duty  admirably  both  towards 
Militia  and  Regulars,  and  had  before  June  mustered 
1000  Yeomanry.  Moreover,  the  Grenvilles,  who  mainly 
controlled  all  local  business,  were  most  zealous  in 
military  matters.  The  quota  of  Volunteers  required  of 
it  was  3594  ;  and  the  Militia  lists  contained  in  all  but 
9900  names.  Strangely  enough,  however,  many  of  the 
inhabitants  were  troubled  with  ignorant  fears  lest  the 
oath  of  allegiance  required  from  every  Volunteer  should 
bind  them  to  some  unknown  military  service.  Lord 
Grenville  went  in  person  to  argue  with  them  and  to 
reassure  them,  but  they  would  not  be  convinced ; 
wherefore,  lest  such  an  example  should  spread,  he  at 
once  called  up  the  peccant  parishes  to  undergo  com- 
pulsory training  under  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act.     This 

1  I.D.  vol.  vi.  L.L.  Cambs,  to  S.S.  nth  Sept.;  vol.  xli.  C.G.M. 
Cambs,  to  S.S.  i6th  Sept.  1804 ;  vol.  xxxii.  L.L.  Sussex,  to  S.S.  23rd 
and  30th  Aug.  1803. 


94      REASONS  FOR  LUKEWARMNESS     chap. 

1803.  suspicion  does  not  appear  to  have  prevailed  elsewhere 
except  in  the  Isle  of  Man,  where  the  people  disliked 
the  combination  of  oath  and  red  coat  as  much  as  in 
Scotland.  "  They  will  be  difficult  to  persuade  of  their 
error,"  wrote  the  Lieutenant-Governor,  "  and  even  if 
persuaded  they  will  be  undisciplined."  The  Manxmen 
may  be  pardoned  for  their  ignorance,  which  was  re- 
ported to  be  excessive ;  but  it  is  extraordinary  that 
their  misgivings  should  have  been  shared  by  men  living 
within  twenty  miles  of  London.^ 

In  Lancashire,  where  the  deficiency  was  less  than 
400  out  of  a  quota  of  14,600,  the  fault  seems  to  have 
been  due  chiefly  to  the  blunderingof  the  Government  in 
the  matter  of  regulations  and  arms,  for  the  people  came 
forward  with  enthusiasm  enough  ;  and  the  same  holds 
good  of  Staffordshire,  where  the  deficiency  amounted 
to  over  700  on  a  quota  of  6800.  In  Warwickshire 
the  Lieutenant  wrote  that  he  could  not  trust  arms  in 
the  hands  of  many  men  who  came  forward  ;  but  to 
show  that  he  was  not  lacking  in  zeal,  he  offered  to 
subscribe  £  10,000  towards  the  cost  of  arming  the  loyal ; 
to  which  generous  offer,  astounding  as  it  may  appear, 
he  received  no  answer.^  In  Wiltshire  and  Northampton 
no  particular  cause  for  lukewarmness  of  patriotism  can 
be  traced.  In  Norfolk  excessive  jealousy  of  the  different 
corps  among  themselves  may  have  accounted  for  the 
fact  that  only  6900  Volunteers  were  forthcoming  instead 
of  7254.  But  it  is  difficult  to  say  what  petty  agencies 
may  have  affected  the  levy  for  good  or  for  evil.  In 
Salop  the  enrolment  of  Volunteers  was  checked  for  a 
time  completely  by  the  action  of  some  Friendly  Societies, 
founded  for  the  support  of  the  sick  and  infirm,  whose 
rules  contained  a  clause  ordaining  the  expulsion  of  any 
member  from  the  moment  when  he  became  a  soldier.^ 