

2  I.D.  vol.  xxxv.  Tho.  Plumer  to  W.O.  12th  Nov.  1803  ;  vol. 
xliv.  Denbigh,  Rich.  Willding  to  S.S.  2nd  July  1804.  The  salary 
of  ;^5  a  year  is  called  a  low  wage  by  the  writer.  The  case  occurred 
within  the  Lieutenancy  of  Denbigh  and  Merioneth.  The  employer 
was  evidently  a  farmer,  so  that  probably  the  man  received  boaf-d 
and  lodging  as  well  as  the  £^  a  year. 


112  VOLUNTEER  OFFICERS  chap. 

1803-4,  that  agricultural  labourers  of  a  great  many  counties 
both  in  England  and  in  Scotland  changed  their  master 
annually  at  Michaelmas  or  Martinmas,  shifting  into 
new  parishes  and  consequently  taking  service  in  new 
Volunteer  corps,  or  at  any  rate  in  different  companies  of 
the  same  corps.  As  Parliament  met  in  November  it 
was  necessary  to  prepare  the  returns  of  the  Volunteers 
for  the  estimates  and  for  the  perusal  of  the  House 
immediately  before  this  annual  change  ;  and  hence  the 
returns  were  never  more  than  approximately,  if  even 
approximately,  correct. 

As  regards  the  officers  of  the  Volunteers,  the  reader  will 
have  gained  some  idea  already  from  certain  of  the  instances 
of  indiscipline.  Taken  ^s  a  body  they  were  probably 
not  very  efficient,  though  of  course  there  were  excep- 
tions. It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  many  officers  of 
high  rank  in  the  Army  gave  their  services  willingly  to 
their  local  corps.  The  case  of  General  Amherst  has 
already  been  cited  ;  and  again,  there  were  in  Sussex 
alone  Lieutenant- General  Whyte,  who  had  held  an 
independent  command  over  nearly  ten  thousand  men  on 
active  service,  Lord  Gage,  Colonels  Newton  and  Crosbie, 
and  the  Duke  of  Richmond.  This  advantage,  how- 
ever, was  not  without  its  drawbacks.  The  Government 
early  in  1804  appointed  inspecting  field-officers  from 
the  half-pay  list  to  every  county  for  the  Volunteers, 
and,  as  these  held  the  rank  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  only, 
there  was  some  discontent  among  such  men  as  those 
above  named  at  being  placed  under  the  orders  of  an 
officer  of  inferior  rank.  The  Commander-in-Chief, 
however,  set  his  foot  at  once  and  firmly  upon  any 
complaints  of  this  kind.  "  While  you  are  in  the  Volun- 
teer service,"  he  wrote  to  Colonel  Crosbie,  "  you  cannot 
avail  yourself  of  your  Army  rank,  not  even  if  your 
corps  is  on  permanent  duty  and  serving  with  other 
corps."  ^ 

Occasionally  an  officer  of  the  Regulars  would  give 

1  I.D.  vol.  xxxii.  L.L.  Sussex,  to  S.S.  3rd  Oct.  1803  ;  vol.  Ixv. 
Sussex,  D.A.G.  to  Col.  Crosbie,  5th  April  1804. 


II  VOLUNTEER  OFFICERS  113 

enormous  time  and  trouble  gratuitously  to  the  improve-  1803-4. 
ment  of  the  Volunteers  in  the  neighbourhood  of  his 
quarters  ;  ^  but  for  the  most  part  corps  were  dependent 
on  such  few  half-pay  officers  as  they  could  collect  under 
the  regulations,  and  upon  their  adjutants.  Good  adju- 
tants, again,  were  not  very  easy  to  procure,  as  is 
usually  the  case  in  time  of  war  ;  and  the  best  of  whom 
record  remains  was  a  man  of  fifty-two  years'  service. 
He  had  passed  through  the  whole  of  the  American  War 
as  a  private  in  the  loth  Foot,  with  many  wounds ;  he 
had  then  served  as  sergeant-major  for  between  twenty 
and  thirty  years  in  the  same  regiment,  had  finally 
received  a  commission,  and  after  yet  another  ten  years 
as  an  officer,  had  retired,  only  to  emerge,  still  possessing 
the  vigour  and  activity  of  youth,  to  be  the  soul  and 
the  mainstay  of  a  Volunteer  corps.^  Such  men,  how- 
ever, were  rare.  In  many  parts  of  Wales  adjutants 
were  especially  difficult  to  find,  for  unless  they  could 
speak  Welsh  they  were  useless.^  Indeed  officers  of  any 
kind  were  so  scarce  in  some  counties  of  the  Principality 
that  the  Lieutenant  of  Denbigh  declared  it  to  be  im- 
possible to  find  enough  for  the  Volunteers  unless  the 
clergy  received  commissions.  With  this  view  he  sub- 
mitted the  names  of  three  reverend  gentlemen  for  a 
single  gazette,  having  first  received  the  sanction  of  their 
diocesan ;  and  was  greatly  disappointed  when  their 
services  were  not  accepted.  In  Rutland  also  the  Lord- 
Lieutenant  urged  that  a  parson  should  be  posted  Lieu- 
tenant, as  every  single  gentleman  in  the  country  was 
already  absorbed  by  some  corps  or  another.*  But  the 
Secretary  of  State  set  his  face  on  principle  against  the 
drawing  of  a  red  coat  over  a  cassock,  and  the  Church, 
as  far  as  the  Volunteers  were  concerned,  remained 
restricted  to  spiritual  warfare. 