

All  this  was  very  well  for  a  few  months — in  London 
and  a  few  more  rich  towns  for  even  longer — but  then 

1  I.D.  vol.  ix.  L.L.  Denbigh,  to  S.S.  i6th  Aug.  1803. 

2  I  speak  as  a  collector,  for  several  years  past,  of  engraved 
portraits  of  distinguished  officers  of  the  Army.  To  such  a  collector 
the  portraits  of  the  illustrious  obscure,  many  of  them  of  great  merit 
AS  works  of  art,  are  little  short  of  a  curse. 


ii6        FAILURE  OF  SUBSCRIPTIONS         chap. 

1803-4.  the  subscriptions  were  exhausted,  and  the  civil  sub- 
scribers, having  done  their  duty  as  they  thought  by 
their  first  contributions,  buttoned  up  their  pockets  and 
would  give  no  more.  Further,  the  more  zealous  the 
Volunteers,  the  more  rapidly  of  course  was  their  raiment 
worn  out.  ".Eighty-five  days'  drill  and  twenty-one 
days'  permanent  duty  have  reduced  the  clothing  allowed 
to  my  corps  by  Government  to  rags,"  wrote  an  officer 
of  a  Welsh  corps  ;  "  the  Captains  will  subscribe  their 
contingent  money,  if  the  Government  will  help."^  But 
if  the  Government  helped  one  corps,  it  must  help  all  ; 
and  the  answer  to  the  above  application  could  only  be 
in  the  negative.  Thence  followed  as  a  natural  conse- 
quence the  humouring  by  their  superiors  of  rich  officers, 
so  as  to  keep  them  in  their  corps  at  any  cost,  and  of 
poorer  officers  in  consideration  of  the  sacrifices  that  they 
had  made  ;  while  a  general  tenderness  on  the  part  of 
the  Government  towards  indiscipline  at  large  in  the 
Volunteers  evoked  from  Windham  in  the  House  of 
Commons  the  statement  that  the  Cabinet  was  afraid 
of  them.  And  this  was  perfectly  true.  How  could 
Ministers  not  be  afraid  of  a  vast  body  of  men, 
many  of  them  voters,  whom  they  had  practically  invited 
to  serve  their  country  in  the  way  which  they  thought 
best  and  easiest  for  themselves,  and  at  the  expense 
of  the  most  patriotic  individuals  among  them?  The 
entire  force  naturally  claimed  the  indulgence  that  was 
due  only  to  the  unselfish  minority  among  them.  The 
subscribers  as  naturally  demanded  some  share  in  the 
control  of  the  levies  which  they  had  helped  to  raise  and 
equip  ;  and  the  State's  rightful  hold  upon  the  Volun- 
teers in  the  matter  of  discipline  was  lost. 

Nor  was  anything  gained  economically.  The 
expense  of  the  Volunteers  to  the  country,  as  it  ap- 
peared on  the  estimates  and  returns,  might  seem 
relatively  small ;  but  this  was  only  because  the  balance 
was   defrayed   by   private  subscription.      Windham   in 

1  I.D.  vol.  ilix.  Glamorgan,  Rowley  Lascelles  to  S.S.  9th  July 
1804. 


II  FALSE  SYSTEM  OF  TRAINING        117 

1806  reckoned  that  the  Volunteers  had  cost  in  three  1803-4. 
and  a  half  years  five  millions  from  the  public  purse, 
and  at  least  as  much  more  from  individual  contributions. 
This  entire  sum  of  ten  millions  of  course  came  out  of 
the  pockets  of  the  nation,  and  impoverished  it  by  that 
amount,  whether  it  was  gathered  in  the  form  of  taxation 
or  of  a  patriotic  gift.  The  burden  of  expense  was 
unwisely  and  inequitably  laid  upon  the  willing  who 
made  shift  to  bear  it ;  but  no  part  of  the  outlay  was 
thereby  saved.  The  only  difference  was  that  the  country, 
by  leaving  its  defence  in  great  measure  to  private 
enterprise,  renounced  even  such  proportion  of  control 
as  was  due  to  it  in  return  for  a  grant  of  public  funds. 