


of     rt*^-^- 


JJP.  voL  xixT.  UL.  Tacz3  WJL  so  SS.  15:^  Aa^  licj 


CHAPTER    III 


1803.  With  all  their  imperfections  on  their  heads — with  a 
Regular  Army  starving  for  want  of  recruits,  a  Reserve 
already  damned  as  an  expensive  failure,  a  Militia  swollen 
to  large  numbers  on  paper,  but  with  ranks  unfilled  and 
impossible  to  fill,  and  an  enormous  Volunteer  force, 
unregulated,  undisciplined,  unorganised,  but  irrepres- 
sible— Addington  and  his  colleagues  met  Parliament  on 
the  22nd  of  November  1 803.  On  the  2nd  of  December 
the  Army  Estimates  were  introduced,  showing  an 
establishment  of  141,000  Regular  troops  (including  the 
Army  of  Reserve)  and  110,000  embodied  Militia  at 
home,  and  61,000  Regular  troops  in  the  Colonies  and 
India.  The  number  actually  effective  at  home  was 
69,000  Regulars,  26,000  Army  of  Reserve,  and  80,000 
Militia,  Artillery  not  included.  There  was  a  brief  pre- 
liminary debate  on  the  12th  of  December,  wherein  Pitt 
declared  that  according  to  the  original  intention,  mean- 
ing, no  doubt,  according  to  his  original  plan,  the  Army 
of  Reserve  was  to  have  been  raised  by  each  county  in 
strict  proportion  to  its  population,  and  no  substitutes 
were  to  have  been  received  except  from  the  county 
concerned  or  from  those  immediately  adjacent  to  it. 
Possibly  his  design  was  to  insinuate  that  under  his  own 
management  the  Act  would  have  been  differently 
administered.  Possibly,  too,  it  might  have  been  ;  but 
the  results  would  have  been  much  the  same.     The  true 

1804.  defect  in  the  Act  lay  in  the  admission  of  substitutes  at 
all ;  and  it  was  futile  for  Pitt  to  argue  that  his  bantling 

120 


CHAP.  Ill   VOLUNTEER  EXEMPTION  ACT   121 

had  been  maltreated,  when  it  had  been   conceived  in       '8°4- 
fallacy,  brought  forth  in  weakness,  and  was  foredoomed 
by  constitutional  debility  to  an  early  grave. 

But  the  great  battle  of  the  session,  as  may  be 
imagined,  was  fought  over  the  Volunteers.  In  order  to 
extricate  Ministers  from  the  thousand  difficulties  in 
which  haste,  feebleness,  and  carelessness  had  involved 
them,  Yorke,  on  the  13th  of  December,  introduced, 
in  the  first  place,  a  Volunteer  Exemption  Bill,  a  simple 
measure  which  was  designed  to  set  all  doubts  upon 
exemption  at  rest,  and  to  enable  Commanding  Officers 
to  certify  that  men  had  undergone  training  without 
arms  in  cases  where  no  arms  had  been  issued.  This 
was  passed  on  the  20th  of  December  1 803  (44  Geo.  III. 
cap.  18)  ;  and  Yorke  shortly  afterwards  presented  a 
more  important  Bill  to  consolidate  all  existing  Acts 
concerning  the  Volunteers.  This  was,  in  fact,  an  effort 
to  correct  the  many  blunders  of  the  past  session,  and 
as  such  was  likely  to  enjoy  a  stormy  career. 