

As  a  first  step  it  was  proposed  that  the  number  of 
days'  exercise  required  to  exempt  Volunteers  from  the 
Militia  ballot  should  be  raised  from  five  to  twenty-four, 
so  as  to  place  exemption  from  the  Militia  and  the  Army 
of  Reserve  upon  the  same  footing.  This  was  at  once 
opposed  as  a  breach  of  faith,  and  Addington  was  fain 
to  plead  that  the  ntw  regulation  would  not  come  into 
force  until  May,  so  that  Volunteers  who  disliked  it 
would  have  plenty  of  time  to  resign. 

An  attempt  was  also  made  to  override  by  enact- 
ment the  decision  of  the  Court  of  King's  Bench  as  to 
the  right  of  Volunteers  to  resign,  when  Perceval,  as  has 
been  seen,  upheld  his  own  contention  against  that  right, 
while  Erskine  vindicated  the  judgment  of  the  court. 
Fox  summed  up  the  action  of  Ministers  on  the  question 
in  a  single  sentence.  '*  First,"  he  said,  "  it  was  intended 
that  the  Volunteers  might  resign  ;  then  the  Attorney- 
General  said  that  they  couM  not  resign  ;  then  the  Court 
of  King's  Bench  said  that  they  could  resign  ;  and  now 
Ministers  bring  in  a  Bill  to  say  that  they  can  resign, 


122  CONSOLIDATION  BILL  chap. 

1804.  and  insert  a  provision  which  renders  it  impossible  for 
many  to  resign."  ^  Against  Fox  and  Erskine  united 
the  Ministry  could  make  litde  fight,  and  the  clause 
containing  the  obnoxious  provision  was  withdrawn. 

The  third  and  most  important  novelty  introduced 
into  the  Bill  was  a  declaration  that  Volunteers  should 
no  longer  be  allowed  to  elect  their  own  officers  ;  and 
this  proposition  was  warmly  combated.  Whitbread, 
a  shrewd,  sensible  man  and  Colonel  of  a  Volunteer 
battalion  at  Bedford,  defended  the  practice  of  electing 
officers,  provided  that  their  names  were  submitted  to  the 
King  through  the  Lieutenant  for  approval.  "  Had  I 
offered  my  services  as  private  in  my  Volunteers,"  he 
said,  "  I  own  that  I  should  be  very  unwilling  to  serve 
under  any  officer  appointed  by  the  Crown  to  command 
me  without  my  own  consent."  Sheridan  warned 
Ministers  against  interference  with  the  right  as  a 
breach  of  faith,  and  Fox  adjured  the  Volunteers  not 
to  allow  themselves  to  be  bullied.^  The  question  was 
compromised  by  making  all  future  rules  of  corps 
subject  to  disallowance  by  the  King.  From  this  point 
to  the  general  question  of  discipline  the  transition  was 
easy  ;  and  since  most  of  the  members  were  officers  of 
Volunteer  corps,  there  were  few  who  had  not  stories  to 
tell  or  suggestions  to  put  forward.  Yorke  considered 
that  discipline  was  sufficiently  safeguarded  by  giving 
Commanding  Officers  power  to  discharge  men,  and  so 
to  make  them  liable  to  the  ballot,  and  by  using  the 
machinery  of  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act  to  call  up  dis- 
orderly or  irregular  men  for  training.^  Pitt,  full  of  his 
experience  as  Colonel  of  the  Cinque  Ports  Volunteers, 
actually  moved  to  omit  as  unnecessary  the  clause  em- 
powering commandants  to  discharge  men  ;  but  Yorke, 
who  knew  the  ways  of  Volunteer  Committees  better 
than  Pitt,  insisted  upon  it,  because  the  regulations  or 
many  corps  forbade  the  dismissal  of  any  man  without 