

2  Uid.  vol.  xlii.  Cheshire,  L.L.  to  S.S.  i8th  Feb.  1804. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  Ixvii.  Yorks  W.R.  V.L.  to  S.S.  19th  Jan.  1804. 
^  Ibid.  vol.  xliii.  L.L.  Stirling,  to  S.S.  2nd  Feb.  1804. 


II         INDISCIPLINE  OF  VOLUNTEERS       109 

The  first  call  upon  Volunteers  for  permanent  duty  1803-4. 
led  also  to  considerable  insubordination,  and  fortunately 
to  one  very  salutary  example.  In  Cambridgeshire  the 
appeal  for  this  service  was  a  failure.  Few  of  the  com- 
manding officers  took  the  trouble  to  answer  at  all ;  only 
four  thought  that  their  men  would  be  willing  to  come 
out,  and  of  the  four  one  doubted  the  success  of  embody- 
ing his  corps  outside  the  limits  of  his  parish.  The 
company  at  Little  SwafFham  could  not  even  refuse  to 
go  on  permanent  duty  without  riotous  and  disorderly 
conduct ;  and  the  West  Wrathing  company  declined 
either  to  drill  at  home  or  to  march  out  to  drill  else- 
where. Both  were  disbanded  ;  and  by  September  1 804 
Cambridge  had  increased  the  number  lacking  to  her 
quota  of  Volunteers  from  300  to  800.^  In  Caermarthen 
one  regiment  mutinied  while  on  permanent  duty,  but 
the  fact  was  not  reported  by  the  Commanding  Officer, 
and  would  not  have  been  known  at  headquarters  had 
not  some  of  the  officers  favoured  the  Secretary  of  State 
with  a  criticism  on  the  judgment  of  a  court  of  inquiry 
upon  some  of  their  fellows.^  In  Dorset  two  companies 
marched  to  Dorchester  for  permanent  duty,  but  declined, 
in  spite  of  remonstrances  and  a  strong  feeling  against 
them,  to  proceed  to  Weymouth.  The  Lieutenant  was 
weak  enough  to  write  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for 
orders,  instead  of  disbanding  them  with  ignominy  in 
their  county  town,  but  in  due  time  they  were  sent 
about  their  business.^ 

In  Devon  the  Sidmouth  Artillery  Volunteers  came 
out  with  others  on  permanent  duty,  and  were  warned 
that  while  so  engaged  they  were  subject  to  the  same 
discipline  as  the  Army.  One  man  appeared  on  parade 
an  hour  late,  asked  his  officer  for  leave  of  absence,  and 
abused  him  violently  on  being  refused.  The  officer 
ordered  some  men  to  take  charge  of  him,  but  they 

1  I.D.  vol,  xH.  C.G.M.  Cambs,  to  S.S.  15th  April,  i6th  Sept.; 
L.L.  to  S.S.  13  th,  23rci  May  1804. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  Ixxi.  Maj.-Gen.  Gascoigne  to  S.S.  23rd  July  1805. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  xlvi.  L.L.  Dorset,  to  S.S.  7th,  12th  May  1804. 


no  A  SALUTARY  EXAMPLE  chap. 

1803-4.  declined,  one  of  them  saying  that  he  knew  the  rules  of 
the  Volunteers  and  that  "he  would  be  damned  if  he  would 
take  the  prisoner  to  the  guard-room."  The  officer 
thereupon  seized  the  first  offender  by  the  collar  and 
dragged  him  off,  fighting  furiously  all  the  way,  while 
the  second  mutineer  harangued  the  populace  and  tried 
to  stir  up  a  riot.  Matters  became  serious  ;  the  local 
magistrates  were  feeble  ;  and  it  was  at  last  necessary  to 
send  for  an  escort  of  the  Army  of  Reserve  to  bring  in 
the  prisoners.  But  now  the  case  was  taken  up  by 
stronger  hands.  The  two  men  were  tried  by  regi- 
mental court-martial  and  sentenced,  the  one  to  150 
lashes,  the  other  to  1 00  lashes,  and  both  to  be  drummed 
out.  The  Commanding  Officer  rightly  and  wisely 
reduced  the  punishment  to  thirty  lashes  and  twenty 
lashes,  but  the  drumming  out  was  performed  with  all 
due  ceremony ;  and  the  effect  was  good.  "  The 
Sidmouth  company,"  wrote  General  Simcoe,  "  consider- 
ing all  circumstances — the  village  politics,  the  tea-table 
interferences,  the  want  of  energy  in  the  magistrates — 
have  behaved  tolerably  well.  Thirteen  resignations 
have  taken  place  (out  of  a  full  strength  of  269)  ;  and 
two  of  these  wished  to  withdraw  their  resignations  but 
were  not  allowed."^ 