

It  may  be  asked  whether  it  were  not  an  indignity 
to  resort  to  the  lash  in  the  case  of  the  Volunteers. 
The  answer  is  that,  with  the  exception  of  some  of  the 
corps  from  the  larger  towns,  the  ranks  were  filled 
chiefly  with  ordinary  labouring  men,  that  is  to  say,  with 
the  same  class  as  supplied  the  rank  and  file  of  the 
Army.  There  are  no  statistics  to  show  actually  that 
this  was  so,  but  there  are  casual  allusions  which  prove 
that  it  was  true  of  Buckinghamshire,  Cambridgeshire, 
Cornwall,  Denbigh,  Gloucestershire,  Middlesex,  Norfolk, 
Radnor,  Stafford,  Sussex,  and  Yorkshire  in  England, 
and  of  Lanark  and  Ross  in  Scotland,  so  that  it  would 
be  reasonable  to  conclude  that  it  was  not  otherwise  in 

^  I.D.  vol.  xlv.  Lt.-Gen.  Simcoe   to  S.S.  23rd  March,   12th 
-April ;  L.L.  Devon,  to  S.S.  27th  March  1804. 


II        COMPOSITION  OF  VOLUNTEERS        in 

the  remaining  counties.^    It  was  evidently  not  originally     1803-4. 
contemplated  that  this  class  would  fill  the  ranks  of  the 
Volunteers,    otherwise   the    Government    would    have 
provided  other  punishment  than  fines  for  breaches  of 
discipline.     Under  a  Levy  en   Masse  they  would,  of 
course,    all   have   been   enrolled ;    and   it   was   almost 
certainly  a  mistake  for   Ministers  ever  to  have  placed 
them  in  the  state  of  Volunteers,  especially  under  the 
August  Allowances.     In  the  first  place,  as  has  been  seen, 
they  were  too  poor  to  afford  a  day's  drill  without  pay  ; 
and   yet   if  their   corps  was  to  be  provided  with  an 
efficient  staff,  they  were  required  to  exercise  on  fifty- 
two  Sundays  and  thirty-three  week-days  for  the  wages 
of  £1.     Some   entertained   earnest   and   conscientious 
objections  to  drill  on  Sundays,  which  made  their  trial 
the  severer.    Nor  was  this  their  only  hardship.    Masters 
in  some  cases  refused  to  hire  servants  who  belonged  to 
Volunteer  corps,  or  deducted  part  of  their  wages  when 
they  went  to  drill.     A  case  is  recorded  of  a  Volunteer, 
enrolled  with  his  employer's  knowledge  and  under  no 
special  agreement  as  to  wages  on  that  account,  who  at 
the  end  of  the  year  found  that  twelve  shillings  out  of 
his  annual  wage  of  five  pounds  had  been  stopped  by  his 
master  for  twelve  and  a  half  days'  attendance  at  exercise.^ 
Lastly,  there  was  the  extremely  troublesome  complication 

1  I.D.  vol.  V.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  Oct.  1803  ;  vol.  xli.  Sir  J. 
Mackenzie  (Ross)  to  S.S.  17th  March  1804;  vol.  vi.  L.L.  Cambs, 
to  S.S.  nth  Sept.  1803  ;  vol.  xliv.  F.  Gregor  to  L.L.  Cornwall, 
14th  Jan.  1804  ;  vol.  xliv.  Denbigh,  Rich.  Willding  to  S.S.  2nd  July 
1804  ;  vol.  1.  L.L.  Glos.  to  S.S.  15th  Jan.  1804  ;  vol.  xxiii.  Vestry 
Clerks  of  Spitalfields  to  S.S.  13th  Oct.  1803;  vol.  Iviii.  L.L. 
Norfolk,  to  S.S.  2nd  Oct.  1804;  vol.  Ixi,  enclosed  in  L.L.Radnor, 
to  S.S.  9th  June  1804;  vol.  xxix.  Magistrates  of  Lichfield  to  S.S. 
19th  Nov.  1803;  vol.  xvii.  Lanark,  J.  Geddes  to  S.S.  17th  Dec. 
1803  ;  vol.  xxxii.  L.L.  Sussex,  to  S.S.  14th  Nov.  1803  ;  vol.  xxxv. 
Yorks  W.R.,  Thomas  Plumer  to  W.O.  12th  Nov.  1803. 