

1  J.D.  vol.  V.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  28th  Oct.  1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  Ixvi.  Maj.-Gen.  Amherst  to  S.S.  nth  Feb.  1804. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  Iv.  L.L.  Montgomery,  to  S.S.  8th  March  1804. 

*  Ibid.  vol.  ix.  L.L.  Denbigh,  to  S.S.  20th  Nov.  1803;  vol.  xxvii. 
L.L.  Rutland,  to  S.S.  17th  Oct.  1803. 

I 


114  VOLUNTEER  OFFICERS  chap. 

1803-4.  Iri    Scotland,  too,  there   was    a    dearth    of  officers, 

chiefly  owing  to  lack  of  wealthy  men.  In  Ross  the 
Volunteers  numbered  under  1700  rank  and  file,  but  the 
Commandants  found  it  impossible  to  get  men  to  lead 
them.  A  few  came  forward  at  first  under  the  idea  that 
the  menace  of  invasion  would  at  once  be  realised,  and 
that  the  repulse  of  the  French  would  leave  them  free  to 
go  home  ;  but  prolonged  service  they  could  not  afford, 
so  they  either  resigned,  or  left  their  names  as  a  favour 
on  the  list  and  declined  to  attend  any  drills.  It  was 
not  surprising,  for  many  of  them  depended  on  their 
own  industry  for  a  living.^  In  Banff,  a  county  that  has 
never  lacked  military  enterprise,  the  Lieutenant  begged 
that  the  officers  should  receive  as  many  days'  pay  as 
the  men,  for  there  were  few  who  could  afford  to  buy 
a  uniform  or  serve  without  compensation.^ 

Nor  were  such  difficulties  wholly  unknown  in 
England,  though  they  presented  themselves  in  a 
different  form.  It  was  rare  for  an  officer  openly  to 
solicit  pay  ;  but  one  Commandant  had  the  courage  to 
ask  that  it  should  be  given  during  permanent  duty, 
and  put  forward  very  good  reasons  for  the  request. 
"  Government  allows  twenty  days'  pay  for  the  men," 
he  said,  "  but  we,  the  officers,  make  it  up  to  eighty-four 
days',  besides  the  expense  of  £2  ^  ^^^  ^^^  clothing."' 
There  lay  the  heart  of  the  matter.  The  Government 
might  boast  of  their  economy  in  limiting  the  mass  of 
the  Volunteers  to  the  August  Allowances,  but  as  a 
matter  of  fact  the  whole  of  them  received  the  June 
Allowances  by  the  generosity  of  their  officers  or  of  other 
private  individuals.  Even  so,  from  want  of  money, 
innumerable  corps  collapsed  or  were  stifled  in  their 
birth.  First,  those  that  had  aspired  to  be  self-support- 
ing found  the  burden  heavier  than  they  could  bear,  and 

1  I.D.  vol.  vi.  Donald  M'Leod  (Ross)  to  S.S.  nth  April  ;  O.C. 
1st  Ross  Volunteers  to  Donald  M'Leod,  5th  Sept.  1804. 

2  /^/V.  vol.  iii.  L.L.  Banff,  to  S.S.  15th  April  1803. 

3  Hid.  vol.  xxiv.  Lt.-Col.  Robert  Harvey  (Norwich  Vols.)  to 
S.S.  19th  Dec.  1803. 


11  VOLUNTEERS'  CLOTHING  115 

either  broke  down  entirely  or  begged  for  the  August  1803-4. 
Allowances.  From  that  instant  their  ultimate  dis- 
appearance was  only  a  question  of  time.  Subscriptions 
were  forthcoming  in  the  first  moments  of  excitement  and 
enthusiasm,  but  after  a  short  time  the  excitement  palled 
and  the  enthusiasm  waned.  Moreover,  expenses  tended 
to  increase  rather  than  the  contrary.  The  regulation 
that  all  infantry  should  be  clothed  in  scarlet  naturally 
caused  such  a  demand  for  scarlet  cloth  that  the  price 
rose  appreciably.^  Again,  the  extravagance  of  a  few 
wealthy  corps  set  an  example  of  gorgeous  raiment  for 
the  men,  and  in  particular  for  the  bandsmen,  which 
regimental  emulation  and  masculine  vanity  soon  con- 
spired to  render  infectious.  Many  a  subscription-list 
was  squandered  in  absurdly  expensive  clothes  and  head- 
dresses ;  and  the  exultation  of  the  Volunteers  in  their 
plumes  and  trappings  is,  after  a  century's  interval, 
positively  humiliating  to  contemplate.  Scores  —  I 
believe  that  I  might  say  hundreds  —  of  Volunteer 
officers  all  over  England  and  Scotland  called  in  the 
painter's  aid  to  immortalise  their  "  regimentals "  and 
their  martial  bearing.^  Every  one  of  the  London  corps, 
whether  by  its  own  act  or  by  the  enterprise  of  some 
print-seller,  obtained  commemoration  at  the  hands  of 
some  limner  of  fashion-plates,  and  has  been  visible  in  the 
windows  of  print-shops  ever  since.  The  likeness  even 
of  Pitt  himself,  whose  scorn  of  frippery  was  hardly 
exceeded  by  his  deep  love  of  his  country,  was  tendered 
to  the  public  in  the  full  uniform  of  the  Cinque  Ports 
Volunteers,  mounted  on  a  prancing  charger  and  flourish- 
ing a  sword  ;  while  for  pendant  there  was  off^ered  a 
similar  presentation  of  the  vain  and  ridiculous  Erskine. 