

Incidentally  this  relaxation  of  the  Government's  hold 
upon  the  Volunteers  led  also  to  a  false  system  of  train- 
ing. Being  left  to  themselves,  these  amateur  soldiers,  of 
course,  aped  their  professional  brethren  ;  and  hours  were 
zealously  devoted  to  the  classical  eighteen  manoeuvres 
of  David  Dundas  and  the  stiff  formality  of  the 
Prussian  system.  All  this  was  utterly  useless.  General 
Money,  a  retired  officer  who  had  fought  in  command 
of  troops  of  Revolutionary  France  in  1792  and  had 
written  one  of  the  best  books  extant  upon  the  work  of 
Light  Infantry,  trained  and  armed  three  companies  of 
Volunteers  as  sharpshooters.  This,  it  must  be  remarked, 
must  have  cost  him  an  appreciable  sum,  for  the  Govern- 
ment while  countenancing  by  its  regulations  the  forma- 
tion of  Rifle  corps,  would  issue  no  rifles,  nor  grant 
more  than  the  contract  price  of  muskets  for  corps  that 
provided  rifles  for  themselves.^  "  You  cannot  make 
men  equal  to  regular  troops  in  twenty-four  days'  drill," 
wrote  Money,  "  but  you  can  make  them  good  sharp- 
shooters in  ten  days  ;  whereas  long,  tedious  drills  weary 
the  peasantry."^  The  plea  fell  upon  deaf  ears.  In 
Parliament,  as  shall  presently  be  seen,  a  soldier  who 
later  won  immortality  in  the  command  of  the  Light 

1  I.D.  vol.  xxxiv.  Yorks  N.R.,  Lt.-Col.  Morritt  to  S.S.   14th 
Oct.  1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  Iviii.  Money  to  L.L.  Norfolk,  12th  Aug.  1804. 


iiS 


MEHTS  O^  IfTXJQNXBneS 


i    Sotfe 


oTHs 


oftlKVi 


ce  aiO" 


rje  resc 


t  k  ID 
oTtke 

of 


jscji  cnfcar  ar 


Mi 


mt  :x2siies5  cf  ri- 


se 


'-So- 


Ijctt  sir.  Vtrggg* 


IIS 


TVa     li-m't  ■> 


n 


THE  SYSTEM  A  FAILURE 


119 


Act.  I  assure  yoo  dut  hociB  I  report  the 
every  considenblc  man  in  the  CDunty."^  There 
no  other  coniptiinT  of  this  kind  of  the  Levy  czi  Nlasse 
Act;  and  it  is  prubaUe  that,  if  pot  to  tlie  test.  Lord 
Fitzwilfiam  and  his  deputies  wooid  have  been  as  zedoos 
in  cnforoi^  it  as  tnar  —^'gM'"*"*-  m  ocfaer  coonticsL. 
Bat  the  really  amaying  thing  is  tliat  after  nine  years 
of  war,  mxn  I793  ^  1802,  after  many  tlwrjlfed 
invaaons  of  Ei^jand  and  one  actnal  invasion  of  bdand, 
tne  wisdoni  of  Ministers  and  or  PKnamcnf  skomd  nave 
been  onaMe  to  produce  an  Act  winch  mnid  be  accepted 
heartily  fay  the  whole  ujuniiy  to  guvcin  the  traioiBg 
of  its  popohtioD  for  defences  The  task,  it  most  he 
abondandy  conlcsBed,  was  no  easy  one;  hoc  after 
review  or  the  profrftnngs  or  Addington  s  Minis!  tf  it 
hardly  be  said,  I  think,  that  they  ^hnwr  in  the 
tion  ofEo^andfer  war.  Stfflitmaitbe 
that  Adffii^gton  was  preceded  fay  rkt,  and 
more  or  less  aider  his  protectiaa  ;  and  that  it  wasHtt 
and  no  other  wfaoi,  nndrr  some  iwhjp^ 
onginated  the  whole  or  die  VohinlBCi 
started  it  wniiiiclf  and  liictiicvjlily  hi 
diiwtinii. 