

^  I.D.  vol.   Ixvi.  Worcester,  Major-Gen.  Amherst  to  S.S:  5th 
Jan.  1804. 


io6       INDISCIPLINE  OF  VOLUNTEERS  chap. 

1803-4.  refused  to  do  so  he  was  dismissed.  Next  day  the 
privates  of  his  company  met,  and  after  duly  debating 
the  conduct  of  the  Commanding  Officer,  passed,  with 
nine  dissentients,  resolutions  that  they  could  not  attend 
another  muster  until  their  comrade  was  reinstated,  and 
that  it  was  ungentlemanlike  for  officers  of  one  company 
to  interfere  with  men  of  another.  These  resolutions 
they  handed  to  their  Captain  to  be  laid  before  the 
Colonel,  together  with  an  expression  of  their  confidence 
in  the  said  Captain.  That  individual,  who,  though  fully 
cognisant  of  what  was  going  forward,  had  not  moved  a 
finger  to  prevent  it,  thereupon  approached  the  Colonel ; 
and  he,  good,  easy  man,  offered  to  refer  the  affair  to  a 
General  Committee  of  the  regiment,  though  he  delayed 
to  do  so  for  some  hours,  in  the  hope  that  matters  would 
right  themselves  spontaneously.  On  the  following  day, 
however,  the  men  who  had  held  the  meeting  printed 
and  published  a  full  account  of  the  proceedings, 
announcing  at  the  close  that  no  alternative  remained  to 
them  but  to  resign.  The  entire  city  of  Bath,  at  that 
time  by  no  means  the  most  orderly  in  the  kingdom, 
was  stirred  to  its  foundations  ;  and  the  Lieutenant,  for 
reasons  best  known  to  himself,  referred  the  matter  to 
the  Secretary  of  State.  That  functionary,  more  in  sorrow 
than  anger,  rebuked  the  original  offender,  who  then 
apologised  to  the  officer.  The  men  who  had  held  the 
meeting  also  apologised ;  and,  in  fact,  there  seems  to  have 
been  a  carnival  of  apology,  without,  however,  any  remark- 
able benefit  to  the  discipline  of  the  Bath  Volunteers.^ 

In  the  East  Riding  of  Yorkshire  the  officers  of  the 
Derwent  Dale  Volunteers  resigned  in  a  body,  their 
grievance  being  that  their  Commanding  Officer  never 
convened  them  for  consultation  upon  any  subject  relat- 
ing to  the  regiment.  So  well  satisfied  were  they  as  to 
the  legitimacy  of  their  complaint  that  they  urged  it 
without  concealment  in  a  letter  to  the  Lord-Lieutenant, 
and  were  somewhat  taken  aback  when  he  disbanded  the 

1  l.D.  Somerset,  vol.  liiii.  Statement  of  21st  Aug.  O.C.  Bath 
Volunteers  to  L.L.  8th  Sept.  1803. 


II  INDISCIPLINE  OF  VOLUNTEERS      107 

regiment  "without  regret,  owing  to  their  unmilitary      1803-4. 
behaviour."  ^ 

In  Gloucester  two  companies  of  Volunteers  were 
formed  at  Wotton-under-Edge,  under  the  direction  of 
a  Committee  which  undertook  to  provide,  not  for  its 
finances,  but  for  its  support  and  for  making  the  neces- 
sary regulations.  The  Committee  consisted  of  a  Magis- 
trate, who  was  chairman,  two  clothiers,  a  doctor  (none 
of  them  Volunteers),  and  the  officers  of  the  corps  ;  and 
the  chairman  was  the  person  who  had  recommended 
the  officers  for  appointment  by  the  Lord-Lieutenant. 
One  day  on  parade  a  lieutenant  addressed  some  con- 
temptuous words  to  an  ensign,  who  replied  by  challeng- 
ing him  to  mortal  combat.  The  Committee  took  the 
matter  up,  and  recommended  to  the  Lieutenant  the 
dismissal  of  the  ensign,  who  was  duly  gazetted  out. 
The  non-commissioned  officers  thereupon  drew  up  an 
address  to  the  General  commanding  the  district,  pro- 
testing against  the  ensign's  dismissal  as  highly  arbitrary 
and  contrary  to  the  rules  of  the  corps.  It  is  noteworthy 
that  of  108  signatories  to  this  document,  37  were  unable 
to  write  their  names.  The  case  is  curious  as  an  example 
of  a  Volunteer  corps  appealing  to  a  military  chief  against 
the  action  of  its  own  Committee.  But  in  truth  they 
would  appeal  to  any  one  in  order  to  get  their  own  way.^ 