

In  Cambridgeshire  there  was  an  extremely  interest- 
ing corps,  in  which  one  company  fell  at  variance  with 
the  Colonel  because  he  objected  to  their  drinking  in  the 
ranks  when  at  drill.  The  Colonel  appealed  to  the 
officers  of  the  company,  who  declined  to  intervene, 
saying  that  the  practice  was  usual ;  and  one  of  the  men, 
having  finished  his  draught,  stripped  off  his  coat,  rolled 
up  his  sleeves,  and  doubling  his  fists  challenged  his 
Colonel  to  fight  him.  Meanwhile  another  officer  came 
forward  to  remonstrate  with  the  ensign  of  the  erring 

1  I.D.   vol.  xciii.  L.L.    Yorks,  E.R.    to   S.S.  29th   Sept.,   5th 
Oct.  1805. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  1.  L.L.  to  S.S.  3rd  Jan.;  Richard  Nelmes  to  L.L.  6th 
April  1804. 


io8      INDISCIPLINE  OF  VOLUNTEERS    chap. 

1803-4.  company,  whereupon  the  ensign  brandished  his  sword  in 
the  intruder's  face,  and  retired  with  twenty  of  his  men  to 
a  cask  of  ale  hard  by,  from  whence,  after  further  refresh- 
ment, they  marched  off  the  ground.  A  court  of  inquiry 
was  held,  when  it  appeared  that  the  ensign  and  five  of 
the  ringleaders  were  drunk  on  this  occasion  ;  indeed, 
one  of  them,  bent  upon  maintaining  his  character,  was 
drunk  when  he  came  before  the  court.  The  chief 
offenders  were  dismissed,  but  to  no  purpose,  for  the 
company  only  repeated  its  misconduct  a  few  weeks 
later,  and  was  then  disbanded.^ 

In  Cheshire  there  was  trouble  with  the  Nantwich 
troop  of  Volunteer  Cavalry,  which  refused  to  go  out 
for  ten  days'  training  or  for  eighty-five  days'  drill  in 
the  year.^  In  Yorkshire  the  Wakefield  Volunteers 
declined  to  obey  an  officer  not  of  their  own  election, 
and  nominated  a  Committee  of  officers  and  privates  to 
give  such  directions  as  the  privates  thought  proper  ; 
but  they  came  to  their  senses  after  the  dismissal  of  their 
leaders,  and  submitted  to  officers  of  the  Lieutenant's 
appointment.^  At  Ripon  there  were  scandals  in  a 
Volunteer  corps  which  occupied  the  pens  of  the  clerks 
at  the  Home  Office  for  months.  Even  in  Scotland 
there  was  one  corps  at  Falkirk  which  joined  issue  with 
the  Lord-Lieutenant  over  the  right  to  elect  its  own 
officers,  and  threatened  to  resign  unless  indulged  with 
its  own  way.  The  Lieutenant  commanded  them  to 
parade  without  arms,  ordered  in  another  corps  with 
muskets  loaded  with  ball  cartridge,  and  resolved  to 
disband  them  on  the  spot  unless  they  repented.  The 
General,  however,  deprecated  any  display  of  force  and 
contrived  to  bring  the  regiment  to  reason  ;  the  entire 
trouble  being  due  to  a  few  turbulent  men  who  were 
disarmed  and  dismissed  on  parade.* 

1  I.D.  vol.  xli.  M.  Brackenbury  to  L.L.  Cambs,  12th  April; 
L.L.  Cambs,  to  S.S.  4th  May  1804. 