

The  unhappy  Volunteer  Consolidation  Bill  dragged 
on  its  weary  way  through  both  Houses  until  the  middle 
of  April  without  making  any  great  progress  ;  but  mean- 

1  H.D.  Commons,  8th  Feb.  1804. 
2   iiifj^  27th  Feb.,  22nd  March  1804. 


126  GOVERNMENT'S  NEW  PROPOSALS  chap. 

1804.  while  the  repeated  remonstrances  of  Craufurd,  Windham, 
and  others  against  the  neglect  of  the  Regular  Army  and 
the  want  of  an  offensive  force  had  borne  fruit,  and  on 
the  29th  of  March  Yorke  unfolded  a  fresh  bundle  of 
proposals.  The  Army  of  Reserve  Act,  as  he  was  fain 
to  confess,  had  ceased  to  produce  any  recruits.  He 
proposed  therefore,  first,  to  suspend  it  for  a  year,  and  to 
limit  the  bounty  in  such  counties  as  had  not  yet  pro- 
vided their  quota  to  ten  guineas  ;  secondly,  to  bring 
10,000  Militia  over  from  Ireland  in  order  to  set  free 
as  many  Regular  troops  ;  thirdly,  to  make  good  the 
loss  to  Ireland  by  augmenting  the  Irish  Militia  from 
1 5,000  to  28,000  men.  Castlereagh,  who  supported  the 
measure,  added  that  this  would  be  the  cheapest  way  of 
accomplishing  what  was  needed,  since  Irish  Militiamen 
could  be  obtained  for  a  bounty  of  four  guineas,  whereas 
the  price  of  substitutes  in  England  ranged  from  forty  to 
fifty  guineas.-^  The  Bills  were  accordingly  brought  in, 
the  one  to  enable  10,000  Irish  Militia  to  volunteer  for 
service  in  England  ;  a  second  for  raising  the  additional 
Militiamen  by  beat  of  drum  and  without  local  expense 
to  the  counties,  the  bounty  of  four  guineas  being  fixed 
by  the  Treasury  ;  and,  lastly,  a  bill  to  suspend  the  Army 
of  Reserve  Act. 

Even  so  the  Government's  resources  were  not  quite 
exhausted.  They  now  proposed  to  increase  the  "  dis- 
posable "  force  of  the  country,  that  is  to  say,  the  force 
that  could  be  spared  to  strike  outside  England,  from 
10,000  to  25,000  men.  This  they  hoped  to  do  by 
levying  new  regiments  on  the  old  system  of  raising  men 
for  rank  ;  but  no  officer  was  to  gain  more  than  one 
•  step  ;  the  step  was  not  to  be  granted  at  all  unless  the 
men  were  produced  within  six  months  ;  and  the  pre- 
scribed bounty  was  not  to  be  exceeded  under  penalty  of 
a  court-martial.  This  experiment,  it  must  be  added, 
was  tried,  and  resulted  in  the  raising  of  second 
battalions  to  the  78th  and  79th  Highlanders,  and  of 
four  new  battalions  in  Ireland,  three  of  which  became 
1  H.D.  29th  March  1804. 


Ill  PITT'S  ALTERNATIVE  POLICY       127 

new  regiments  of  the  Line;^  but  a  contract  given  to       1804. 
two  officers  to   raise    5000    men    for   levy  money   of 
thirteen  guineas  a  head  was  a  complete  failure.^ 

During  the  early  months  of  1804  the  incompetence 
of  Addington  and  his  colleagues  became  so  apparent 
that  on  the  23rd  of  April,  in  a  general  debate  on  the 
defence  of  the  country,  Pitt  turned  upon  them  with  the 
strongest  censure.  "  No  one  measure  for  public  defence 
can  they  truly  be  said  to  have  originated,"  he  declared, 
"  whereas  several  they  have  enfeebled  and  retarded."  On 
the  25th,  in  Committee  on  the  Army  of  Reserve 
Suspension  Bill,  Pitt  reviewed  the  entire  policy  of  the 
Government,  and  explained  that  which  he  proposed 
to  substitute  for  it.  The  formation  of  new  Regular 
regiments  he  condemned  as  impossible  ;  but  he  advo- 
cated in  their  place  the  reduction  of  the  Militia  in 
England  from  70,000  to  48,000  men,  the  augmentation 
of  the  Army  of  Reserve  by  ballot  to  60,000  or  70,000 
men,  and  its  maintenance  at  that  figure  so  that  there 
might  be  drawn  from  it  annually  14,000  to  15,000  men 
for  the  Regular  Army.  To  render  the  ballot  effective 
and  to  disarm  subscription  -  clubs  he  proposed  that 
ballotted  men  should  be  able  to  purchase  exemption  for  a 
moderate  fixed  sum,  and  if  they  served  in  person,  should 
receive  that  sum  as  bounty  ;  that  substitutes  should  be 
found  by  the  parish  and  not  by  the  individual  and  taken 
from  the  hundred  and  not  from  the  market  towns  ;  that 
the  bounty  should  be  limited  and  that  the  magistrates 
should  see  that  the  limit  was  not  exceeded  ;  and  that,  if 
the  substitutes  could  not  be  found  in  the  hundred,  the 
bounty-money  should  be  handed  to  the  Colonels  of 
the  county-regiments  to  obtain  a  recruit  for  that  amount 
and  no  more.  He  reckoned  that  thus  the  Army  of 
Reserve   would    offer   always   the   larger  bounty,  and 