

Some  further  pecuniary  concessions  had  also  been 
made  to  the  Volunteers.  A  day's  pay,  over  and  above 
the  twenty  days'  pay  allowed  annually  by  the  August 
Allowances,  was  promised  to  every  non-commissioned 
officer  and  private  present  at  an  inspection  of  his  corps 
by  a  General  Officer  or  Inspecting  Field-Officer,  pro- 
vided that  such  inspections  did  not  recur  more 
frequently  than  once  in  two  months.^  A  grant  of  pay 
for  one  sergeant  to  every  company  on  the  August 
Allowances  was  also  conceded,*  as  also  a  further  sum 
for  hiring  or  obtaining  safe  dep6ts  for  arms.  At  about 
the  same  time  were  issued,  in  anticipation  of  the  Volun- 
teer Act  of  1804,  further  regulations  to  encourage  all 
corps,  whether  of  maritime  or  inland  counties,  to  go  on 
permanent  pay  and  duty  for  periods  of  not  more  than 
a  month  or  less  than  ten  days.     But  here,  as  usual, 

1  Circular  of  lith  and  17th  Aug.  1804.  This  Circular  of  llth 
August  is  not  in  the  Circular  Book,  but  may  be  found  in  I.D.  vol. 
Ixviii.  Miscellaneous.  It  was  arranged  to  take  troops  by  post- 
carriage  for  the  last  four  stages  to  London,  the  stations  fixed  upon 
for  the  purpose  being  Guildford,  Andover,  Marlborough,  Bedford, 
Banbury,  Davcntry,  Northampton,  Kettering,  Stilton,  and  Cam- 
bridge. It  was  reckoned  that  the  waggons  would  carry  the  troops 
forty  miles  a  day  for  three  days  ;  and  the  proprietors  were  directed 
to  send  three  days'  forage  with  them. 

2  I.D.  vol.  Ixvii.  L.L.  Yorks  W.R.  to  S.S.  22nd  Aug.  1804. 
5  Circular,  loth  Feb.  1804. 

*  Circular,  19th  March  1804. 


138  THE  MARCHING-GUINEA  chap. 

1804.  Addington  and  his  colleagues  contrived  to  import  con- 
fusion into  their  orders.  In  a  circular  of  the  5th  of  March 
they  promised  an  advance  of  a  guinea,  which  was  known 
as  the  marching-guinea,  to  all  men  who  would  come  out 
on  permanent  pay  and  duty  as  aforesaid.  In  a  second 
circular  of  1 2th  April  they  engaged  to  give  also  ten  days' 
additional  pay  to  all  men  under  the  August  Allowances 
who  within  the  next  two  months  would  do  so  many 
additional  days'  exercise  without  leaving  their  homes  ; 
but  denied  them  the  marching-guinea.  Men  under  the 
June  Allowances,  on  the  other  hand,  were  to  receive  no 
special  pay  when  on  permanent  duty,  as  the  days  taken  up 
thereby  were  to  be  reckoned  among  the  eighty-five  for 
which  they  received  pay  annually  ;  but  they  were  to 
receive  the  marching-guinea.  It  appears,  further,  that 
yet  more  regulations  were  issued,  which  I  have  been 
unable  to  discover,  reducing  the  extreme  term  of  per- 
manent duty  to  three  weeks,  but  still  holding  out  the 
reward  of  the  marching-guinea.  Then  came  a  series  of 
painful  disillusions.  The  Haddington  Volunteers  went 
out  for  permanent  duty  for  fourteen  days,  and  received 
only  fourteen  shillings  instead  of  the  twenty-one  which 
they  had  expected.  Some  of  the  Durham  Volunteers 
went  out  and  received  pay,  but  could  obtain  no  guinea. 
In  Glamorganshire  a  corps  under  the  June  Allowances 
went  out,  claimed  its  guinea,  and  was  refused  because  it 
had  agreed  to  serve  in  its  Military  District  only,  and 
not  in  any  part  of  Great  Britain.  All  of  these  cases 
occurred  before  the  passing  of  the  new  Volunteer  Act 
of  1804,  and  were  partly  due  to  the  old  confusion 
between  June  and  August  Allowances  ;  but  they  did  not 
fail  (and  they  were  by  no  means  solitary  instances)  to 
rouse  bitter  discontent.^ 