

It  is  difficult  to  see  why,  when  a  permanent  defen- 
sive force  was  wanted,  Pitt  should  have  approved  the 
expenditure  of  enormous  sums  in  creating  one  which 
was  avowedly  built  upon  ephemeral  sentiment.  "  Zeal 
is  in  its  nature  a  very  transitory  feeling,"  said  Wind- 
ham, "  and  a  permanent  Volunteer  system  is  almost  a 
contradiction  in  terms."  Whitbread  put  the  case  more 
strongly  still.  The  Volunteers,  as  he  truly  said,  were 
in  daily  danger  of  being  dissolved.  The  dismissal  of  a 
corps  was  the  only  remedy  for  a  difference  between  it 
and  the  Government.  Moreover,  every  corps  that  he 
knew  of  was  more  or  less  in  debt ;  and  the  calls  for  a 
second  subscription  would  only  collect  from  the  liberal 
that  which  should  be  exacted  from  all.  "  We  have 
gone  to  enormous  expense  in  drawing  men  from  the 
Militia  to  the  Regulars  [from  1799  to  1801]  ;  we  have 
gone   to    enormous   expense   in   raising   an   Army  of 

^  H.D.  Commons,  27th  Feb.  2  /^/^^  29th  Feb.  1804. 


Ill  CRAUFURD'S  CRITICISMS  125 

Reserve,  and   finally  we  fall  back    on    the  Volunteer       '804. 
system,  which  is  the  most  expensive  of  all."  ^ 

But  by  far  the  most  clear-sighted  man  in  either 
House  was  the  soldier,  Robert  Craufurd.  Being  im- 
bued with  the  foolish  notion  that  it  was  his  business  to 
treat  his  audience  to  all  the  paraphernalia  of  exordium, 
peroration,  and  so  forth,  he  spoke  at  enormous  length, 
and  hence  received  little  attention.  From  the  first  he 
declared  that  the  Volunteer  system  was  a  mistake  from 
beginning  to  end,  wrong  in  its  constitution,  in  the 
defrayal  of  its  cost,  in  its  committees  of  management,  in 
its  training,  in  the  use  to  be  made  of  it,  even  in  its  cloth- 
ing. The  system  of  private  contribution  was  wrong. 
The  country  ought  to  bear  the  entire  expense  of  the 
Volunteers,  and  would  thus  do  away  with  the  necessity  for 
committees  which  were  constantly  coming  into  collision 
with  Government.  The  training  was  wrong.  The 
Prussian  system  of  drill  was  ill-adapted  for  fighting  in 
England,  and  would  be  a  mistake  for  the  whole  Army  if 
the  troops  were  to  be  employed  in  England  only.  The 
whole  of  the  first  class  under  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act 
ought  to  be  called  up,  dressed  in  an  uniform  coat,  and 
trained  principally  to  marksmanship  and  to  withdraw  at 
the  word  of  command  from  shelter.  The  clothing  was 
wrong.  It  was  an  error  to  dress  Volunteers  in  red,  for, 
if  they  retired,  the  Regular  troops  might  think  that  their 
comrades  of  the  Line  had  been  defeated,  and  would  be 
disheartened,  whereas  the  enemy  would  be  encouraged. 
It  was  wrong  also  to  cheapen  military  titles.  Lastly, 
it  was  a  fatal  defect  that  among  the  Volunteers  it 
was  impossible  to  enforce  discipline.  "  If  you  try  to 
enact  regulations,  you  are  told,  not  that  they  are  unjust 
or  just,  but  that  they  are  not  agreeable  to  the  Volun- 
teers.    So  delicate  a  machine  is  unfit  for  war."  ^ 