

1  H.D.  Commons,  19th  March  1804. 

2  Ibid.  8th  Feb.,  27th  Feb.  1804. 

3  Ibid.  8th  Feb.  1804. 


Ill  CONSOLIDATION  BILL  123 

consent  of  the  majority  of  the  members.^  On  the  other  1804. 
hand,  it  was  argued  that  it  was  dangerous  to  give  a 
commandant  authority  to  subject  a  man  to  the  ballot 
and  to  the  probable  expense  of  finding  a  substitute, 
without  any  appeal ;  but  none  the  less  the  clause  was 
carried  as  it  stood. 

The  question  of  fines  for  irregular  attendance 
or  misconduct  was  also  brought  forward  ;  but  the 
Attorney-General  was  shy,  as  he  said,  of  proceeding  too 
far  with  a  compulsory  system  for  the  Volunteers  ;  and, 
though  Pitt  took  a  different  view,  a  great  many  mem- 
bers seem  to  have  held  with  Perceval.  One  member, 
Mr.  Giles,  had  from  the  first  maintained  that  Volun- 
teers might  discipline  themselves,  but  that  Parliament 
had  no  right  to  impose  discipline.^  Yorke  condemned 
the  enforcement  of  attendance  and  discipline  by  fines 
and  imprisonment  as  "  inconsistent  with  the  Volunteer 
system;  "  ^  and  Whitbread  said  roundly  that  any  attempt 
to  enforce  fines  with  severity  would  cause  many  Volun- 
teers to  run  away.* 

In  truth,  the  more  the  question  of  the  Volunteers 
was  debated,  the  more  obvious  it  became  that,  whether 
their  military  value  were  great  or  small,  they  were  ex- 
tremely expensive  and  utterly  unmanageable.  No  one 
knew  how  to  draft  a  Bill  which  could  control  them  ; 
and  if  any  one  knew  how  to  draft  it,  no  one  knew  how 
to  carry  it.  Addington  and  his  colleagues  shuffled  and 
shifted  their  ground  upon  every  point  with  pitiable 
weakness,  trying  always  to  obtain  some  mastery  of 
the  huge  creature  that  they  had  called  into  existence  ; 
but  invariably  they  failed,  and  were  always  not  un- 
deservedly chastised  by  biting  comments  from  Fox  and 
Windham.  By  the  19th  of  March  1804  the  Bill  had 
been  committed  and  recommitted  four  times  ;  twenty- 
four  new  clauses  had  been  added  ;  nearly  all  the 
original  clauses  had  been  altered  and  amended  ;  and  yet 
it  was  as  far  from  passing  as  ever. 

1  H.D.  Commons,  6th  March  1804.      2  /^/^_  13th  Dec.  1803. 
8  Ibid.  2nd  March  1804.  *  Ibid.  19th  March  1804. 


124  CONSOLIDATION  BILL  chap. 

1 804.  There  were  suspicions  in  more  than  one  quarter  that 

the  whole  principle  of  Volunteers  was  wrong  ;  and  even 
Pitt,  in  course  of  the  debates,  betrayed  some  misgiving 
as  to  their  usefulness.  He  admitted  that  the  Volunteer 
system  had  been  pushed  to  a  far  wider  extent  than  had 
been  at  first  foreseen,  and  that  he  looked  with  great 
concern  upon  its  imperfections  ;  but  he  vowed  none  the 
less  that  he  believed  in  it.^  He  admitted  further  that 
there  should  be  permanence  and  consistency  in  a  defen- 
sive force,  which  should  render  it  equal  not  only  to  the 
present  but  to  all  future  dangers  ;  and  added  that  in  his 
opinion  the  principles  upon  which  the  Volunteer  system 
had  been  founded  were  perfectly  right.  "  But,"  he 
continued,  "  it  is  impossible  to  trust  continually  to  the 
operation  of  the  Volunteer  spirit.  When  the  danger  is 
past  they  may  doubt  the  necessity  of  future  exertions. 
It  then  becomes  the  duty  of  Parliament  to  do  that  for 
the  country  which  spontaneous  zeal  cannot  do.  .  .  . 
If  the  Volunteer  system  fails,  we  can  fall  back  on  the 
National  Defence  Act."  2 