

^  The  remaining  battalion  was  drafted  into  the  87th  Foot.  C.y. 
vol.  Ixi.  p.  630. 

2  S.C.L.B.  30th  April  1804.  The  officer  was  a  certain  Colonel 
French,  who  was  mixed  up  in  the  scandals  of  Mrs,  Clarke.  He  pro- 
duced only  154  men  by  31st  Jan.  1805. 


128         PITT'S  NEW  GOVERNMENT         chap. 

1804.  by  drawing  its  recruits  from  the  locality  would  leave 
the  market  towns  open  without  competition  to  the 
Regulars.^ 

Such  initiative  in  suggestion,  added  to  so  much 
careful  and  explicit  detail,  showed  pretty  clearly  that  Pitt 
expected  very  shortly  to  take  the  reins  of  Government 
into  his  own  hands.  The  scheme,  however,  did  not 
pass  without  criticism.  Yorke  declared  that  it  was 
hopeless  to  think  of  drawing  substitutes  only  from  the 
same  hundred  as  the  ballotted  men,  and  impracticable  to 
expect  to  put  down  subscription-clubs  ;  while  Fox, 
an  acknowledged  authority  on  such  matters,  averred 
that  "  he  had  never  heard  of  an  Act  which  laid  down 
that  five  men  must  not  subscribe  ^5  apiece  to  provide 
a  substitute  for  the  one  among  them  that  might  be 
ballotted,  but  must  toss  up  which  of  them  must  pay 
^25."^  But  the  House  was  more  eager  to  condemn 
Yorke's  measures  than  to  consider  those  of  Pitt,  and  the 
majority  in  Addington's  favour  was  so  small  that  on  the 
following  day  he  resigned  office. 

Owing  to  difficulties  which  need  not  detain  us 
here,  fully  three  weeks  passed  before  Pitt  was  able  to 
form  a  new  Administration,  wherein  Lord  Camden  held 
the  office  of  Secretary  for  War  and  the  Colonies. 
Hence  Pitt  was  unable  until  the  5  th  of  June  to  bring 
forward  the  Bill  which  embodied  his  new  and  mature 
scheme  for  raising  men.  The  objects  which  he  set 
before  himself  were  good  and  statesmanlike,  namely, 
first,  to  put  an  end  to  the  competition  for  recruits 
between  the  Regular  Army,  the  Militia,  and  the  other 
forces  engaged  for  home-service  only  ;  secondly,  to 
abolish  the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  establishing  a  Per- 
manent Additional  Force  as  a  standing  foundation  for  the 
recruiting  of  the  Army.  As  a  first  step  he  proposed  to 
repeal  the  Army  of  Reserve  Act  and  reduce  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  Militia  to  its  original  figure  of  40,000 
men  for  England  and  8000  for  Scotland.  He  then 
proposed  to  merge  the  quota  of  the  Army  of  Reserve 
1  H.D.  Pitt,  25th  April  1804.  2  j^j^^  25th  April  1804. 


Ill  PITT'S  NEW  SCHEME  129 

and  of  the  Supplementary  Militia  into  one,  making  a  1804. 
total  force  of  79,000  men.^  As  fast  as  this  number  was 
diminished  by  the  enlistment  of  its  members  into  the 
Regular  Army,  the  counties  were  to  be  called  upon 
to  fill  the  vacancies,  with  the  proviso  that  in  no  one  year 
should  the  number  of  men  to  be  so  raised  exceed  one- 
sixth  of  the  entire  force.  In  plain  words,  he  proposed 
to  devise  machinery  for  establishing  a  Permanent 
Reserve  of  79,000  men  for  the  Army,  and  for  making 
good  any  drains  upon  it  to  the  extent,  at  most,  of  13,000 
men  annually,  over  and  above  any  recruits  that  might  be 
obtained  for  regiments  by  ordinary  and  voluntary  enlist- 
ment. As  an  encouragement  to  the  counties  to  favour 
this  measure  he  proposed,  if  the  men  were  produced,  to 
remit  all  fines  incurred  by  them  for  deficiencies  under 
the  Army  of  Reserve  Act. 