

Had  the  Army  of  Reserve  and  the  Supplementary 
Militia  stood  at  their  full  strength  at  this  time,  there 
would  have  been  no  occasion  to  put  the  new  Bill  into 
force  until  casualties  had  occurred  ;  but,  as  has  been 
told,  both  were  seriously  below  their  establishment,  and 
to  increase  them  to  the  appointed  figure  it  was  necessary 
to  raise  at  once  little  short  of  20,000  men.^  In  addition 
to  this  it  was  necessary  that  at  least  1 1 ,000  men 
should  be  levied  annually  to  replace  those  who  should 
have  volunteered  from  the  Army  of  Reserve  into  the 
Regular  Army,  the  first  instalment  falling  due  on 
1st  October  1805.  Altogether,  therefore,  the  scheme 
required  3 1 ,000  men  to  be  supplied  within  the  succeed- 
ing fifteen  months. 

How  was  this  number  to  be  obtained  .''  The  ballot 
had  broken  down,  having  produced,  thanks  to  the 
admission  of  substitutes,  an  indifferent  lot  of  men  and  a 
gigantic  rise  in  bounties.     The  first  step,  therefore,  was 

1  Army  of  Reserve  of  United  Kingdom,  49,880  ;  Supplementary 
Militia  of  Great  Britain  (Ireland  had  no  Supplementary  Militia), 
29,071.     Total,  78,951. 

2  Deficiencies  in  the  Army  of  Reserve,  1 2,477  ;  in  the  Militia, 
7305.     Total,  19,782. 

K 


I30  PITT'S  NEW  SCHEME  chap. 

1804  to  reduce  bounties  ;  and  Pitt  hoped  to  achieve  this  end 
by  putting  an  end  to  the  ballot  and  throwing  upon  the 
parochial  officers  the  responsibility  for  producing  the 
quota  of  men  assigned  to  their  parishes.  He  proposed 
to  empower  them  to  give  a  bounty,  which  was  not, 
under  penalties,  to  exceed  three-fourths  of  the  bounty 
offered  to  recruits  for  the  Regular  Army,  and  to  take  an 
appointed  share  of  it  for  their  own  encouragement.  On 
the  other  hand,  they  would  be  forbidden  to  accept  men 
who  resided  more  than  twenty  miles  away  from  the  parish, 
if  in  the  same  county,  or  more  than  ten  miles  distant 
if  in  another  county.  If  they  failed  to  produce  their 
men,  the  parish  was  to  be  fined  ^^20  for  every  man 
deficient  of  the  quota,  and  was  therewith  to  be  quit  of 
all  further  trouble.  Effective  Volunteers  and  Yeomanry 
were  to  be  exempted  from  the  rates  levied  for  payment 
of  these  fines.  The  money  thus  collected  was  to  be  paid 
into  the  general  recruiting  fund  of  the  kingdom  ;  and 
the  Commanding  Officer  of  the  regiment  concerned  was 
then  to  fill  the  vacancy  by  ordinary  recruiting,  paying 
the  same  bounty  as  that  offered  by  the  parish  and  no 
more.  Finally,  the  men  were  to  be  enlisted  for  home 
service  only,  and  for  five  years  or  until  six  months  after 
the  cessation  of  war  ;  and  the  bounties  proposed  were  as 
follows  : — For  the  Regular  Army,  ^^16  :  i6s.;  for  the 
Reserve,  under  the  new  Bill,  £12  :  12s.;  to  the  Re- 
servists upon  enlisting  in  the  Regular  Army,  ^^  10  :  los. 
The  fee  granted  to  the  parish  officers  for  each  recruit 
was  to  be^^i  :  is.  The  men  when  raised  were  to  be 
formed  into  second  battalions  to  the  Regular  Army, 
promotion  of  officers  being  interchangeable  between  the 
two  battalions,  so  that  the  attachment  between  officers 
'  and  men  might  encourage  enlistment  for  general  service. 