

Its  provisions  may  be  summarised  as  follows.  The 
Act  itself  was  known  as  the  Permanent  Additional  Force 
Act  (44  Geo.  III.  England,  cap.  ^6  ;  Scotland,  cap.  66  ; 
Ireland,  cap.  74)  ;  and  the  first  section  provided  for 
raising  58,235  men  in  England  ;  10,666  men  in  Scot- 
land ;  and  10,000  in  Ireland  (sec.  i).  The  men  already 
raised  under  the  Army  of  Reserve  Act  were  to  be 
accepted  towards  the  fulfilment  of  these  quotas.  Returns 
were  to  be  made  in  each  county  of  the  men  deficient  of 
the  full  quota  under  the  Army  of  Reserve  Act,  and  that 
number  was  to  be  forthwith  raised  as  part  of  the  force 
required  under  the  present  Act  (sec.  2).  Ample  facili- 
ties were  given  for  comparison  of  the  returns  of 
deficiencies  presented  by  the  counties  and  by  the  In- 
spector-General of  the  Army  of  Reserve,  and  for  the 
adjustment  of  differences  between  them  (sees.  3-9). 
The  Militia  of  Great  Britain  was  to  be  reduced  to  its 
original  quota  under  the  Militia  Act  of  1802  (sec.  10), 
and,  in  cases  where  the  Militia  exceeded  that  strength, 
no  further  ballot  was  to  be  held  until  this  number  had 
been  reduced  as  aforesaid  (sec.  11).  In  counties  where 
the  Militia  was  below  its  quota,  the  deficiency  was  to 
be  raised  as  part  of  the  Additional  Force  under  the  Act 
(sec.  11),  unless  the  deficiency  fell  short  of  the  quota 
of  1 802  ;  in  which  case  the  numbers  short  of  the  quota 
were  first  to  be  made  good  (sec.  12).  For  the  year 
beginning  on  ist  October  1804,  and  ending  on  ist 
October  1805,  and  for  each  succeeding  year,  a  maximum 
of  9000  men  in  England,  of  1 800  men  in  Scotland,  and 
of  4000  men  in  Ireland  (14,800  in  all)  was  to  be  raised 
to  fill  the  vacancies  of  men  who  had  enlisted  in  the 


Ill  PITT'S  RECRUITING  ACT  133 

Regular  Army  from  the  Additional  Force  (sec.  15).  1804. 
Parish-officers  were  authorised  to  obtain  men,  and 
were  to  be  entitled  to  a  share  of  bounty  for  every  man 
produced  (sec.  20),  provided  such  men  had  resided  for 
thirty  days  in  the  parish  or  in  some  other  parish  not 
more  than  ttn.  miles  distant  from  it  in  the  same  county, 
and  provided  that  the  parish-officers  brought  a  certificate 
of  the  recruit's  residence  to  the  magistrate  on  attesting 
him  ;  the  penalty  for  refusing  to  bring  such  certificate 
being  a  fine  of£  i  to  £^  (sec.  21).  The  levying  of  rates 
and  raising  of  subscriptions  to  induce  persons  to  enlist 
was  forbidden,  and  the  penalty  for  offering  more  than 
the  prescribed  bounty  was  a  fine  of  ^^20  (sec.  22).  The 
bounty  was  not  to  exceed  three-fourths  of  the  bounty 
given  for  the  Regular  Army  ;  it  was  to  be  paid  out  of 
the  Imperial  Treasury  ;  and  it  was  to  be  accepted  in 
lieu  of  all  payments  and  allowances  prescribed  by  the 
Army  of  Reserve  Act  (sec.  24).  Parishes  failing  to 
produce  men  within  one  month  after  notice  given  (in 
the  first  instance,  within  six  weeks  after  the  passing  of 
the  Act)  were  to  be  fined  ^20  for  every  man  deficient, 
after  which  the  Commanding  Officer  of  the  corps  con- 
cerned was  to  be  at  liberty  to  enlist  recruits  to  the 
number  deficient,  for  the  bounty  named  in  section  24 
and  no  more  (sec.  26).  The  men  were  to  be  enlisted 
for  five  years  or  until  six  months  after  the  signing  of 
peace,  and  were  to  swear  that  they  were  not  lame, 
ruptured,  or  subject  to  fits  (sec.  28).  If  a  parish  paid 
its  fine  for  any  man  deficient,  but  managed  to  produce 
a  man  before  a  recruit  had  been  enlisted  by  the  Com- 
manding Officer,  three-fourths  of  the  fine  were  to  be 
remitted  (sec.  33).  Rates  levied  for  payment  for  fines 
were  to  be  separated  from  the  poor  rates.  Effective 
Yeomen  and  Volunteers  and  Militiamen  serving  by 
person  or  substitute  were  exempted  from  such  rates,  if 
the  property  on  which  they  were  assessed  for  poor  rates 
did  not  exceed  the  annual  value  of  j^20. 