

The  most  noticeable  point  in  the  Act,  apart  from 
the  dispensation  with  the  ballot,  was  the  shifting  of  the 


134  VOLUNTEER  ACT,  1804  chap. 

1804.  expense  of  bounties  from  the  parochial  funds  to  the 
Imperial  Treasury,  thus  marking  a  temporary  advance 
in  the  more  equitable  distribution  of  the  expense  of 
recruiting  the  Army. 

II 

A  few  weeks  before  this  Act,  Pitt's  administration 
passed  also  the  Volunteer  Consolidation  Act  (44  Geo. 
III.  cap.  54  ;  5th  June  1804),  which  in  its  final  shape 
contained  the  following  provisions.  First,  the  Volun- 
teer Act  of  1802,  the  Billeting  Act  of  1803,  and  the 
Exemption  Act  recently  passed,  were  repealed.  The 
King  was  empowered  to  continue  the  services  of 
accepted  corps  and  accept  the  offers  of  new  corps 
(sec.  i).  Volunteers  entitled  to  exemption  under  the 
repealed  Acts  were  to  have  the  benefit  of  the  n  until  the 
1st  of  July  1 804  (sec.  2).  Effective  Volunteers  were 
also  to  be  exempt  from  the  ballot  for  the  Militia  and 
for  any  additional  force;  though  such  corps  as  had 
disclaimed  exemption  were  to  be  held  to  their  bargain 
(sec.  4)  ;  and  an  effective  member  was  defined  to  be 
one  who  in  the  cavalry  attended  four  days  and  in  the 
infantry  eight  days  of  exercise  every  three  months 
(sec.  5).  Men  belonging  to  corps  to  which  arms  and 
accoutrements  had  not  been  issued  were  equally  entitled 
to  the  exemption  if  they  duly  attended  muster  and 
exercise  (sec.  6).  Men  on  leave  of  absence  were  per- 
mitted to  do  the  whole  of  their  drills  within  four  months 
(sec.  7),  or  in  two  successive  periods  of  four  months 
each  (sec.  8).  It  is  to  be  noted  that  effective  men 
enrolled  in  the  Yeomanry  or  Volunteers  were  by  the 
new  Act  not  exempted  from  the  ballot,  but  from  service 
in  the  Militia  and  Army  of  Reserve,  their  names  being 
kept  on  the  ballot- list  so  that  they  might  be  called  up 
at  once  if  discharged  from  the  Volunteers  (sec.  17)  ; 
and  the  like  exemption  was  guaranteed  to  them  after 
the  signature  of  peace  if  they  continued  to  serve  as 
effective  Volunteers  throughout  the  war  (sec.  18). 
Infantry   corps   voluntarily   assembling   for  permanent 


Ill  VOLUNTEER  ACT,  1804  135 

duty  were  subjected  to  the  Mutiny  Act  and  Articles  of  1804. 
War  (sec.  23)  ;  but  not  corps  of  Yeomanry  cavalry 
(sec.  24).  Officers  of  Yeomanry  and  Volunteers  were 
to  rank  with  those  of  the  Militia  and  Regular  Army 
as  the  youngest  of  their  respective  grades  (sec.  26). 
Commanding  Officers  were  authorised  to  discharge  men 
for  misconduct,  though  not  to  the  prejudice  of  any 
rules,  made  by  the  corps,  which  had  received  the  King's 
approval,  and  subject  always  to  the  King's  pleasure 
(sec.  27).  Commandants  were  further  empowered  to 
disallow  the  day  on  which  a  man  misbehaved  as  a  day 
of  attendance,  or  to  disallow  his  day's  pay,  unless  the 
case  were  otherwise  provided  for  by  the  rules  of  the 
corps  (sec.  28).  They  could  also  order  a  man  into 
custody  for  misbehaviour  for  so  long  as  the  corps  might 
remain  under  arms  on  the  occasion  (sec.  29).  The 
right  of  resignation  was  affirmed  conditionally  upon  a 
man  giving  fourteen  days'  notice,  delivering  up  his 
arms,  and  paying  all  fines  due  from  him  (sees.  30,  31). 
Upon  resignation  a  man  became  liable  to  serve  in  the 
Militia  or  any  Additional  Force  ;  and  the  Commanding 
Officer  was  required  to  certify  his  discharge  to  the  Clerk 
of  the  General  Meeting  of  the  Lieutenancy  (sec.  32). 
Persons  aggrieved  by  the  refusal  of  the  Commanding 
Officer  to  accept  their  resignation  might  appeal  to  two 
Deputy-Lieutenants,  whose  decision  was  to  be  final 
(sec.  33).  The  clause  in  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act 
allowing  2s.  6d.  a  day  to  be  paid  to  persons  employed  to 
instruct  Volunteers  was  repealed  (sec.  34).  On  being 
called  up  for  active  service  two  guineas  were  to  be  paid 
to  the  Captains  for  each  man,  and  when  called  out  for 
permanent  duty,  one  guinea ;  for  which  sums  the 
Captain  was  required  to  account  to  the  men  (sec.  36). 
Another  guinea  was  to  be  allowed  them  on  return  from 
active  service  (sec.  39).  Finally,  no  future  rules  and 
regulations  of  Volunteer  corps  were  to  *be  binding 
unless  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  and  not 
disallowed  by  the  King  (sec.  S^)  '^  ^^^  ^^^  right  was 
reserved  to  the  King  of  annulling  any  rules  which  might 