

^  Stanhope's  Life  of  Pitt,  iv,  223-224. 

2  Corres.  de  Napoleon,  ^7^7-  Robert  Craufurd's  criticism  in 
the  House  of  Commons  was  precisely  to  the  same  effect — Craig's 
force  was  larger  than  was  wanted  for  defensive  purposes  and  too 
small  to  take  the  offensive. 


Ill  EXPEDITION  TO  THE  CAPE         149 

Maida  in  1806,  a  brilliant  action  which  might  have  been       1805. 
turned  to  great  account  had  not  both  the  General  and 
the  Admiral  concerned  been  shallow  impostors. 

The  expedition  to  the  Cape  had  been  originally 
designed  to  reinforce  the  West  Indies,  in  consequence 
of  Villeneuve's  abortive  raid  on  the  Windward  Islands. 
It  was  not  ready  until  the  end  of  May  ;  and  mean- 
while Nelson's  pursuit  of  the  French  Admiral  made  the 
despatch  of  a  force  to  the  Antilles  unnecessary.  At 
the  end  of  July,  therefore,  its  destination  was  altered  to 
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  It  numbered  rather  more 
than  6000  men  under  Sir  David  Baird  ;  and,  reaching 
the  Cape  after  a  very  tedious  passage,  compelled  the 
Dutch  to  yield  up  the  Colony  on  the  i8th  of  January 
1806.  This  object  accomplished,  Baird  was  persuaded 
by  the  Commodore,  Sir  Home  Popham,  to  lend  him  a 
battalion  for  an  absurd  expedition  to  Buenos  Ayres, 
which,  as  shall  presently  be  seen,  entangled  England, 
much  against  the  wishes  of  the  Government,  in  unprofit- 
able operations  in  that  quarter. 

Meanwhile  during  the  spring  and  summer  of  1805 
England  awaited  Napoleon's  attack  with  breathless 
suspense.  Towards  the  end  of  June  confidence  in  the 
security  of  the  British  Isles  seems  to  have  been  pretty 
firmly  established  ;  but  Robert  Craufurd  warned  the 
Commons  that  the  danger  was  not  yet  passed.  The 
enemy,  he  said,  might  draw  off  our  naval  force  to  the 
West  Indies,  and,  hurrying  back  to  Europe,  gain 
temporary  command  of  the  Channel,  capture  the  anchor- 
age of  the  Downs,  and  bring  their  army  over.  Mr. 
Bragge,  the  Secretary  at  War,  answered  this  by  a  smile, 
whereupon  Craufurd  retorted  that  the  plan  had  actually 
been  proposed  by  the  Marquis  de  Bouille  to  Count  de 
Grasse  in  178 1,  before  the  battle  of  the  Saints.  It  is 
curious  that  Craufurd  should  actually  have  divined 
Napoleon's  intentions.^  Once  indeed,  on  the  night 
of  the  15th  of  August,  when  some  burning  rape- 
straw  was  mistaken  for  a  beacon,  a  false  alarm  was 
1  H.D.  Commons,  28th  June  1805. 


I50       NAPOLEON'S  MARCH  TO  ULM     chap. 

1805.  given,  and  all  the  forces  in  Derbyshire  and  the  West 
Riding  of  York  at  once  got  under  arms.  The  behaviour 
of  the  Volunteers  generally  on  this  occasion  was  most 
praiseworthy.  The  Rotherham  infantry  in  particular,  a 
battalion  nearly  six  hundred  strong,  was  at  its  appointed 
rendezvous,  with  all  its  waggons  and  every  man  present, 
within  twelve  hours,  having  made  a  march  of  twenty- 
two  miles.^  But  Napoleon  was  never  really  in  a  condi- 
tion to  execute  his  project.  He  had  started  on  the 
wrong  lines  by  constructing  a  flotilla  of  vessels  which 
were  designed  to  be  both  fighting  ships  and  transports, 
but  answered  the  purpose  of  neither.  The  difficulty  of 
bringing  these  small  craft  to  the  ports  of  the  Channel  in 
the  face  of  the  British  cruisers  was  very  formidable,  and 
even  when  assembled  there  they  could  not,  despite  of 
much  money  spent  on  improving  the  harbours,  put 
to  sea  in  less  than  two  tides.  The  distribution  of  the 
troops  among  these  boats  was  indeed  settled  upon  paper, 
but  except  on  paper  it  was  absurd.  The  great  man's 
orders  to  his  fleets  had  also  been  faulty  ;  and  as  a  matter 
of  fact  he  never  had  more  than  90,000  troops  ready  for 
immediate  embarkation.  Upon  the  failure  of  his  fleets 
to  clear  the  Channel,  therefore,  he  broke  up  his  camp  at 
Boulogne  and  marched  on  the  28  th  of  August  for  the 
Danube,  covering  his  failure  by  a  number  of  letters 
wherein  he  laid  the  blame  for  all  shortcomings  upon 
his  Admirals. 