

Thus,  at  every  turn,  the  old  difficulty  recurred. 
The  Volunteers  had  undoubtedly  improved  greatly 
under  permanent  duty,  but  large  numbers  of  them  were 
still  utterly  useless.  In  Norfolk,  in  May  1804,  the 
Inspector  could  report  only  three  corps  out  of  thirty- 
three  to  be  fit  for  service  ;  and  the  Lord-Lieutenant, 
himself  a  General,  was  obliged  to  confirm  his  judgment.^ 
This  was  a  maritime  county,  which  had  enjoyed  for 
eight  months  the  privilege  of  sending  men  on  per- 
manent duty  ;  and  the  condition  of  the  Volunteers  in 
inland  counties  can  hardly  have  been  as  good.  Moreover, 
such  improvements  as  there  were  had  been  bought  only 
by  enhanced  expenditure,  by  doles  of  pay  for  this, 
allowances  for  that,  bounties  or  marching-guineas  for 
the  other.  And  though  the  men  might  be  steady  on 
parade  and  proficient  at  their  manual  exercise,  their 
officers  remained  always  a  weak  point ;  nor  was  this 
weakness  likely  to  be  strengthened  while  their  jealousies 

^  I.D.  vol.  Ixiv.  Suffolk  Mil.  Sec.  to  Mr,  King  (with  enclosure), 
4th  Aug.  1804. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  Iviii.  L.L.  Norfolk,  to  S.S.  ist  May,  17th  June  1804. 


Ill  DEFECTS  OF  VOLUNTEERS         141 

forbade  them  to  work  together  under  a  competent  1804. 
instructor.  The  tone  of  the  entire  force  was  parochial, 
or  at  best  provincial,  never  national.  Its  commanders 
clamoured  for  non-commissioned  officers  from  the 
King's  Regular  regiments,  for  these  were  their  inferiors, 
or  at  most  their  equals  ;  but  Volunteer  officers  thought 
themselves  hardly  used  when  the  Colonels  of  the  Line 
declared,  very  truly,  that  their  sergeants  and  corporals 
could  not  be  spared  from  their  legitimate  work.  Yet 
they  revolted  from  guidance  by  the  King's  Regular 
officers,  who  knew  nothing  of  their  local  importance 
and  judged  them  simply  by  their  fitness  or  unfitness 
for  their  work.  It  must  be  remembered  also  that  they 
were  wholly  under  the  protection — one  cannot  call  it 
the  control — of  the  Home  Office  ;  the  War  Office  and 
Horse  Guards  having  no  part  in  them.  General 
Tarleton,  commanding  the  Severn  District,  complained 
to  the  Commander-in-Chief  that  he  could  not  get  a 
Yeoman  in  his  district  to  travel  for  him  five  miles  with 
an  official  order.  After  ten  days'  delay  he  received  a 
"  cold,  phlegmatic  answer  "  from  the  Adjutant-General 
that  he  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  Volunteers.  The 
reply  was  strictly  true,  nor  could  have  any  other  have 
been  returned.  Had  the  Adjutant-General  infused  any 
warmth  into  his  letter,  he  would  doubtless  have  added 
that  he  thanked  Heaven  that  he  had  nothing  to  do  with 
the  Volunteers,  seeing  that  their  obedience  was  volun- 
tary. When  on  permanent  duty,  which  it  must  be 
remembered  was  not  compulsory,  or  called  out  to  repel 
invasion,  the  Volunteers  were  indeed  bound  under 
military  law  to  obey  the  King's  Generals,  but  at  other 
times  they  could  and  did  snap  their  fingers  at  them,  and 
indeed  very  often  at  every  other  authority.  Well 
might  Craufurd  exclaim  that  so  delicate  a  machine  was 
unfit  for  war. 