


Ill  COST  OF  MILITIA  RECRUITS  147 

number  of  enlistments  still  fell  short  of  the  appointed  1805. 
tale,  the  process  was  repeated  for  another  ten  days,  after 
which  all  further  effort  was  to  be  abandoned  (sec.  7). 
The  recruits  were  allowed  to  choose  their  own  regi- 
ments, were  entitled  to  a  bounty  of  ten  guineas  (sec.  10), 
and  were  not  to  be  drafted  from  their  chosen  corps 
without  their  own  consent  (sec.  20).  Non-commis- 
sioned officers  retained  their  rank  upon  enlisting  into 
the  Line,  though  they  might  be  reduced  to  the  ranks 
for  misconduct  ;  but  no  sergeant  or  corporal  could 
enlist  as  such  into  the  Artillery  (sec.  13). 

Under  this  Act  10,696  Militiamen^  passed  into  the 
Regular  Army  between  the  loth  of  April  and  the  26  th 
of  June,  four-fifths  of  them  into  the  Infantry,  and  about 
one-tenth  (to  the  huge  indignation  of  many  Regular 
officers)  into  the  Marines.  It  is  noticeable  that  neither 
Middlesex  nor  Surrey  contributed  a  man  to  these 
figures  ;  and  that  Kent  with  two  battalions  of  Militia 
supplied  but  eleven  men.  Assuming  that  these  Militia- 
men received,  one  with  another,  ^20  to  serve  as  substi- 
tutes, their  net  cost  to  the  country  in  bounties  before 
they  could  be  finally  bribed  to  enter  the  Regular  Army 
amounted  to  some  ^^  3  30,000.  Had  they  been  enlisted 
directly  in  1803  they  would  have  been  obtained  for  one 
half  of  that  sum.  However,  by  these  means,  and  by 
contributions  from  the  Army  of  Reserve,  the  effective 
strength  of  the  Regular  Army,  infantry  and  cavalry, 
rose  from  152,000  on  the  ist  of  May  to  159,000  on  the 
I  St  of  June  ;  and  in  view  of  the  steady  ripening  of  the 
Coalition  of  Russia,  Austria,  and  Prussia  against  France, 
Pitt  decided  to  take  the  offensive. 


IV 

It  was  characteristic  of  the  man  that  he  could  not 
bring  himself  to  direct  the  whole  of  his  available  force 

1  But  another  return  in  W.  O.  Mi/a,  E.B.,  dated  5th  June,  gives 
the  figure  at  170  sergeants,  236  corporals,  10,755  ™c"-  Total, 
11,161. 


148    MEDITERRANEAN  EXPEDITION     chap. 

1805.  against  any  one  point.  Past  experience  might  have 
warned  him  against  frittering  away  his  troops  in  small 
detachments  ;  but  even  before  he  came  back  to  office  he 
had  foreshadowed  a  division  of  his  forces  between  the 
north  of  Germany  and  the  south  of  Italy  ;  ^  and  to 
these  expeditions  was  now  added  a  third  to  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope. 

The  first  of  these  armaments  was  that  designed  for 
the  Mediterranean,  which  seems  to  have  been  under 
consideration  as  early  as  February,  and  was  actually 
despatched  in  April,  before  the  drafting  of  the  Militia- 
men into  the  Line.  It  consisted  of  rather  fewer  than 
5000  men  under  Sir  James  Craig,  and  was  destined 
primarily  for  the  protection  of  Sicily,  but  secondarily  to 
join  the  Russians  in  operations  for  the  defence  of  Naples, 
to  occupy  Alexandria,  to  defend  Sardinia,  or  even  to 
capture  Minorca.  Napoleon's  comment  upon  it  was 
as  follows  :  "  The  celebrated  secret  expedition  entered 
Lisbon  on  the  7  th  of  May  and  left  it  on  the  loth. 
Whither  is  it  bound  ?  That's  the  problem.  My 
opinion  is  that  the  only  reasonable  thing  it  can  do  is  to 
capture  the  Cape  or  reinforce  Jamaica  or  the  Windward 
Islands.  If  it  is  destined  for  Malta  [its  actual  destina- 
tion in  the  first  instance]  all  the  better.  Nothing  can 
better  prove  the  folly  (jneptie)  of  the  English  Cabinet  ; 
for  these  combined  continental  movements  founded  on 
a  few  thousand  men  are  pygmy  combinations.  If  there- 
fore you  find  that  the  expedition  is  gone  to  Malta,  you 
may  rub  your  hands  (rejouissez  vous),  for  the  English 
will  have  deprived  themselves  of  6000  (sic)  men  and  of 
a  certain  number  of  ships."  ^  This  force  in  the  Medi- 
terranean, it  may  be  added,  did  little  profitable  work 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  war.  The  one  of 
its  achievements  which  is  remembered  is  the  battle  of 