

The  new  Act,  however,  set  doubts  upon  these 
points  at  rest,  and  in  September  the  Government  gave 
still  further  encouragement  to  the  training  of  Volun- 

1  I.D.  vol.  xxxviii.  Lord  Haddington  to  S.S.  5th  June  1804  ; 
vol.  xlvii.  L.L.  Durham,  to  S.S.  6th  Feb.  1804;  vol.  xlix.  R. 
Lascelles  (Glamorgan)  to  S.S.   1 8th  Jan.  1804. 


Ill      IMPROVEMENT  OF  VOLUNTEERS     139 

teers  by  ofFerIng  ten  days'  pay  to  all  who  would  go  out  1804. 
for  ten  days  of  additional  exercise  during  the  following 
six  months.^  Under  such  stimulus  and  with  the  experi- 
ence of  continuous  service  the  Volunteers  improved 
rapidly  during  1804.  The  number  of  men  who  came 
out  for  permanent  duty  between  the  ist  of  November 
1803  and  the  5th  of  March  1804  was  just  over  80,000 
of  all  ranks  ;  and  as  these  belonged  to  the  maritime 
counties  only,  the  figure  is  creditable  to  them.  In  June 
Pitt  announced  that  the  number  had  been  swelled  to 
between  100,000  and  150,000.^  In  fact,  the  men 
enjoyed  permanent  duty.  The  unmarried  only  were  by 
preference  taken  for  it,  and  their  reunions  were  some- 
times so  festive  that  critics  were  found  who  denounced 
them  as  demoralising  to  the  population.  No  doubt 
permanent  duty  had  its  drawbacks ;  but  no  one  who 
has  witnessed  the  salutary  change  wrought  in  country 
lads  by  even  a  week  of  continuous  training  can  doubt 
that  those  drawbacks  were  far  outweighed  by  the 
advantages. 

Meanwhile  arrangements  had  also  been  made  for 
forming  the  Yeomanry  and  Volunteers  into  brigades, 
the  proportion  being  as  follows  : — 


Eastern  District  .         .  2  brij 

jadesof  cav 

airy 

,  4  brigad 

Southern  District         .   i 

>» 

j> 

3 

South-Western  District  i 

»j 

»» 

4 

South  Inland  District  .   i 

» 

ii 

4 

London       .         .         .1 

»» 

>» 

7 

Home         .         .         .0 

» 

»> 

6 

Further,  every  effort  was  made  to  group  small  isolated 
corps  into  regiments  and  battalions,  not  always  with 
success,  owing  to  the  bitterness  of  local  jealousies. 
Norfolk  and  Suffolk  gave  particular  trouble  in  this 
matter ;  and  indeed  it  was  from  Suffolk  that  there  came 
the  only  protest  against  the  new  system  of  brigades. 
Lord  Rous  declaiming  vigorously  against  the  Suffolk 
Yeomanry    being   brigaded    under   a  regular    officer, 

1  Circular  of  24th  September  1804. 
2  H.D.  1 8th  June  1804. 


I40  DEFECTS  OF  VOLUNTEERS       chap. 

1804.  General  Money,  if  called  out  to  repel  actual  invasion. 
Lord  Rous,  it  may  be  observed,  was  not  himself  an 
officer  of  Yeomanry  at  this  time,  though  he  had  been 
so  during  the  last  war.  Moreover,  though  Suffolk  sup- 
ported thirteen  troops  of  Yeomanry,  these  were  so  jealous 
of  each  other  that  they  were  not  even  regimented. 
Lastly,  Money,  though  a  retired  General  of  considerable 
reputation,  had  given  enormous  pains  to  the  Volun- 
teers, and  actually  commanded  a  regiment  of  Norfolk 
Yeomanry.  However,  the  General  of  the  District,  Sir 
James  Craig,  was  obliged  to  come  forward,  smooth  the 
ruffled  feathers  of  the  incensed  magnate,  and  point  out 
ostentatiously  to  Money,  who  had  been  guilty  of  no 
more  than  announcing  the  organisation  of  the  brigade 
in  orders,  that  his  command  as  a  brigadier  was  strictly 
limited  to  the  event  of  active  service,  and  that  great 
caution  must  be  employed  in  proclaiming  such  facts,  as 
the  Volunteer's  obedience  was  only  voluntary.^ 