

Ill 

So  the  winter  of  1 804  drew  on,  and  the  Govern- 
ment's  attention  became  fixed  chiefly  on  Pitt's  Per- 


142  FAILURE  OF  PITTS  ACT  chap. 

1804.  manent  Additional  Force  Act.  Passed  on  the  25  th  of 
June,  it  allowed  a  fortnight's  grace  to  the  parish  officers 
to  master  its  contents,  and  one  month  more  for  the 
raising  of  the  allotted  number  of  men,  so  that,  according 
to  the  wording  of  the  law.  Ministers  expected  the  first 
batch  of  20,000  men  to  be  raised  by  the  9th  of  August. 
On  the  23rd  of  August  they  issued  a  circular  to  the 
Lords-Lieutenant  asking  what  measures  they  were 
taking  to  execute  the  Act  and  with  what  success,  repeat- 
ing the  request  on  the  30th  of  August.  Answers  came 
in  slowly,  but  were  uniformly  the  same.  Hardly  a  man 
could  be  obtained  ;  the  area  of  recruiting  was  too  much 
restricted  ;  the  bounties  were  too  low  ;  the  reward  to 
parish  officers  was  too  small.  The  Lieutenant  of  Norfolk 
added  that  recruiting  was  much  hampered  by  the  number 
of  young  labouring  men  serving  in  the  Volunteers.  It 
made  little  difference  what  reasons  were  assigned.  The 
parish  officers,  after  perusal  of  the  Act,  had  made  up 
their  minds  that  it  was  hopeless  to  obtain  recruits  under 
such  conditions,  and  that  the  Government  only  wanted 
fines  in  lieu  of  men  ;  so  they  christened  the  measure 
"TheTwenty  Pound  Act,"  and  resigned  themselves  to  the 
inevitable  payment.  The  Government,  therefore,  issued 
another  circular  on  the  25th  of  September,  pointing 
out  that,  after  all,  only  the  men  deficient  of  the  Army 
of  Reserve  and  Supplementary  Militia  were  required 
for  the  present,  and  that  the  limit  of  time  would  be  ex- 
tended to  the  15  th  of  November,  after  which  the  officers 
of  the  Regular  Army  would  receive  orders  to  raise 
recruits,  and  the  fine  of  £20  upon  the  parishes  would  be 
rigorously  enforced.  This  produced  no  greater  result 
than  an  exceedingly  sharp  answer  from  Inverness  to 
the  effect  that,  from  a  county  where  some  districts  were 
two  hundred  miles  distant  from  the  county  town,  the 
Secretary  of  State  was  expecting  impossibilities.^ 

The  Government  then  sent  round  another  circular, 
of  the   17th   of  October,  conceived  in  terms  of  bland 
insinuation.      Would    it   not    help    the    levy   if    the 
1  I.D.  vol.  xxxviii.  L.L.  Inverness,  to  S.S.  4th  Oct.  1804. 


Ill        DENUNCIATION  OF  PITT'S  ACT       143 

churchwardens  and  overseers  of  every  parish  were  1804. 
informed  that  they  would  receive  a  guinea,  free  of  all 
deductions,  for  every  man  produced,  and  that  for  every 
man  so  found  no  expense  or  burden  would  be  laid  upon 
the  parish,  whereas  for  every  recruit  raised  by  the 
Colonels  of  regiments  a  fine  would  be  imposed  ?  "  It  is 
conceived,"  continued  the  circular,  *'  that  by  such  a 
comparative  statement  it  will  be  made  manifest  to  the 
inhabitants  how  materially  they  will  consult  their  own 
advantage  by  providing  the  men  required  of  them  by 
the  15th  of  November."  Then  at  last  there  was  some 
little  sign  of  movement  in  the  counties  ;  and  it  was  high 
time,  for  by  the  ist  of  November  only  778  recruits  had 
been  raised  out  of  the  19,782  which  were  required,  and 
of  these  95  had  deserted.  The  amelioration  was  not 
such  as  to  prevent  violent  attacks  upon  the  measure 
when  Parliament  met  in  January  1805.  Returns  were  1805. 
called  for,  and  on  the  1 5th  of  February  a  motion  was 
brought  forward  in  the  Lords  for  the  repeal  of  the  Act 
as  a  total  failure.  Lord  Hawkesbury  defended  it, 
alleging  that  practically  it  had  not  come  into  force  until 
November  1804,  and  that  during  the  past  fortnight  it 
had  produced  300  recruits  a  week,  at  which  rate  it  would 
bring  in  1 1 ,000  in  the  year.  Upon  this  very  incon- 
clusive assurance  the  House  rejected  the  motion  for 
repeal ;  but  a  week  later  (21st  February)  the  attack  was 
renewed  in  the  Commons  by  far  more  powerful  advo- 
cates. Windham  led  the  way  with  a  detailed  criticism 
of  all  past  measures  of  recruiting,  and  pointed  out  that 
such  men  as  had  been  raised  had  been  produced  chiefly 
by  crimps  who,  in  spite  of  the  professed  limitation  of 
the  bounty,  received  in  practice  both  the  fines  from  the 
parish  and  the  sums  allotted  to  tempt  recruits,  making 
a  total  of  ;^34  for  every  man.  He  contended  that  the 
Army  could  be  maintained  by  voluntary  enlistment  if 
it  were  made  attractive  enough  ;  and  to  that  end  he 
advocated  short  or  (as  it  was  then  called)  limited  service, 
the  abolition  of  drafting,  special  regulations  of  service  in 
the  West  Indies,  abolition  of  flogging  except  for  certain 