


152        EXPEDITION  TO  THE  WESER     chap. 

1805.  division  of  11,000  men  sailed  in  November  from  the 
Downs  to  Cuxhaven  under  General  Don,  and  took 
post  on  the  Lower  Weser,  the  Russians  having  already 
stationed  themselves  higher  up  the  river ;  and  in 
December  Lord  Cathcart,  following  with  the  rest  of  the 
force,  found  himself,  by  January  1 806,  in  command  of 
over  26,000  men,  without  counting  nearly  3000,  who 
had  been  wrecked  or  driven  back  by  a  storm.  In  all, 
therefore,  Pitt  had  sent  out  some  30,000  troops,  16,000 
of  them  British,  to  North  Germany,  but  unfortunately  too 
late.  On  the  2nd  of  December  the  battle  of  Austerlitz 
was  fought,  which  put  an  end  to  all  hopes  of  a  diver- 
sion in  favour  of  Moravia.  Prussia,  by  a  fatal  error, 
had  kept  herself  aloof  from  the  struggle  ;  and  the  Tsar, 
by  a  still  more  fatal  error,  after  the  defeat  of  Austerlitz, 
put  his  troops  in  North  Germany  under  the  command 
of  the  King  of  Prussia.  Strong  hints  reached  Cathcart 
from  Berlin  that  he  would  do  well  to  leave  the  country, 
and  in  February  1806  he  re-embarked  his  whole  force 
for  England.  Prussia  must  be  held  mainly  responsible 
for  this  fiasco  ;  and  yet  it  should  be  observed  that  if 
Cathcart's  troops  had  been  sent  to  reinforce  Craig, 
they  would  have  retained  their  power  to  act  with 
effect  whatever  the  issue  of  Austerlitz. 

However,  the  troops  were  at  least  intact ;  and  if 
the  Permanent  Additional  Force  Act  had  fulfilled  Pitt's 
hopes,  there  would  have  been  fair  prospect  of  really 
telling  operations  in  1806.  But  nothing  could 
galvanise  that  unhappy  measure  into  life.  After  a  year 
of  disappointment  Ministers  sent  another  circular,  on 
the  1 6th  of  September,  to  the  Lords-Lieutenant,  request- 
ing full  details  of  their  proceedings  with  regard  to 
the  execution  of  the  Act,  and  offering  a  new  scale  of 
rewards  for  recruits.  The  reward  for  recruiting  parties 
for  the  Regular  Army  was  raised  from  ^^3  :  3s.  to 
;^5  :  I2S.  for  every  approved  recruit.  ^^4  :  4s.  also  was 
offered  for  every  man  enlisted  for  the  Permanent 
Reserve  by  order  of  the  Commanding  Officers  of  Regular 
battalions;   and  ^^4  :  4s.   in  lieu   of  ^^i  :  is.   to   parish 


HI 


PITT'S  RECRUITING  ACT 


^S3 


officers,  of  which  £i  :  is.  was  to  be  paid  to  the  actual 
bringer  of  the  recruit.^  The  object  herein  was  stated 
to  be  that  parish-officers  should  be  able  to  offisr  to  all 
persons  who  enlisted  men  for  them  the  same  sum  as 
was  appointed  by  the  King's  regulations  for  the  Regular 
Army,  namely  ^2:12:6.  The  liberality  and  advantages 
of  this  plan,  as  of  former  plans,  were  dwelt  upon  at  exces- 
sive length,  and  the  terror  of  the  fine  upon  the  parish 
was  exhibited  for  the  tenth  time  in  naked  and  painful 
contrast  to  the  temptations  of  the  bounty.  Nothing, 
however,  could  stir  the  apathy  of  the  parochial  officers ; 
wherefore,  after  a  preliminary  call  for  returns  from  the 