

The  discussion  upon  this  important  subject  found  its 
place  on  the  second  reading  of  the  Mutiny  Act,  but 
there  was  little  worth  noting  in  the  debate.  Windham 
dwelt  upon  three  principal  points  only.  The  first  was 
positive,  namely,  the  benefit  to  the  Army  of  attracting, 
as  he  trusted,  a  better  class  of  recruit.  The  second  and 
third  were  negative.  He  maintained  that  the  loss  of 
men  discharged  would  not  be  serious  ;  and  that,  judging 
by  the  experience  of  the  East  India  Company's  Army,  it 
would  not  be  a  formidable  inconvenience.  Finally,  the 
first  term  of  service  was  fixed  at  seven  years  for  the 
infantry,  ten  years  for  the  cavalry,  and  twelve  for  the 
artillery,  provided  that  the  King  should  for  so  long 
require  the  recruits'  services  ;  to  which  Commanding 
Officers  on  any  foreign  station  could  add  six  months 
and  no  more,  at  their  discretion,  and  the  King  could 
add  three  years  by  proclamation  ;  the  latter  period, 
however,  to  determine  in  any  case  within  six  months 
of  the  signature  of  a  definite  treaty  of  peace.  Further, 
men  of  less  than  eighteen  years  of  age  were  not  to 
begin  to  reckon  their  term  of  service  until  they  were 
eighteen  (46  Geo.  III.  c.  66^  Schedules  A,  B). 

The  final  regulations  in  amplification  of  the  Act  were 
not  issued  until  7th  October  1806,  when  the  terms  were 
fixed  as  follows  : — 

Infantry   could    engage  and    re-engage    for    three 

1  46  Geo.  III.  c.  51,  23rd  May  1806. 
2  Military  Transactions,  Supplement,  p.  11. 


Ill  WINDHAM'S  ARMY  REFORMS        165 

distinct  periods,  each  of  seven  years  ;  cavalry  for  three  1 806. 
distinct  periods  of  ten  years,  seven  years,  and  seven 
years ;  artillery  for  three  periods  of  twelve  years,  five 
years,  and  five  years.  No  man  could  re-enlist  until 
within  twelve  months  of  the  end  of  his  first  period 
of  service,  or  until  within  two  years  of  the  expiration 
of  his  second  period.  No  man  could  re-enlist  into 
another  regiment  until  completely  discharged  from  the 
first.  The  period  of  service  could  be  extended  for  six 
months  by  the  Commanding  Officer  of  any  colony  or 
station  abroad,  and  by  the  King,  in  respect  of  all  men 
serving  either  at  home  or  abroad,  until  six  months 
after  the  signature  of  a  definite  treaty  of  peace,  provided 
that  such  extension  of  service  should  in  no  case  exceed 
three  years.  Men  concluding  their  last  period  of  service 
could  not  be  called  upon  to  serve  for  more  than  six 
months  after  its  expiration.  No  man  could  be  drafted 
to  another  regiment  without  his  own  consent.  Every  two 
years  of  service  in  the  East  or  West  Indies  were  to  count 
as  three.  Every  man  who  had  earned  his  discharge  was 
entitled  to  a  free  passage  home,  and  to  marching- 
money  to  carry  him  from  the  place  of  discharge  to  his 
own  dwelling.  The  pay  of  corporals  and  privates  in 
the  cavalry  was  to  be  raised  by  one  penny  a  day  upon  their 
re-engagement  for  a  second  term,  and  again  for  a  third 
term  of  service.  The  pension  to  all  ranks  of  non-com- 
missioned officers  and  to  privates  after  completion  of 
their  second  term  was  fivepence  a  day.  At  the  con- 
clusion of  the  third  term  sergeants  could  retire  on  is.  to 
IS.  lod.;  corporals  on  is.  to  is.  6d.;  and  privates  on 
IS.  a  day.  If  they  served  beyond  their  third  period, 
they  were  entitled  to  an  extra  halfpenny  a  day. 