

1806.  After    this    preamble    he    discussed    the   means   of 

making  it  an  eligible  calling.  High  pay,  though  the 
only  certain  method  of  ensuring  his  object,  he  rejected 
as  economically  impossible  ;  but  there  remained  encour- 
agements, rewards,  and  short  service.  As  to  encourage- 
ments, the  dignity  of  the  Service  had  been  impaired  by 
the  Volunteers,  but  there  was  still  the  resource  of  a 
generous  provision  for  aged  and  disabled  soldiers.  As 
to  rewards,  he  considered  that  they  had  been  too  much 
neglected  in  favour  of  rigorous  discipline  which  drove 
men  to  desertion  ;  and  to  enforce  this  point  he  reminded 
the  House  that  of  13,000  men  raised  under  Pitt's  Addi- 
tional Force  Act  2800  had  deserted.  Apart  from  this, 
however,  looking  to  the  unpopularity  of  service  in  the 
West  Indies,  he  advocated  an  additional  allowance  to 
men  serving  in  the  Colonies.  But  the  reform  upon 
which  he  relied  above  all  others  was  short  service,  which 
both  he  and  Robert  Craufurd  had  already  frequently 
pressed  upon  the  Government.  To  this  end  he  pro- 
posed that  men  should  be  enlisted  first  for  seven  years, 
such  being  the  usual  term  of  apprenticeship,  and  should 
enjoy  the  usual  privilege  on  discharge  of  exercising  their 
trade  wherever  they  wished.  If  at  the  close  of  his  first 
term  a  man  was  ready  to  re-engage  for  a  second  period 
of  seven  years,  he  was  to  receive  extra  pay  of  sixpence  a 
week  and  be  entitled  after  fourteen  years'  service  to  a 
pension  for  life.  If  he  re-engaged  for  a  third  term  his 
extra  pay  was  to  be  raised  to  one  shilling  a  week,  and  at 
the  end  of  twenty-one  years'  service  he  was  to  be  assured 
of  a  full  Chelsea  pension  of  one  shilling  a  day.  Incident- 
ally Windham  proposed  to  increase  the  whole  of  the 
Chelsea  allowances,  so  that  the  first  class  of  pension 
should  be  worth  a  shilling  a  day,  the  second  ninepence, 
and  the  third  sixpence.  The  grand  difficulty,  namely 
that  of  men  whose  service  expired  abroad  in  time  of  war, 
he  proposed  to  face  boldly  by  enacting  that  Commanding 
Officers  should  be  empowered  to  retain  them  for  six 
months  beyond  their  term  and  for  no  longer,  at  the 
end  of  which  period  they  were  to  be  entitled  to  their 


Ill  SHORT  SERVICE  i6i 

discharge  and  to  a  free  passage  home.  As  to  the  existing  1 806. 
Army,  the  intention  was  to  discharge  no  man  until  he 
had  completed  his  twenty-one  years,  but  to  grant  the 
additional  sixpence  a  week  to  all  who  had  served  more 
than  seven  and  less  than  fourteen  years,  and  the 
additional  shilling  to  all  who  had  served  more  than 
fourteen  and  less  than  twenty-one  years. 

The  scheme  was  a  bold  one,  but  it  came  as  less  of  a 
surprise  than  might  have  been  expected,  for  the  Duke 
of  York  had  circulated  a  sketch  of  it,  with  some  modi- 
fications, in  June  1804,  to  fourteen  General  Officers, 
seven  of  whom  could  be  reckoned  the  most  distin- 
guished men  in  the  Army.  Their  replies  differed  very 
greatly.  General  Hewett,  the  Inspector-General  of 
Recruiting,  strongly  opposed  it,  alleging  the  difficulty 
and  expense  of  supplying  foreign  garrisons  and  prefer- 
ring the  system,  favoured  by  Pitt,  of  establishing  a  Per- 
manent Reserve  of  70,000  men,  of  whom  20,000  might 
be  induced  to  volunteer  annually  into  the  Line. 
General  Fox,  the  brother  of  Charles  James,  on  the  other 
hand,  seconded  the  proposal,  opining  that  desertion 
would  be  less  frequent  and  the  service  less  unpopular  if 
men  returned  to  their  friends  young  and  well,  instead  of 
reappearing  only  as  worn-out  cripples  at  Chelsea  and 
Kilmainham.  He  did  not  fear  any  injury  to  discipline, 
believing  that  the  soldier,  being  better  contented,  would 
be  more  subordinate.  Incidentally  he  mentioned  that 
very  cruel  and  severe  punishments  had  been  disused 
from  about  1775  ^^^^^  about  1798,  when  they  had 
reappeared  and  seemed  likely  to  increase. 