

The  infantry  counted  three  regiments  (seven 
battalions)  of  Guards,  one  hundred  numbered  regiments 
of  the  Line,  three  Garrison  Battalions,'^  nine  Veteran 
Battalions,  six  independent  corps  specially  formed  for 
garrisons  in  West  Africa,  New  South  Wales,  and  Canada, 
and  the  Royal  Staff  Corps.  The  above  were  all 
European  troops,  and  to  them  may  be  added  nine  foreign 
battalions,  besides  the  ten  battalions  of  the  King's 
German  Legion. 

There  were,  further,  eight  West  India  Regiments 
and  four  independent  West  Indian  companies. 

The  artillery  numbered   17,927  of  all  ranks,  over 

1  These  figures  are  from  Castlereagh's  speech  of  3rd  April.  I 
use  them  because  they  include  the  artillery  ;  but  they  do  not  tally 
with  the  official  returns  in  Military  Transactions,  and  I  do  not 
think  that  the  omission  of  the  artillery  in  the  latter  accounts  for 
the  difference.  The  returns  show  a  grand  total  of  185,701,  of 
which  167,701  engaged  for  general  service. 

2  These  had  been  made  up  of  the  sixteen  Reserve  battalions, 
consisting  of  boys  and  worn-out  old  men  recruited  for  the  Army  of 
Reserve. 


158        STATE  OF  THE  ARMY,   1806         chap. 

1806.      and  above  five  recendy  created  batteries  of  the  King's 
German  Legion. 

Of  the  cavalry  five  regiments  only  were  abroad,  four 
out  of  the  five  being  in  India.  The  remainder  were  all 
at  home,  the  King's  German  Legion  being  among  them. 

Of  the  Infantry  fifty  British  battalions,  over  and 
above  all  foreign  and  provincial  corps,  were  quartered 
in  the  West  Indies,  in  Canada,  the  Mediterranean,  the 
Cape,  and  Ceylon.  Twenty  more  were  in  India.  Of 
the  foreign  corps  one  battalion  was  in  India,  and  the 
remainder  in  the  Mediterranean.  The  British  troops 
abroad  were,  generally  speaking,  the  best  in  the  Army  ; 
and  their  effective  strength  on  the  17th  of  March  1806 
was  67,033,  or  24,910  short  of  establishment. 

In  the  United  Kingdom  there  were,  besides  the  Guards, 
106  Regular  battalions  and  corps,  from  which,  however, 
must  be  deducted  eleven  Garrison  and  Veteran  Battalions, 
as  well  as  sixty-three  feeble  second  battalions  recently 
formed  out  of  the  Army  of  Reserve  and  the  Permanent 
Additional  Force.  These  last  were  still  very  weak  and 
raw,  and  for  the  most  part  were  not  bound  to  serve 
out  of  the  British  Isles.  In  all,  from  the  beginning  of 
the  war  up  to  March  1806,  23,370  men  had  volunteered 
into  the  Regular  Army  from  the  Army  of  Reserve  and 
the  Permanent  Additional  Force,  and  14,271  from  the 
Militia;  and  during  the  years  1803,  1804,  and  1805, 
23,860  recruits  had  been  raised  by  ordinary  recruiting, 
making  a  total  of  60,000  Regular  troops  of  less  than 
three  years'  service.-'  On  the  other  hand  there  could 
be  set  against  these,  six  mature  and  three  young 
battalions  of  the  King's  German  Legion. 