

There  remained  the  problem  of  reducing  the  expense 
of  the  Volunteers,  a  problem  which  needed  to  be  faced 
at  once,  for  the  private  subscriptions  were  nearly  ex- 
hausted, and  it  was  plain  most  of  the  corps  must  lean 
wholly  upon  the  Government  in  a  little  while.  Windham 
admitted  that  the  reduction  must  be  gradual ;  and  there- 
fore proposed  to  begin  by  diminishing  their  allowances, 
cutting  off  their  pay  and  granting  them  privileges  in 
return.  This  would,  of  course,  lead  to  a  curtailment  of 
their  numbers,  but  even  if  a  Volunteer  corps  were  dis- 
banded the  men  remained.  First,  therefore,  he  would 
reduce  the  eighty-five  days'  training  in  the  year  to 
twenty-six,  and  lessen  the  pecuniary  grants  to  the 
1  H.D.  Commons,  28th  June  1805,  Craufurd's  speech. 


m 


i68  NATIONAL  TRAINING  BILL      chap. 

1806.  Yeomanry  by  reducing  the  pay  of  the  officers,  and  the 
allowances  both  for  drill  sergeants  and  for  permanent 
duty.  As  to  the  Volunteers  he  would  give  them  clothing 
for  the  current  year,  but  would  not  promise  it  for  the 
following  year.  The  principle  upon  which  he  meant 
to  work  was  that  Volunteers  should  not  exist  except  at 
their  own  expense.  No  men  who  accepted  more  than 
arms  and  accoutrements  from  the  Government  were 
worthy  of  the  name  of  Volunteers  ;  and  nothing  in 
future  was  to  exempt  a  man  from  national  training 
unless  he  became  such  a  Volunteer. 

Next,  as  to  the  national  training  itself,  it  must  be 
enforced  by  compulsion,  but  by  as  light  compulsion  as 
possible  ;  and  he  therefore  proposed  that  men  should 
undergo  it  without  leaving  their  homes,  and  that  dis- 
cipline should  be  as  mild  as  might  be.  But  obviously 
all  could  not  be  trained  at  once,  and  there  must  be 
selection.  For  this  purpose  he  would  divide  the  able- 
bodied  men  into  three  classes,  and  choose  from  them  by 
ballot  200,000  men  to  be  trained  annually  for  twenty- 
six  days,  receiving  pay  of  one  shilling  a  day.  If  a 
certain  proportion  of  men  voluntarily  offered  themselves 
for  training,  the  ballot  might  be  so  far  diminished ;  and 
if.  a  sufficient  number  came  forward  he  would  be  pre- 
pared to  accept  it  in  lieu  of  the  full  quota  prescribed  by 
law.  The  training  itself  he  proposed  to  conduct  by 
means  of  detachments  of  Militia  and  of  the  Regulars 
nominally  attached  to  the  counties.  In  particular  he 
would  take  advantage  of  the  officers  appointed  to  the 
skeleton  second -battalions  raised  under  the  Army  of 
Reserve  Act,  who,  at  great  expense  to  the  country,  had 
been  placed  on  full  pay  from  the  half- pay  list  or 
removed  from  their  proper  duty  some  time  before  a 
recruit  had  been  levied,  and  had  stood  "  waiting  and 
gaping  for  their  men  like  oysters  at  ebb-tide."  ^  All  of 
these  provisions  and  regulations  for  the  present,  however, 
would  apply  to  England  only  ;  for  in  Scotland  the 
people  were  more  military  and  the  Volunteers  more 
1  H.D.  Commons,  3rd  April  1806. 