

This,  however,  was  the  expiring  struggle  of  the 
unfortunate  measure,  which,  none  the  less,  the  authori- 
ties at  the  Horse  Guards  pronounced  to  be  the  most 
valuable  that  had  ever  been  produced.  For  in  the  first 
place  it  connected  the  Army  with  the  country,  and  in 
the  second  permanently  established  second  battalions 
for  all  the  regiments  of  the  Line  that  were  serving 
abroad.^  Then  on  the  23rd  of  January  Pitt  died,  and 
his  administration  gave  place  to  the  "  Ministry  of  all 
the  Talents  "  under  the  presidency  of  Lord  Grenville. 
The  war  department  was  entrusted  to  Windham,  the 
great  advocate  of  short  service  and  the  uncompromising 
enemy  of  the  Volunteers,  who  entered  upon  his  new 
functions  on  the  5th  of  February  1806.  Thus  it  was 
evident  that  great  changes  of  military  policy  would 
certainly  ensue  ;  and  it  will  be  well,  therefore,  to  review 
the  situation  at  the  moment. 


In  the  first  place,  all  immediate  danger  of  invasion 
had  been  banished  by  the  total  defeat  of  the  French  and 
Spanish  fleets  at  Trafalgar  on  the  21st  of  October  1805. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  European  Coalition  had 
been  broken  up.  Austria,  heavily  defeated  at  Ulm 
and  Austerlitz,  withdrew  from  the  struggle  immediately 
after  the  latter  action,  and  on  the  26th  of  December 
agreed  to  the  humiliating  Treaty  of  Pressburg.  The 
Tsar,  though  mightily  discouraged,  was  determined  to 
fight  in  Polish  territory,  having  been  excluded  from 
that  of  Austria  under  an  armistice  preliminary  to  the 
Treaty.  But  as  the  disaster  of  Ulm  had  caused  the 
hasty  withdrawal  of  the  Austrians  from  Upper  Italy, 

1  I.D.  vol.  xciv.  L.L.  Berks,  to  S.S.  8th  Jan.   1806;  vol.  cii. 
L.L.  Sussex,  to  S.S.  3rd  Jan.  1806. 

2  Military  Transactions,  Supplement,  pp.  3-4. 


Ill  STATE  OF  THE  ARMY,  1806  157 

so  that  of  Austerlitz  had  forced  the  Tsar  to  recall  from  1 806. 
Naples  the  small  corps  with  which  Craig  had  hoped  to 
co-operate  ;  and  the  detachment  under  Craig's  orders 
was  obliged  therefore  to  stand  on  the  defensive  in  Sicily. 
All  offensive  movements  in  the  Mediterranean,  on  this 
account,  were  for  the  present  paralysed.  It  depended 
mainly  upon  the  attitude  of  Prussia  whether  an  effective 
field  for  offensive  operations  could  be  found  in  Northern 
Europe,  though  in  point  of  fact  no  better  sphere  could 
have  been  selected  than  that  of  Italy,  which  lay  per- 
fectly open  and  ready. 

The  effective  strength  of  the  Army  on  the  17  th  of 
March  1806  was,  including  artillery,  192,372  ;  of 
which  165,790  were  engaged  for  general  service,  and 
the  rest  for  home  service  only.^  The  cavalry  at  this 
time  consisted,  over  and  above  the  Blues  and  Life 
Guards,  of  thirty-two  regiments  of  Dragoon  Guards 
and  Dragoons,  to  which  must  be  added  five  regiments 
of  the  King's  German  Legion. 