

However,  in  case  the  supply  of  recruits  thus  obtain- 
able should  fail,  or,  as  Windham  put  it,  because  "  a 
custom  had  grown  up  for  Irish  Militiamen  to  enter  the 
Line,"  an  Act  was  passed  to  enable  Volunteers  from  the 
Irish  Militia  to  enlist  in  the  Army  (46  Geo.  III.  c.  1 24, 
2 1st  July  1806).  Hereby  the  King  was  empowered  to 
allow  Volunteers  from  the  Militia  to  enlist  in  the  Line 


1 66      WINDHAM'S  MILITIA  REFORMS   chap. 

1806.  during  twenty  days  in  each  year  after  the  24th  of  July 
(sees.  I,  2).  The  proportion  was  not  to  exceed  fifteen 
men  for  every  company  annually  (sec.  7),  and  if  a 
greater  number  offered  themselves,  the  Commanding 
Officer  might  select  among  them  which  he  would  let  go 
and  which  he  would  retain  (sec.  9).  The  establishment 
of  the  Irish  Militia  being  at  the  time  26,480,  this  source 
of  recruiting,  if  the  full  number  of  men  volunteered, 
would  bring  in  close  upon  4000  men  annually. 

Next  Windham  dealt  with  the  Militia,  which  he 
declared  to  be  our  true  army  for  home  defence,  and  for 
that  service  equal  to  any  part  of  our  force.  The  one 
change  which  he  purposed  to  institute  was  to  continue 
the  suspension  of  the  ballot,  and  to  rely  upon  a  limited 
bounty  to  produce  sufficient  recruits.  An  Act  was  there- 
fore passed  (46  Geo.  III.  cap.  91,  i6th  July  1 806)  for  the 
return  of  corrected  lists  of  persons  liable  to  serve  in  the 
Militia,  and  to  suspend  the  ballot  for  two  years.  This 
enacted  simply  that  new  lists  should  be  made  out  (sees. 
1-5)  ;  and  that  as  the  Militia  still  exceeded  the  original 
quota  fixed  by  the  Act  of  1802,  the  ballot  should  be 
suspended  for  two  years  (sec.  6).  But  powers  were 
reserved  to  the  King  to  cause  deficiencies  in  that 
original  quota  to  be  made  good  by  the  ballot  at  any 
time  (sec.  7). 

VI 

Finally,  Windham  attacked  the  great  question  of 
the  Volunteers  ;  and  here  he  was  absolutely  uncom- 
promising. He  admitted  that,  when  the  Levy  en  Masse 
Act  was  passed,  the  difficulty  of  enforcing  it  had  made 
him  favour  a  voluntary  system.  But  it  would  have  been 
a  very  different  system  to  that  which  was  actually 
adopted.  He  would  have  scattered  depots  of  arms  and 
schools  of  instruction  all  over  the  country,  and  trained 
the  mass  of  the  people  simply  to  fire  and  hit  their 
mark.  This  would  have  been  far  cheaper  than  the 
existing  arrangement,  which  was  exceedingly  expensive, 
and  moreover  locked  up  recruits  who  might  have  been 


Ill   WINDHAM'S  VOLUNTEER  REFORMS    167 

brought  into  the  Regulars.  He  would  have  encouraged  1806. 
the  Volunteer  Associations  to  arm  and  discipline  them- 
selves at  their  own  expense  ;  but  the  mass  of  the  people 
he  would  have  had  loosely  trained,  so  as  to  make 
useful  recruits  for  the  Regular  Army.  Another  matter 
also  needed  to  be  set  right,  namely,  section  26  of  the 
Volunteer  Consolidation  Act,  which  gave  rank  to 
officers  of  Volunteers  and  Yeomanry  next  to  those  of 
Militia  or  the  Regular  Army  of  the  same  grade.  This 
cheapening  of  military  rank  had  caused  great  discontent. 
Craufurd,  it  must  be  mentioned,  in  a  previous  debate 
had  adduced  the  case  of  a  retailer  of  tarts  and  cheese- 
cakes, who,  being  a  Colonel  of  Volunteers,  was  authorised 
to  give  orders  to  Lieutenant-Colonels  commanding 
Regular  battalions.  "  Such  a  man,"  he  said,  *'  might 
be  very  superior  to  such  officers  in  civil  life,  but  not  in 
military  ;  and  yet  if  a  General  of  a  brigade  were  killed 
in  action,  the  command  of  the  brigade  might  devolve 
upon  the  vendor  of  pastry."  ^  All  such  nonsense  as 
this  Windham  intended  to  bring  summarily  to  an  end 
by  enacting  that  in  no  case  should  an  officer  of  the 
Yeomanry  or  Volunteers  take  rank  above  field-officers 
of  the  Regulars  or  Militia.  An  Act  of  one  section 
(46  Geo.  in.  cap.  125)  to  this  effect  was  accordingly 
passed  on  the  21st  of  July. 