

N 


178        THE  VOLUNTEERS  REVIVED        chap. 

J  807.  King's  name  to  rouse  them  to  new  exertions.  In  a 
future  session  he  hoped  to  replace  this  "fleeting  and 
inapplicable  mass  "  by  a  Sedentary  Militia  ;  but  this  for 
the  present  was  impossible,  as  the  ballots  for  filling 
vacancies  in  the  Militia  were  already  beginning.-^ 

It  is  plain  that  the  Commander-in-Chief's  memoran- 
dum had  sunk  deeply  into  Castlereagh's  mind,  and  that, 
in  his  heart,  he  was  as  strongly  opposed  to  the  Volun- 
teers as  Windham  himself.  However,  for  the  present  he 
felt  constrained  to  humour  them,  and  as  a  first  step 
issued  a  circular  on  the  27th  of  April  announcing  that 
Windham's  allowances  would  be  granted  to  all  Volun- 
teer corps  whether  raised  after  the  24th  of  July  or  not, 
and  that  other  matters  concerning  the  Volunteers  were 
under  consideration.  This  last  phrase  was  coupled  with 
an  expression  of  sanguine  hope  that  the  measure  would 
encourage  Commanding  Officers  to  make  their  regiments 
efficient  and  prevent  the  gradual  decline  of  the  move- 
ment. Beyond  doubt  this  and  the  employment  of 
Volunteer  sergeants  as  recruiting  officers,  with  an  allow- 
ance of  five  guineas,  did  infuse  new  life  temporarily  into 
the  "  fleeting  and  inapplicable  mass "  ;  though  the 
course  of  events  showed  more  and  more  the  fatal  error 
that  Addington  had  made  in  neglecting  the  Regular 
Army  for  the  sake  of  the  Volunteers. 

But  the  matter  of  real  urgency  was  the  need  for  aug- 
menting the  Regular  Army,  and  to  this  end  Castlereagh 
could  at  first  sight  suggest  but  two  methods  "without 
involving  the  Government  in  Parliamentary  difficulties"; 
namely  to  complete  the  Irish  Militia,  which  was  6000 
below  strength,  so  as  to  draw  the  annual  1 5  per  cent  of 
its  men  into  the  Line  after  the  ist  of  July,  and  to  employ 
Volunteer  sergeants  all  over  the  United  Kingdom  as 
recruiting  officers.  A  fortnight's  further  study,  how- 
ever, convinced  him  that  some  more  eiFectual  means 
must  be  discovered  ;  and  he  found  himself  reduced  to 
one  of  two  alternatives,  either  to  draw  more  men  from 
the  Militia,   or   to  extort   them  if  possible  from  the 

^  Castlereagh,  Desp.  viii.  46-51. 


Ill  BAD  NEWS  FROM  ABROAD  179 

parishes  by  means  of  fines,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Army  1807. 
of  Reserve  Act.  The  latter  expedient  had  so  recently 
failed  that  he  could  not  hesitate  to  recommend  the 
former  ;  and  he  therefore  inclined  to  call  for  20,000 
men  from  the  Militia  of  Great  Britain,  and  so  to  regu- 
late the  process  of  volunteering  from  that  force  as  to 
shorten  as  far  as  possible  the  period  of  drunkenness  and 
disorder  v/hich  invariably  accompanied  it.  Lastly,  in 
order  to  avoid  a  ballot  if  possible,  he  suggested  that 
j^io  should  be  given  to  the  Colonels  of  Militia  for  every 
man  taken  from  them,  to  be  applied  by  them  to  the 
purpose  of  obtaining  voluntary  recruits. 