

But  now  bad  news  began  to  flow  in  from  all  quarters 
with  dismal  iteration.  First  came  that  of  the  mutiny  at 
Vellore,  which,  though  happily  quelled  by  the  amazing 
gallantry  and  readiness  of  a  single  officer,  called  for  the 
immediate  despatch  to  India  of  4000  men.  Then  came 
the  story  of  the  disgraceful  failure  in  Egypt,  accom- 
panied by  what  was,  in  the  circumstances,  deplorable 
waste  of  lives.  Then  Lord  Hutchinson  wrote  from  the 
Russian  headquarters  pleading  earnestly  for  a  diversion 
in  the  Baltic  ;  and  the  King  of  Sweden  pressed  as 
earnestly  for  a  force  to  co-operate  with  him  and  with 
the  remnant  of  the  Prussian  Army  to  save  Stralsund. 
For  the  French  had  begun  to  move  again,  always  with 
success  in  spite  of  Eylau.  Dantzig  surrendered  to  them 
on  the  24th  of  May  ;  and  Stralsund  was  one  of  the  few 
ports  left  open  to  British  merchandise  on  the  Continent. 
The  case  was  so  urgent  that  the  Cabinet  resolved  to 
send  at  once  such  men  as  could  be  spared;  and  on  the  9th 
of  June  Lord  Cathcart  received  orders  to  take  command 
of  about  28,000  British  and  Germans,  and  to  proceed 
with  a  first  division  of  about  8000  Germans  to  Stralsund, 
as  soon  as  transports  could  be  procured  for  them. 

The  despatch  of  this  detachment  caused  Castlereagh 
deep  searchings  of  heart.  He  reckoned  that  it  would 
leave  the  British  Isles  with  but  21,290  trustworthy 
infantry,  including  the  Guards,  for  home  defence  ;  the 
second  battalions,  formed  from  the  Army  of  Reserve 


i8o  FRIEDLAND  AND  TILSIT  chap. 

1807.  and  nominally  nearly  29,000  strong,  being  too  poor  to 
be  relied  on  for  service  in  the  field.  Ordinary  recruiting 
could  not  be  counted  on  at  best  to  produce  more  than 
16,000  men  a  year,  which  was  about  the  figure  of  the 
casualties  in  each  of  the  two  years  last  past.  The  Army 
was  therefore  stationary.  The  second  battalions  were 
valuable  as  recruiting  dep6ts,  but  no  more.  There 
were  fifty-six  of  them,  complete  in  officers  but  with  only 
200  men  apiece.  The  cost  of  the  recruits  which  they 
gathered  worked  out  altogether  at  ^73  a  head.  They 
kept  16,000  men,  enlisted  for  general  service,  in  idle- 
ness because  these  could  only  be  transferred  to  the  first 
battalions  of  their  own  regiments;  in  fact,  unless  they  were 
at  once  filled  up  by  20,000  men  from  the  Militia,  they 
could  never  answer  their  double  purpose  of  feeding  their 
first  battalions  and  furnishing  an  efficient  force  for  home 
defence.  The  deficiencies  in  the  Militia  consequent 
upon  so  heavy  a  draft  could  only  be  made  good  by  the 
ballot,  more  especially  as  the  five  years'  service  of  some 
6000  principals  would  expire  at  the  beginning  of  1808.^ 
Such,  then,  was  the  conclusion  to  which  Castlereagh 
had  been  driven  by  the  end  of  May,  and  to  this  he 
rigidly  adhered  in  spite  of  much  private  advice  to  the 
contrary.  For,  as  the  summer  progressed,  the  situation 
became  more  and  more  serious.  Cathcart,  pursuant  to 
his  orders,  sailed  for  Stralsund  with  his  German  troops, 
and  arrived  there  on  the  i6th  of  July  ;  but  mean- 
while not  only  had  the  Russians  been  utterly  defeated  at 
Friedlandon  the  14th  of  June,  but  the  Tsar  had  thrown 
himself  into  the  arms  of  Napoleon  by  the  conclusion  of 
the  Treaty  of  Tilsit  on  the  7  th  of  July.  Thereby  not 
only  was  England  left  without  a  friend  in  Europe  except 
hapless  Sweden,  governed  by  a  half-demented  King  ; 
but  she  was  threatened  with  the  forcible  closing  of  the 
ports  of  Sweden,  Denmark,  and  Portugal  against  her,  and 
with  the  active  hostility  of  all  three  countries.  Thus  with 
the  Danish  fleet  at  his  command  Napoleon  might  hope 
to  renew  his  plans  of  invasion. 