

Parliament  rose  on  the  28  th  of  July,  after  a 
momentous  session  ;  but  Windham  had  already  begun 
his  reforms  among  the  Volunteers.  On  the  9th  of  June 
he  issued  a  circular  to  the  effect  that  the  allowance  of 
£110  per  troop  of  Yeomanry  for  contingent  expenses 
would  be  discontinued  after  the  24th,  and  that  £2  per 
annum  for  every  non-commissioned  officer  and  man 
would  be  substituted.  A  month  later,  on  the  17th  of 
July,  he  circulated,  in  the  form  of  letters  to  the  Secre- 
tary at  War,  the  revised  regulations  for  the  pay  and 
allowances  of  the  Volunteers  and  Yeomanry  at  large  ; 
whereby  in  effect  he  swept  away  the  June  Allowances 
altogether.^  To  cavalry  under  the  June  Allowances  he 
granted  ;^3  a  man  for  clothing,  and  ;^2  a  man  for  all 
other  expenses,  and  an  adjutant  for  corps  of  three  troops 
of  forty  rank  and  file  and  upwards.  To  cavalry  under  the 
August  Allowances  he  gave  ;^2  a  man  for  all  expenses, 
an  adjutant  to  corps  over  300  strong,  and  a  sergeant- 
major  to  corps  of  over  120  and  under  300  men.  The 
infantry  he  appears  to  have  placed  uniformly  under  the 
August  Allowances  ;  and  to  corps  raised  after  the  24th 

^  As  usual  the  Clerks  at  the  Home  Office  inserted  no  printed 
copies  of  the  enclosures  which  are  the  essence  of  the  circular.  It 
is  certain  that  Windham  intended  to  put  all  the  Volunteers  on  the 
August  Allowances  {H.D.  22nd  April  1806,  vol.  vi.  p.  850),  but 
apparently  he  was  induced  to  relent  so  far  as  the  cavalry  was  con- 
cerned. The  new  rules  as  to  cavalry  I  found  in  I.D.  Miscell. 
July  1806. 


Ill  CHANGE  OF  MINISTRY  173 

of    July    1 806    he   refused    to    give    any    allowance       1806. 
whatever. 

Not  unnaturally  there  was  loud  and  dismal  outcry. 
Multitudes  of  corps  succumbed,  or  disbanded  them- 
selves in  indignation,  to  the  number  altogether  of  over 
11,000  men  ;  and  many  counties  vented  their  wrath  by 
passing  votes  of  confidence  in  the  Volunteers,  and 
lamenting  their  unhappy  destruction.  Windham  re- 
mained unmoved,  for  this  was  no  more  than  he  expected. 
The  Training  Act,  however,  proved  to  be  a  more 
difficult  experiment  than  he  had  looked  for.  His 
first  step,  on  the  15  th  of  September,  was  to  send  a 
circular  to  the  Lords-Lieutenant  saying  that  he  pro- 
posed to  station  detachments  of  certain  regiments  in 
every  county  to  assist  in  the  training  of  the  population 
and  to  collect  recruits,  and  desiring  to  know  if  the 
regiments  which  he  had  selected  would  be  acceptable,  or 
whether  any  county  would  prefer  some  other  or  others. 
This  as  a  preliminary  step  was  sensible,  but  meanwhile 
all  further  arrangements  were  suspended  while  the  new 
lists  of  men  liable  to  the  Militia  ballot  were  being  made 
out.  This  business  took  much  time;  and  in  spite  of 
repeated  reminders,^  the  lists  were  not  ready  until  the 
end  of  the  year,  so  that  it  was  February  1 807  before 
copies  of  the  Act  were  circulated  to  the  counties,  and 
directions  given  for  the  apportionment  of  the  quotas. 
The  royal  warrant  for  holding  the  ballots  under  the  Act 
followed  on  the  17th  of  February,  and  Windham 
declared  in  Parliament  that,  if  necessary,  it  would  be 
enforced  in  the  spring.  But  in  the  middle  of  March 
the  Ministry  of  all  the  Talents  resigned  ;  and  Castle- 
reagh,  Windham's  ablest  critic,  succeeded  him  as 
Minister  for  War  and  the  Colonies. 