

1  Castlereagh's  Desp.  pp.  53-66. 


Ill      THE  COPENHAGEN  EXPEDITION      i8i 

The  peril  was  very  great.  It  seemed  certain  that  »8o7. 
England  must  be  driven  back  once  more  to  the  defen- 
sive, and  must  undergo  yet  another  term  of  the  miser- 
able anxieties  of  1803  and  1804.  Fortunately  some 
inkling  of  the  secret  agreement  between  Napoleon  and 
the  Tsar  reached  the  British  Cabinet,  which  determined 
it  to  forestall  France  in  her  designs  upon  Denmark.  On 
the  19th  of  July  a  powerful  fleet  was  ordered  to  proceed 
to  the  Baltic,  and  Cathcart  was  directed  to  bring  his 
German  troops  back  from  Stralsund  to  Elsinore,  where 
the  British  part  of  his  force  would  meet  him.  With 
an  army  completed  to  28,000  men  he  was  then  to 
demand  the  surrender  of  the  Danish  fleet,  and,  if  it 
were  refused,  to  besiege  and  capture  Copenhagen. 

Three  days  after  this  momentous  decision,  and  while 
the  country  was  still  quaking  over  a  fresh  alarm  of 
invasion,  Castlereagh  unfolded  his  plans  to  a  newly- 
elected  Parliament.  Having  first  dwelt  upon  the  in- 
sufiiciency  of  ordinary  recruiting  to  fill  the  ranks  of 
the  Army,  he  declared  his  intention  of  calling  on  the 
British  Militia  to  provide  2 1 ,000  men,  and  on  the  Irish 
Militia  to  provide  7000  men,  for  the  Line.  The  vacancies 
made  through  this  call  and  through  the  discharge  of 
Militiamen  who  had  served  their  five  years  were  to  be 
filled  up  by  ballotting  36,000  men  for  England,  and  pro- 
curing by  ballot  or  voluntary  enlistment  8000  men  for 
Ireland.  It  was  a  heavy  demand,  as  he  admitted,  but  it 
would  render  further  ballot  unnecessary  for  two  or  three 
years.  He  proposed  also  to  give  the  men  who  joined  the 
Line  the  alternative  of  enlisting  for  life  if  they  wished, 
and  to  grant  them  an  increased  bounty  if  they  did  so. 

Passing  to  Windham's  Training  Act,  he  declared  that 
he  had  found  it  impossible  to  carry  out ;  but  he  pro- 
posed to  use  its  machinery  for  classifications  and  ballots, 
and  if  possible  to  lengthen  the  training  to  two  if  not 
three  years.  From  thence  he  hoped  to  evolve  a  Local 
Militia,  and  so  to  render  the  Act  really  useful.  Mean- 
while he  thought  that  the  Volunteers  should  be  upheld 
until  some  decidedly  superior  substitute  to  them  should 


1 82        MILITIA  TRANSFER  ACT,  1807     chap. 

1807.  be  discovered.  He  had  therefore  revived  the  Inspecting 
Field-Officers,  who  had  been  aboHshed  by  Windham, 
and  should  encourage  the  Volunteers  to  come  out  on 
permanent  duty.  Therewith  he  introduced  bills  to 
enable  the  Militia  to  enlist  in  the  Line,  and  to  provide 
for  refilling  it  upon  the  consequent  depletion. 

Castlereagh's  expedients  were  obviously  only  meant 
to  bridge  over  a  single  year  until  he  could  devise  some 
permanent  scheme.  He  wished,  as  he  said,  to  disturb 
existing  arrangements  as  little  as  possible.  There  were 
of  course  strong  speeches  made,  condemning  resort  to 
the  ballot  and  recommending  that  if  it  must  be  employed 
it  should  be  for  the  purpose  of  re-creating  the  Army  of 
Reserve.  Great  objection  also  was  taken,  not  without 
reason,  to  the  depletion  of  the  Militia,  Addington  in 
particular  averring  that  it  had  led  to  the  resignation  of 
a  vast  number  of  officers  in  1804.^  Windham  went 
back  to  his  old  argument  that  ballot  created  bounty, 
bounty  rising  to  excess  created  new  ballot,  and  so  on  in 
a  vicious  circle  until  bounties  became  unendurable;  and  he 
urged  that  he  alone  had  tried  to  move  out  of  that  circle. 
This  might  be  true  ;  but  it  must  be  said  in  justice  to 
Castlereagh  that  he  meddled  as  little  as  possible  with 
Windham's  measures,  and  that  if  he  introduced  drastic 
treatment  of  his  own,  he  was  compelled  to  do  so  by  the 
pressure  of  the  military  and  political  situation  abroad. 