


Ill  NATIONAL  TRAINING  ACT  169 

efficient,   while   the    Militia   laws    also  were  of  more       1806. 
recent  introduction. 

It  was  not  to  be  supposed  that  changes  so  drastic 
would  pass  unchallenged  in  a  House  full  of  Volunteer 
field-officers,  and  yet  the  opposition  was  very  moderate. 
Castlereagh  protested  that  the  new  Training  Act  would 
be  a  breach  of  the  engagement  given,  that  the  Levy  en 
Masse  Act  should  not  be  enforced  if  a  certain  quota  of 
Volunteers  were  produced  by  the  counties ;  ^  but  this 
contention,  though  perfectly  just,  carried  little  weight. 
Perceval,  on  the  22nd  of  April,  initiated  a  debate  in 
defence  of  the  Volunteers,  but  gained  little  by  it,  and 
when  the  Training  Bill  was  actually  introduced  it  was 
received  for  the  most  part  in  no  carping  spirit.  General 
Pulteney,  in  his  shrewd  way,  went  to  the  heart  of  the 
matter  by  observing  that  much  as  he  admired  the 
Volunteers,  he  would  no  more  trust  to  voluntary 
services  for  the  defence  of  a  nation  than  to  voluntary 
contributions  for  the  support  of  its  finances.'^  In  fact, 
despite  a  few  vehement  protestants  to  the  contrary,  the 
House  appeared  to  favour  some  form  of  compulsory 
training.  The  one  doubtful  point  was,  how  should  that 
training  be  carried  out ;  and  this  Windham  left  far  too 
much  to  chance.  Indeed  he  provoked  a  roar  of  laughter 
by  insisting  upon  the  wisdom  of  a  provision  that  the 
parish  constable  should  be  present  at  all  drills  to  enforce 
the  instruction  given  by  the  sergeant.^ 

However,  on  the  i6th  of  July  the  Training  Act 
became  law,  being  confined  to  England  only  (46  Geo. 
III.  cap.  90).  It  began  by  repealing  the  First  Defence 
Act  and  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act  (sec.  i),  and  com- 
mitting the  execution  of  the  present  Act  to  the 
Lieutenancies  of  counties  (sees.  2,  3).  Upon  the 
return  of  the  lists  of  persons  liable  to  serve  in  the 
Militia,  the  Privy  Council  was  to  apportion  among  the 
counties  200,000  men  to  be  trained,  which  portions 
were  to  be  redistributed  by  the  Lieutenancies  among 

1  H.D.  Commons,  3rd  April  1806. 
2  Ibid.  24th  June  1806.  ^  /^/^.  27th  June  1806. 


I70         NATIONAL  TRAINING  ACT         chap. 

1806.  the  hundreds  and  parishes,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Militia 
(sec.  4).  Persons  exempt  from  the  Militia  were  not  to 
be  exempt  from  the  present  Act,  except  schoolmasters 
and  practising  doctors  (sees.  5,  6).  In  making  their 
apportionment  the  Lieutenancies  were  to  take  account 
of  the  number  of  effective  Yeomen  and  Volunteers 
who  were  exempted  from  training  under  the  present 
Act,  as  also  of  persons  exempted  from  the  Militia  but 
not  from  training  under  the  present  Act  (sec.  7).  The 
King  could  order  the  whole  or  any  part  of  the  number 
apportioned  to  be  ballotted,  enrolled,  and  trained  ;  but 
if  persons  voluntarily  offered  themselves  for  training, 
then  only  the  number  deficient  of  the  quota  was  to  be 
ballotted  (sec.  9).  The  manner  of  ballotting  was  pre- 
scribed by  sec.  12  ;  wherein  it  was  ordained  that  the 
proceedings  should  not  begin  before  10  a.m.,  nor  be 
prolonged  beyond  6  p.m.  Appeals  against  the  ballot 
were  to  be  heard  by  Deputy-Lieutenants  (sec.  13). 
The  year  of  training  was  appointed  to  begin  on  the  i  st 
of  November,  and  to  last  till  the  ist  of  the  following 
November  (sec.  14).  Persons  trained  for  one  year 
were  not  liable  to  be  ballotted  again  for  two  years  (sec. 
15).  Exemption  for  one  year  could  be  bought  by  pay- 
ment of  a  fine  of  ^^lo  or,  in  the  case  of  persons  with 
incomes  of  less  than  ;^ioo  a  year,  of  £^  (sec.  16). 
Permanent  exemption  was  granted  to  ballotted  persons 
who  entered  Volunteer  corps,  so  long  as  they  remained 
efficient  (sec.  18).  Quakers  and  United  Brethren  were 
exempted  by  annual  payment  of  a  sum  ranging  from 
^i  to  j^7  :  I  OS.  at  the  discretion  of  the  magistrate  (sec. 
20)  ;  and  infirm  persons  could  be  exempted  free  of 
charge  by  two  Deputy-Lieutenants,  or  one  Deputy  and 
one  magistrate,  upon  a  medical  certificate  (sec.  23). 
The  King  could  order  persons  to  be  trained,  and  fix  the 
time  and  place  for  the  purpose  ;  but  Sundays  were  not 
to  be  days  of  exercise,  and  no  man  could  be  called 
out  for  more  than  twenty-four  days  in  the  year,  nor  to 
a  greater  distance  than  five  miles  from  his  home  (sees. 
25,    26).      Men  who  voluntarily  offered   to   undergo 