


Ill  NATIONAL  TRAINING  ACT  171 

training  for  any  additional  days  might  be  regularly  1806. 
paid  for  them  at  the  King's  pleasure,  up  to  the  number 
of  twenty-four  days,  with  or  without  the  addition  of  a 
bounty  of  los.  at  the  close  of  the  training  (sec.  iii). 
One  constable  in  every  parish  was  to  attend  exercise,  on 
pain  of  a  fine  of  ^^i  for  every  day's  absence,  and  could 
be  rewarded  with  a  sum  not  exceeding;^ 5  (sec.  28).  The 
custody  of  arms  and  accoutrements  was  left  to  the  Lieu- 
tenancy (sec.  30).  The  King  was  empowered  to  appoint 
Generals  and  officers  and  non-commissioned  officers  for 
the  command  and  training  of  the  men  ;  to  embody  the 
enrolled  men  on  threat  of  invasion,  and  to  place  the  men 
enrolled  in  the  current  or  preceding  year  either  in 
existing  regiments  or  new  corps,  to  be  led  out  into  any 
part  of  Great  Britain  ;  and  the  men  while  embodied  were 
subjected  to  the  Mutiny  Act  and  Articles  of  War  (sees. 
33-35).  All  men  so  called  out  were  to  take  the  oath 
of  allegiance  ;  but  could  not  be  compelled  to  serve  out 
of  Great  Britain  (sees.  36,  37).  The  King  was  further 
empowered  to  give  provisional  orders  for  embodiment, 
and  the  Lieutenants^to  appoint  signal  and  alarm  stations. 
Men  not  appearing  pursuant  to  order  and  signal 
were  to  be  treated  as  deserters  (sees.  38-40).  Men  and 
officers  when  embodied  were  to  receive  the  same  pay  as 
the  Regulars,  and  to  be  entitled  to  Chelsea  pensions 
(sec.  42).  An  allowance  of  two  guineas  was  to  be 
given  to  each  man  for  necessaries  upon  embodiment, 
and  a  further  allowance  of  one  guinea  to  enable  him  to 
return  home  after  defeat  of  the  enemy  (sees.  43-44). 
Parishes  refusing  to  ballot  men  under  this  Act  were 
subject  to  a  fine  of  £^  for  every  man  deficient  of  their 
quota  (sec.  50),  but  the  Act  did  not  extend  to  the  City 
of  London  (sec.  49).  Finally,  all  persons  enrolled 
under  the  Act  were  subject  to  the  regulations  (sec.  22) 
laid  down  on  the  Schedule  thereto,  viz.: — 

All  persons  trained  under  the  Act  were  to  receive 
pay  for  twenty-four  days  at  is.  a  day. 

All  persons  were  to  attend  drill,  obey  the  orders  of 
officers  and  sergeants,  and  take  due  care  of  their  arms. 


172  ALLOWANCES  REDUCED  chap. 

1806.  under  penalty  of  a  fine,  elaborately  graduated  to  suit 
variations  of  income,  for  non-attendance.  In  cases  of 
misconduct  the  offender  was  to  be  delivered  by  the 
officer  or  sergeant  to  the  parish  constable,  and  to  be 
brought  by  the  constable  before  a  magistrate,  who  was 
empowered  to  fine  him  to  the  extent  of  los.,  with  two 
days*  imprisonment  in  default  of  fines  not  exceeding  5s., 
and  of  five  days'  for  fines  not  exceeding  £  i .  Finally, 
Deputy-Lieutenants  were  empowered  to  offer  rewards 
(to  be  defrayed  out  of  fines)  for  skill  in  marksmanship. 
Otherwise  all  fines  under  sec.  59  were  to  be  applied  to 
the  expense  of  training  within  the  county. 