

Altogether  things  seemed  to  be  extremely  satisfac- 
tory, and  yet  they  by  no  means  came  up  to  the 
requirements  of  the  military  authorities.  On  the  15th 
of  February  the  Commander-in-Chief  submitted  a 
memorandum  in  which  he  declared  that  ordinary  re- 
cruiting was  quite  inadequate  to  produce  an  army  suffi- 
cient for  England's  various  needs.  Already  the  demands 
upon  the  Regular  Forces  were  so  great  that  the  defence 
of  the  country  depended  chiefly  upon  the  Militia,  which 
consequently  required  to  be  kept  in  a  high  state  of  dis- 
cipline, and  must  be  stationed  on  the  coast,  to  the  great 
inconvenience  of  officers.  It  was  therefore  imperative, 
first,  to  provide  a  large  "  disposable  "  force  ;  secondly, 
to  institute  a  defensive  force  from  which  the  former 

1  The  Secretary  at  War  gave  the  number  of  the  Volunteers  at 
363,400.     H.D.  Commons,  12th  Jan.  1807. 

2  H.D.  Speeches  of  Windham  and  Sir  J.  Doyle,  12th  Jan.,  and 
of  Windham,  12th  March  1807. 


176  NEEDS  OF  THE  ARMY  chap. 

1807.  could  be  recruited,  experience  having  shown  that  men 
who  had  once  embraced  a  military  life  were  generally 
willing  to  extend  their  service  without  limit ;  and, 
thirdly,  to  form  a  more  extended  Militia,  which  might 
obviate  all  the  objections  to  the  present  system  and  to 
the  Volunteers.  The  Commander-in-Chief  therefore 
recommended  that  the  Infantry  of  the  Line  should  con- 
sist of  its  existing  loi  regiments,  and  that  each  of  them 
should  consist  of  two  battalions,  1000  strong  apiece, 
the  first  battalion  enlisted  for  general  and  the  second  for 
home  service.  Each  of  these  regiments  should  be 
allotted  and  attached  to  one  of  the  counties  of  the 
United  Kingdom.  The  second  battalions  should  be 
raised  and  kept  complete  by  ballot  for  seven  years,  their 
service  being  limited  to  the  British  and  Channel  Islands, 
but  with  liberty  to  enlist  for  general  service  in  the  first 
battalions.  The  deficiencies  in  the  second  battalions  only 
should  be  filled  by  the  ballot. 

As  to  the  Militia,  it  should  be  increased  from 
84,000  to  150,000,  either  by  ballot  or  exemption,^ 
formed  into  battalions  which  should  be  officered  by 
county  gentlemen,  and  which  should  not  be  liable  to  be 
moved  from  their  counties  except  in  case  of  invasion  or 
internal  commotion.  The  battalions  should  be  called 
out  for  one  month's  training  in  the  year  ;  the  companies 
should  be  further  exercised  once  a  week  or  once  a 
fortnight  in  their  parishes,  and  there  should  be  an 
inspecting  field-officer  to  each  four  or  five  thousand  men 
to  superintend  their  discipline,  and  to  take  command  of 
them  in  the  event  of  their  marching  out  of  their  counties. 