


Ill  DIFFICULTY  OF  RE-FILLING  MILITIA  187 

The  replenishing  of  the  Militia,  however,  was  a  very  1 807. 
different  story.  In  the  first  place,  the  levy  was  delayed 
by  the  necessity  of  making  out  new  lists  in  almost 
every  county,  so  as  to  include  boys  who  had  grown  up 
since  the  last  ballot,  and  to  enable  Volunteers  to  work  out 
their  exemption.  Then  there  were  very  thorny  ques- 
tions raised  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  sections  which 
governed  exemption.  The  reference  in  the  new  Act 
was  to  the  Volunteer  Consolidation  Act  of  1 804,  which 
required  that  returns  of  eff'ective  Volunteers  should  be 
furnished  on  the  ist  of  August  and  ist  of  December. 
Was  it  sufficient  for  a  Volunteer's  exemption  that  he 
should  have  served  for  sixteen  days  during  the  previous 
eight  months  or  the  full  number  of  twenty-four  days  in 
the  previous  twelve  months  ?  Such  was  the  kind  of 
question  from  county  after  county  which  flooded  the 
Secretary  of  State's  office  for  days  ;  and  finally  it  was 
decided,  by  very  strict  construction  of  the  law,  that  no 
Volunteer  should  be  exempted  unless  he  had  attended 
drill  eight  times  between  the  ist  of  April  and  the  ist 
of  August.^  This  decision  probably  seemed  severe,  but 
it  was  lenient  compared  with  the  suggestion  of  the 
Lord-Lieutenant  of  Surrey,  who  did  not  love  the  Volun- 
teers :  "  Will  not  all  the  Volunteers,  if  they  attend  all 
their  drills  before  the  ist  of  December,  be  exempt  from 
any  ballot  after  it  ?  If  so,  why  not  direct  all  ballots 
to  be  taken  before  the  30th  of  November  ^  It  can  be 
done."  The  worthy  nobleman  did  not  gain  his  point  ; 
but  he  was  not  to  be  troubled  by  Volunteers  much  longer. 

Another   hideous   complication   arose   out   of    the 
various  changes  of  attitude  and  legislation  in  respect  of 

York,  185.  Scotland: — Aberdeen,  12  ;  Dumfries,  61  ;  Edinburgh, 
13  ;  Forfar,  1 09  ;  Inverness,  6  ;  Ross,  19  ;  Stirling,  7.  Ireland'. — 
Fermanagh,  3  ;  Kerry,  68  ;  Kilkenny,  i  ;  Leitrira,  40  ;  Limerick, 
I  ;  Longford,  90.  Of  the  number  deficient  453  men  were  due 
from  seven  English  counties,  227  from  as  many  Scottish  counties, 
and  203  from  six  Irish  counties. 

1  I.D.  vol.  civ.  Minutes  of  G.M.  Aberdeen,  29th  Oct.  ;  vol. 
cvi.  Minutes  of  G.M.  Ross,  14th  Oct.;  vol.  cxv.  L.L.  Kent,  to  S.S. 
2nd  Nov.  1807. 


1 88        QUESTIONS  OF  EXEMPTION         chap. 

1807.  the  Militia  since  the  war  began.  It  will  be  remembered 
that  Addington  at  once  called  out  the  Supplementary 
Militia,  and  that  Pitt,  by  the  Permanent  Additional 
Force  Act,  enacted  that  the  Supplementary  Militia 
should  be  absorbed,  and  the  Militia  generally  reduced 
to  its  ordinary  establishment  under  the  Act  of  1802. 
It  will  be  remembered  further  that,  by  the  Volunteer 
Consolidation  Act  of  1804,  Volunteers  were  not 
exempted  actually  from  the  ballot ;  but  any  Volunteer 
on  being  baUotted  could  show  his  certificate  of  efficiency, 
and  thereby  obtain  exemption  from  service  in  the 
Militia.  His  name,  however,  was  retained  on  the  ballot- 
list,  so  that,  if  he  ceased  to  be  effective,  he  could  be 
called  up  for  service,  and  if  his  name  had  actually  been 
drawn  for  the  Militia,  he  was  liable,  in  this  case,  to  fill 
the  first  vacancy  that  occurred  in  the  Militia.  In  1 807 
there  were  many  Volunteers  in  this  predicament,  owing 
partly  to  Windham's  reforms,  partly  to  a  selfish  calcula- 
tion that,  if  there  were  to  be  no  more  ballot,  it  was  not 
worth  while  to  work  for  exemption.  Now  arose  the 
question  whether  such  men  could  be  forced  to  fill  the 
vacancies  caused  by  Castlereagh's  Militia  Transfer  Act 
and  Militia  Augmentation  Act.  The  vacancies  had  not 
been  brought  about  in  the  ordinary  way,  but  by  whole- 
sale sweeping  of  the  Militiamen  into  the  Line  ;  and, 
moreover,  Castlereagh,  after  thus  reducing  the  Militia 
by  three-fifths  of  its  ordinary  quota,  had  ordered  the  loss 
to  be  more  than  made  good  by  calling  up  three-fourths  of 
the  ordinary  quota  under  the  ballot.  Was  it  reasonable 
that  Volunteers  drawn  under  a  former  ballot  and  then 
exempted  but  since  become  ineffective,  should  be  called 
upon  without  fresh  ballot  to  make  up  deficiencies  thus 
artificially  created .?  The  question,  after  much  argu- 
ment, was  submitted  to  the  Law-Officers  of  the  Crown, 
who  decided  that  such  men  were  not  legally  liable  to  fill 
such  artificial  vacancies,  though  they  were  liable  to  fill 
natural  vacancies  if  their  county's  Militia,  at  the  time 
when  Castlereagh's  Act  was  passed,  was  short  of  its 
ordinary  establishment  under  the  Act  of  1802.     On  the 