

1  Castlereagh,  Desp.  viii.  pp.  20,  72-75. 


1 84  MILITIA  COMPLETION  ACT       chap. 

1807.  The  corresponding  Act  for  Great  Britain  (47  Geo. 

III.  sess.  2.  cap.  71)  was  to  the  following  effect.  First, 
the  Act  for  suspending  the  ballot  was  repealed  (sec.  i). 
It  was  then  enacted  that  within  three  months  of  the 
passing  of  the  Act,  a  number  equal  to  three-fourths 
of  the  quota  under  the  Militia  Act  of  1802  should 
be  raised  (sec.  2).  Where  new  or  amended  lists 
were  required  the  time  was  extended  to  five  months 
and  four  months  (sec.  8).  The  fine  for  exemption 
was  raised  to  ;^20  ;  which,  or  any  part  of  it  not 
falling  below  half  the  average  price  of  a  substitute, 
could  be  paid  to  the  ballotted  man  who  was  enrolled  in 
place  of  the  person  paying  the  fine  ;  but  the  man  who 
accepted  the  ;^20,  or  any  part  of  it,  as  aforesaid,  was 
not  to  be  entitled  to  the  allowance  usually  granted  to  men 
worth  less  than  £soo  (sees.  16-18).  The  bounty  to 
be  given  to  parochial  substitutes  was  not  to  exceed  ;^  i  o, 
and  not  more  than  ^5  was  to  be  paid  to  any  substitute 
whatever  until  he  joined  his  regiment.  All  fines,  unless 
expended  as  aforesaid,  were  to  be  paid  into  the 
Imperial  Exchequer  (sees.  19,  20).  Volunteers  were 
not  exempted  from  the  ballot  unless  they  had  served 
the  full  number  of  days  provided  by  the  Volunteer 
Consolidation  Act  of  1 804  ;  nor  were  persons  ballotted 
under  the  Training  Act  exempted,  nor  officers  on  half- 
pay,  unless  they  had  tendered  their  services  as  officers 
of  Militia  or  Volunteers  (sees.  22,  23).  Counties, 
hundreds,  or  parishes  not  producing  their  full  quota  of 
men  were  liable  to  a  fine  of  £60  for  every  man  deficient, 
subject  to  a  remission  of  three-fourths,  one-half,  and 
one -quarter  if  the  deficiency  were  made  good  within 
one,  two,  or  three  months  respectively  (sees.  28,  31). 
Counties  that  refused  to  ballot  could  be  subjected  to  the 
same  fine  of  ^^60  (sees.  32,  23)-  When  the  full 
number  of  men  had  been  supplied,  the  ballot  was  to  be 
suspended  until  the  ist  of  January  18 10  (sec.  34). 
Finally,  the  Act  was  not  to  apply  to  London  (sec.  27). 
Dealing  first  with  the  transfer  of  Militiamen  to  the 
Line,  it  appears  that  most  of  the  Commanding  Officers 


Ill    UNFAIR  TREATMENT  OF  MILITIA     185 

of  Militia  behaved  very  handsomely  in  encouraging  1807. 
their  men  to  enlist ;  though  as  the  deficiency  of  officers 
in  the  service  increased  from  301  on  the  ist  of  July 
1807  to  449  on  the  ist  of  April  1808,  it  must  be  feared 
that  their  subordinates  were  not  equally  patient.  It 
must  be  confessed  too  that  the  Militia  was  not  treated 
fairly  in  the  matter.  An  order  was  sent  out  that,  during 
the  thirty  days  set  apart  for  the  enlistment  of  Militia- 
men, no  officers  of  the  Regular  Army  must  appear  near 
the  quarters  of  any  Militia  regiment  ;  but  the  Adjutant- 
General  sent  a  circular  to  all  the  Regular  battalions  to 
inform  them  of  the  date  when  the  thirty  days  would 
expire,  and  to  intimate  that  their  recruiting  parties 
might  then  go  to  the  Militia  regiments,  though  they 
"  must  be  careful  not  to  disturb  their  discipline."  Such 
a  caution  as  was  contained  in  these  last  words  might 
suffice  to  save  the  conscience  of  the  Horse  Guards,  but 
could  not  avert  the  scenes  of  riotous  drunkenness  which 
inevitably  accompanied  the  treating  and  other  methods 
of  suasion  employed  by  recruiting  officers.  The  whole 
proceeding  was  an  infringement  of  the  spirit  of  the  law  ; 
and  it  is  not  surprising  that  in  some  quarters  it  was 
deeply  resented.  The  Lieutenant  of  Lancashire,  indeed, 
on  receiving  directions  from  the  Adjutant-General  to 
admit  the  recruiting  parties,  flatly  refused  to  obey  them 
until  ordered  by  the  Home  Secretary.^ 