


Ill        THE  QUESTION  OF  STANDARD        189 

other  hand,  any  men  ballotted  in  future,  and  exempted       1807. 
as  effective  Volunteers,  would,  on  ceasing  to  become 
effective,  be  liable  to  supply  any  vacancies  which  might 
then  exist,  or  might  hereafter  arise.^ 

Another  question,  which  was  more  easily  decided, 
was  this : — Was  a  man  who  had  found  a  substitute  in  the 
Army  of  Reserve,  liable  to  be  ballotted  under  Castle- 
reagh's  Act,  since  under  43  Geo.  III.  cap.  123,  such 
men  were  exempted  from  the  Militia.?  ^  The  answer  was 
decisive.  The  Army  of  Reserve  Act  had  been  repealed  ; 
therefore  the  Act  above  quoted  was  no  longer  in  force, 
and  such  men  were  liable  to  be  ballotted.' 

Yet  another  trouble,  which  exercised  the  Deputy- 
Lieutenants  sorely,  and  not  for  the  first  time,  was  the 
standard  of  height.  The  Militia  Act  of  1802  fixed  the 
standard  at  five  feet  four  inches.  The  Act  43  Geo.  III. 
cap.  100,  sec.  2,  enacted  that  no  substitute,  personal  or 
parochial,  should  be  rejected  if  he  were  five  feet  two 
inches  in  height,  provided  that  he  were  otherwise  fit  for 
service.  Some  Lieutenants  and  their  Deputies,  not  un- 
naturally, construed  this  to  mean  that  principals  were  to 
be  five  feet  four  inches  high,  and  substitutes  five  feet 
two  inches.  Others,  quite  indifferent  as  to  the  physical 
quality  of  their  men  so  long  as  they  could  produce  them 
in  some  shape  or  form,  took  five  feet  two  inches  as  the 
standard  for  all ;  while  others  again,  being  conscientious 
public  servants,  rejected  men  under  five  feet  four  inches. 
By  all  the  folly  of  having  two  coexistent  standards  was 
impartially  denounced,  until  the  question  was  finally  set 
at  rest  by  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  at  War  that  the 
standard  of  five  feet  two  inches  was  now  universal.* 

Lastly,  an  old  failing  at  the  Home  Office  was  brought 
to  light  by  a  sarcastic  letter  from  a  Deputy-Lieutenant 

1  W.O.  Mi/a.  E.B.  784,  Sub-div.  Clerk  of  Leominster  to  Sec.  at 
War,  loth  Nov.  1807. 

2  W.O.  Mila.  E.B.  War  Office  to  J.  Allen,  12th  Nov.  1807. 

3  See  page  35. 

*  I.D.  vol.  cxviii.  O.C.  Northampton  Mila.  to  S.S.  2nd  Nov. 
1807  ;  vol.  cxx.  L.L.  Somerset,  to  S.S.  4th  Dec.  1807  ;  fV.O. 
Mila.  E.B.  W.O.  to  Major  Durbin,  23rd  Nov.  1807. 


I90    EVILS  OF  CRUDE  LEGISLATION      chap. 

1807.  of  Somerset.  "On  the  14th  of  August  last,"  wrote 
this  indignant  gentleman  in  October,  "  an  Act  was 
passed  for  speedily  completing  the  Militia.  It  has  not 
reached  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  yet,  nor  have  they  any 
reason  to  expect  it,  unless  you  order  copies  to  be  sent 
without  delay." 

Under  such  initial  difficulties  was  the  ballot  of  1 807 
set  on  foot.  Even  at  the  risk  of  wearying  the  reader, 
I  have  not  shrunk  from  setting  down  legal  difficulties 
which  have  long  been  dead  and  can  never  rise  again, 
in  order  to  show  how  infinitely  the  natural  obstacles  to 
the  levying  of  recruits  may  be  increased  by  hasty  and 
ill-considered  enactments,  and  even  more  by  additional 
Acts  passed  to  amend  and  explain  the  same.  The  root 
of  the  matter,  of  course,  lay  in  the  absence  of  a  definite 
policy,  the  inevitable  result  of  which  was  the  hurried 
abandonment  of  one  set  of  expedients,  and  the  equally 
precipitate  adoption  of  another  set.  But  though 
it  is  too  much  to  expect  of  human  wisdom  that 
it  can  foresee  all  the  ingenious  tricks  which  a  people 
may  discover  for  the  evasion  of  an  unpopular  duty,  yet 
there  are  far  too  many  signs  of  sheer  blindness  and 
carelessness  in  all  the  legislation  which  so  far  has  passed 
under  review.  And  it  must  be  remembered  that  every 
doubt  as  to  the  state  of  the  law  seriously  impeded  the 
progress  of  the  levy.  Every  legal  question  was  hotly 
discussed  before  it  reached  the  Secretary  of  State,  setting 
all  the  authorities  within  each  Lieutenancy  at  variance, 
embroiling  Lieutenancies  with  their  neighbours,  raising 
ill-feeling  between  commanders  of  Militia  regiments  and 
county  magnates,  and  embittering  the  perennial  strife 
between  the  civil  power  and  the  military.  It  is  a  reproach 
to  our  statesmen  that  such  friction  should  still  have 
abounded  after  fourteen  years  of  almost  unbroken  war. 