

VIII 

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  progress  of  the  ballot  itself. 
There  was,  of  course,  a  rush  for  substitutes  ;  and  crimps 


Ill  THE  BALLOT  OF  1807  191 

and  insurance  companies  drove  a  roaring  trade.  Crimp-  1807. 
ing,  indeed,  reached  such  a  height  that  it  was  carried  on 
not  only  by  publicans,  parish  officers,  and  such  like,  but 
by  privates,  non-commissioned  officers,  and  even  officers 
of  the  Army,  Militia,  and  Volunteers ;  nor  was  there  one 
who  failed  to  make  from  ^5  to  ^  1 5  out  of  every  substi- 
tute that  he  provided.  In  one  case  a  man  was  engaged 
for  the  Warwick  Militia  by  a  corporal  for  a  bounty  of 
j^io  ;  the  corporal  sold  him  to  a  sergeant  for  ^{^  18  ;  the 
sergeant  made  him  over  to  a  crimping  publican  for 
some  unrecorded  price  ;  and  the  publican  finally  disposed 
of  him  to  a  parish  officer  for  ^27  :  6s.  Indeed,  parochial 
officers  lay  generally  at  the  mercy  of  the  professional 
crimps,  who  controlled  the  market  by  laying  hold  of  the 
substitutes,  selling  them  to  one  another,  and  keeping 
them  in  pay  until  the  unhappy  parishes,  rendered 
desperate  by  fines  and  repeated  ballots,  were  driven  at 
last  to  give  them  their  own  price. 

Nevertheless  parishes  were  not  without  resources  of 
their  own.  Their  principle  was,  very  naturally,  to 
avoid  above  all  things  the  burden  of  supporting  the 
Militiamen's  families ;  and  consequently  they  always  pre- 
ferred to  enlist  single  men.  They  would  take  any  boy 
who  could  reach  the  standard  of  height  and  pass  a 
medical  examination,  rather  than  the  finest  of  married 
men.  In  Warwickshire  the  military  officers  complained 
loudly  that  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  were  remiss  in  the 
execution  of  their  duty.  The  Lieutenant  who,  with  all 
his  subordinates,  plumed  himself  upon  the  methods  by 
which  his  Lieutenancy  was  ruled,  indignantly  repudiated 
the  charge.  The  General  of  the  district  retorted  that 
two  hundred  children  had  been  furnished  as  substitutes, 
who  might  grow  into  men,  but  were  at  present  only  fit 
for  drummers.^  And  beyond  all  question  vast  numbers 
of  the  so-called  men  all  over  England  were  even  as  these 
children  of  Warwick.  As  crimps  the  parish  officers 
appear  only  to  have  mastered  the  elements  of  their 

1  /.D.  vol.  cxlviii.  L.L.Warwick,  to  S.S.  26th  Jan.;  Maj.-Gen. 
Cockburn  to  L.L.  Warwick,  and  to  S.S.  6th  February  1808. 


192  INSURANCE  SOCIETIES  chap. 

1 807.  profession,  for  we  hear  of  one  who  engaged  a  substitute  at 
Warwick  for  forty  pounds,  and  offered  the  man  as  much 
as  fifty  guineas  if  he  would  lend  him  the  money  for 
five  years  free  of  interest.  The  crudity  of  this  proposal 
suggests  ambition,  indeed,  but  hardly  financial  genius.^ 
The  insurance  companies  and  subscription  societies 
were  very  prominent  in  the  ballot  of  1807.  In  all 
counties  near  London  they  indemnified  the  holders  of 
their  policies  by  producing  either  a  fine  or  a  substitute 
who  had  cost  them  less  than  £10^  and  who  invariably 
deserted  with  the  £  5  which  the  law  permitted  to  be  paid 
to  him.  The  Lord-Lieutenant  of  Buckingham  deplored 
the  inefficacy  of  the  law  to  check  this  evil,  and  suggested 
that  it  might  be  possible  to  attack  it  by  invalidating  the 
policies,  on  the  ground  that  they  were  not  stamped.'^  In 
Gloucestershire  and  the  Western  counties  there  was  a 
very  extensive  insurance  office  which  charged  three 
guineas  for  an  insurance  of  ;^20,  an  extravagant 
premium  for  which  they  might  well  have  returned  ;^50. 
But  the  London  societies  spread  their  branches  wide  over 
the  country,  bribing  recruiting-sergeants  and  non-com- 
missioned officers  right  and  left,  and  sowing  corruption 
thickly  wherever  they  went.  "  We  shall  be  glad,"  runs 
one  of  their  circulars  to  the  sergeant-majors  of  Militia, 
"  to  receive  in  Middlesex  growing  boys  five  feet  two 
inches  high,  and  men  near  fifty  years  of  age,  unless  their 
age  is  too  manifest.  ...  I  propose  to  allow  two  guineas 
to  the  sergeant  and  his  party  engaging  the  recruit,  and 
one  guinea  to  you  for  each  person  we  may  pass  from 
your  county  ;  the  men  or  boys  to  be  obtained  for  us  at 
as  low  a  rate  as  possible,  and  in  no  case  to  stand  us  in 
more  than  ^^15  when  delivered  in  London,  I  should 
suppose  that  men  refused  by  your  regiment  will  be  after- 
wards had  for  j^8  or  ^10  ;  and  the  whole  of  their  sub- 
sistence till  they  can  arrive  in  town  must  be  borne  out 