

^  Circular  to  L.L.  6th  Aug.  1807. 

^  Circular  to  L.L.  of  the  five  counties,  22nd  Aug.  1807. 
^  I.D.  vol.    cxviii.    L.L.  Northumberland,   to   S.S.  13th  Aug. 
1807. 


Ill  VOLUNTEERING  DEBASED  199 

Surrey,  "  was  at  first  entered  into  in  a  right  and  proper  1807. 
spirit,  but  now  it  has  dwindled  down  to  little  else  than 
exemption  from  other  services."  ^  "  When  the  Volun- 
teers were  first  raised,"  wrote  a  gentleman  from  Nor- 
wich, "  I  subscribed  like  other  people,  as  it  was  conceived 
that  the  subscribers  were  to  bear  all  the  expense  ;  and 
numbers  of  people  enrolled  themselves.  But  when  pay 
was  allowed,  a  new  set  of  men  joined,  who  found  that 
when  work  was  short  the  Volunteer's  pay,  added  to  casual 
employment,  would  enable  them  to  live.  Half  of  them 
are  rank  revolutionists.  Half  of  them  meet  in  a  court 
at  the  back  of  my  house,  where  I  hear  them  damning 
the  King  and  Parliament.  They  command  their  officers 
and  declare  openly  that  they  will  do  what  they  please."  ^ 
Norwich,  it  must  be  remarked,  like  all  manufacturing 
towns  at  that  time  when  England's  transition  from  an 
agricultural  to  a  manufacturing  country  was  accomplish- 
ing itself,  contained  a  somewhat  turbulent  population  ; 
and  the  damning  of  Parliament,  though  a  serious 
symptom  in  those  days,  has  become  a  mere  common- 
place in  these.  But  that  men  should  command  their 
officers  is  an  evil  thing  in  every  generation  ;  and  there 
had  always  been  too  much  of  it  among  the  Volunteers. 
In  the  Isle  of  Wight  in  this  same  year  the  privates 
of  a  troop  of  Yeomanry  (which  were  then  reckoned 
Volunteer  cavalry)  had  decHned  to  serve  any  longer  if  a 
certain  officer  were  admitted,  maintaining  in  defiance  of 
Act  of  Parliament  that  every  officer  must  be  regularly 
proposed  and  approved  by  the  corps  at  large.  The 
Commanding  Officer  therefore  resigned,  whereupon  the 
troop  elected  an  officer  of  their  own  choosing  and  tried 
to  put  him  into  command.^  The  old  idea,  that  Volun- 
teers could  do  as  they  pleased,  never  wholly  perished, 
and  indeed  actually  received  countenance  from  the 
Courts  of  Law.  In  the  spring  of  1 807  the  Richmond 
Volunteers  were  on  parade,  when  a  sergeant  took  occasion 

1  I.D.  vol.  cxxi.  V.L.  Surrey,  to  S.S.  2nd  Sept.  1807. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  cxxiv.  Norfolk,  Thomas  Howes  (undated)  to  S.S. 

3  Ibid,  cxiii.  V.L.  Hants,  to  S.S.  8th  Oct.,  19th  Nov.  1807. 


200       VOLUNTEERS'  INDISCIPLINE         chap. 

J  807.  to  strike  Colonel  Drew,  the  Commanding  Officer.  Drew 
returned  the  blow  with  the  flat  of  his  sword,  and  caused 
the  sergeant  to  be  disarmed  and  turned  out.  The  ser- 
geant thereupon  brought  an  action  against  the  Colonel, 
when  Mr.  Justice  Heath  laid  it  down  that  Drew  had  no 
right  to  take  the  sergeant's  sword,  and  that  the  sergeant 
had  a  right  to  defend  it.  He  therefore  summed  up 
against  Drew,  and  the  jury  brought  in  a  verdict  of  ^^200 
damages  with  ;^300  costs.^  This  was  probably  the 
heaviest  blow  struck  at  the  subordination  of  the  Volun- 
teers throughout  their  existence ;  and  it  fell  just  at  a  time 
when  discipline  particularly  needed  to  be  strengthened. 
It  was  now  discovered  also  that  there  had  been  gross 
abuses  in  connection  with  the  allowances  granted  to  the 
Volunteer  corps  for  the  maintenance  of  their  arms  ;  and 
a  circular  was  issued  to  intimate  that  in  future  these  would 
be  granted  only  for  such  arms  as  were  certified  by  the 
Inspecting  Field-Officers  to  be  in  good  repair.^  In  Wilt- 
shire it  seems  that  good  reason  existed  for  extraordinary 
wear  and  tear  of  muskets  ;  for  the  Volunteers,  weary  of 
waiting  for  the  invasion  of  the  French,  had  turned  them 
to  the  destruction  of  game  and  rabbits,  an  operation 
which  was  probably  little  less  perilous  to  the  King's 
subjects  than  invasion  itself;  and  had  certainly  not  been 
contemplated  when  the  weapons  were  issued.^  In  fact 
whatever  the  Volunteers  may  have  been  in  1804,  they 
stood  revealed  in  1 807  in  their  primitive  condition  as  an 
armed  rabble. 