


IV  LOCAL  MILITIA  ACT  213 

by  entering  the  Local  Militia,  whatever  the  rules  of  the  1808. 
Societies  (sec.  25).  Corps  of  Volunteer  Infantry,  irrespec- 
tive of  age,  might  transfer  themselves  bodily  to  the  Local 
Militia,  with  the  King's  approval ;  also  Artillery  Volun- 
teers and  Yeomen;  but  any  vacancies  remaining  after  such 
transference  were  to  be  supplied  by  ballot  if  not  filled 
voluntarily  within  three  months.  All  transferred  Volun- 
teers were  required  to  declare  that  they  had  received  no 
bounty  exceeding  two  guineas  (sees.  29,  30).  On 
assembling  for  exercise  Local  Militiamen  were  entitled  in 
the  first  year  to  one  guinea,  and  in  subsequent  years  to 
half-a-guinea  for  necessaries  ;  also  to  a  further  guinea  on 
being  called  out  or  embodied  under  any  Order  in  Council 
or  proclamation  under  the  Act  (sec.  31).  Persons 
serving  in  the  Local  Militia  were  entitled  to  the  same 
exemptions  from  the  Regular  Militia  as  the  Volunteers 
had  received  under  the  Training  Act,  also  to  two  years 
exemption  after  the  end  of  their  four  years'  service,  unless 
their  turn  to  be  ballotted  came  round  earlier  (sec.  32). 
The  Local  Militia  could  be  formed  into  battalions  and 
regiments,  and  a  proportion  of  the  regimental  staff  kept 
on  permanent  pay.  Officers  were  to  rank  after  those  of 
their  grade  in  the  Regular  Militia ;  but  no  higher  title 
than  Lieutenant-Colonel  Commandant  was  to  be  held, 
except  by  Lords-Lieutenant  and  officers  who  had  held  the 
rank  of  Colonel  in  the  Regular  Army  or  Militia  (sees. 
34,  35).  Officers  of  Volunteers  transferred  with  their 
corps  to  the  Local  Militia  retained  their  rank,  but  were 
forbidden  in  any  case  to  take  rank  above  a  Lieutenant- 
colonel  in  the  Regular  Army  (sec.  36).  The  Local 
Militia  could  be  put  under  the  command  of  General 
Officers,  and  called  out  for  annual  training  for  not 
more  than  twenty-eight  days,  and  to  no  greater  distance 
than  an  adjoining  county  (sec.  38).  Men  could  remove 
from  the  Militia  of  one  county  to  that  of  another  on 
giving  notice  to  their  Commanding  Officers  (sec.  39). 
In  case  of  invasion  or  rebellion  the  Local  Militia  could 
be  embodied  and  marched  to  any  part  of  Great  Britain 
(sec.  40).     It  could  also  be  called  out  by  the  Lord- 


'  214  LOCAL  MILITIA  ACT  chap. 

1808.  Lieutenant  to  suppress  riots,  when  its  assembly  was 
limited  to  fourteen  days  only  and  was  to  be  counted  as 
part  of  its  training  (sec.  42).  In  both  of  the  above  cases 
it  was  to  be  entitled  to  the  same  pay  as  the  Regular 
Militia,  and  the  wives  and  families  of  the  men  were 
likewise  entitled  to  parish  relief  (sees.  43,  44).  Local 
Militiamen  might  enlist  in  the  Army,  Navy,  Marines, 
and  Regular  Militia  except  during  the  period  of  annual 
training  ;  and  the  vacancies  thus  created  were  to  be 
filled  up  like  all  other  vacancies  for  the  Militia,  any 
suspension  of  the  ballot  for  the  Regular  Militia  notwith- 
standing (sees.  45,  46).  Counties  were  liable  to  a  fine 
of  ;^I5  for  every  man  deficient  of  their  quota  on  every 
14th  of  February,  subject  to  remissions  of  two-thirds 
and  one-third  of  such  fines  if  the  deficiency  were  made 
good  before  the  14th  of  March  and  14th  of  April 
respectively  (sees.  47,  48).  Finally,  there  was  inserted 
at  the  instance  of  Whitbread  ^  a  section  for  the  relief  of 
men  who  had  paid  fines  or  found  substitutes  for  the 
Army  of  Reserve,  and  had  since  been  compelled  to 
serve  as  principals  under  Castlereagh's  Act  of  1 807  for 
completing  the  Militia  (sec.  47). 