

1  The  number  should  be  309,000. 

P 


2IO  THE  LOCAL  MILITIA  chap. 

1808.       bring  these  290,000  to  320,000,  only  30,000  men  were 
wanted  ;  but  the  deficiency  was  so  unequal  in  different 
districts  that  not  fewer  than  60,000  would  answer  the 
purpose.     He    proposed    therefore    to    create   a   Local 
Militia  of  60,000  men,  to  be  gradually  increased  as  the 
Volunteers  diminished,  and  to  supersede  them  in  time 
of  peace.     The  force   would   be   raised  by  ballot,  but 
only   in  districts   where   sufficient   Volunteers,  or   men 
between   the  ages  of  eighteen  and  thirty-five,  did  not 
spontaneously  come  forward.    To  encourage  such  volun- 
tary offers,  he  would  give  a  small  bounty  to  those  who 
entered  the  new  force  of  their  own  will ;  and  he  hoped 
also   to   tempt   gentlemen  of  rank  to  join  as  officers. 
The  qualifications   of  the   Regular   Militia  would  be 
required  of  captains   but   not   of  subalterns.      Service 
would  be  for  four  years,  and  always  within  the  county 
except  in  case  of  invasion.     When  a  ballot  was  held,  no 
substitutes  would  be  allowed,  the  case  of  the  Provisional 
Cavalry  having   given  warning   against  such  a  course. 
The  fine  for  exemption  would  be  so  great  as  to  dis- 
courage men  from  paying  it ;  and  finally  all  insurance 
against  personal  service  would  be  made   penal.     The 
force  would  be  cheaper,  man  for  man,  than  Windham's 
levies,  and  would  finally  reach  the  number  of  400,000 
men.     With  such  a  force,  and  200,000  regular  troops, 
the  Empire  would  be  secure.^ 

It  will  be  observed  that  though  Castlereagh  hinted 
that  he  looked  forward  to  the  disappearance  of  the 
Volunteers,  he  adroitly  dissembled  his  true  feelings 
concerning  them  ;  so  much  so  that  he  brought  down 
the  usual  denunciation  of  them  from  Windham.  But 
Windham's  chief  quarrel  with  the  measure  was  that 
Castlereagh  had  practically  adopted  his  Training  Act, 
only  altering  the  number  of  days'  training,  and  incor- 
porating the  men  into  battalions,  whereas  he  himself 
wished  to  keep  them  as  a  great  reserve  to  be  passed 
straight  into  the  Line.  He  also  declared  that  Castle- 
reagh had  other  designs  than  merely  making  good  the 
1  H.D.  12th  April  1808. 


IV  LOCAL  MILITIA  ACT  211 

deficient  number  of  Volunteers,  because  a  circular  had  1808. 
been  issued  to  stop  all  further  increase  of  that  force. 
To  all  this  Castlereagh  responded  with  much  tact  that 
he  had  borrowed  a  great  deal  from  Windham's  Train- 
ing Act,  and  was  not  the  least  ashamed  of  it.  Upon 
the  whole,  the  opposition  to  the  Bill  seems  to  have  been 
half-hearted,  though  more  than  one  member  urged 
consideration  of  an  alternative  plan  suggested  by  Lord 
Selkirk.  This  was  to  call  up  all  young  men  from 
eighteen  to  twenty-five  years  of  age,  train  them  for 
three  months  in  their  first  year  and  for  smaller  periods 
in  subsequent  years,  until  at  twenty-five  they  became 
exempt.  Castlereagh  disposed  of  this  by  saying  that  it 
would  destroy  the  whole  system  of  quotas,  and  bear 
very  unequally  upon  the  counties  unless  the  Volunteers 
were  at  once  abolished.  And  it  must  be  remembered 
always  in  connection  with  Castlereagh's  scheme,  that  he 
had  inherited  the  *'  fleeting  and  inapplicable  mass  "  from 
his  predecessors,  and  that  its  existence  was  a  perpetual 
bar  to  any  but  a  very  gradual  reorganisation  of  the 
people  for  military  purposes. 