

To  this  end  Castlereagh  had  been  maturing  his  plans 
for  increasing  the  Militia  at  the  expense  of  the  Volun- 
teers. His  idea  was  to  select  first  all  that  was  good  of 
his  predecessor's  schemes,  and  to  graft  upon  that  stock 
a  new  shoot  of  his  own  ;  and  he  therefore  put  forth  the 
following  suggestions,  the  figures  being,  with  one  exce{>- 
tion,  reckoned  for  England  only  : — 

I.  To  keep  100,000  Volunteers  only  of  the  best  de- 
scription, in  Great  Britain  y  and  those  chiefly  in  large  towns 
and  populous  manufacturing  districts,  where  men  would 

1  H.D.  8th  March  1808.  2  /^/^,  13th  Aug.  1807. 


IV  CASTLEREAGH'S  REFORMS  205 

be  glad  to  turn  to  them  in  order  to  evade  other  service ;       1 808, 
the  State  imposing  on  them  such  conditions  as  would 
make  them  a  cheap,  useful,  and  efficient  force. 

2.  To  create  200,000  Sedentary  Militia,  to  be 
trained  for  twenty-eight  days  annually,  but  not  to  leave 
their  counties  except  in  case  of  invasion  or  rebellion. 

3.  To  train,  under  Windham's  Training  Act, 
200,000  men,  and  make  them  liable  to  serve  in  the 
Line  in  case  of  invasion. 

Though  he  set  down  these  three  descriptions  of 
force  in  the  order  thus  given,  he  intended  originally 
that  the  two  first  should  be  based  upon  the  last,  that  is 
to  say,  upon  the  Training  Act.  He  found  fault  with 
Windham's  measure  upon  three  principal  grounds — viz. 
that  Windham  had  offered  to  pay  the  men  called  out 
for  exercise  an  equivalent  for  the  loss  of  their  time 
and  labour,  which  the  country  could  not  afford  ;  that 
it  was  impossible  to  provide  adequate  training  for 
men  within  the  space  of  twelve  months ;  and  that, 
though  it  was  obviously  useless  and  dangerous  to  bring 
large  bodies  of  men  together  unless  previously  organised 
and  provided  with  officers,  it  was  impossible  con- 
veniently to  find  officers  for  so  large  a  number  as 
200,000. 

He  proposed,  therefore,  to  establish  the  following 
principles  as  the  basis  for  a  new  system  of  training  : — 

1.  That  instruction  in  the  use  of  arms  should  be 
imposed  upon  all  able-bodied  men  between  eighteen 
and  thirty  as  a  positive  duty,  to  be  enforced  by  fine  ; 
and  that  every  parish  should  keep  a  list  of  men  between 
those  ages. 

2.  That  the  State  should  provide  the  means  and  dis- 
charge the  expenses  of  instruction,  but  allow  no  pay  for 
attendance  at  drill.  Every  effort,  however,  should  be 
made  to  train  in  their  own  parishes  men  who  lived  at  a 
long  distance  from  the  places  of  assembly. 

To  facilitate  the  teaching,  the  Government  was  to 
distribute  and  employ  drill-sergeants  in  all  the  counties, 
taking  them  from  the  permanent  staff  of  the  Sedentary 