

It  will  be  observed  that  the  Act  in  its  final  form 
varied  somewhat  from  the  original  plan  sketched  by 
Castlereagh,  most  notably  in  the  omission  to  provide  a 
body  of  supplementary  men  for  the  immediate  filling  of 
vacancies.  The  invitation  to  entire  Volunteer  corps  to 
enrol  themselves  as  Local  Militia  was  also  a  concession, 
though  possibly  a  wise  concession,  which  marred  the 
original  idea  of  composing  the  new  force  wholly  of 
young  men,  who  should  have  received  their  elementary 
instruction  under  the  Training  Act.  There  was,  more- 
over, as  shall  be  seen,  another  weak  point  in  the  loose 
wording  of  the  sections  concerning  the  "  marching- 
guinea."  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  converted  at  a 
stroke  a  large  number  of  uncontrollable  men  into  corps 
which  could  be  disciplined  and  compelled  to  obey 
orders  ;  and  this  was  a  great  step  in  advance.     More- 

1  H.D.  2nd  May  1808. 


IV  PRESSURE  ON  VOLUNTEERS        215 

over,  it  will  be  noticed  that  the  experience  of  the  past  1808. 
was  wisely  turned  to  account  in  the  drafting  of  the 
Act.  There  were  to  be  no  more  doubts  as  to  the  worth 
of  exemptions  purchased  for  the  Militia,  the  Army  of 
Reserve,  or  any  other  Additional  Force ;  no  more 
questions  whether  men  could  be  ballotted  to  fill  vacancies 
or  recruits  could  be  enlisted  into  the  Army  ;  no  more 
trouble  with  the  tricks  of  Friendly  Societies.  Moreover, 
the  total  abolition  of  substitution  was  an  incalculable 
gain,  though  in  reality  the  reform  only  carried  out 
the  original  intention  of  the  elder  Pitt's  Militia  Act  of 
1757.  This  deserves  to  be  lifted  into  prominence  as 
perhaps  the  most  notable  point  in  the  whole  of  our 
administrative  military  history. 

It  will  be  convenient,  before  touching  upon  other 
topics,  to  follow  up  the  construction  of  the  Local 
Militia  during  the  summer  of  1808,  intimately  con- 
nected as  it  is  with  the  history  of  the  Volunteers.  At 
the  opening  of  the  year  the  Government  seemed  inclined 
to  continue  its  favours  to  the  latter  force,  for  it  issued 
a  circular  on  the  2nd  of  April  to  say  that  the  Volun- 
teers might  come  out  again  on  permanent  duty  during 
1808  for  not  more  than  fourteen,  or  fewer  than  ten, 
days,  with  the  same  allowances  as  in  1807.  But  within 
five  days  there  came  out  another  circular  to  say  that 
in  many  Volunteer  corps  the  difference  between  the 
effective  numbers  and  the  establishment  was  so  great 
that  a  new  establishment  must  be  made,  and  that  mean- 
while all  corps  were  provisionally  limited  to  the  number 
of  men  actually  enrolled  on  the  ist  of  April.  This,  no 
doubt,  was  [the  circular  to  which  Windham  alluded  in 
his  speech  ;  and  it  intimated  pretty  clearly  that  Volun- 
teer corps  below  a  certain  strength  would  be  swept  out 
of  existence  without  a  chance  of  completing  themselves 
so  as  to  avert  the  evil  day.  Two  days  before  the 
Local  Militia  Act  received  the  Royal  assent,  another 
circular  of  the  28  th  of  June  warned  all  commandants  of 
Volunteers  that  unless  they  sent  in  their  muster-rolls 
within  fourteen  days  of  the  ist  of  August,  their  corps 