


202 


CHAP.  IV     WINDHAM'S  SCHEME  FAILS       203 

swelled  the  expenses  for  Chelsea  and  Kilmainham  by  1808. 
j^  2  00,000  annually  ;  and  this  sum  would  be  still  further 
augmented  within  a  few  years  as  the  periods  of  service 
of  the  various  batches  of  men  began  to  expire.  Lastly, 
constant  changes  of  station  made  it  impossible  to  apply 
accurately  the  rules  for  the  increase  of  a  man's  pay  after 
each  term  of  seven  years'  service,  particularly  in  con- 
junction with  the  privilege  that  two  years'  service  in  the 
East  and  West  Indies  should  count  as  three.  In  those 
days  men  had  a  passion  for  shifting  from  regiment  to 
regiment  as  often  as  they  had  opportunity,  and  it  was 
impossible  to  register  their  movements  so  closely  as  to 
do  justice  either  to  them  or  to  the  public. 

Castlereagh,  on  receiving  this  report,  very  mag- 
nanimously urged  every  consideration  that  could  be 
brought  forward  in  favour  of  Windham's  system  ;  but 
the  Horse  Guards  met  the  statements  and  arguments 
with  facts  and  figures  which  were  neither  to  be  contro- 
verted nor  ignored.^  Accordingly,  when  the  Mutiny 
Bill  came  before  Parliament,  in  March  1808,  Castle- 
reagh was  obliged  to  represent  that  short  service,  though 
it  might  answer  for  work  in  Europe,  was  impossible  for 
a  country  which  had  to  supply  so  many  foreign  gar- 
risons as  England.  Of  204,000  Regular  troops  in  the 
Army,  70,000  were  engaged  for  short  service  ;  36,000 
of  them,  enlisted  during  the  past  twelve  months,  would 
all  be  lost  in  seven  years,  and  in  fact  limited  service 
could  not  cover  its  own  waste.  He  mentioned  incident- 
ally that  the  great  increase  of  recruits  gathered  by 
voluntary  enlistment  had  been  due  really  to  an  extra- 
ordinary cause.  Windham  had  threatened  to  disband 
the  whole  of  the  fifty-four  second  battalions  formed  by 
the  Army  of  Reserve,  unless  they  were  increased  to  four 
hundred  men  apiece  within  six  months,  and  this  menace 
had  led  the  officers  of  these  battalions  to  make  unusual 
exertions  lest  they  should  be  relegated  to  the  half-pay 
list.  He  therefore  moved  a  clause,  not  to  sweep  away 
short  service  altogether,  but  to  allow  recruits  the  option 
1  Corresp.  in  Supplement  to  Military  Transactions^  Appendix  1 8. 


204         CASTLEREAGH'S  REFORMS  chap. 

1808.  of  enlisting  for  a  term  or  for  life  as  they  might  prefer.^ 
He  carried  the  House  with  him.  The  Mutiny  Act  of 
1808  bound  every  recruit  to  serve  until  legally  dis- 
charged ;  but  short  service  none  the  less  remained  as  an 
alternative  open  to  such  men  as  preferred  it. 

Windham,  as  was  natural,  stood  up  for  the  system 
which  he  had  introduced,  setting  forth  his  side  of  the 
question  in  a  series  of  thirteen  propositions,  with  a  vast 
array  of  figures  all  tending  to  show  that  recruits  were 
better,  cheaper,  and  more  numerous  under  his  scheme 
than  under  any  other.  Castlereagh,  unfortunately,  had 
yet  more  facts  and  figures  to  his  hand  to  overthrow  these 
in  a  series  of  counter  propositions  ;  and  it  must  be  con- 
fessed that  in  the  duel  of  statistics  he  came  off  the 
better.^  In  fact  there  was  no  gainsaying  the  unpleasant 
truth  that,  without  some  such  heroic  measure  as  the 
quadrupling  of  the  private  soldier's  daily  pay,  it  was 
impossible  to  keep  the  ranks  of  the  Army  filled  without 
some  form  of  compulsion  ;  and  Castlereagh  was  pro- 
foundly convinced  that  it  was  imperative  not  only  to 
maintain  but  to  increase  the  Army.  Enforced  service 
abroad  was  out  of  the  question  ;  but  enforced  service 
at  home  was  consecrated  by  constitutional  usage  and 
confirmed  by  the  Militia  Acts.  The  Army  of  Reserve 
had  been  an  experiment  in  another  department  of  com- 
pulsion, but  it  had  not  been  successful.  Practically  the 
only  resource,  therefore,  was  to  turn  the  Militia  once 
more  into  a  recruiting  dep6t  for  the  Army. 