

The  Regular  Militia  was  to  be  ballotted  for  as  under 
the  existing  Acts,  neither  the  trained  men  nor  the 
Sedentary  Militia  being  exempt,  but  the  men  being  still 
chosen  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  forty-five,  so 
as  not  to  throw  too  heavy  a  burden  upon  a  limited 
class.  "  Necessity,"  he  wrote,  "  may  lead  hereafter 
and  consequently  justify  us  in  applying  the  principle  of 
conscription  more  directly,  but  in  the  first  instance  our 
object  should  be  to  make  the  service  of  the  Sedentary 
Militia  as  little  onerous  as  possible,  and  to  try  what 
resources  can  be  drawn  by  proper  encouragement  and 
voluntary  enlistment  from  a  body  so  constituted."  ^  But 
the  Regular  Militia,  through  the  additional  facility 
of  procuring  men  by  enlistment,  would  be  much 
strengthened  ;  and,  as  Castlereagh  observed,  "  a  corps 
of  this  description  seems  an  indispensable  ingredient  in 
the  Army  of  a  state  which  must  reduce  its  military 
force  suddenly  in  time  of  peace,  and  call  it  forth  as 
suddenly  upon  the  recurrence  of  war." 

Finally,  the  Regular  Army,  when  the  system  was 
perfected,  would  be  kept  up  partly  by  ordinary  recruiting, 
partly  by  Volunteers  from  the  Sedentary  Militia,  and  in 
the  third  place  by  a  school  to  be  established  on  a  large 
scale  for  the  reception  of  boys,  who  should  pass  two  or 
three  years  there  in  education  before  being  attached  to 
regiments.  He  conceived  that  both  parents  and  parishes 
would  be  glad  to  send  children  to  such  an  institution  if 

1  This  sentence  is  faithfully  transcribed,  so  the  faults  in  it  must 
not  be  ascribed  to  the  author.     Castlereagh's  English  was  always 

detestable. 


2o8 


CASTLEREAGH'S  REFORMS 


CHAP. 


1808.  they  were  assured  that  they  would  be  educated  first, 
and  not  compelled  to  bear  arms  too  soon.  The  term 
of  service  for  such  boys  would  be  seven  years,  reckon- 
ing from  their  attainment  of  the  age  of  eighteen. 

All  the  recruits  were  to  have  the  option  of  enlist- 
ing for  short  service  or  for  life,  without  limitation 
as  to  place.  Men  engaged  for  life  would  be  thrown 
principally  into  first  battalions  ;  men  engaged  for  a 
limited  term  into  second  battalions.  Thus  the  difficulty 
of  relief  for  foreign  garrisons  would  be  overcome, 
and  any  advantages  derivable  from  short  service  would 
be  retained.  All  alike  would  be  liable  to  foreign 
service  ;  and  if  it  were  necessary  to  levy  a  large  number 
of  men  by  ballot,  they  would  be  received  into  the  second 
battalions,  from  whence  they  could  be  tempted  to  re- 
engage for  longer  service. 

In  round  numbers  Castlereagh  reckoned  that  the 
complete  armed  force  of  England  would  ultimately 
attain  to  the  following  strength  : — 