

The  Local  Militia  Bills  became  law  on  the  30th  of 
June  (48  Geo.  III.  cap.  1 1 1,  Scotland,  cap.  150).  They 
enacted  that  a  Permanent  Local  Militia  should  be 
enrolled  in  Great  Britain,  not  to  exceed,  together  with 
the  Volunteers,  six  times  the  quota  of  the  Militia  under 
the  Militia  Act  of  1802,  that  is  to  say,  not  to  exceed 
308,934  men  ;  and  that  deficiencies  among  effective 
Volunteers  should  be  supplied  by  Local  Militiamen 
(sees.  1-3).  Only  men  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and 
thirty  were  to  be  ballotted  ;  and  no  substitution  nor 
bounty  to  ballotted  men  was  to  be  allowed  (sec.  8). 
Sick  or  infirm  persons  could  be  exempted  by  two 
Deputy-Lieutenants  under  medical  certificate  (sec.  11). 
Ministers  of  religion,  schoolmasters,  and  practising 
doctors  were  likewise  exempted  ;  also  men  who  were 
serving,  or  had  served,  in  the  Army  of  Reserve  or  had 
found  a  substitute  or  paid  the  fine  for  exemption  from 
service  therein.     Men  who  were  in  the  like  case  in 


212  LOCAL  MILITIA  ACT  chap. 

1 808.  respect  of  the  Regular  Militia  were  exempt  for  four 
years  after  the  expiration  of  their  term  of  service,  or 
for  six  years  from  the  date  of  the  enrolment  of  their 
substitute  (sec.  13).  Articled  clerks  and  apprentices, 
poor  men  with  fewer  than  three  children  born  in  lawfiil 
wedlock,  and  persons  under  five  feet  four  inches  in 
height  but  not  under  five  feet  two  inches,  though 
exempted  from  the  Regular  Militia,  were  liable  to  serve 
in  the  Local  Militia  (sec.  14)  ;  but  ballotted  apprentices 
might  not  enlist  in  the  Army  without  their  master's 
consent  (sec.  15).  Ballotted  men  were  to  be  sworn  to 
serve  for  five  years  unless  sooner  discharged  (sec.  16). 
Any  ballotted  man  not  presenting  himself  to  be  enrolled 
was  to  be  fined  ;C30  »  or  ^20  if  his  annual  income  were 
less  than  £100  ;  or  ^^  10  if  his  income  were  under  ;^  100 ; 
which  fines  were  to  be  paid  to  the  Paymaster-General 
of  the  Forces,  and  were  to  give  exemption  for  two 
years  only  (sec.  17).  Persons  imprisoned  for  not 
paying  these  fines  were  liable  to  serve  for  their  full 
term  of  four  years  after  expiration  of  their  period  of 
imprisonment  (sec.  18).  Ballotted  men  engaging  to 
serve  in  Volunteer  corps  at  their  own  expense  were 
entitled  to  remission  of  half  the  fine,  but  if  they  failed 
to  continue  to  serve  for  four  years,  they  were  liable  to 
forfeit  treble  the  sum  remitted,  and  to  serve  in  the 
Local  Militia  (sec.  20).  Persons  paying  the  fine  were 
required  to  declare  that  they  had  not  insured  themselves 
against  such  payment ;  and  on  refusing  so  to  declare, 
or  on  making  a  false  declaration,  were  to  forfeit  thrice 
the  amount  of  the  fine,  with  alternative  of  three  months'" 
imprisonment.  The  penalty  for  insuring  persons  against 
fines  was  a  fine  of  ^^50  (sees.  22,  23).  When  men 
between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  forty  voluntarily 
enrolled  themselves  in  any  parish,  the  ballot  was  to  be 
held  only  for  the  number  deficient  of  the  quota ;  and  such 
voluntary  recruits  were  to  receive  a  bounty  of  £2  :  2s.,. 
which,  however,  they  were  to  forfeit  if  they  enlisted  in 
the  Regular  Army  within  two  years  (sees.  24,  26,  27).. 
Members  of  Friendly  Societies  were  not  to  be  prejudiced 