

Castlereagh  said  nothing  of  all  this  in  introducing 
his  Bill,  but  remarked  simply  that  it  was  now  ascertained 
that  the  easiest  and  swiftest  way  of  increasing  the  Army 
was  to  draw  men  from  the  Militia.  The  Act  of  1807 
had  encouraged  the  transfer  of  29,000  men  from  the 
Militia  to  the  Line,  and  in  twelve  months  over  27,000 
had  been  transferred.  He  had  asked  the  country  for 
45,000  to  fill  the  gaps  in  the  Militia,  and  in  six  months 

1  C.C.L.B.  8th  Aug.  1808  ;  I.D.  vol.  cxxxvii.  L.L.  Hants, to  S.S. 
26th  Sept.  ;  L.L.  Hereford,  to  S.S.  14th  Oct.  ;  vol.  cxxxix.  L.L. 
Leicester,  to  S.S.  14th  Aug.  1808  ;  ff^.O.  Mila.  E.B.  21st  July,  ist, 
3rd,  loth  Aug.  1808. 


222  MILITIA  ENLISTMENT  ACT,  1809     chap. 

1809.  41,500  had  joined  their  regiments.  He  proposed,  there- 
fore, once  again  to  encourage  Militiamen  to  enlist  in  the 
Army  to  such  an  extent  as  to  leave,  as  in  1807,  three- 
fifths  of  the  establishment  untouched.  But  whereas  in 
1807  it  was  necessary  not  only  to  complete  the  establish- 
ment but  to  raise  men  in  excess,  in  this  year  it  would  be 
necessary  only  to  cover  deficiencies,  so  that  for  England 
only  24,000  would  be  called  for  instead  of  36,000. 
He  purposed  if  possible  to  dispense  with  the  ballot,  and 
to  throw  the  expense  of  raising  these  men  not  upon  the 
counties  but  upon  the  public.  He  would  therefore  in 
the  first  place  try  to  gather  the  necessary  Militia  recruits 
by  voluntary  enlistment,  offering  a  bounty  often  guineas 
from  the  Imperial  Treasury.  If  a  ballot  were  found 
necessary,  he  would  give  this  sum  to  the  ballotted  man, 
either  as  a  bounty  if  he  served  himself,  or  as  a  subsidy 
towards  the  price  of  a  substitute.  He  hoped  that  the 
county  gentlemen  and  Colonels  of  Militia  would  forward 
the  levy,  since  the  expense  was  to  fall  upon  the  Imperial 
Treasury  and  not  on  the  counties  ;  and  upon  the  whole 
he  was  sanguine  that  the  ballot  would  be  unnecessary 
and  that  general  recruiting  for  the  Army  would  not  be 
injured. 

These  proposals,  of  course,  met  with  some  opposition. 
Tierney  saw  no  occasion  to  increase  the  Army  until  the 
House  knew  on  what  service  it  was  to  be  employed,  and 
Lord  Milton  declared  that  to  make  the  Militia  fill  the 
.  ranks  of  the  Regulars  was  nothing  less  than  conscription 
for  the  Army.^  On  the  other  hand,  Colonel  Wood  of 
the  Middlesex  Militia  declared  that  he  and  his  fellow- 
commanders  had  overcome  their  prejudices  against  the 
system,  inasmuch  as  by  furthering  it  they  could  best 
serve  their  country.  Bounties,  observed  the  Colonel, 
were  not  high  ;  for  he  had  lately  got  thirty  men  for 
eight  guineas  apiece — a  statement  of  delightful  effrontery, 
since  as  a  matter  of  fact  he  was  employing  an  agent  in 
Norwich  to  gather  recruits  from  the  Local  Militiamen, 
to  the  exasperation  of  that  county  and  to  the  infraction 
1  H.D.  25th  Jan.  1809. 