


2i6     CONVERSION  OF  VOLUNTEERS     chap. 

1808.  would  lose  the  privileges  of  effective  Volunteers  and  be- 
come subject  to  the  ballot  for  the  Local  Militia.  There 
was  to  be  no  delay,  no  evasion,  no  parleying.  The  **  fleet- 
ing inapplicable  mass"  must  become  stable  and  applicable, 
or  it  would  find  itself  turned  into  Local  MiHtia. 

Then  came  the  question  whether  the  Volunteer 
corps  would  or  would  not  as  a  rule  transfer  themselves 
bodily  to  the  Local  Militia.  Speaking  generally,  they 
seem  to  have  been  somewhat  backward  in  doing  so. 
In  some  cases  the  officers  were  willing  enough,  but  their 
men  would  not  follow  them.  In  Suffolk  the  Helming- 
ton  battalion  was  ready  to  furnish  ten  officers  but  only 
three  men.  In  the  same  county  the  transfer  of  the 
Risbridge  battalion  was  wrecked  by  the  conduct  of  two 
captains,  who  were  incensed  because  their  Commanding 
Officer  refused  to  recommend  one  of  them  for  pro- 
motion to  major.  It  is  satisfactory  to  know  that  in 
accordance  with  the  recommendation  of  the  Colonel 
this  corps  was  at  once  disbanded.  In  Sussex  the 
Volunteers  as  a  body  declined  to  have  anything  to  do 
with  the  Local  Militia ;  and  in  Nottinghamshire 
some  revolted  from  the  very  name  and  could  not 
be  won  over.  In  Ross  likewise  they  stood  haughtily 
aloof  until  they  discovered  that  their  parishes  would  be 
liable  to  heavy  fines,  when,  like  true  Scots,  they  begged 
hastily  to  be  transferred,  and  offered  even  to  sacrifice 
their  bounty  if  permitted  to  do  so.  In  Kent  the 
Volunteers  dissolved  themselves  in  dudgeon  in  all 
directions  ;  and  for  a  quota  of  7776  no  fewer  than 
5074  needed  to  be  ballotted.  In  Lancashire  over  5000 
Volunteers  accepted  service  in  the  Local  Militia,  but  even 
so  compulsion  was  necessary  to  force  nearly  7000  more 
into  the  ranks  ;  and  a  certain  number,  until  brought  to 
their  senses,  positively  refused  to  be  ballotted.  In  Lincoln- 
shire again  it  was  necessary  to  invoke  the  ballot  for 
nearly  half  of  the  quota.  On  the  other  hand,  there 
were  many  counties  in  which  the  spirit  was  very  much 
better.  Caermarthenshire,  Denbigh,  and  Wiltshire  pro- 
duced the  whole  of  their  men  without  a  ballot ;  Hamp- 


IV  CONVERSION  OF  VOLUNTEERS     217 

shire  did  very  nearly  as  well ;  and  in  Devon,  whose  full  1808. 
quota  was  9000,  over  8000  Volunteers  converted  them- 
selves into  Local  Militia.  In  all  it  seems  that  in  seventy- 
six  counties  of  Great  Britain  it  was  necessary  to  raise 
only  32,810  men  by  ballot.^  Upon  the  whole,  there- 
fore, the  Volunteers,  though  poor  of  spirit  in  some 
counties,  came  forward  as  well  as  could  be  expected  ; 
and  they  were  encouraged  by  the  latitude  which  the 
Act  gave  them  to  enrol  voluntary  recruits  in  the  Local 
Militia,  and  so  to  draw  in  stragglers  from  corps  which, 
as  complete  bodies,  had  no  relish  for  the  new  service.^ 
In  W^ales  it  seems  probable  that  the  readiness  of  the 
Volunteers  to  accept  transfer  to  the  Local  Militia  was 
due  to  the  poverty  of  the  officers  ;  for  in  Pembroke  the 
Lieutenant  pleaded  hard  for  a  corps  to  be  continued  in 
the  status  of  Fusiliers,  since  the  officers  were  chiefly 