

19,776 
760 

On  passage            ..... 
With  Moore,  10,871  ;  with  Spencer,  3704 

4454 
i4»575 

»» 

Of  the  troops  at  home  the  greater  number  were 
second  battalions,  there  being  in  fact  but  two  first 
battalions  in  England,  four  in  Scotland,  and  nine  in 
Ireland.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  when  in  July 
Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  was  despatched  to  Portugal  with 
some  9000  troops,  the  whole  of  his  infantry  (nine  and  a 
half  battalions)  was,  with  the  exception  of  half  a  battalion 
of  Rifles,  drawn  from  Ireland.  He  was  reinforced  in 
August  by  seven  more  battalions,  three  of  them  second, 
and  four  of  them  first,  amounting  to  about  4000  men 
in  all,  and  with  these  added  to  Spencer's  force  was  fought 
the  campaign  of  Roli^a  and  Vimeiro. 

The  Convention  of  Cintra  brought  the  operations  to 
an  unfortunate  end  ;  and  the  recall  of  all  the  generals 
who  were  concerned  in  it  threw  the  command  into  the 
hands  of  Sir  John  Moore.  In  the  course  of  the  autumn 
and  winter  Castlereagh  increased  his  force  to  some 
42,000  men,  British  and  German  ;  and  with  33,000 
of  these  Moore  moved  north-eastward  from  Portugal  to 
join  the  Spanish  armies,  but,  finding  that  they  had  been 
hopelessly  beaten,  finally  decided  to  make  the  dash  upon 
Napoleon's  communications  which  has  made  his  name 
famous.  On  the  i6th  of  January  1809  he  fought  the 
action  of  Coruna,  and  on  the  following  day  the  wreck,  of 
his  army  embarked  for  England,  where  it  disembarked 
a  little  over  26,000  strong.^ 

^  I  am  indebted  for  these  figures  concerning  Moore's  army  to 
Oman's  History  of  the  Peninsular  War,  i.  646. 


IV       MILITIA  ENLISTMENT  BILL,  1809     221 


II 

On  the  25  th  of  January  1809  Castlereagh,  after  a      *  °^" 
very  handsome  tribute  to  Moore,  introduced  a  new  Bill 
to  enable  the  Militia  to  enlist  into  the  Army.     He  was 
not  without  good  justification.     The  casualties  for  the 
year    1808  had  been   17,183,  and  against  these  figures 
ordinary  recruiting  had  produced  only  10,477  ^^^  ^^^ 
2486  boys.     On  the  other  hand,  the  Spanish  insurrection 
against  Napoleon,  kindled  by  the  spontaneous  impulse 
of  a  proud  and  gallant  people,  had  roused  the  greatest 
enthusiasm  in  England.     Nine  battalions  of  Militia,  the 
Bucks,  the  Durham,  the  Hants,  the  Hereford,  the  Leicester, 
the  Pembroke,  Flintshire,  Merioneth,  and  Carnarvon, 
had  volunteered  for  active  service  in  Spain  within  a  few 
weeks  after  the  insurrection  became  known  in  England.' 
Moreover,  the  diversion  of  Napoleon's  troops  to  Spain 
had  drawn  great  numbers  of  his  men  from  Germany  ; 
while  the  capture  of  one  of  his  corps  at  Baylen  had 
heartened   all  the  armies  that  he    had  ever   defeated. 
Austria  was  arming   with  feverish  haste   to   take    her 
revenge  ;  and  even  in  Prussia,  crushed  and  humbled  to 
the  dust,  free  corps  were  organising  themselves  to  strike 
at  the  first  favourable  moment.     The  time,  therefore, 
seemed  propitious  for  a  great  effort  to  overthrow  the 
conqueror  who  for  so  long  had  dominated  Europe. 