

The  process  of  raising  Militiamen  by  beat  of  drum 
seems  to  have  gone  on  fairly  quietly,  though  occasion- 
ally there  was  trouble.  London,  as  usual,  was  forward 
in  attempting  to  steal  men  from  other  counties.  Thus 
the  Tower  Hamlets  Militia  sent  a  recruiting  party, 
without  any  beating  order,  to  Stroud  in  Gloucestershire, 
where  they  offered  a  reward  of  a  guinea  to  any  man  who 
would  bring  them  recruits  for  their  regiment.  Recruits 
having  been  brought  in,  received  five  guineas  on  the 
spot,  were  sent  up  to  the  regiment,  and  from  thence 
were  at  once  sent  back  on  furlough  to  their  homes,  with 
the  intimation  that  they  too  would  receive  a  guinea 
for  every  recruit  that  they  in  their  turn  should  produce. 
By  this  ingenious  method  the  Tower  Hamlets  enlisted 
numbers  of  men  at  a  cheap  rate,  leaving  the  people 
of  Gloucestershire  enraged  but  impotent.^  Another 
difficulty  was  that  under  voluntary  enlistment  a  parish 
often  provided  more  than  its  quota,  and  thus  as  a 
reward  for  its  patriotism  incurred  an  undue  burden  for 
the  support  of  the  Militiamen's  families.^  But  on  the 
whole  the  complaints  were  few,  and  matters  seem  to 
have  proceeded  with  great  smoothness. 

In  Ireland  (49  Geo.  III.  cap.  ^6,  3rd  June  1809)  the 
men  for  completion  of  the  Militia  were  to  be  voluntarily 
enlisted,  at  a  bounty  not  exceeding  eight  guineas  (sec. 
i).  Counties  not  producing  their  quota  within  twelve 
months  were  to  be  fined  ^30  for  every  man  deficient. 
But  over  and  above  this  an  Irish  Militia  Consolidation 

1  I.D.  vol.  clxiv.  L.L.  Glos.  to  S.S.  4th  Aug.  1809. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  clxiv.  L.L.  Glos.  to  S.S.  8th  Dec.  1809. 


228  IRISH  MILITIA  ACTS  chap. 

1809.  Act  was  introduced  on  the  6th  of  February  by  the  Chief 
Secretary,  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,  though  in  great  measure 
prepared  by  Castlereagh  in  1805.^  Hereby  the  Irish 
Militia  was  appointed  to  consist  of  thirteen  battalions  of 
six  companies  each,  two  of  seven  companies,  ten  bat- 
talions of  eight  companies,  one  of  nine  companies,  and 
six  often  companies,  or  24,100  men.  No  regiment  was 
to  have  more  than  100  rank  and  file  in  a  company 
(sees.  2,  9).  Militiamen  enlisting  into  the  Regulars, 
except  under  a  special  Act,  were  liable  to  six  months'  im- 
prisonment (sec.  63).  Full  machinery  for  the  ballot 
was  authorised,  but  the  Lord-Lieutenant  was  empowered 
to  allow  the  Militia,  or  any  vacancies  therein,  to  be 
supplied  by  voluntary  enlistment  (sec.  130)  ;  or  to 
authorise  parochial  assessments  for  money  to  raise  men 
in  lieu  of  the  ballot  (sec.  124).  This  last  was  the  most 
important  provision  in  the  Bill  for  Ireland,  for,  whereas 
it  had  been  a  temporary  expedient  before,  it  was  now 
made  a  perpetual  possible  substitute  for  the  ballot,  which 
had  always  been  a  source  of  trouble  in  that  country. 