

The  rest  of  the  armed  strength  of  the  country  was  to 
be  distributed  into  Local  Militia,  Yeomanry,  and  Volun- 
teers only,  the  Regular  Militia  passing  out  of  existence. 

The  Volunteers  should  be  in  corps  not  less  than 
600  strong,  and  entirely  self-supporting,  so  as  to  be  of 
no  expense  to  the  public  except  for  their  arms  and  for 
their  pay  when  called  out  on  permanent  duty,  at  which 
time  they  ought  to  be  subject  to  martial  law. 

The  Local  Militia  should  be  formed  on  the  same 
principle  as  the  rest  of  the  Army,  the  establishments 
being  equalised  so  far  as  the  populations  of  the  counties 
permitted.  The  arrangements  for  calling  them  out  for 
training  should  be  such  as  to  make  the  service  as  little 
burdensome  as  possible,  so  that  the  country  gentlemen 
might  be  encouraged  to  hold  commissions.  The  Local 
Militia  should  in  every  case  assume  the  uniform,  colours 
and  equipment  of  the  regiment  of  the  Line  belonging 
to  its  county,  and  in  fact  become  a  part  of  it.  The 
men  of  the  second  battalions  should  be  encouraged  by 
bounties  to  extend  their  services  to  their  first  battalions, 
and  those  of  the  Local  Militia  in  like  manner  to  the 
second  battalions.  Probably  enough  men  would  come 
forward  voluntarily  to  fill  the  gaps  in  the  second  bat- 
talions, but  if  not  the  ballot  must  be  resorted  to  ;  for 


IV  CALVERT'S  MEMORANDUM  225 

the  essence  of  the  plan  was  that  the  second  battalions  1809, 
should  be  kept  complete.  Thus  a  real  and  useful 
connection  would  be  established  between  the  different 
branches  of  the  milit^r^  force  ;  the  regiments  of  the 
Line  would  be  closely  connected  with  the  counties  whose 
names  they  bore  ;  and  the  Militia  would  become  what 
it  ought  to  be  constitutionally — the  basis  of  the  national 
force.  Only  thus  could  the  recruiting  for  the  Army 
be  placed  on  an  assured  and  permanent  footing.  The 
amount  of  the  force  thus  produced  would  be — 

Infantry  of  the  Line  for  general  service,  exclusive  of 

Guards,  Veteran  battalions,  and  Sixtieth     .         .  100,000 
Second   battalions,  limited  to  service  in  the  British 

Isles        .......          .  100,000 

Local  Militia,  at  least     ......  200,000 

Yeomanry      ........  32,000 

Volunteers     ........  100,000 

Total  (all  foreign  corps  excluded)         .         .        532,000^ 

This  memorandum,  which  bears  the  signature  of  Sir 
Henry  Calvert,  the  Adjutant-General,  expanded  the 
scheme  proposed  by  the  Commander-in-Chief  in  1 807. 
It  anticipated,  as  will  be  at  once  remarked,  the  terri- 
torial system  which  at  present  obtains  in  the  Army  ;  and 
there  can  be  no  doubt  of  its  soundness  in  many  respects. 
It  was  an  absurdity  to  have  two  descriptions  of  Militia, 
one  of  which  in  practice  only  duplicated  the 
second  battalions  of  the  Line,  and  competed  with  them 
for  recruits  ;  and  the  division  of  the  forces  into  the 
Regular  and  Movable  Army  recruited  by  voluntary 
enlistment,  and  the  Sedentary  Army  recruited  by  ballot 
without  power  of  substitution,  would  have  been  more 
intelligible,  more  business-like,  and  more  efficient. 
Castlereagh,  however,  seems  to  have  shrunk  from  the 
change,  and  though,  as  shall  in  due  time  be  seen,  the 
Local  Militia  practically  displaced  the  Volunteers,  yet 
no  steps  were  taken  wholly  to  abolish  the  Regular 
Militia. 