

The  Local  Militia  appears  to  have  stopped  short 
somewhat  in  the  progress  made  at  the  beginning  of 
1809.  Whitbread  stated  in  the  House  of  Commons 
that  half  of  that  in  his  own  county,  Bedford,  had  never 
been  out  on  permanent  duty  nor  received  their  clothing, 
while  in  other  counties  none  whatever  had  been  called 
out  for  training.  The  Government  seems  to  have  been 
uneasy  about  its  expense,  which  was  set  down  at  ;^i6  a 
man  annually  ;  and  it  was  further  alleged  that  military 
duty  was  unsettling  the  men  for  their  ordinary  pursuits.' 
Accordingly  an  Act  to  amend  the  Local  Militia  Act 
was  passed  on  the  i8th  of  April  (50  Geo.  III.  cap.  25), 
which  contained  the  following  provisions. 

In  case  of  reduction  of  the  permanent  staff,  com- 
mandants were  empowered  to  engage  other  non-com- 
missioned officers  at  a  reduced  rate  of  pay  (sec.  i). 
The  days  of  exercise  to  qualify  Volunteers  for  exemp- 
tion from  service  in  the  Regular  and  Local  Militia  were 
reduced  from  twenty-four  to  eighteen  annually  (sec.  2). 
The  fine  of  ^^  1 5  upon  counties  for  every  man  deficient 
of  the  quota  on  the  14th  of  February  was  suspended, 
though  it  was  to  be  enforced  for  every  man  not  present 
at  the  annual  training  (sec.  5).  Constables  were  required 
to  make  returns  of  deficiencies  on  the  14th  of  November, 
and  the  counties  were  obliged  to  make  them  good 
before  the  14th  of  February  on  pain  of  a  fine  of  ^^i  5  (sec. 
6).  Local  Militiamen  who  enlisted  in  the  Line  and  made 
no  declaration  of  the  bounty  that  they  had  received, 
in  order  that  the  same  might  be  refunded,  were  subject 
to  a  fine  of  twice  the  amount  of  the  bounty,  to  be 

1  C.J.  vol.  Ixvi.  p.  561. 
2  H.D.  Whi thread's  Speech,  ist  March  1810. 


242  LOCAL  MILITIA  EVADED  chap. 

1810.  stopped  from  their  pay  (sec.  7).  Local  Militiamen 
who  were  members  of  Friendly  Societies  were  not  to 
be  subject  to  fines  imposed  by  such  societies  for  non- 
attendance  during  their  period  of  service  (sec.  13). 
Apprentices  were  forbidden  to  transfer  themselves  from 
the  Volunteers  to  the  Local  Militia  without  their  masters* 
consent  (sec.  14).  It  was  further  ordained  that  military 
oiFences  of  Local  Militiamen  should  be  triable  by  court- 
martial,  whether  their  regiment  was  embodied  or  not 
(sec.  3). 

It  will  have  been  noticed  that  the  Government 
resolved  to  save  money  in  the  first  instance  by  reducing 
the  number  of  days'  training  for  the  Volunteers  rather 
than  for  the  Local  Militia  ;  but  early  in  1 8 1  o  an  order 
was  issued  for  the  reduction  of  the  permanent  staff  of 
the  Local  Militia,  as  an  initial  economy,  and  the  first 
section  of  the  Act  above  quoted  was  intended  to  comfort 
commandants  under  the  bereavement  of  their  favourite 
non-commissioned  officers.^  But  unfortunately  there 
were  other  matters  besides  economy  to  be  attended  to, 
for  which  no  provision  was  made  in  the  Act.  The 
original  measure,  binding  men,  as  it  practically  did,  to 
personal  service  by  ballot,  bred  in  those  liable  to  serve 
not  only  considerable  stubbornness,  but  an  amazing 
talent  for  evasive  trickery,  while  at  the  same  time 
developing  deplorable  weakness  in  some  of  the  Lieu- 
tenancies. In  Kent  over  seventy  ballotted  men  refused 
either  to  pay  the  fine  or  to  serve  ;  and  the  Lord-Lieu- 
tenant wrote  to  ask  the  Secretary  of  State  what  was  to 
be  done,  though  the  Act  distinctly  said  that  such  men 
could  be  imprisoned  and  were  liable  to  serve  after  their 
imprisonment.  Again,  several  wealthy  tradesmen  of 
Maidstone,  on  being  drawn  for  the  Local  Militia,  con- 
sented to  be  enrolled,  but,  on  the  day  before  the  training 
began,  took  the  bounty  to  enter  the  Regular  Militia, 
and  so  excused  themselves  for  not  attending.     They 