

1  I.D.  vol.    cliii.  Col.  Whitbread  (Beds.)    to  S.S.    26th  April 
1809. 

2  A  second  amending  Act  (49  Geo.  III.  c.  82)  was  also  passed 
later  in  the  session,  but  contains  nothing  essential  to  our  purpose. 


230  DECAY  OF  VOLUNTEERS  chap. 

1809.  It  will  have  been  gathered  from  Castlereagh's  speech 

quoted  above  that  the  Volunteers  had  declined  as  the 
Local  Militia  increased  ;  and  in  June  those  that  were  not 
genuinely  self-supporting  received  their  death-blow  in 
an  intimation  that  no  further  allowance  for  clothing 
would  be  granted  to  Volunteer  Infantry.^  Little  more 
therefore  will  remain  to  be  said  of  this  force,  though, 
curiously  enough,  the  services  of  the  Volunteers  were 
really  needed  in  Cornwall  in  February  1809.  A  trans- 
port containing  240  soldiers  of  Junot's  army,  which 
was  bound  to  France  in  pursuance  of  the  Convention  of 
Cintra,  came  into  Penzance  in  a  sinking  state.  The 
men  on  board  her  were  out  of  all  discipline  and 
control,  and  threatened  to  break  out  of  the  ship  and  land. 
The  Volunteers  in  the  district  were  therefore  hastily 
called  out  to  overawe  the  Frenchmen  and  to  patrol  the 
countryside ;  so  that  on  this  occasion  it  may  be  said  that 
they  were  of  real  value.^  But  from  this  time  forward 
they  were  wholly  eclipsed  by  the  Local  Militia,  which 
now  demands  a  slight  review. 

Windham's  criticism  of  the  new  force  was  that  it 
contained,  no  doubt,  a  fine  body  of  men  ;  but  were  they 
soldiers  ?  To  this  it  can  only  be  answered  that,  if  they 
were  not  in  some  measure  soldiers,  the  Volunteers,  from 
which  two-thirds  of  them  were  sprung,  must  have  been 
incurably  inefficient.  Out  of  the  195  battalions,  116 
came  out  for  a  month's  or  a  fortnight's  training  during 
1809,  which  was  a  creditable  number  considering  that 
the  Local  Militia  was  only  called  into  being  on  the  30th 
of  June  1808.  In  any  case  they  furnished  a  useful 
number  of  recruits  to  the  Army  and  Regular  Militia. 
In  June  1 809  a  circular  was  issued  empowering  Lords- 
Lieutenant  to  offer  a  bounty  of  eight  guineas  to  all  men 
who  would  join  the  Regular  Militia  ;  and  from  the 
Bucks  regiments  alone  nineteen  men  were  collected  in 
a  few  days.  The  Lord-Lieutenant  of  that  county  also 
suggested    and    obtained    approval    of   a    useful    and 

^  Circular  to  the  L.Ls.  30th  June  1809. 
2  J  D    vol.  clviii.  L.L.  Cornwall,  to  S.S.  23rd  Feb.  1809. 


IV  LOCAL  MILITIA  RIOTS  231 

economical  reform,  namely,  that  the  recruits  should  be  1 809. 
called  out  for  a  period  of  training  half  as  long  again  as 
that  of  the  rest  of  the  battalion.^  But  indeed  it  may 
be  said  that  Buckinghamshire,  under  the  guidance  of  the 
Grenvilles,  was  always  one  of  the  foremost  counties  for 
any  patriotic  work.  From  Denbigh  the  Lieutenant 
reported  that  his  Local  Militiamen  were  ready  to  enter 
the  Army  without  any  bounty  or  solicitation.^  In  fact, 
though  no  sufficient  evidence  exists  absolutely  to  prove 
the  fact,  it  should  seem  that  a  number  of  young 
fellows  no  sooner  found  themselves  obliged  to  serve, 
without  option  of  finding  a  substitute,  than  they  became 
ready  to  make  the  Army  their  profession  in  earnest. 