

The  Government,  from  leniency  towards  the  counties 
and  to  give  them  time  to  prepare  their  lists,  prolonged 
the  time  for  voluntary  enlistment  to  the  30th  of  June  ; 
but  the  ballot  was  duly  applied  to  complete  the  Militia 
after  the  ist  of  July  ;  and  the  usual  crop  of  troubles  at 
once  sprang  up.  In  many  counties  it  seems  that  there 
was  something  like  a  revolt  of  the  Deputy-Lieutenants 
and  Justices,  "  whose  conduct  and  language  checked  the 
operation  of  the  law."  From  others  there  were  pathetic 
appeals  that  the  bounty  of  £10  to  parochial  substitutes, 
which  was  ordered  to  cease  on  the  ist  of  September, 
might  be  prolonged  to  the  ist  of  October,  owing  to  the 
time  consumed  in  making  out  new  ballot -lists.^  But 
the  Act  reserved  no  power  to  the  Crown  to  do  this  ; 
and  the  aggrieved  counties  were  fain  to  submit  to  the 
inevitable.  Where  new  ballot-lists  had  not  been  made 
out,  there  were  still  more  formidable  obstacles.  In 
Inverness  twenty-eight  indignant  tradesmen  complained 
that  they  had  all  of  them  been  drawn  for  the  Militia,  to 
the  omission  of  many  others  who  had  not  been  included  in 
the  ballot  because  the  lists  were  two  years  old.  They 
alleged  further  that  the  number  of  constables  had  been 
doubled  from  forty  to  eighty  within  the  past  eighteen 
months  to  secure  exemption  for  a  certain  number  of 
young  men ;  and  they  appealed  frantically  for  new  lists, 
because  trade,  since  they  had  been  ballotted,  was  at  a 
standstill.'^  In  another  subdivision  of  the  same  county 
the  ballot  failed  completely.  Several  of  the  lotmen 
disappeared  or  deserted  ;  others  raised  legal  objections 
which  procured  them  bill  after  bill  of  suspension  from 

1  I.D.  vol.  clxxx.  L.L.  Linlithgow,  to  S.S.  2nd  August  1810. 
Eight  more  counties  made  the  same  request. 

*  liU.  vol.  clxxix.  Enclosure  in  David  Macpherson  to  S.S.  24th 
Aug.  1 8 10.  Memorial  of  a  subdivision  of  Inverness  to  S.S.  Dec. 
1810. 


IV  TROUBLES  WITH  BALLOT  237 

the  Supreme  Court  until  the  last  day  of  the  ballot  had       1810^ 
expired.     Their  suits  were  all  of  them  dismissed  with 
costs  ;  but  meanwhile  they  had  gained  their  point  and 
were  safe  until  the  next  ballot. 

This,  however,  was  but  one  manifestation  of  the 
general  hatred  of  the  Militia  in  Scotland.  The  Vice- 
Lieutenant  of  Bute  reported  at  the  end  of  October  that 
the  Arran  division  could  not  possibly  produce  its  quota 
owing  to  the  invincible  aversion  of  the  people  from 
personal  service  ;  and  he  requested  that  the  Militia 
might  be  completed  by  ballot  and  that  the  exemption- 
fines  might  be  applied,  as  in  former  cases,  to  the  pur- 
chase of  substitutes.  He  added  that  the  people  had 
begun  to  claim  exemption  as  seafaring  men,  and  that 
if  this  claim  were  allowed  it  would  be  preferred  by  the 
entire  population,  whereas,  if  his  recommendation  were 
accepted,  the  fines  would  certainly  be  forthcoming,  for 
there  was  an  insurance  company  ready  to  oblige  its 
clients  with  the  money  for  a  premium  of  four  guineas  a 
year.*  Nairn,  again,  one  of  the  counties  that  had 
pleaded  for  extension  of  the  time  wherein  the  ten-guinea 
bounty  might  be  granted,  declared  that  without  this 
privilege  she  could  not  raise  her  quota  of  men.  "  The 
business,"  added  the  unfortunate  Lieutenant,  "  is  so 
intricate,  owing  to  the  number  of  Acts  of  Parliament,  that 
scarcely  two  counties  have  acted  upon  them  under  the 
same  construction."  Perth  begged  likewise  for  postpone- 
ment of  the  ballot.^  In  Lanark  matters  were  so  far 
behind-hand  that  even  a  fortnight  after  the  time  for  the 
ballot  had  expired,  the  new  lists  had  not  been  distributed 
to  the  Deputy-Lieutenants.  This  was  due  in  part  ta 
certain  legislation  of  1804  which  deprived  the  Lieu- 
tenancies of  Scotland  of  the  power  to  remunerate  their 
own  servants,  and  made  it  in  consequence  exceedingly 
difficult  to  get  the  work  done.  But,  unlike  the  other 
counties,   Lanark  lamented   the   prolongation   of    the 