

1  I.D.  vol.  clxxx.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  14th  Oct.;  vol.  clxxxix. 
Subdiv.  Clerk,  Leicester,  to  S.S.  24th  Aug.;  vol.  clxxx.  L.L.  Berks, 
to  S.S.  22nd  Oct.  18 10. 

2  lbid.\o\.  clxxxi.  O.C.  Cardigan  Mila.  to  S.S.  nth  March 
j8io. 


240  OBSCURITY  OF  THE  ACTS         chap. 

1810.  State,  who  laid  it  down  that  both  sides  were  wrong. 
No  ballot,  he  wrote,  can  be  held  after  the  ist  of 
October  until  the  ist  of  January  18 12  without  the 
King's  special  directions ;  but  if  such  directions  be 
given,  payment  of  the  fine  will  not  exonerate  the 
parishes  in  default.^ 

Once  again  I  must  apologise  for  quoting  at  length  the 
difficulties  raised  by  the  construction  of  the  enactments 
that  so  rapidly  succeeded  each  other  in  these  times. 
The  judgment  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  quoted 
immediately  above,  shows  how  drastic  this  particular 
Act  really  was.  Practically  it  said  to  the  counties  : 
"  You  shall  produce  so  many  men  for  the  Militia  by  a 
certain  day,  or  you  shall  pay  a  fine  of  £^0  for  every 
man  deficient,  and  still  be  liable  to  produce  them  later 
on.**  But  the  Act  did  not  say  so  in  so  many  words, 
and  possibly  Ministers  refrained  from  inserting  any 
phrase  which  should  exactly  convey  such  a  meaning,  in 
the  hope  that  they  might  not  be  compelled  to  enforce 
this  particular  interpretation  of  it.  If  this  were  the 
case,  they  were  greatly  disappointed.  So  many  Acts 
dealing  with  the  Militia,  some  in  full  force,  some 
obsolete,  were  before  the  Lieutenants  and  their  Deputies, 
to  say  nothing  of  the  complications  produced  by  the 
establishment  of  the  Local  Militia,  that  they  became 
very  pardonably  confused.  They  therefore  either 
construed  the  Acts  according  to  the  precedents  known 
to  themselves,  or  wrangled  over  their  true  meaning,  or 
in  the  last  resort  unanimously  lost  their  tempers,  and 
shrank  from  putting  the  measures  into  force.  The 
exaction  of  a  fine  for  men  not  raised  was,  according  to 
the  Militia  Act  of  1802,  in  the  nature  of  a  composition 
which  balanced  the  two  sides  of  the  account ;  and  it 
would  have  been  better  in  the  first  instance  to  have 
made  it  perfectly  clear  that  what  held  good  in  1802 
was   not   intended   to   apply   to    1809.     The   natural 

^  I.D.  vol.  clxxxvii.  L.L.  Lanes,  to  S.S.  20th  Feb.;  Lord 
Stanley  to  S.S.  25th  Sept.  1810;  H.O.  Mila.  E.B.  S.S.  to  L.L. 
Lanes,  28th  Sept.  18 10. 


IV  LOCAL  MILITIA  AMENDMENT       241 

consequence  of  these  doubts,  and  of  the  bad  blood  1810. 
engendered  thereby,  was  that  in  18 10  there  were  levied, 
instead  of  the  18,512  men  still  required  to  complete 
the  number  laid  down  by  the  Act,  no  more  than 
14,934.  Of  these  6055  had  been  raised  by  beat  of 
drum  and  8879  by  ballot,  and  of  the  latter  797  only 
were  principals  against  8082  substitutes.^ 