

^  I  have  been  unable  to  find  this  order  or  circular,  but  its  issue 
is  proved  by  I.D.  vol.  cxcii.  O.C.  4th  Oxford  L.M.  to  S.S.  5th 
Jan.  1810. 


IV  LOCAL  MILITIA  EVADED  243 

were  astute  enough,  however,  to  agree  with  the  recruit-  1810. 
ing  officer  of  the  Regular  Militia  that  they  should  be 
allowed  to  find  a  substitute  ;  and  when  the  transaction 
was  completed  they  declared  that  it  was  cheaper  to  take 
the  bounty  and  find  a  substitute  for  the  Regular,  than 
to  pay  a  fine  for  two  years'  exemption  from  the  Local, 
Militia.  It  must  be  acknowledged  that  the  ingenuity 
of  these  men  did  them  considerable  credit,  and  lent 
great  force  to  Sir  Harry  Calvert's  contention  that  there 
should  be  only  one  description  of  Militia.  But  Kent 
was  remarkable  for  providing  knotty  questions  for  the 
Secretary  of  State.  In  this  same  year  it  possessed  a 
parish  in  which  every  man  liable  to  ballot  was  serving 
or  had  paid  the  fine  for  exemption,  but  which  none  the 
less  had  not  produced  its  quota  of  men  for  the  Local 
Militia  ;  and  there  arose  the  point  whether  or  not  it 
was  liable  to  a  fine  for  every  man  deficient.^  In 
Lancashire  again  the  Lieutenancy,  writhing  under  the 
ballot,  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  so  many 
suggestions  for  dispensing  with  it,  that  in  despair  he 
expressed  himself  as  unable  to  interfere  with  the  local 
details  of  enforcing  the  Militia  Acts.^ 

Another  great  difficulty  arose  from  desertion.  The 
Commandant  of  the  ist  Devon  Local  Militia  forwarded 
to  the  Home  Office  a  handbill  advertising  for  no  fewer 
than  seventy-seven  deserters  from  his  regiment.  There 
were  some  doubts,  he  said,  as  to  whether  they  could 
legally  be  convicted  of  desertion,  not  having  appeared 
at  the  last  training  ;  and,  if  they  could  not,  he  expected 
not  to  muster  half  of  his  men  at  the  next.  The 
Secretary  of  State  was  able  to  assure  him  that  under 
the  Militia  Act  or  1 802  these  men  were  liable  to  a  fine 
of  ^20,  or  six  months'  imprisonment ;"  but  it  was  one 
of  the  curses  of  the  Local  Militia  Acts  that  instead  of 

1  I.D.  vol.  clxxxvii.  L.L.  Kent,  to  S.S.  8th  Feb.,  6th  June  18 10. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  clxxxvii.  L.L.  Lanes,  to  S.S.  22nd   March;   H.O. 
Mila.  E.B.  S.S.  to  L.L.  Lanes,  7th  May  18 10. 

8  Ibid.  vol.  clxxxiii.  O.C.  ist   Devon  L.M.  to   S.S.  14th   Oct.; 
H.O.  Mila.  E.B.  S.S.  to  O.C.  i6th  Oct.  18 10. 


244         TRICKS  OF  LOCAL  MILITIA        chap. 

1810.  giving  commandants,  who  at  best  were  only  amateurs, 
a  plain  code  for  the  government  of  their  regiments,  it 
was  constantly  referring  them  to  Militia  Acts  and 
Volunteer  Acts  of  which  they  had  no  knowledge. 