

1  I.D.  vol.  clxxix.  V.L.  Bute,  to  S.S.  30th  Oct.,  27th  Nov.  18 10. 

2  Ibid.vol.  clxxix.  L.L.  Nairn,  to  S.S.  2nd  Sept.   1810;  vol. 
cxcii.  L.L.  Perth,  to  S.S.  20th  June  18 10. 


238  TROUBLES  WITH  BALLOT         chap. 

iSio.  enlistment  by  beat  of  drum  for  one  month,  and  the 
consequent  loss  of  power  during  that  month  to  raise 
parochial  substitutes  for  ten  guineas.^  Edinburgh  made 
a  like  complaint  of  the  suspension  of  the  ballot  during 
June.  In  Midlothian  only  seven  men  had  been  raised 
by  beat  of  drum,  and  most  of  the  ballotted  men  had 
paid  fines  instead  of  finding  substitutes,  which  did 
not  deliver  the  parishes  from  the  fine  of  ^^40  for  every 
man  deficient.  Private  bounties  for  substitutes,  added 
the  Vice-Lieutenant,  had  in  some  counties  reached  the 
height  of£^o  ;  and  this  was  confirmed  by  the  Lieutenant 
of  Fife,  who  reported  that  he  had  raised  the  quota  for 
his  county,  but  that  bounties  had  indeed  exceeded  the 
above  figure,  the  £^0  paid  being  in  addition  to  the 
ten  guineas  allowed  by  the  Act,  so  that  the  total 
amounted  to  ;^6o :  los.  In  consideration  of  the 
circumstances  the  Vice-Lieutenant  of  Edinburgh  begged 
that  the  fines  of  ^20  paid  for  exemption  might  be 
accepted  as  part  of  the  penalty  of  £^0  levied  on  the 
county  for  every  man  deficient.  He  pleaded  in  vain. 
To  one  and  all  of  these  requests  that  the  law  might  be 
wrested  to  one  side  or  another  in  their  favour,  there 
could  be  but  one  reply — that  the  Secretary  of  State 
could  grant  no  dispensations  from  Act  of  Parliament.^ 

In  England  there  were  difficulties  of  much  the  same 
kind  as  in  Scotland.  In  Buckinghamshire  the  Lieutenant 
urged  that  a  short  Bill  should  be  passed  to  extend  the 
time  for  the  ballot  until  March  1 8 1 1 ,  so  that  recalci- 
trant counties  might  be  brought  to  their  senses  by 
heavy  fines.  His  own  quota  was  nearly  complete,  but 
in  his  virtuous  indignation  he  omitted  to  mention  that 
some  of  his  men  had  been  raised  at  Leicester,  where  the 
crier  had  been  sent  round  to  offer  forty  guineas  apiece 
for  three  or  four  men  for  the  Buckinghamshire  Militia. 
In  Berkshire  the  Lieutenancy  took  upon  itself  to  ballot 
men  after  the  ist  of  October,  and  would  not  set  them 

1  I.D.  vol.  clxxxvii.  L.L,  Lanark,  to  S.S.  19th  Oct.  1810. 

2  Il>id.  vol.  clxxxiv.  L.L.   Edinburgh,   to  S.S.   3rd  Oct,  ;  vol. 
clxxxv.  V.L.  Fife,  to  S.S.  25th  Aug.  18 10. 


IV  TROUBLES  WITH  BALLOT 


■39 


free  without  the  Secretary  of  State's  order/  In  Cardigan  1 8io. 
a  new  and  unexpected  complication  came  to  light.  The 
county  had  duly  supplied  its  quota  of  men  under  the  Act 
of  1809,  but  the  Militia  was  still  short  of  its  strength  by 
eighty-four  men  ;  the  Government  having  calculated  its 
last  contributions  to  the  Line  upon  the  assumption  that 
its  regiment  was  up  to  its  establishment,  whereas  102 
men  were  wanting  to  complete  it.^  In  Lancashire  there 
was  as  much  trouble  with  the  Deputy- Lieutenants  as 
with  the  people.  The  mercantile  community  at  large 
had  come  to  an  amicable  agreement  that  apprentices 
should  enlist  when  trade  was  slack,  and  be  claimed  by 
their  masters  when  trade  was  brisk.  The  rest  of  the 
population,  stricken  with  envy  of  so  happy  a  solution 
of  a  difficult  problem,  bound  their  sons,  brothers,  and 
cousins  apprentices  pro  forma^  so  as  to  be  able  to  claim 
them  likewise  whenever  they  were  wanted.  Thus  in 
Lancashire  military  service  was  converted  into  a  kind 
of  out  door  relief,  which  could  be  repudiated  as  soon 
as  suited  the  convenience  of  the  recipient.  The  case  of 
the  Deputy-Lieutenants  was  different.  Always  highly 
critical  in  the  North  as  to  the  interpretation  of  Acts  of 
Parliament,  possibly  because  they  were  unwilling  to 
execute  them,  the  Deputies  were  divided  in  opinion  as  to 
the  construction  of  the  last  Act  for  completing  the  Militia. 
The  enactment,  so  argued  one  party,  was  designed  to 
procure  men  by  the  ist  of  October  :  after  that  date 
there  could  be  no  fresh  ballot ;  and  therefore  the 
payment  of  the  fine  of  ^40  would  exonerate  any  parish 
from  further  operation  thereof  On  the  contrary, 
contended  the  opposite  party,  the  intention  was  that 
the  ballot  should  be  continued  until  the  men  were 
supplied,  and  then  suspended  until  the  ist  of  January 
18 12.     The  question  was  carried  to  the  Secretary  of 