


IV  FOREIGN  AFFAIRS 


233 


leader  on  the  spot  to  receive  175  lashes,  remitted  ail  the       1809. 
remainder  of  the  punishments,  and  within  twelve  hours 
was  able  to  report  that  discipline  had  been  restored.^ 

So  much  for  the  strength  of  the  forces  in  1809  ;  it 
is  now  time  to  look  to  the  employment  of  them  abroad. 
First,  it  must  be  noted  that  in  the  spring  of  1809 
Austria  declared  war  upon  France,  and  the  Archduke 
Charles  advanced  against  the  French  Army  while  it 
was  not  yet  concentrated.  This  diversion  compelled 
Napoleon  to  recall  troops  from  Spain  ;  and  Sir  Arthur 
Wellesley,  who  had  been  sent  back  to  Portugal  in 
command  of  a  force  of  some  2 1 ,000  rank  and  file,  which 
was  presently  raised  to  some  33,000,  was  able  for  a  time  to 
take  the  offensive  and  fight  the  compaigns  of  the  Douro 
and  Talavera.  The  latter  of  these,  chiefly  owing  to  the 
sickly  state  of  his  army  in  the  valley  of  the  Guadiana, 
was  somewhat  costly  in  the  matter  of  casualties.'^ 
Moreover,  Minsters,  unable  from  dearth  of  specie  to  send 
more  troops  to  the  Peninsula,  despatched  in  July  an 
expedition  of  40,000  men  to  the  Scheldt,  where  the 
incompetence  of  the  Commander  assured  failure  to  an 
enterprise  whose  success  was,  at  best,  extremely  doubtful. 
The  climate  played  havoc  among  the  rank  and  file  and 
made  the  campaign  extremely  costly.  Add  to  this  the 
facts  that  General  Beckwith,  having  been  reinforced  by 
four  battalions  in  November  1 808,  attacked  and  captured 
Martinique  with  10,000  men  in  February  1809  ;  and 
that  General  Stuart  was  able  to  embark  1 1 ,000  men  for 

1  I.D.  vol.  clxxiii.  O.C.  East  Staffs,  L.M.  to  L.L.  30th  June 
1809  ;  vol.  clvi.  L.L.  Cambs,  to  S.S.  25th  June  1809  ;  vol.  clix.  L.L. 
Merioneth,  to  S.S.  1st  July  1809  ;  vol.  clxv.  Sir  H.  Hoskyns  to  L.L. 
Hertford,  20th  June  1809  ;  vol.  clxxiii.  O.C.  West  Somerset  L.M. 
to  S.S.  27th  June  1809. 

3  The  return  of  casualties  in  the  Peninsula,  31st  March  to  25th 
December  1809,  was  : — 

Dead 493' 

Deserted         ....       349 

Discharged     .  .  .  •  4' 

Total 5321 

C.J.  vol.  Ixv. 


234       CASTLEREAGH'S  RESIGNATION   chap. 

1 809.  raids  upon  the  French  in  Naples  and  Calabria ;  and  it  will 
be  seen  that  in  all  some  84,000  rank  and  file,  or  say 
95,000  of  all  ranks,  were  employed  in  offensive  operations 
during  this  year,  though  with  lamentably  small  results. 

Meanwhile,  apart  from  Walcheren,  the  country  had 
encountered  a  series  of  misfortunes.  First,  the  Duke 
of  York  had  been  forced  by  the  scandals  concerning 
Mrs.  Clarke  to  resign  the  post  of  Commander-in-Chief ; 
and  the  weight  of  this  blow  to  the  military  administration 
can  only  be  appreciated  by  students  who  know  what 
the  Army  was  before  the  Duke  took  it  in  hand.  Again, 
the  Ministry  had  been  broken  up,  and  Castlereagh,  the 
ablest  man  that  ever  controlled  the  War  Office,  had 
been  driven  from  it.  Spencer  Perceval  had  become 
Prime  Minister  ;  Castlereagh's  place  had  been  taken  by 
Lord  Liverpool,  a  sound,  sensible  man,  whose  reputation 
is  far  below  his  desert ;  and  Palmerston  had  been 
appointed  Secretary  at  War.  Moreover,  the  Austrian 
attempt  to  break  down  the  power  of  Napoleon  had 
proved  a  failure.  Wagram  had  forced  her  to  a 
humiliating  peace  ;  and  the  Emperor  of  the  French 
was  free  once  more  to  turn  all  his  force  against  Spain. 
The  only  comforting  feature  in  the  situation,  known 
only  to  a  few  in  England,  and  hardly  apprehended  by 
them,  was  that  Russia  had  not  thrown  in  her  lot 
against  Austria  with  a  whole  heart,  as  her  alliance  with 
France  required  of  her.  In  England,  therefore,  all  was 
grumbling  and  discontent ;  and  the  denunciations  in 
Parliament  of  the  fiasco  of  Walcheren  were  hardly  more 
bitter  than  the  criticisms  concerning  Wellington  and  his 
campaign  of  Talavera. 