

Nevertheless  there  was,  as  it  happened,  a  great  deal  of 
trouble  with  the  Local  Militia  during  1 809.  In  Aberdeen 
the  people  of  Garioch  rose  tumultuously  to  prevent  the 
enrolment  of  their  quota ;  and  the  Deputy-Lieutenants 
only  accomplished  their  duty  at  great  personal  risk  and 
under  the  protection  of  a  military  force.'  But  this 
isolated  outbreak  was  of  small  importance  compared 
with  a  turbulent  spirit  which  appeared  in  all  parts  of  the 
Kingdom.  It  seems  that  certain  women,  by  whom 
inspired  it  is  impossible  to  say,  made  it  their  business  to 
tramp  from  regiment  to  regiment  of  the  Local  Militia, 
trying  to  excite  riots.  The  pretext  for  disturbance  was 
a  pretended  right  of  the  men  to  the  guinea  allowed 
under  sec.  31  of  the  Act  to  provide  them  with 
necessaries — "  that  fatal  clause,"  as  the  Lord-Lieutenant 
of  Carnarvon  termed  it — and  certainly  as  a  pretext  it 
proved  very  successful.  There  were  petty  mutinies  in 
various  quarters,  of  which  many  were  hushed  up ;  though 
some  record  of  the  more  serious  remains.  At  Ely  a  Cam- 
bridgeshire regiment,  after  perfectly  orderly  behaviour 
for  twenty-seven  days,  turned  against  their  Commanding 

1  I.D.  vol.  civ.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  27th  June  ;  21st  Dec. 
1809.  I  have  been  unable  to  discover  the  circular  alluded  to,  but 
its  existence  and  purport  are  proved  by  the  former  of  these  letters. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  clix.  L.L.  Merioneth,  to  S.S.  loth  June  1809. 

'  Ibid.  vol.  ccxxxvi.  L.L.  Aberdeen,  to  S.S.  2nd  Jan.  1813. 


232  LOCAL  MILITIA  RIOTS  chap. 

1809.  Officer  upon  the  twenty-eighth,  threatening  him  with 
their  bayonets  and  with  cries  of  "  no  knapsacks  "  ;  the 
grievance  being  that  some  of  the  captains,  following  the 
custom  of  the  Volunteers,  had  given  the  men  their 
guinea,  while  others  had  spent  it  upon  knapsacks  and  so 
forth.  It  was  necessary  for  the  Lord-Lieutenant  to  go 
down  in  person  to  explain  matters  to  the  men,  after 
which  five  ringleaders  were  tried  by  regimental  court- 
martial  and  flogged.  In  Merioneth  again  the  men  were 
discontented  because  the  money  was  spent  on  knapsacks 
instead  of  being  placed  in  their  hands.  In  Hertford- 
shire the  Archenfield  Local  Militia,  at  the  instance  of 
a  sergeant,  rose  against  their  officers  for  no  apparent 
reason,  but  doubtless  owing  to  trouble  over  the  wretched 
guinea  ;  and  all  the  townspeople  joined  the  mutineers 
in  a  disorderly  riot.  Once  again  it  was  imperative  to 
flog  four  men,  though  the  Commander-in-Chief  left  it 
to  the  Colonel  to  remit  any  excess  over  one  hundred 
lashes.  In  Taunton  a  far  more  serious  affray  arose  from 
the  attempt  of  a  corporal  and  several  men  to  rescue  a 
prisoner  from  the  guard-room.  The  townspeople 
joined  in  the  riot ;  one  of  the  officers  was  wounded  by 
the  bayonet  of  one  of  the  ringleaders,  and  order  was  not 
restored  until  the  Thirteenth  Light  Dragoons,  the 
Taunton  Rifle  Corps,  and  the  recruiting  parties  in  the 
town  had  turned  out  in  arms.  The  cause  of  the  trouble 
could  not  be  traced.  There  was  no  complaint  about 
the  marching-guinea  ;  and  on  the  morning  of  the  day 
the  battalion  had  done  no  more  work  than  a  march  of 
five  miles  to  the  Commandant's  country  house,  where 
he  treated  them  to  bread  and  cheese  and  beer.  In  fact 
the  riot  seems  to  have  been  due  to  a  kind  of  infection 
of  disorder  which  ran  all  through  the  Local  Militia — 
most  of  them,  it  must  be  remembered,  converted 
Volunteers — during  the  lastfortnight  of  June.  However, 
the  Commandant  at  Taunton  was  equal  to  the  occasion. 
He  assembled  the  regiment,  disarmed  it,  summoned  a 
drum-head  court-martial  which  sentenced  the  leader  to 
500  lashes  and  four  more  men  to  100  apiece  ;  tied  up  the 