

Yet  another  besetting  sin  of  the  Local  Militiamen, 
a  sin  begotten  of  cupidity,  was  to  enlist  as  Volunteers  or 
as  substitutes  in  the  Regular  Militia  of  other  counties 
than  their  own,  contrary  to  the  law.  Such  men  of 
course  received  good  bounty  ;  but  the  only  penalty  was 
imprisonment  for  "  neglecting  to  appear  at  the  place  of 
exercise "  as  Local  Militiamen.  In  at  least  one  case 
such  an  offender  gave  information  against  himself  in 
order  to  keep  his  bounty  at  the  cost  of  imprisonment, 
thus  exemplifying  once  more  the  error  of  keeping 
two  different  descriptions  of  Militia  simultaneously.^ 

In  Scotland  there  was  occasionally  unpleasantness 
because  some  corps  of  Local  Militia  had  carried  with 
them  the  habits  acquired  when  they  were  Volunteers, 
particularly  in  cases  where  independent  companies,  each 
under  its  own  petty  magnate,  had  been  united  into 
battalions.  In  one  battalion  of  this  kind  some  of  the 
captains  were  Deputy-Lieutenants,  and  as  such  assumed 
the  right  to  control  the  Commandant.  On  one  occasion 
when  their  Commanding  Officer's  views  did  not  coincide 
with  their  own,  they  formed  a  meeting  of  the  Lieu- 
tenancy and  delivered  to  the  men  their  arms,  accoutre- 
ments, and  camp  equipage,  contrary  to  his  orders  and 
indeed  contrary  both  to  Act  of  Parliament  and  the 
King's  regulations ;  and  the  unhappy  Commandant, 
submitting  at  the  moment  "  to  avoid  the  appearance  of 
dissension,"  carried  his  sad  story  to  the  General  of  the 
District,  who  forwarded  it  to  the  Secretary  of  State.^ 

But  the  greatest  obstacle  of  all  with  which  com- 
mandants of  Local  Militia  had  to  contend  was  the 
undisguised  hostility  of  the  population  in  many  quarters 
towards  the  force,  and  the  efforts  of  violent  men  to 

^  l.D.  vol.  clxxx.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  3rd  June  18 10. 
2  Ibid.   vol.   clxxxvii.    O.C.  Kirkcudbright   L.M.    to    G.O.C., 
Scotland,  7th  May  i8io. 


IV  RIOTS  IN  LOCAL  MILITIA  245 

prevent  the  Act  from  being  executed.  In  the  Cinque  1810. 
Ports  the  magistrates  faithfully  and  courageously  did 
their  duty  in  collecting  their  Local  Militiamen  amid 
daily  insults  and  menaces.  In  the  Romney  division 
not  a  man  would  serve  nor  pay  the  fine ;  but  the  magis- 
trates at  once  issued  warrants  against  the  recalcitrants, 
and  in  Hastings,  Pevensey,  and  Tenterden  they  suc- 
ceeded in  enforcing  the  Act.  They  ordered  the  recruits 
to  Dover  ;  and  the  men  were  peaceably  and  contentedly 
approaching  the  town  when  the  people  of  Dover 
waylaid  them,  and  either  persuaded  or  intimidated 
them  into  returning  home.  Some  of  them  were 
retrieved  and  taken  to  Deal  barracks,  as  the  only 
chance  of  training  them,  and  the  rest  were  warned 
that  they  were  deserters  and  that  unless  they  presented 
themselves  within  a  fortnight  they  would  be  treated  as 
such.^  In  other  quarters  the  old  supposed  grievance 
about  the  "  marching-guinea "  or  allowance  for  neces- 
saries, reduced  after  the  first  training  to  half  a  guinea, 
was  again  made  the  pretext  for  mutinous  outbreaks. 
More  than  one  commandant  was  nervous  lest  the  men 
should  claim  the  whole  of  it  in  cash,  though  the  Secre- 
tary of  State  had  directed  it  to  be  spent,  as  the  law 
intended,  upon  necessaries.  The  question  was  compli- 
cated by  the  fact  that  in  many  of  the  regiments 
of  Regular  Militia,  which  from  long  standing  and 
good  management  possessed  a  heavy  stock-purse,  it 
had  been  the  custom  to  pay  the  men  the  half-guinea 
without  any  deductions.^  It  seems,  moreover,  to  have 
been  the  fact  that,  at  any  rate  in  some  quarters,  the  men 
could  purchase  necessaries  for  themselves  more  cheaply 
than  their  officers  could  purchase  for  them.^  However 
that  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  the  rank  and  file,  in  spite 
of  Acts  of  Parliament,  regulations,  and  the  punishment 