


252  MILITIA  ENLISTMENT  ACT,  1811    chap. 

1811.  the  Line;  and  in  Ireland  fifteen  men  from  every  company 
(cap.  20,  sec.  I  ;  cap.  30,  sec.  4).  In  Great  Britain  the 
Secretary  of  State  was  to  ascertain  annually  the  number  of 
men  (not  exceeding  the  above  total  in  all)  to  be  enlisted 
from  each  regiment  of  Militia,  which  number  was  not  in 
any  case  to  rise  above  one-seventh  of  the  quota  of  1 802  ; 
and  he  was  to  signify  it  before  the  ist  of  February  to  the 
Commanding  Officer  of  every  regiment  (sec.  3).  A 
greater  number  might  be  enlisted  by  the  King's  order 
in  cases  where  counties  had  not  contributed  to  the  Line 
the  full  quota  allowed  to  them  under  former  Acts,  and 
had  therefore  an  excess  of  men  over  the  establishment 
laid  down  by  the  present  Act  (sec.  4).  In  Ireland,  if 
the  full  quota  were  not  enlisted  in  any  one  year,  the 
deficiencies  might  be  added  to  the  quota  of  the  next 
year,  and  enlisted  together  with  it  (cap.  30,  sec.  5). 
Commandants  of  Militia  were  to  explain  the  terms  of 
enlistment  into  the  Line  to  the  men  within  two  days 
of  receiving  the  order,  and  men  were  to  be  allowed  to 
enlist  for  the  seven  days  immediately  following  ;  after 
which,  at  intervals  of  not  less  than  a  fortnight,  periods 
of  three  more  days  apiece  were  to  be  appointed  for 
enlistment  (sees.  6,  8). 

The  remainder  of  the  provisions  dealt  with  the 
reduction  of  the  Militia  ;  so  it  will  be  well  first  to  state 
that,  by  an  Order  in  Council  of  the  nth  of  March,  the 
ballot  had  been  continued  in  such  counties  as  had  not 
completed  their  quota  of  Militia  to  the  establishment  laid 
down  by  the  Act  of  1 809  ;  and  that  on  the  4th  of  April 
there  had  been  passed  an  Act  (51  Geo.  III.  cap.  17) 
validating  all  enrolments  under  ballots  held,  without 
such  order,  after  the  ist  of  October  18 10.  The 
deficiency  under  the  Act  of  1809  was  therefore  in 
process  of  being  made  good  ;  and  it  was  now  enacted 
under  51  Geo.  III.  cap.  20,  that  fines  incurred  by 
parishes  for  men  deficient  on  the  ist  of  October  18 10 
should  be  remitted  to  the  extent  of  three-fourths,  one 
half,  and  one-third,  if  the  men  were  produced  by  the 
ist  of  June,  ist  of  July,  and  ist  of  September  181 1 


IV  MILITIA  COMPLETION  253 

respectively  (sec.  21).     When  the  men  required  under       181 1. 
the  Act  of  1809  had  been  raised,  the  ballot  was  to  be 
suspended  until   ist  July  18 13  (sec.  23)  ;  and  Militia- 
men might  thenceforth  be  raised  by  beat  of  drum  for 
a  bounty  of  twelve  guineas,  of  which  part  was  to  go 
towards  the  expense  of  obtaining  the  recruit,  and  part 
to   be   paid   into    his   hand  (sees.   23,  25).     Boys   of 
fourteen  and  upward  could,  by  the  King's  order,  be 
enlisted  to  a  proportion  not  exceeding   one-fourth  of 
the  whole  number  of  men  required  for  the  year  ;  their 
standard  of  height  to  be  fixed  by  regulation  (sec.  26). 
The  Militia  of  Great  Britain  after  the  passing  of  this 
Act  was  to  be  gradually  reduced  to  the  quota  of  1802  ; 
but  the  King  was  empowered  to  order  supernumeraries 
to  be  raised  by  beat  of  drum  in  numbers  equal  to  that  of 
the  men  enlisted  into  the  Line  in  each  year  under  the 
present  Act ;  which  supernumeraries  were  to  be  taken 
to  fill  no  vacancies  except  those  of  the  men  so  enlisted 
into  the  Line  (sees.  29-31).     Officers  and  non-com- 
missioned officers,  who  would  become  supernumerary 
upon  this  reduction,  could  be  ordered  to  remain  with 
their  regiments  ;  and  special  arrangements  were  made 
for  supernumerary  field-officers  (sees.  32-3$)-  The  King, 
after  the  reduction  of  the  Militia  as  aforesaid,  was  em- 
powered to  order  a  number  of  men,  equal  to  that  which 
had  been  allowed  to  enlist  into  the  Line,  to  be  raised 
by  ballot  in  each  county,  whether  such  number  should 
have  enlisted  or  not ;  and  if  a  ballot  were  so  ordered, 
all  vacancies  from  death,  discharge,  etc.,  were   to  be 
filled  according  to  the  provisions  of  the  Militia  Act  of 
1802  (sec.  36).     A  bounty  of  ten  guineas  was  to  be 
paid   to    every   ballotted    man,    whether   principal   or 
substitute,   and   no   further  allowance    whatever   (sees. 
37,   38).     Deputy-Lieutenants  were  to  apportion  the 
voluntary   and    ballotted    recruits  among   the   various 
parishes  (sees.   39,  40)  ;  and  Local  Militiamen  were 
permitted    to    enlist    into    the    Militia   of    their   own 
counties  (sec.  41).     Lastly,  support  to  the  families  of 
Militiamen  raised  after  the  passing  of  this  Act  was  to 