


254  MILITIA  INTERCHANGED  chap. 

1811.  be  discontinued,  except  in  the  case  of  ballotted  men 
who  were  enrolled  as  principals  (sec.  20). 

These  enactments  for  England  and  Ireland,  as  will 
have  been  remarked,  were  a  new  departure,  inasmuch  as 
they  provided  for  a  fixed  annual  draft  of,  roughly 
speaking,  10,000  men  from  the  Militia  into  the  Line, 
which  draft,  if  not  complete  in  one  year,  could  be  made 
good  in  the  next  ;  and  it  was  obviously  intended  that, 
if  possible,  the  equivalent  for  this  draft  should  be 
voluntarily  enlisted  every  year  into  the  Militia  so  as  to 
silence  all  invidious  statements  that  men  were  being 
ballotted  or  conscribed  for  the  troops  of  the  Line. 
Thus  at  length  effect  was  in  part  given  to  Sir  Harry 
Calvert's  recommendations  of  1809  ;  and  though  the 
two  descriptions  of  Militia,  the  Regular  and  the  Local, 
were  still  preserved,  the  first  was  reduced  to  its  peace 
establishment,  and  the  ballot  was  reserved,  except  in 
cases  of  emergency,  for  the  latter  only. 

A  further  important  step  in  respect  of  the  Militia 
was  an  Act  to  permit  the  interchange  of  the  British  and 
Irish  Militias,  pursuant  to  Castlereagh's  advice  (51  Geo. 
III.  cap  118).  Hereby  it  was  enacted  that  in  future  all 
Militiamen  should  be  engaged  to  serve  in  any  part  of 
the  British  Isles — that  in  fact  there  should  no  longer  be 
a  Militia  of  Great  Britain  and  a  Militia  of  Ireland,  but 
one  Militia  of  the  United  Kingdom  (sees.  1-6).  No 
British  corps  was  to  continue  in  Ireland,  nor  Irish  corps 
in  England,  for  more  than  two  years  successively  ;  and 
at  no  time  was  more  than  half  of  the  British  Militia  to 
be  in  Ireland,  or  more  than  one-third  of  the  Irish  Militia 
in  England,  except  in  case  of  rebellion  or  invasion. 
Moreover,  British  or  Irish  Militia  who  had  once  served  in 
the  sister  Kingdom  were  not  to  be  liable  to  serve  there 
again  except  in  rotation  after  an  interval  of  four  years 
or  six  years  respectively  (sees.  8,  9).  No  corps  was  to 
be  called  upon  to  serve  in  a  sister  Kingdom  without  the 
King's  orders.  The  King  was  empowered  to  accept 
voluntary  offers  of  the  present  Militia  so  to  serve ;  and 
existent  Militiamen  voluntarily  engaging  for  service  in 


IV  BALLOT  DIFFICULTIES  255 

any  part  of  the  United  Kingdom  were  to  receive  a       1811. 
bounty  of  two  guineas.     It  was  specially  provided  that 
Commanding  Officers  should  explain  to  their  men  that 
there  was  no  compulsion  (sees.  10-14), 

Meanwhile  the  ballot,  prolonged  by  royal  order  for 
the  completion  of  the  Militia  under  the  Act  of  1 809, 
continued  during  the  opening  months  of  18 11,  and  was 
not  furthered  by  the  fact  that  no  bounty  to  ballotted 
men  was  now  granted  by  Government.  In  Scotland  the 
proceedings  were  still  delayed  by  petty  actions  brought 
against  the  Lieutenancies  by  lotmen,  by  endless 
ingenious  pleas  for  exemption,  by  the  absconding  of 
ballottable  men  until  the  ballot  was  over,  and  by  the  old 
dispute  with  the  Barons  of  the  Exchequer  over  the 
payment  of  the  Lieutenancies'  clerks  and  other  servants. 
The  price  of  substitutes,  also,  had  risen  to  an  appalling 
height.  In  Forfar  it  was  reported  to  range  from  ^^50 
to  j^8o;  and  the  county  declared  itself  unable,  even  by 
rigid  enforcement  of  the  law,  to  produce  its  quota. 
Nevertheless  there  were  signs  that,  either  from  better 
feeling  or  from  hard  necessity,  there  was  rather  less 
reluctance  in  Scotland  to  serve  in  the  Militia,  for 
Sutherland  among  her  quota  furnished  sixty-six  prin- 
cipals as  against  four  substitutes.  On  the  other  hand,  in 
Skye  and  other  parts  of  the  west  coast  men  prepared  to 
emigrate  to  Carolina  rather  than  serve  their  country  ; 
and  one  gentleman  in  Haddington  had  formed  so  low 
an  opinion  of  the  zeal  of  his  compatriots  that  he  recom- 
mended the  Secretary  of  State  to  discharge  the  whole  ot 
the  Scottish  Militia.  "  You  have  1 1 ,000  men  in  Scotland," 
he  wrote,  "doing  nothing,  and  unwilling  to  volunteer  for 
the  Line  as  they  will  lose  support  for  their  families,  which 
is  the  great  inducement  to  them  to  serve.  If  you  were 
to  discharge  the  11,000  you  would  get  9000  recruits, 
for  most  of  them  are  weavers  who  cannot  get  work."  ^ 