

In  England  matters  were  little  different.     In  Man- 

1  I.D.  vol.  cc.  L.L.  Inverness,  to  S.S.  May,  12th  June;  Angus 
Mackintosh  to  S.S,  5th  July  181 1  ;  vol.  cci.  O.C.  Berwick  Mila. 
to  S.S.  1 2th  March.     Return  of  men  raised  in  Sutherland  under 


256  BALLOT  DIFFICULTIES  chap. 

181 1.  Chester  the  fines  paid  for  deficiencies  in  the  number  of 
men  amounted  to  £']ioo.  In  Brecon  the  price  of 
substitutes  rose  above  £60 ;  and  in  Staffordshire  it 
became  so  prohibitive  that  the  Lieutenancy  suspended 
enrolment  for  a  time  in  the  hope,  which  was  fulfilled,  of 
lowering  it.  In  Yorkshire  a  Deputy-Lieutenant  sug- 
gested a  general  commutation  of  service  for  money,  to 
be  paid  by  hundreds  and  even  larger  districts  within  the 
county,  as  a  certain  means  of  raising  men  at  less  cost  and 
with  less  oppression,  and  of  diminishing  the  abuse  of  in- 
surance. The  method  had,  he  said,  been  practised,  though 
prohibited  by  law,  and  when  exercised  by  honourable 
Colonels  had  been  found  beneficent  both  to  the  regiment 
and  the  county.  Thus,  even  in  the  ninth  year  of  the 
war,  the  one  idea  of  filling  the  Regular  Militia  was  still 
to  find  substitutes,  or  in  other  words  to  compete  with  the 
Regiments  of  the  Line  for  recruits  at  enormous  expense 
to  individuals  and  local  bodies.  Yet  the  Government 
continued  to  prefer  this  system  to  that  advocated  by 
Calvert ;  and  though  at  this  distance  of  time  it  seems 
utterly  to  be  condemned,  we  should  perhaps  be  rash  to 
infer  that  it  was  wrong  in  practice.  I  can  only  account 
for  Ministers'  adherence  to  it  upon  the  hypothesis  which 
I  have  already  suggested,  that  the  strong  element  of 
gambling  which  it  contained  was  palatable  to  the  people.^ 
It  must  be  added,  however,  that  when  the  ballot  was 
ended  and  enlistment  by  beat  of  drum  restored,  the 
Government  did  its  best  to  ease  matters  by  allowing 
every  Militia  regiment  to  recruit  its  full  proportion  of 
boys,  and  left  the  standard  of  their  height  to  the  un- 
trammelled judgment  of  Commanding  Officers.^ 

Act  of  1809,  9th  Jan.  181 1  ;  vol.  ccvii.  L.L.  Forfar,  to  S.S.  23rd 
Feb.  181 1  ;  vol.  ccxx.  Mr.  J.  Brown,  Haddington,  to  S.S.  15th  April 
1811. 

^  I.D.  vol.  ccxi.  T.  Stanley  to  Attorney-General,  12th  March 
(enclosing  memorial  from  Manchester)  ;  vol.  ccxvi.  L.L.  Staffs,  to 
S.S.  4th  Jan.  ;  vol.  cci.  L.L.  Brecon,  to  S.S.  27th  April ;  vol.  ccxx. 
Sir  J.  Duckett  (Yorks)  to  S.S.  20th  March  181 1. 

2  Circular  to  O.C.  Militia  Regts.  15th  July  ;  to  O.C.  1st  Somer- 
set Militia,  4th  Sept.  181 1. 


IV  GOOD  SPIRIT  OF  MILITIA  257 

In  the  matter  of  volunteering  for  the  Line  the  181 1. 
Militia  seems  to  have  shown  laudable  alacrity,  supplying 
11,453  recruits,  or  1143  in  excess  of  the  number 
required  of  them,  in  the  course  of  the  year  181 1.  In 
the  West  Middlesex  Regiment  so  many  above  the  full 
quota  offered  themselves  on  the  first  day  that  it  was 
possible  to  select  the  best  from  among  them  ;  ^  and  this 
is  the  more  remarkable,  for  the  operations  in  the 
Peninsula  had  not  yet  assumed  the  brilliancy  to  which 
they  were  later  to  attain.  Other  corps  were  equally 
forward  ;  ^  though  some  of  course  held  back  ;  but 
the  policy  of  asking  for  a  small  number  of  men  only 
was  in  this  year  successful.  Nor  were  the  regiments, 
as  a  body,  less  ready  to  volunteer  for  duty  in  Ireland. 
Some  hesitation  was  shown  at  first,  for  there  was 
nervousness  among  principals  lest  they  should  commit 
themselves  to  service  beyond  their  covenanted  term  ; 
but  they  were  speedily  reassured  when  they  learned 
that  strict  faith  would  be  kept  with  them.  The  Home 
Office,  however,  when  inviting  offers  from  the  various 
corps  made  one  very  foolish  mistake  by  omitting  to 
mention  that  the  men  serving  in  Ireland  would  be  paid 
in  Irish  currency,  which  was  below  the  British  currency 
in  value.  No  doubt  the  purchasing  value  of  the  Irish 
currency  in  Ireland  was  equal  to  that  of  the  British  in 
England  ;  but  Commanding  Officers,  after  representing 
to  their  men  in  good  faith  that  they  would  receive  the 
same  pay  and  allowances,  felt  greatly  the  awkwardness 
and  humiliation  of  having  to  explain  to  them,  after  they 
had  volunteered  their  services,  that  their  pay  would  be 
reduced.  The  War  Office,  which  also  sent  a  circular 
upon  the  subject  to  the  Militia  regiments,  was  careful 
to  make  the  matter  clear  ;  and  the  Home  Office  was 
quite  inexcusable  for  neglecting  to  do  so.  It  was  just 
such  folly  as  this  that  shook  the  faith  of  the  forces  in 