

Within  a  few  days  this  was  followed  by  another 
mutiny  of  the  Upper  Tivy  Local  Militia  of  the  county 
of  Cardigan,  which  had  been  assembled  for  twenty  days' 
training  at  Aberystwith  on  the  loth  of  May.  The 
men  were  quite  orderly  and  contented  until  a  news- 
paper arrived  with  an  account  of  the  riot  at  Bath.  The 
Commanding  Officer  at  once  published  in  regimental  and 
company  orders  the  King's  Regulations  as  to  the 
expenditure  of  the  half-guinea  for  necessaries ;  but  on 
parade  that  day  there  were  signs  of  insubordination, 
though  after  the  reading  of  the  Regulations  to  the  men 
once  more  in  the  Colonel's  presence,  these  disappeared. 
The  parade  was  then  dismissed,  and  the  leaders  in 
disobedience,  on  expressing  contrition,  were  pardoned, 
with  the  exception  of  one  man  who  was  tried  by  court- 
martial  and  sentenced  to  three  hundred  lashes.  Upon 
this  the  Colonel  received  warning  from  several  indi- 
viduals that  he  and  his  officers  would  be  murdered  if 
the  sentence  were  carried  out ;  and  this  was  no  vain 
threat,  for  Aberystwith  was  a  kind  of  Alsatia,  a  home 
of  the  lawless,  fiill  of  men  who  could  serve  their 
country  but  would  not,  nor  might  be  constrained  to  do 
so  but  by  an  armed  force. 

^  I.D.  vol.  cxciii.  O.C.  West  Mcndip  (Somerset)  L.M.  to  S.S. 
17th,  1 8th  May  ;  G.O.C.  Western  District,  to  S.S.  loth  May  1810. 


248  RIOTS  IN  LOCAL  MILITIA  chap. 

1 810.  Ori  the  30th  of  May,  the  last  day  of  the  training, 

the  Colonel  formed  a  guard   of  twenty-seven    trust- 
worthy men  to  take  charge  of  the  prisoner,  and  dis- 
missed  the   rest  to  their  homes.     They  cheered  the 
Colonel,  and  many  of  them  left  the  town  that  evening. 
In  the  course  of  the  night  the  Colonel  was  warned  that 
an    attempt    would    be   made   to   rescue    the    prisoner, 
whereupon  he  repaired  to  the  guard-room  himself  with 
his  pistols,  and  ordered   in   ball-cartridge.      Nothing, 
however,    happened    until    next    morning,   when    the 
prisoner  was  tied   up  for  punishment  in  a  courtyard 
at  the  back  of  the  guard-room,  the  Colonel  intending 
only  to  inflict  a  few  lashes  to  bring  the  man  to  his 
senses.     One  of  the  mob  thereupon  jumped  on  to  the 
wall  of  the  courtyard,   and  at   this  signal  the  rabble 
without  discharged  a  shower  of  stones  upon  the  small 
party  within.     Several   men   of  the  guard  were  badly 
hurt,  and  the  remainder,  losing  their  tempers,  fired  at 
every    man   who    appeared    on    the    wall    until    their 
ammunition  was  exhausted.     The  prisoner  was  hastily 
unbound  lest  he  should   be  killed  by  stones,  and  the 
Colonel  withdrew  his  party  into  the  House  of  Correc- 
tion hard  by,  which  the  rioters,  among  whom  were  a 
few   Local   Militiamen,    at   once   assailed   with    every 
missile  that  they  could  find,  swearing  that  they  would 
murder  the  Colonel  and  officers.     At  last  the  Colonel 
went  out  alone,  when  the  populace  incontinently  took 
to  its  heels,  and  the  little  party  marched  out  triumphant 
with  its  prisoner  to  the  Colonel's  quarters.     None  of  the 
mob  were  injured,  but  many  of  the  officers  were  badly 
hurt,  one  of  them  indeed  dangerously  ;  and  the  Com- 
manding Officer  could  only  write  that  "after  thirty  years* 
service  he  had  always  found  that  these  marching-guineas 
led  to  mutiny."     "But,"  he  added,  "it  was  not  the 
guineas  but  the  punishment  of  a  mutineer  which  led 
to  the  riot,  in  which  there  were  engaged  all  the  scum 
of  Aberystwith,  but  only  about  thirty  Militiamen."  ^ 