

1  l.D.  vol.  ccxii.  O.C.  West  Middlesex  Mila.  to  S.S.  3rd  May 
1811. 

■-'  Ibid.  vol.  ccviii.  O.C.  N.  Hants  Mila.  to  S.S,  2nd  May  ;  voL 
ccxiii.  O.C.  Montgomery  Mila.  to  S.S.  1st  May  181 1. 

S 


258         LOCAL  MILITIA  IMPROVES  chap. 

1 81 1.      the  Government,  led  them  to  regard  every  offer  with 
suspicion,  and  brought  about  mutinies  and  riots.^ 

Turning  next  to  the  Local  Militia,  it  must  first  be 
observed  that  it  was  greatly  increased  by  further  dissolu- 
tion or  transference  of  Volunteer  corps  during  1 8 1 1 . 
Indeed  the  surviving  Volunteer  and  Yeomanry  corps 
were  none  of  them  called  out  upon  permanent  duty 
during  this  year,  and  therefore  disappeared  in  great 
measure  from  the  public  view.  What  increase  the  Local 
Militia  may  have  gained  hereby,  there  are  unfortunately 
no  returns  to  show  ;  but  it  is  evident  that  it  was  now 
settling  down,  and  was  accepted  as  the  backbone  of  the 
national  forces.  There  was  one  faint  echo  of  the  trouble 
over  the  marching-guinea  in  the  course  of  the  summer  ;  ^ 
and  there  was  one  very  bad  case  of  an  officer  who  sold 
his  uniform  at  the  end  of  the  training  in  18 10,  but 
retained  his  commission,  in  order  to  escape  the  ballot 
for  the  Regular  Militia,  until  the  outset  of  the  training 
in  1811.^  There  was  also  some  trouble  still  with  Local 
Militiamen  who  enlisted  illegally,  for  the  sake  of  the 
bounty,  into  Regular  Militia  regiments  of  other  counties, 
and  then  appealed  to  their  Commanding  Officers  to 
reclaim  them  for  the  Local  Militia  ;  but  the  Govern- 
ment seems  to  have  abstained  deliberately  from  taking 
measures  to  check  this  evil.*     Still,  generally  speaking, 

^  I.D.  vol.  cci.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  9th  July;  vol.  ccix.  O.C. 
Hereford  Mila.  to  S.S.  181 1. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  cciii.  O.C.  Stirling  L.M.  to  S.S.  4th  June  181 1. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  ccxvii.  L.L.  Somerset,  to  S.S.  14th  June  181 1. 

*  The  following  letter  from  the  O.C.  Notts  Mila.  to  S.S.  loth 
April  181 1  {I.D.  vol.  ccxiv.)  will  show  the  extent  of  this  practice. 
"  Several  men  of  my  regiment  enlisted  into  the  Regular  Militia  of 
other  counties,  I  believe  with  fraudulent  intentions.  Last  year  a 
sergeant  of  the  Derbyshire  Militia  enlisted  four  of  my  men,  knowing 
that  they  belonged  to  my  regiment  ;  and  my  Adjutant  tells  me  that 
fifty  have  enlisted  into  other  Militia  regiments,  and  that  ten  of  them 
have  written  to  him  to  be  claimed.  What  am  I  to  do  ?  These 
men  have  clearly  acted  illegally  ;  but  if  I  seize  them  I  shall  injure 
the  recruiting  service,  probably  protect  men  who  have  been  guilty  of 
perjury  and  fraud,  and  encourage  others  to  do  the  like."  To  this 
the  Secretary  of  State  answered  that  the  Regular  Militia  must, 
under  49  Geo.  IIL  cap.  1 29,  be   discharged  if  claimed.     "  If  you 