

1  I.D.  vol.  clxxxii.  Clerk   to   Magistrates   of  Cinque   Ports   to 
Lord  Warden,  i8th  Sept.  1810. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  clxxxv.  O.C.  Glamorgan  L.M.  to  S.S.  22nd  March 
1810. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  clxxxvii.  L.L.  Kirkcudbright,  to  S.S.  1 8th  June  18 10. 


246  RIOTS  IN  LOCAL  MILITIA         chap. 

1 8 10.  of  rioters  in  1809,  still  harboured  a  vague  notion  that 
they  had  the  right  to  this  allowance  in  cash  without 
deductions,  and  that,  if  it  were  withheld,  they  were  being 
defrauded.  No  man  likes  to  be  cheated,  and  no  men 
enjoy  it  less  than  those  who  spend  their  lives  in  en- 
deavouring to  get  the  better  of  their  neighbours.  No 
class  is  so  suspicious  as  the  waged  class,  and  thus  its 
feelings  are  easily  worked  upon  by  unscrupulous  men. 

The  first  mischief  occurred  at  Bath,  where  the 
regiment  of  West  Mendip  Local  Militia,  usually  a 
loyal  and  orderly  corps,  was  assembled  for  training. 
On  the  morning  of  the  i6th  of  May  the  men  on 
receiving  the  order  to  march  refused  to  move,  but 
presently  obeyed,  and  went  without  further  ado  through 
a  field-day,  at  the  close  of  which  the  Commandant 
addressed  them  on  the  subject  of  the  marching  money, 
read  out  the  words  of  the  Act  of  Parliament  concern- 
ing it,  and  apparently  satisfied  them  thoroughly.  On 
returning  to  the  town  the  Commandant  ordered  the 
leading  sections  to  be  marched  as  prisoners  to  his 
lodgings,  where  he  intended  to  read  them  a  lecture. 
The  regiment  thereupon  broke  its  ranks  as  if  to 
rescue  them,  but  was  checked  by  its  officers ;  and  the 
prisoners  were  then  marched  to  gaol.  In  the  evening 
the  men  paraded,  perfectly  sober  and  orderly,  expressed 
regret  at  their  behaviour  of  the  morning,  and  begged 
for  release  of  the  prisoners,  to  which  the  Colonel 
replied  he  would  make  no  conditions,  but  that  their 
treatment  would  depend  on  the  behaviour  of  the  regi- 
ment. There  would  have  been  no  more  trouble  but 
that  the  rabble  of  Bath  came  up,^  led  away  a  few  of  the 
worst  characters,  and,  going  with  them  to  the  gaol, 
forced  the  doors  and  released  the  prisoners.  Then  all 
order  was  lost.  The  Colonel,  attempting  to  re-arrest 
one  of  the  prisoners,  was  threatened  by  the  bayonets 
of  his  own  men.     His  officers  were  attacked  by  the 

1  The  letter  says  that  they  had  "  Burdett "  upon  their  hats  ; 
that  very  absurd  person  being  the  popular  champion  of  liberty  at 
the  moment. 


IV  RIOTS  IN  LOCAL  MILITIA  247 

mob  ;  and  the  whole  town  was  in  uproar,  until  the  '^'°- 
Lancashire  Regular  Militia  arrived  from  Bristol  to 
restore  order.  Then  the  Local  Militia  came  to  their 
senses  and,  though  the  populace  was  still  raging,  escorted 
the  prisoners  back  to  gaol.  Two  of  them  were  then 
tried  by  court-martial,  sentenced  to  fifty  lashes,  tied  up 
before  the  whole  regiment,  without  the  slightest  sign 
of  indiscipline,  and  pardoned  at  the  last  moment.  The 
riot  lasted  for  three  days  ;  and  the  sympathies  of  the 
lower  class  were  so  entirely  with  the  mob,  both  at  Bath 
and  at  Bristol,  that  the  Lancashire  men  were  hardly 
allowed  by  their  landlords  to  leave  the  houses  in  which 
they  were  billeted,  and  indeed  in  some  cases  were  obliged 
to  force  the  doors.^ 