

These  were  serious  symptoms  ;  and  not  less  formid- 
able was  the  depleted  condition  of  some  of  the 
Militia  regiments  in  consequence  of  the  heavy  drafts 
required  from  them  by  the  Line,  and  the  discharge  of 

1  I.D.  vol.  ccxl.  O.C.  Devon  Mila.  to  S.S.  nth  July  ;  S.S.  to 
O.C.  Devon  Mila,  12th  July  1813. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  ccxli.  O.C.  Glamorgan  Mila.  to  S.S.  20th  Jan.;  vol. 
ccxxxviii.  O.C.  Cardigan  Mila.  to  S.S.  26th  Feb.  ;  vol.  ccxliii. 
O.C.  1st  Lanes  Mila.  to  S.S.  Feb.  18 13. 

T 


274     REGULAR  MILITIA  DEPLETED      chap. 

1813.  principals  upon  the  expiration  of  their  term  of  service. 
The  Adjutant  of  the  Notts  Militia  reported  that  he  had 
five  hundred  men  who  had  never  handled  a  firelock, 
and  fourteen  sergeants  out  of  thirty-one  who  were  new 
to  their  work.  He  therefore  begged  that  he  might 
be  allowed  to  give  his  non-commissioned  officers  seven 
days  of  preliminary  instruction  before  the  training  ;  ^ 
but  his  letter  was  not  even  answered.  Many  other 
regiments  must  have  been  in  much  the  same  condition, 
but  no  heed  appears  to  have  been  taken  of  them. 
Events  were  moving  fast  in  Europe,  and  Ministers 
appear  to  have  left  all  minor  details  to  chance.  Mem- 
bers of  disbanded  Volunteer  Corps  complained  loudly, 
and  not  unreasonably,  that  after  all  their  years  of  service 
they  had  lost  their  exemption  from  the  Local  Militia 
ballot  through  no  fault  of  their  own.  Ministers 
expressed  regret.  They  had  hoped  that  the  ballots 
would  have  been  over  before  the  time  appointed  for  the 
dissolution  of  the  Volunteer  Corps  ;  but  as  it  was  not 
so,  the  Volunteers  must  take  the  consequences,^  More- 
over, as  the  Regular  Militia  ballot  recommenced  on  the 
I  St  of  July  1 8 13,  the  Volunteers  became  subject  to  that 
also,  with  the  alternative  of  paying  from  ^^30  to  ^^40 
for  a  substitute.^  Emphatically  the  last  state  of  the 
Volunteers  was  worse  than  the  first. 

But  there  was  much  excuse  for  ignoring  such  small 
matters  as  these,  for  as  the  year  waned  disaster  upon 
disaster  befell  the  hated  Bonaparte.  Prussia  had  turned 
upon  him  early  in  the  year ;  Sweden  had  followed  her 
later  ;  and  in  August  Austria  at  last  threw  in  her  lot 
against  him.  Two  long  and  chequered  campaigns  were 
ended  in  October  by  the  decisive  overthrow  of  Napoleon 
at  Leipsic  ;  and  in  November  the  wreck  of  his  army 

^  I.D.  vol.  ccxlvi.  Adjt.  Notts  Mila.  to  S.S.  20th  March 
1813. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  ccxlviii.  Geo.  Jackson  (Surrey)  to  S.S.  23rd  April  ; 
S.S.  to  Geo.  Jackson,  26th  April  1813. 

3  IbU.  vol.  ccl.  L.L.  York  West  Riding,  to  S.S.  25th  April 
1813. 


IV  STRENGTH  OF  FORCES,  1813  275 

retired  across  the  Rhine.  A  few  weeks  earlier  Welling-  1813, 
ton,  having  utterly  defeated  Joseph  at  Vittoria  in  June, 
had  crossed  the  Spanish  frontier  into  France  ;  and  on 
the  loth  of  November  he  drove  Soult  from  the  lines  of 
the  Nivelle  with  heavy  loss.  A  week  before,  on  the 
4th  of  November,  Parliament  met  and  Casdereagh 
announced  that  the  time  was  come  for  a  supreme  effort. 
First  he  intimated  that,  in  spite  of  all  the  country's 
exertions,  the  Army  and  Militia  were  as  strong  numeric- 
ally as  ever  ;  for  improved  attention  to  the  health  and 
discipline  of  the  troops  had  so  greatly  reduced  casualties, 
including  desertion,  that  they  amounted  to  little  more 
than  12  or  14  per  cent  in  time  of  war,  whereas  they 
had  formerly  amounted  to  10  per  cent  even  in  the 
profoundest  peace.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  returns 
show  that  in  spite  of  heavy  casualties  in  the  Peninsula, 
the  effective  strength  of  the  Regular  troops,  British  and 
foreign,  was  260,797  on  the  25th  of  September  18 13, 
against  255,876  on  the  25  th  of  January  1813  ;  while 
the  strength  of  the  Militia  during  the  same  period 
had  been  reduced  only  from  71,055  to  69,886.  The 
casualties  for  the  year,  according  to  Castlereagh's 
estimate,  would  not  exceed  30,000 ;  but  while  he 
thought  that  ordinary  recruiting  would  continue  to  be 
successful  under  the  new  system,  he  doubted  the 
adequacy  of  the  supply  that  would  be  derived  from  the 
Militia.  Since  1 805  that  force  had  furnished  close  upon 
100,000  men  to  the  Army,  and  the  70,000  men,  of  which 
it  was  at  the  highest  computation  composed,  were  for  the 
most  part  ready  to  enter  the  Line.  But  some  of  them 
were  unfit  for  foreign  service,  and  he  did  not  therefore 
wish  to  send  the  regiments  bodily  out  of  the  country, 
but  to  allow  them  to  give  men  enough  to  the  Line 
to  enable  England  to  maintain  her  present  attitude.  He 
would  therefore  leave  at  least  one-fourth  of  each  regiment 
at  home ;  but  would  offer  a  small  additional  bounty  to 
tempt  the  rest  to  enlist,  and  if  a  certain  number  accepted 
service,  would  permit  their  officers  to  go  with  them.  In 
addition  to  this,  he  proposed  to  allow  a  certain  number 