

^  I.D.  vol.  ccxxvi.  Sir  A.  Muir  Mackenzie  to  the  Lord  Chief 
Baron,  24th  Dec.  1812. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  ccxxvii.  C.G.M.  Glamorgan,  to  S.S.  i6th  Sept.  18 12, 
one  specimen  which  must  serve  for  many.  The  Sec.  of  State 
expressly  disclaimed  the  provision  of  the  bounty  from  the  Imperial 
Exchequer  in  a  letter  to  L.L.  Caithness,  14th  Aug.  18 12,  H.O.L.M. 
E.B.  vol.  liv. 


IV  FRICTION  BETWEEN  MILITIAS     267 

they  were  called  out  on  active  service,  of  freedom  to  18 1». 
carry  on  their  trades  in  every  town  in  the  Kingdom, 
seem  to  have  reconciled  the  men  to  these  unpopular 
conditions.^  The  Local  Militia  was  frequently  employed 
in  suppressing  riots  in  Cheshire,  Lancashire,  Yorkshire, 
and  Derbyshire  during  the  course  of  the  year,  but  there 
was  no  trouble  in  the  force  itself.  It  is  true,  however, 
that  the  Lieutenancy  of  Cheshire  recommended  that  the 
Stockport  and  Macclesfield  Local  Militia  should  not  be 
assembled,  owing  to  the  disturbed  state  of  the  district 
and  the  probability  that  every  private  in  the  corps  was 
more  or  less  concerned  with  the  causes  of  the  unrest.^ 
The  force  had,  in  fact,  definitely  settled  down  to  its 
work;  and  there  seemed  to  be  good  prospect  that,  if 
permitted  to  remain  in  existence,  it  might  yet  serve  its 
purpose  of  giving  military  training  to  the  whole  nation. 
The  continued  separation  of  the  Local  Militia  from 
the  Regular  Militia,  nevertheless,  remained  a  source  of 
weakness  and  of  friction.  The  restriction  of  the  Local 
Militia  to  men  between  eighteen  and  thirty  years  of  age, 
and  the  exemption  of  these  men,  even  for  one  year 
after  their  term  had  expired,  from  the  ballot  for  the 
Regular  Militia,  naturally  tended  to  throw  service  in 
the  Regular  Militia  chiefly  upon  men  over  thirty  years 
old,  who  were  for  the  most  part  married,  husbands  and 
fathers.  The  only  possible  remedy  would  have  been 
to  blend  the  two  Militias  into  a  single  Militia  of  two 
classes,  to  make  all  the  younger  men  pass  through  the 
Local  Militia  as  a  matter  of  course,  and  to  give  them 
no  exemption  from  the  ballot  for  the  Regular  Militia. 
Moreover,  personal  service  only,  and  not  service  by 
substitute,  in  the  Regular  Militia,  should  have  availed 
to  earn  exemption  from  service  in  the  Local  Militia. 
Had  the  war  been  prolonged  it  is  possible  that  the 

1  I.D.  vol.  ccxxviii.  O.C.  4th  Lanark  L.M.  to  S.S.  8th  Sept. 

1812.  ^   .     •,         , 

2  Ibid.voX.  ccxxiii.  Minutes  of  G.M.  Cheshire,  25th  April  ;  vol. 
ccxxix.  Printed  Minutes  of  Lieutenancy  of  Lanes,  ist  May  ;  vol. 
ccxxxv.,  O.C.  Sheffield  L.M.  to  S.S.  i8th  April  181 2. 


268  FOREIGN  AFFAIRS  chap. 

j8i2.  organisation  might  have  been  perfected  ;  but,  as  things 
were,  the  initial  blunders  of  Addington  and  Pitt  had 
consumed  in  foolish  experiments  the  years  which  might 
have  been  devoted  to  the  building  up  of  a  sound  and 
permanent  system. 