

The  truth  seems  to  have  been  that  Government  had 
not  foreseen  an  embarrassment  which  was  bound  inevit- 
ably to  show  itself  when,  as  was  the  case  in  1 8 1 2,  the 
four  years'  service  of  the  first  batch  of  Local  Militia- 
men should  expire.  As  the  entire  force  was  created 
practically  at  the  same  moment,  it  followed  necessarily 
that  the  entire  force  became  entitled  to  its  discharge  at 
the  same  moment,  and  that  consequently,  unless  a 
certain  number  of  men  were  allowed  to  re-engage,  no 
old  soldiers  would  be  left  to  leaven  the  raw  recruits. 
An  officer  in  the  Edinburgh  Local  Militia  pointed  out 
a  remedy  for  this  by  suggesting  that  every  man  on 
reaching  the  age  of  eighteen  should,  as  a  matter  of 
course,  be  enrolled  in  the  Local  Militia,  and  that  some 
machinery  should  be  devised  for  the  automatic  enlist- 


266       LOCAL  MILITIA  RE-ENGAGED     chap. 

1812.  ment  and  discharge  every  year  of  a  certain  fraction  of 
the  men  liable  to  service.^  In  the  absence  of  such 
machinery  the  Lieutenancies  were  at  a  loss  to  know 
what  to  do.  Many  of  them  recognised  the  importance 
of  making  the  Local  Militia  a  means  of  national 
training  ;  but  on  the  other  hand  the  officers  naturally 
clamoured  for  a  few  old  soldiers  to  be  left  to  them. 
Here,  however,  a  further  difficulty  arose.  A  bounty  was 
to  be  allowed  under  the  Act  to  every  Local  Militiaman 
who  extended  his  service,  but  the  bounty  was  to  be  paid 
not  by  the  counties  but  by  the  parishes.  Now  when 
the  Volunteers  transferred  their  services  to  the  Local 
Militia,  it  had  frequently  happened  that  through  the  zeal 
and  good  example  of  the  gentry  one  parish  had  contributed 
every  able-bodied  man  to  the  service,  while  its  neighbour, 
from  want  of  natural  leaders,  had  contributed  none.  The 
Local  Militiamen  of  the  zealous  parish  were  ready  and 
eager  to  re-engage  for  a  further  period  of  service  ;  but 
the  parochial  ratepayers  felt  it  to  be  a  poor  return  for 
their  patriotism  that  they  should  be  subjected  to  an  extra 
tax  for  bounties  because  they  had  provided  more  men 
than  their  neighbours  for  defence  of  the  country  ;  and 
complaints  upon  this  account  were  very  common.^ 

However,  in  spite  of  these  drawbacks  and  of  some 
perilous  reforms  wrought  by  the  new  Act,  the  Local 
Militia  appears  to  have  passed  through  the  year  1812 
very  quietly.  Some  Commanding  Officers  dreaded  the 
abolition  of  the  marching-guinea  and  the  change  which 
gave  Local  Militiamen  exemption  for  only  one  instead 
of  two  years  from  the  Regular  Militia  ballot ;  but  on 
the  other  hand  the  grant  of  relief  to  their  wives  and 
families  in  all  circumstances,  the  exemption  from  the 
duty  of  acting  as  peace-officers,  and   the  promise,  if 