


262         NEW  LOCAL  MILITIA  ACT  chap. 

i8iz.  Parishes  might  be  grouped  together  for  convenience  of 
ballotting  (sec.  28),  The  clauses  forbidding  insurance 
and  substitution  were  re-enacted  ;  but  voluntary  recruits 
might  be  accepted,  and  parishes  could  levy  a  rate  to  pay 
them  a  bounty  of  not  more  than  two  guineas  (sees.  34- 
36).  Persons  voluntarily  enlisting  themselves,  if 
between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  thirty-five,  with  not 
more  than  two  children,  and  five  feet  two  inches  in 
height,  could  avert  the  ballot  to  the  extent  of  their 
numbers  (sec.  37).  Exemption  was  granted,  over  and 
above  the  persons  in  the  former  Acts,  to  poor  men  with 
more  than  two  children  and  to  students  on  an  eleemosyn- 
ary foundation.  Men  who  had  served  by  substitute 
in  the  Regular  Militia  or  in  any  additional  force  were 
exempted  for  four  years  after  the  expiration  of  their 
period  of  service,  and  men  who  had  served  in  person  for 
six  years  (sec.  38).  Men  already  enrolled  in  the  Local 
Militia  were  exempted  from  the  ballot  for  the  Regular 
Militia  for  two  years  after  the  expiration  of  the  period 
of  service,  unless  they  neglected  to  attend  training ;  but 
men  enrolled  after  the  passing  of  this  Act  were  to  be 
exempt  for  one  year  only  (sees.  39,  40).  The  fine  for 
exemption  was,  as  before,  ;^30,  reduced  to  ^^20  for  men 
with  annual  incomes  of  less  than  ^200,  and  to  ;^io  for 
those  whose  income  fell  below  ;^ioo.  Payment  of  the 
fine  or  personal  service  ensured  certain  exemption  for  two 
years  (sec.  44,  and  cap.  116,  sec.  i).  Men  imprisoned 
for  not  paying  their  fine  could  be  compelled  to  serve 
their  four  years  after  the  term  of  imprisonment  had 
expired  (sec.  45).  Deputy-Lieutenants  might  re-appor- 
tion quotas  in  cases  where  they  seemed  inequitable 
(sec.  48).  Vacancies  were  to  be  filled  up  by  fresh 
ballot,  the  parish  to  supply  the  vacancy  of  a  man  pro- 
moted to  be  non-commissioned  officer  being  chosen  by 
lot,  unless  the  promotion  were  due  to  the  reduction  of 
another  non-commissioned  officer  to  the  ranks  (sec.  60). 
Special  directions  were  given  as  to  the  timely  ballotting 
of  men  to  fill  the  place  of  those  whose  term  of  service 
was  expired  (sec.  61).     The  enrolment  of  servants  was 


IV  NEW  LOCAL  MILITIA  ACT         263 

not  to  vacate  contracts  with  masters,  unless  the  servant  181 2. 
did  not  return  to  the  same  master  as  soon  as  possible 
after  the  end  of  the  training.  Any  dispute  concerning 
wages  under  the  value  of  ^^20  might  be  settled  by  a 
Justice  of  the  Peace,  who  had  power  to  levy  distress  if 
the  money  were  not  paid  as  he  decided  (sec.  62).  Local 
Militiamen  were  allowed  to  enlist  into  the  Line,  with  the 
exception  of  non-commissioned  officers  and  musicians, 
who  could  only  do  so  with  their  Commanding  Officer's 
consent,  and  of  apprentices,  who  needed  to  obtain  their 
master's  consent  (sec.  65).  All  vacancies  were  to  be 
filled  up  as  appointed  in  sec.  60,  even  though  the  ballot 
for  the  Regular  Militia  might  be  suspended ;  but  volun- 
tary recruits,  as  in  sec.  37,  were  allowed  to  enter  until  the 
quotas  fixed  by  the  present  Act  were  complete  (sec.  66). 
The  Local  Militia  was  to  be  formed  into  companies  of  not 
less  than  sixty,  or  more  than  one  hundred  and  twenty 
privates,  with  three  officers  ;  and  these,  where  the  num- 
bers in  the  county  sufficed,  were  to  be  organised  into 
one  or  more  regiments  of  not  more  than  twelve  or  less 
than  ten  companies  ;  or,  failing  this,  into  battalions  of 
not  more  than  seven  or  less  than  four  companies.  Regi- 
ments of  eight  hundred  men  and  upwards  were  to  have 
four  field-officers  ;  corps  of  480  to  800  men,  three  field- 
officers  ;  battalions  of  less  than  480  men,  two  field- 
officers  ;  and  corps  of  three  companies,  one  field-officer. 
Corps  of  five  companies  and  upwards  were  allowed  to 
have  a  Light,  or  a  Grenadier  company  ;  to  regiments  of 
eight  companies  and  upwards,  both  Light  and  Grenadier 
companies  were  permitted,  each  with  two  lieutenants 
instead  of  lieutenant  and  ensign.  Every  company  over 
ninety  strong  might  have  three  subalterns  (sec.  68). 
Officers  in  excess  of  the  establishment  at  the  time  of  the 
passing  of  the  Act  could  be  retained  (sec.  69).  Counties 
could  be  divided  into  districts  for  the  supply  of  different 
corps  within  them  (sec.  62).  Local  Militia  upon  embodi- 
ment were  entitled  to  the  same  pay  and  allowances  as  the 
Regular  Militia;  with  a  grant  of  los.  6d.  a  man  in  the  first 
year,  and  5s.  3d.  a  man  in  subsequent  years,  for  necessaries 