

Another  and  more  serious  difficulty  was  that  the 
system  of  maintaining  the  Regular  Militia  by  voluntary 
enlistment  began  to  show  signs  of  breaking  down, 
even  though  the  bounty  offered  to  both  boys  and  men 
was  ten  guineas.^  The  provision  in  the  Act  of  18 13 
which  allowed  Commanding  Officers  to  recruit  men  at 
their  regimental  headquarters,  wherever  they  might  be 
stationed,  was  intended  to  remedy  this  failing,  but  it  is 
extremely  doubtful  whether  it  did  so.  Commanding 
Officers  were  loth  to  destroy  the  local  character  of  their 
regiments  by  taking  in  aliens  from  other  counties  ;  and 
in  cases  where  their  numbers  were  fallen  very  low,  they 
asked  rather  to  be  sent  back  for  a  time  to  their  county 
town  than  for  power  to  enlist  recruits  in  a  strange 
land.^  On  the  other  hand  it  appears  that  Highlanders 
would  follow  a  Highland  Militia  regiment  to  any 
quarter,  and  refuse  to  enlist  in  any  other.*  But  the 
concession  granted  by  the  Act  of  1 8 1 3  was  vitiated  for 

informed  at  the  same  time  that  on  the  istof  June  they  might  offer 
the  following  bounties  to  men  who  would  enlist  in  the  Regular 
infantry  : — viz.  to  men  who  were  serving  before  the  1st  of  April, 
14  guineas  for  life  service  and  10  guineas  for  limited  service  ;  to 
men  who  had  served  only  since  31st  March,  10  guineas  for  life 
service  and  6  guineas  for  short  service.  I.D.  vol.  ccl.  Circ.  of  S.S. 
14th  May  1813. 

^  I.D.  vol.  ccxxxvi.  O.C.  Banff  and  Inverness  Mila.  to  S.S.  29th 
Jan.,  nth,  26th  Feb.,  23rd  March  ;  vol.  ccxxxvii.  Lieut.-General 
Wynyard  to  A.G.  2nd  Jan.  181 3. 

2  liiJ.  vol.  ccxli.  Commdt.  Edinburgh  Mila.  Depot  to  S.S.  7th 
Oct.;  S.S.  to  Commdt.  nth  Oct.  18 13. 

3  Hid.  vol.  ccliii.  O.C.  Beds.  Mila.  to  S.S.  7th  Jan.  18 14. 

*  Ibid.  vol.  ccxxxviii.  O.C.  Ross  Mila.  to  S.S.  17th  Feb.  1813. 


IV  FRICTION  BETWEEN  MILITIAS      273 

purposes  of  recruiting  by  the  standing  order  which  1813. 
forbade  Local  Militiamen  to  be  enlisted  in  any  Regular 
Militia  but  that  of  their  own  county.^  It  was  useless  to 
give  commanders  power  to  invite  recruits  outside  their 
counties  when  all  the  finest  young  men,  being  absorbed 
by  the  Local  Militia,  were  withheld  from  them.  In 
truth,  the  competition  between  the  Local  and  the  Regular 
Militia  had  become  acute,  and  the  Commanding  Officers 
of  the  latter  began  to  complain  bitterly.  ♦*  The  Local 
Militia  has  become  a  source  of  patronage  to  its  com- 
manders," wrote  the  Colonel  of  the  Cardigan  Militia. 
"  Lately  sixty  young  men  offered  themselves  to  one 
of  our  County  Local  Militia  regiments.  The  Com- 
manding Officer  took  forty  of  them,  and  discharged 
that  number  of  undesirable  men.  Hence  the  ballot  for 
the  Regular  Militia  falls  on  old  and  married  men,  in 
fact,  on  the  rejected  of  the  Local  Militia.  If  they  serve 
in  person,  they  are  fit  for  nothing  ;  and  their  substitutes 
from  the  manufacturing  districts  desert."  From  Lanca- 
shire came  a  similar  remonstrance  owing  to  the  difficulty 
of  raising  Regular  Militiamen  by  beat  of  drum.  "Exemp- 
tion from  the  Militia  ballot  draws  the  finest  young  men 
to  the  Local  Militia,  because  if  they  wish  to  enlist  from 
thence  into  the  Line,  they  can  do  so  when  they  please. 
These  men  if  ballotted  [for  the  Regular  Militia]  would 
serve  ;  or  they  would  enlist  in  the  Line  or  Regular 
Militia  rather  than  risk  losing  the  bounty.  As  it  is, 
service  in  the  Regular  Militia  is  forced  upon  men  to 
whom  it  is  almost  ruin,  or  they  must  give  enormous 
bounties  to  substitutes." " 