

1  Circular  to  L.Ls.  of  England,  17th  March  181 3. 

2  Circular  to  L.Ls.  29th  Oct.  1813. 

'  I.D.  vol.  ccxxxiii.  Warden  of  the  Stannaries  to  Col.  Lemon, 
18th  Nov.  1812. 


IV    ORDINARY  RECRUITING  IMPROVES    271 

by  beat  of  drum  at  the  headquarters  of  their  regiments,  181 3. 
or  within  ten  miles  thereof,  even  though  such  head- 
quarters should  be  remote  from  their  own  county  (sees. 
6,  7).  The  number  of  men  enlisting  into  the  Line  in 
counties  having  more  than  one  regiment  of  Militia  was 
restricted  to  one-seventh  of  the  establishment  of  the 
Militia,  irrespective  of  the  number  actually  serving ;  but 
if,  on  the  24th  of  January  in  any  year,  the  actual  number 
of  men  serving,  after  deduction  of  the  quota  allowed  to 
enlist  into  the  Line,  exceeded  the  establishment,  such 
excess  of  men  was  to  be  allowed  to  enlist  also  (sees.  8, 
9).  For  the  first  time  since  the  war  began  no  special 
provision  was  necessary  for  raising  recruits  ;  and  the 
existing  machinery  worked  smoothly  and  well.  Never- 
theless, one  or  two  regiments  of  Militia  began  to  show 
signs  of  exhaustion,  or  at  any  rate  of  unwillingness  to 
furnish  their  quotas  of  men  to  the  Line  ;  for  between 
the  ist  of  April  and  the  25th  of  November  18 13  the 
Militia  furnished  no  more  than  9095  recruits,  out  of  its 
appointed  10,000,  for  the  Regular  Army.^  Ordinary 
recruiting,  however,  flourished  astonishingly  under  the 
new  regulations,  producing  in  the  course  of  the  year 
12,824  men  and  1874  boys,  or  an  average  of  a  full 
thousand  men  a  month. 

It  must,  however,  be  noted  that  some  of  these  recruits 
were  obtained  by  exceptional  methods.  In  order  to 
increase  the  force  in  America  the  Militia  of  thirteen 
Scottish  counties,  and  of  Wicklow,  South  Lincolnshire, 
West  Suffolk,  South  Hants,  and  West  Norfolk,  received 
permission  to  enlist  men  for  the  Forty-Ninth  Foot  for 
service  in  North  America  only,  with  an  assurance  of 
discharge  within  six  months  of  a  general  peace  ;  of  a 
grant  of  fifty  acres  of  land  to  privates,  sixty  acres  to 
corporals,  and  seventy-five  to  sergeants  ;  and  of  a  free 
passage  for  their  wives  and  families  to  Quebec  within 
twelve  months  of  the  husbands'  departure.* 

1  Return  in  C.J.  vol.  Ixix.  p.  638. 

2  The  English  and  Irish  regiments  above  named,  together  with 
the  Fife,  Perth,  Berwick,  Kirkcudbright,  and  Ross  regiments,  were 


272    MILITIA  RECRUITING  TROUBLES  chap. 

1813.  There   was    some    little    trouble    with    the    Scottish 

Militia  in  some  quarters,  owing  to  the  claim  of  a  great 
many  substitutes  to  be  discharged  on  the  completion  of 
ten  years'  service.  It  seems  that  this  was  the  result  of 
a  regular  agitation  set  on  foot  by  some  pettifogging 
lawyers  in  various  parts  of  Scotland  ;  but  the  wording 
of  the  Act  was  so  plainly  adverse  to  any  such  claim,  that 
the  men  were  easily  persuaded  of  their  folly,  and  the 
mischief  was  stamped  out  with  little  trouble.^ 