


264         NEW  LOCAL  MILITIA  ACT  chap. 

J 8 12.  (sec.  86).  The  annual  training  was  to  be  for  not  more 
than  twenty-eight  days,  and  the  men  could  not  be 
ordered  to  march  outside  their  own  counties  (sec.  88) 
unless  the  Lieutenant  recommended  for  convenience  of 
training  that  the  regiment  should  be  assembled  in  an 
adjoining  county  (sec.  90),  and  except  in  case  of  invasion 
or  insurrection  (sec.  123).  Offences  committed  during 
the  training  could  be  tried  afterwards  (sec.  95).  Local 
Militiamen,  when  embodied,  could  be  subjected  to 
stoppages  for  linen  and  necessaries,  not  exceeding  four- 
pence  a  day  (sec.  102).  Men  absenting  themselves 
from  training  were  to  be  treated  as  deserters  and  liable 
to  a  fine  of  ^20  or  six  months' imprisonment  (sec.  105)  ; 
but  their  vacancy  was  to  be  filled  up  by  ballot  if  they 
were  absent  for  three  months,  though  they  were  none 
the  less  liable  to  serve  if  they  returned  (sec.  106).  A 
proportion  of  non-commissioned  officers  could  be  kept 
on  permanent  pay  by  the  King's  order  (sec.  116);  and 
these  could  be  called  upon  to  raise  voluntary  recruits  for 
the  Regular  Army  or  Militia  (sec.  119).  Commanding 
Officers  were  required  to  make  out  a  list  of  men,  of  the 
age  and  standing  prescribed  by  sec.  17,  who  were  willing 
to  prolong  their  service  for  a  bounty  not  exceeding 
^2  :  2s.  ;  and  such  men  were  to  be  enrolled  as  volun- 
teers for  the  place  or  parish  for  which  they  originally 
served  (sec.  135).  The  King  was  empowered  to 
increase  the  Local  Militia  to  six  times  the  quota  of  the 
Regular  Militia,  on  summoning  Parliament  within  four- 
teen days  (sec.  156).  Counties  were  to  be  fined  £1  ^  for 
every  man  deficient  of  their  quota  on  the  14th  of  February 
every  year  (sees.  176,  177)  ;  and  the  payment  of  this 
fine  was  to  be  accepted  in  discharge  of  its  duty  in  raising 
and  training  men  (sec.  185).  Local  Militiamen  actually 
serving  were  exempted  from  payment  of  rates  towards 
these  fines. 

The  most  important  novelties  in  this  Act  were,  first, 
the  reduction  of  the  strength  of  the  Local  Militia,  and, 
secondly,  the  power  given  to  Local  Militiamen  to  pro- 
long their  service,  which  was  justly  criticised  in  Parliament 


IV  LOCAL  MILITIA  RE-ENGAGED         265 

as  an  abandonment  of  the  original  principle  of  putting  iSri. 
the  whole  population  through  the  ranks.  It  was 
defended  on  the  ground  that  it  would  produce  a  more 
effective  force,  avert  the  need  for  calling  men  from 
their  ordinary  avocations,  and  save  ^100,000  a  year. 
No  doubt  at  so  critical  a  time  these  were  important 
considerations  ;  and  yet  it  was  a  great  misfortune  that 
Ministers  should  have  yielded  to  them.  For  the  first 
time  Castlereagh  had  compelled  the  country  to  recognise 
that  it  was  the  duty  of  every  able-bodied  citizen  in  the 
prime  of  life  to  be  trained  to  arms,  and  had  introduced 
legislation,  none  too  drastic,  to  enforce  that  duty.  Yet 
the  Act  vitiated  this  good  service,  first  by  admitting 
Volunteer  corps  without  regard  to  the  age  of  the  Volun- 
teers, and,  secondly,  by  allowing  men  who  were  ready  to 
do  their  duty  to  take  the  place  of  men  who  were  not. 
In  both  cases  they  admitted  the  very  principle  which 
they  professed  to  repudiate — that  of  substitution — and 
this  was  a  most  objectionable  compromise.  It  was 
unstatesmanlike  since  it  took  no  thought  for  the  future, 
whereas  Castlereagh  had  designed  the  Local  Militia  to 
be  a  permanent  force  ;  and  it  was  unnecessary,  because 
the  country  was  still  conscious  that  its  fate  was  uncertain 
and  could  only  be  assured  by  a  great  effort. 