


276    FOREIGN  SERVICE  FOR  MILITIA    chap. 

1813.  to  serve  abroad  as  Militiamen  in  Provisional  Battalions, 
so  that  their  wives  and  families  could  enjoy  parochial 
support  during  their  absence,  their  service  abroad  being 
limited  to  Europe,  and  their  Commanding  Officers  to 
be  Colonels  of  Militia.  As  to  numbers,  he  proposed  to 
take  from  the  Regular  Militia  the  10,000  men  allowed 
every  year  by  law,  a  further  quota  of  1 0,000  in  advance, 
and  6000  to  8000  men  due  from  certain  counties  which 
had  not  produced  their  full  quota  in  former  years. 
These,  added  to  the  numbers  obtained  by  ordinary 
recruiting,  would,  he  hoped,  bring  the  year's  supply  to 
40,000  men.  For  the  rest  he  intended  to  allow 
Militiamen  to  count  previous  service  in  the  Militia 
towards  their  pensions,  and  to  give  pensions  also  to 
Militia  sergeants,  in  order  to  encourage  men  to  enlist. 

The  Bill  was  unopposed  upon  any  ground  even  by 
the  most  hardened  sticklers  for  constitutional  nicety, 
and  it  duly  became  law  on  the  24th  of  November  (54 
Geo.  III.  cap.  i  ;  for  the  City  of  London,^  cap.  1 7  ;  for 
the  Stannaries,  cap.  20).  Hereby  the  King  was 
empowered  to  accept  voluntary  offers  from  three- 
quarters  of  the  actual  number  of  men  in  any  Regular 
Militia  regiment  of  the  United  Kingdom,  to  serve  in 
any  part  of  Europe  (sec.  i).  A  bounty  of  eight 
guineas  was  to  be  given  to  all  non-commissioned  officers 
and  men  who  made  such  offer,  and  they  were  to  be 
sworn  to  serve  in  any  part  of  Europe  during  the 
remainder  of  the  war  and  until  six  months  after  the 
ratification  of  a  definitive  treaty  of  peace  (sec.  2). 
The  proportion  of  officers  to  be  accepted  was  as. 
follows  : — 

From  any  regiment  providing  900  men        .  3  field-officers 

From  any  regiment  providing  600  men        .  2     „         „ 
From  any  regiment  providing  300  men  or 

three-quarters  of  its  actual  strength      .  i     „         „ 

A  proportion  of  other  officers  might  also  be  accepted 
(sec.  4).     The  men  volunteering  on  these  terms  might 

^  Another  Act  (54  Geo.  III.  cap.  38)  was  passed  to  allow  a  pro- 
portion of  the  London  Militia  to  enlist  in  the  Line. 


IV       MILITIA  ENLISTMENT  ACT,  1813     277 

be  formed  into  provisional  battalions  (sec.  5).  No  181 3. 
officer  of  Militia  was  to  rank  with  the  Regulars  higher 
than  as  a  Lieutenant-Colonel  of  Militia  ;  and  if  sufficient 
Militia  officers  did  not  offer  themselves,  the  King  might 
appoint  others  (sees.  6,  7).  The  Militia  officers  accepting 
service  under  the  Act  were  entitled  to  half-pay,  and 
their  widows  to  pensions  (sec.  8).  All  ranks  of  Militia- 
men were  to  be  subject  to  the  Mutiny  Act  (sec.  o)  ; 
but  in  other  respects  they  were  to  retain  their  immunities 
and  privileges,  provision  for  wives  and  families,  etc.  (sec. 
10).  In  the  case  of  men  enlisting  into  the  Line,  the 
King  could  grant  commissions  in  the  Regular  Army  to 
Militia  officers  in  the  proportions  of  a  captain,  lieutenant, 
and  ensign  for  every  hundred  men;  and  five  sergeants  and 
six  corporals  could  likewise  be  enlisted  for  every  hundred 
privates.  Officers  could  be  allowed  also  to  smaller 
numbers  of  men  enlisted.  Such  companies  could  be 
attached  to  existing  battalions  of  the  Line,  or  massed 
together  into  additional  battalions  (sec.  12).  Their 
officers  were  to  be  entitled  to  half-pay  (sec.  18).  Com- 
manding Officers  of  Militia  were  empowered  to  refuse, 
on  sufficient  cause  shown,  to  discharge  Militiamen 
anxious  to  enlist  in  the  Line  ;  and  no  clerk  or  bands- 
man could  be  enlisted  without  the  consent  of  the  Com- 
manding Officer  (sees.  14,  15).  No  man  was  to  be 
drafted  from  the  regiment  in  which  he  had  enlisted 
without  his  own  consent  (sec.  16).  The  number  of 
men  to  be  enlisted  for  service  in  any  part  of  Europe 
was  not  to  exceed  30,000  men,  nor  three-fourths  of  the 
actual  strength  of  any  regiment  (sec.  19). 