

Calvert's  plan,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  to  have 
one  hundred  regiments  of  Infantry  of  the  Line — the  first 
battalions,  containing  100,000  men,  to  be  enlisted  without 
limit  as  to  time  or  place  ;  the  second  battalions,  also 
100,000  strong,  to  consist  of  ballotted  men  engaged  for 
home  service  only,  but  officered  by  Regular  officers ;  the 
third  and  fourth  battalions  (for  such  they  were  to  be, 
though  he  did  not  call  them  so)  to  be  Local  Militia  at 
least  200,000  strong ;  and  the  whole  to  be  on  a 
strictly  territorial  basis.  The  first  battalions  would 
form  the  "  disposable  force  "  for  service  in  any  part  of 
the  world  ;  the  second  battalions  would  be  for  home 
defence  and  would  maintain  the  first  at  their  due 
strength  by  means  of  voluntary  enlistment  encouraged 
by  bounty  ;  and  the  third  and  fourth  battalions  would 


V  SUMMARY— CALVERT  287 

maintain  the  second  in  the  same  fashion.  Practically  1814. 
this  would  have  turned  the  Regular  Militia  into  second 
battalions  of  the  Regular  Army  ;  and,  as  things  were 
then  carried  on,  the  reform  would  probably  have  furthered 
both  efficiency  and  economy.  But  it  would  not  have  over- 
come the  prime  difficulty,  namely,  the  fact  that  only  the 
refuse  of  the  Local  Militia  ballot  would  have  remained 
to  be  gathered  in  by  the  ballot  for  the  second  battalions. 
Moreover,  the  open  employment  of  the  ballot  to  recruit 
the  Regular  Army  was  precisely  the  thing  which  had 
made  the  Army  of  Reserve  unpopular  ;  and  in  such  a 
ballot  it  would  not  have  been  possible  to  forbid  sub- 
stitution, which  was  the  curse  of  the  service. 

The  question  was  immensely  difficult.  Time  might 
have  brought  the  answer  if,  in  accordance  with  Castle- 
reagh's  ideal,  every  able-bodied  man  had  been  compelled 
to  serve  his  time  with  the  Local  Militia  upon  entering 
his  eighteenth  year.  But  this  is  no  more  than  to  say 
that  things  might  have  been  carried  on  very  efficiently 
if  a  proper  system  had  been  evolved  and  practised  in 
time  of  peace,  which,  of  course,  is  the  indubitable  fact, 
though  the  British  nation,  in  spite  of  a  thousand  proofs, 
steadily  refuses  to  believe  it.  Improvisations  in  time  of 
war  can  never  be  thoroughly  efficient,  and  must  always 
be  unduly  expensive.  The  wit  of  man  can  hardly 
devise  a  scheme  of  military  organisation  for  so  complex 
an  Empire  as  the  British  Empire,  which  shall  be  devoid 
of  faults  ;  and  it  is  far  better  and  cheaper  to  discover 
and  to  correct  these  faults  in  time  of  peace. 

Incidentally  it  may  be  remarked  that  one  special 
detail  of  the  War  Office's  plans,  which  was  particularly 
urged  both  by  the  Duke  of  York  and  by  Calvert,  was 
never  wholly  fulfilled.  To  the  last  there  were  a  few 
regiments  which  consisted  of  a  single  battalion  apiece 
only,  and  these  regiments  were  for  the  most  part 
quartered  in  the  East  and  West  Indies.  Nevertheless, 
there  was  some  method  in  this  omission  ;  the  Twelfth 
Foot,  for  instance,  being  supplied  with  a  second  battalion 
when   it   came  home  from  India.     But,  on  the  other 