


V  SUMMARY— CASTLEREAGH  285 

with  not  even  Militia  intervening  between  them,  and  18 14. 
with  no  man  wearing  uniform  except  the  Regular  Army. 
His  plan  failed.  Short  service  proved  to  be  a  dis- 
appointment as  a  temptation  to  recruits.  The  national 
training,  as  he  projected  it,  was  impossible  ;  and  the 
one  great  service  which  he  rendered  was  the  suppression 
of  such  Volunteers  as  were  not  self-supporting.  Never- 
theless, his  brief  administration  marked  a  real  turning- 
point  in  the  history  of  the  war,  for  he  had  at  least 
upheld  principles  that  were  sound. 

Then  came  Castlereagh,  better  known  for  his  work 
at  the  Foreign  Office  than  at  the  War  Office,  and  better 
remembered,  unfortunately,  for  the  Six  Acts  than  for  his 
part  either  in  war  or  diplomacy.  Grasping  at  once  all 
that  was  good  in  Windham's  teaching,  he  started  from 
the  postulate  that  "  learning  the  use  of  arms  should  be 
imposed  as  a  positive  duty  upon  all  individuals  within 
certain  ages,  to  be  enforced  by  fine."  For  the  moment 
circumstances  compelled  him  to  maintain  the  Volunteers 
for  a  year  ;  but  in  his  own  mind  he  had  sealed  their  fate. 
To  make  national  training  a  genuine  institution  he 
established  a  Sedentary  or  Local  Militia,  to  be  chosen 
by  ballot,  without  liberty  of  substitution,  from  the 
entire  male  population  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and 
thirty,  for  four  years'  service,  during  which  period  the 
men  were  to  be  exercised  from  time  to  time  as  companies 
near  their  own  homes,  and  assembled  once  annually  as 
battalions  for  not  more  than  twenty-eight  days.  Into 
this  force  he  swept  as  many  of  the  false  Volunteers  as 
cared  to  take  service,  retaining  as  Volunteers  only  such  as 
were  self-supporting.  At  the  same  time,  after  making  an 
enormous  draft  upon  the  Regular  Militia  to  bring  the 
Army  to  respectable  strength,  and  reinforcing  the 
Militia  through  the  ballot,  by  an  even  greater  number 
than  the  draft,  he  laid  down  the  principle  that  a 
regular  supply  of  10,000  men  should  be  drawn  from  it 
annually  and  made  good  as  far  as  possible  by  voluntary 
enlistment.  He  thus  returned  in  some  measure  to 
Addington's  system,  using  the  Local  Militia  as  Adding- 


286  SUMMARY— CALVERT  chap. 

1814.  ton  had  used  the  Regular  Militia,  and  the  Regular 
Militia  as  Addington  had  used  the  Army  of  Reserve, 
but  with  this  difference  —  that  the  Local  Militiamen 
were  ballotted  without  option  of  substitution  and  could 
enlist  at  any  time  into  the  Regular  Army,  while  the 
Regular  Militia  could  enlist  only  at  stated  periods  and 
in  large  batches. 

By  these  expedients  the  necessary  supply  of  men  for 
the  Regular  Army  was  kept  up  until  the  end  of  the 
war.  That  they  would  have  sufficed  if  the  war  had 
lasted  for  two  or  three  years  longer  I  cannot  believe. 
The  Militia,  by  Castlereagh's  own  admission,  was  be- 
ginning to  fail  under  the  strain  ;  and  since  1 8 1 3  it  had 
been  forced  to  enlist  a  certain  number  of  boys  in  lieu 
of  men.  Morover,  though  Ministers  asserted  that  the 
expense  of  recruiting  soldiers  into  the  Army  through 
the  Militia  was  little  more  costly  than  direct  enlistment, 
there  was  small  object  in  keeping  up  so  expensive  a 
force  as  the  Regular  Militia  merely  as  a  great  recruit- 
ing dep6t,  more  especially  since  the  Local  Militia  had 
consented  to  do  service  outside  their  own  counties. 
Beyond  question  some  new  system  must  have  been 
found,  whether  borrowed  from  Calvert  or  from  some 
other  authority. 