

Another  Act  (54  Geo.  III.  cap.  10,  6th  Dec.  18 13) 
enabled  the  Regular  Militia  to  be  employed  in  any  part 
of  the  United  Kingdom  without  reference  to  the  re- 
strictions in  51  Geo.  III.  cap.  118.  Yet  another  (54 
Geo.  III.  cap.  12)  empowered  the  King  to  augment  his 
foreign  force  by  the  addition  of  eighth,  ninth,  and 
tenth  battalions  to  the  Sixtieth  Rifles  ;  and  a  third  (54 
Geo.  III.  cap.  19)  authorised  the  King  to  accept  offers 
of  Local  Militia  to  serve  out  of  their  counties  until  the 


278         PROVISIONAL  BATTALIONS  chap. 

1813.  ^  25th  of  March  1 8 1 5,  for  not  more  than  forty-two  days  in 
the  year,  such  service  to  be  treated  as  part  of  the  annual 
training,  and,  if  it  exceeded  twenty-eight  days,  to  be 
accepted  in  lieu  of  it. 

These  measures  were,  of  course,  one  and  all  of  them 
revolutionary  and  adapted  for  an  exceptional  and  extra- 
ordinary crisis  only  ;  but  they  do  not  seem  to  have 
been  very  successful.  The  Local  Militia,  on  the  whole, 
though  there  were  a  few  exceptions,  offered  to  extend 
its  services  all  over  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance 
with  the  Act ;  but  the  Regular  Militia  by  no  means 
displayed  any  great  alacrity  to  extend  its  service  to 
Europe.  In  the  first  place,  the  Government  seems  to 
have  made  a  mistake  in  offering  two  different  kinds  of 
service  to  the  Militia,  for  the  officers  did  not  know  to 
which  to  encourage  their  men.  They  assumed  that  the 
Government  would  prefer  recruits  for  the  Line  pure  and 
simple,  and  used  their  influence  accordingly,  with  the 
more  readiness  since  a  smaller^number  of  men,  according 
to  former  regulations,  entitled  Militia  officers  to  a 
commission  in  the  Regular  Army.  It  was  therefore  a 
shock  and  a  surprise  to  them  when  they  were  informed 
that  Ministers  preferred  men  to  engage  for  the  Pro- 
visional Militia  Battalions,  and  would  accept  no  offer  from 
ofScers  unless  they  brought  eighty  privates  with  them.^ 
But  apart  from  this,  the  men  were  generally  unwilling  to 
serve  in  the  Provisional  Militia  battalions  except  on 
various  conditions,  such  as  being  left  with  their  own 
company-officers  or  field-officers,  and  the  like.  Thus 
in  the  Cornish  Militia  at  one  moment  107  men  were 
ready  to  serve  abroad  as  Militiamen  on  one  day,  but 
only  80  a  fortnight  later,  though  154  willingly  enlisted 
in  the  Line.  In  Westmoreland,  on  the  other  hand, 
nearly  200  men  came  forward  to  serve  abroad  as 
Militia  ;  whereas  in  Cumberland  there  were  only  17 
men  ready  to  accompany  14  officers.     In  Denbigh  the 

^  S.S.  to  O.Cs.  of  27  Militia  regiments,  6th,  9th,  nth,  13th, 
14th,  15th,  1 8th,  20th,  23rd,  30th  Dec.  I.D.  vol.  ccxli.  Staff 
officers  of  Glamorgan  Mila.  to  S.S.  9th  Dec.  18 13. 