

On  25th  June  1813  .         .         .  2Ji,397 

On  25th  Dec.  1813  .         .         .  219,35' 

It  was  on  25th  June  1814  .         .         .  209,158 

With  the  prospects  of  peace  near  at  hand  fi*om  the 
moment  of  Napoleon's  abdication  in  April,  it  is  not  fair 
to  draw  too  strict  deductions  from  any  of  these  figures, 
though  it  must  be  remembered  that  we  were  still  at  war 
with  America.  It  must  also  be  recollected  that  Castle- 
reagh's  measures  at  the  end  of  18 13  were  by  admission 
desperate,  and  not  designed  to  meet  more  than  a 
temporary  emergency.  Nevertheless  it  must,  I  think, 
be  admitted  that  the  war  was  brought  to  a  close  before 
the  problem  of  recruiting  the  British  Army  had  been 
finally  solved. 


CHAPTER     V 

1 8 14.  Upon  a  review  of  the  whole  matter  it  may  seem  at 
first  sight  that  a  variety  of  opposing  conclusions  may 
be  drawn  from  the  facts  set  forth  in  the  foregoing 
pages.  Opponents  of  compulsory  service,  for  instance, 
can  point  to  the  constant  break-down  of  the  ballot,  to 
the  unfairness  and  oppression  which  it  caused,  and  to 
the  success  of  voluntary  enlistment  even  for  the  Militia. 
Advocates  of  Volunteers,  again,  may  adduce  the  readi- 
ness of  that  force  to  go  upon  permanent  duty,  and  its 
alacrity  in  turning  out  upon  the  few  occasions  when  a 
real  or  false  alarm  demanded  its  service.  But  the  whole 
question  of  the  recruiting  of  our  military  forces  must 
be  judged  not  by  isolated  occurrences,  but  by  the  whole 
mass  of  events  and  the  general  trend  of  legislation 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  war. 

The  initial  mistake  of  Addington  and  his  colleagues 
was  that  they  did  not  make  the  increase  and  mainten- 
ance of  the  Regular  Army  their  first  object — did  not 
perceive,  in  feet,  that  all  military  measures  which  are  not 
framed  with  the  ultimate  purpose  of  benefiting  the 
Regular  Army  are  not  only  useless  but  positively  pre- 
judicial. Thus  they  allowed  substitution  in  the  Militia 
Act  of  1 801,  though  the  exclusion  of  the  principle,  in 
the  case  of  men  enlisted  for  home  defence  only,  would 
have  been  perfectly  legitimate,  and  the  number  of 
Militiamen  called  for — 70,000  or,  including  the  Supple- 
mentary Militia,  94,000  for  a  population  of  fifteen 
millions  in  the  United  Kingdom — certainly  cannot  be 
considered   oppressive.     By   the  express  words  of  the 

282 


CHAP.v        SUMMARY— ADDINGTON  283 

Act  these  94,000  were  forbidden  to  enlist  in  the  Regular  1814. 
Army,  and  as  they  consisted  chiefly  of  substitutes,  they 
simply  deprived  the  Army  of  that  number  of  recruits. 
Having  thus  drained  the  recruiting  market  heavily  to 
produce  a  defensive  force,  Addington  in  the  second 
place  bethought  him  of  the  Regular  Army,  and  tried  to 
call  the  Army  of  Reserve  into  existence  to  supply  it ; 
the  said  Army  of  Reserve  being  simply  additional  to  the 
Militia,  formed  once  again  by  ballot,  with  the  principle 
of  substitution  again  admitted,  and  differing  from 
the  ordinary  Militia  only  in  that  the  men  were  allowed  to 
enlist  in  the  Regulars.  This  done,  he  allowed  the  Volun- 
teers to  take  the  bit  between  their  teeth  and  to  mass 
themselves  in  extravagant  numbers ;  and  then  proceeded 
to  reduce  the  ballot-lists  to  skeletons  by  exempting  all 
Volunteers  both  from  Militia  and  Army  of  Reserve. 
As  he  was  unprepared  with  rules  to  govern  this  mob 
of  men,  which  had  sprung  into  existence  against  his  wish, 
his  Home  Secretary  was  obliged  to  introduce,  by  side- 
winds and  sly  devices,  regulations  which  gave  rise  to 
endless  friction  and  discontent,  and  yet  were  powerless 
to  enforce  discipline.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  to 
the  end  of  the  war  our  military  system  never  recovered 
from  the  mischief  wrought  by  Addington  and  his 
Secretary  for  War,  Hobart,  during  the  year  1803.  It 
was  no  fault  of  theirs  that  England  was  not  ruined  both 
in  a  financial  and  a  military  sense,  so  unspeakable  were 
their  blindness,  their  weakness,  and  their  folly. 