


288         SUMMARY— BOYS— CONVICTS      chap. 

1814.  hand,  the  ideal  arrangement  that  there  should  be  one 
hundred  first  battalions  abroad,  and  as  many  second 
battalions  at  home,  broke  down  completely.  The 
second  battalions  for  the  most  part  may  hardly  be  said 
to  have  existed,  except  on  paper,  until  Windham  became 
Minister  for  War ;  although  there  were  two  of  them 
in  Cathcart's  force  which  sailed  to  North  Germany  in 
1805.  Later,  there  were,  of  course,  many  both  in  the 
Peninsula  and  at  Walcheren.  The  territorial  attach- 
ment of  regiments  to  counties  also,  though  greatly 
improved,  was  not  perfected  ;  and  recruits  from  the 
Militia,  in  not  a  few  instances,  preferred  another 
regiment  to  that  which  was  assigned  to  them.  The 
favourite  corps,  as  has  been  told,  were  those  of  the 
Light  Division  ;  and  it  is  no  more  than  natural  that 
young  soldiers  should  have  preferred  to  enter  regiments 
which  were  daily  adding  to  their  fame.^ 

Two  small  points,  upon  which  there  is  often  much 
loose  talk,  may  be  briefly  touched  upon  before  I  bring 
this  sketch  to  an  end.  The  first  is  the  enlistment  of 
boys.  This  was  begun  in  1805  by  sanction  of  the  Duke 
of  York,  and  he  was  doubtless  wise  to  permit  it  early 
in  order  that  the  boys  might  have  time  to  grow  up. 
The  Army  of  Reserve  was  in  great  measure  composed 
of  raw  lads  who  drew  pay  as  men.  Boys,  on  the  other 
hand,  enlisted  as  such,  received  only  ninepence  instead 
of  one  shilling  a  day.^  The  total  number  of  boys, 
recruited  as  such  into  the  Army  during  the  war,  did 
not  exceed  20,000,  or,  roughly,  one-twelfth  of  the  whole. 

Again,  it  is  often  said  that  the  ranks  of  the  Army 
were  filled  with  the  sweepings  of  the  gaols.  Undoubtedly 
convicts  sentenced  to  transportation  were  discharged 
wholesale  from  the  hulks  on  condition  of  their  enlisting, 
occasionally  in  batches  of  five  hundred  together,  but  they 
were  all  sent  to  battalions,  which  were  practically  penal, 

1  During  the  late  South  African  war  young  men  flocked  from  all 
parts  of  England  to  the  dep6ts  of  counties  whose  regiments  had 
distinguished  themselves. 

2  H.D.  Palmerston's  speech,  26th  Feb.  18 10. 


V  RECRUITING  OF  CONVICTS  289 

in  the  West  Indies  or  the  West  Coast  of  Africa,  as  1814. 
also  were  such  few  soldiers  as  chose  to  commute  five 
hundred  or  a  thousand  lashes  for  service  in  the  same 
much-dreaded  quarters.  Nor  was  the  principal  penal 
battalion,  the  Royal  York  Rangers,  a  bad  one.  At 
first,  under  an  unintelligent  commander,  it  seems  to  have 
been  a  hell  upon  earth,  where  the  cat  was  in  daily  use  ; 
but  presently  it  passed  into  good  hands,  when  flogging 
became  unknown  and  the  men  were  perfectly  docile  and 
well-behaved,  earning  praise  from  the  Commander-in- 
Chief.  Certainly  convicts  did  not  make  up  one  per 
cent  of  the  recruits.  No  doubt  Deputy-Lieutenants 
passed  a  good  many  doubtful  or  simply  wild  characters 
into  the  Militia,  who  were  gladly  transferred  by  their 
Colonels  to  the  Line  ;  but  to  suppose  that  the  ranks 
were  filled  by  the  criminal  class  is  to  assume  that  we 
were  a  nation  of  criminals. 