

The  ballot  having  been  discredited,  and  the  recruit- 
ing market  thrown  wholly  into  the  hands  of  the  crimps 
by  these  two  unhappy  men,  Pitt  took  over  the  military 
administration  in  a  state  of  utter  chaos.  His  remedy 
was  to  turn  parish  officers  into  recruiting  sergeants,  give 
them  a  reward  for  every  recruit  that  they  produced  fi-om 
Imperial  funds,  and  to  fine  them  for  every  man  deficient 
of  their  quota,  such  fines  being  payable  of  course  out  of 
local  funds.  Such  a  system  might  possibly  have  suc- 
ceeded had  it  been  tried  at  first  in  time  of  peace,  and 
become  familiar  to  the  parish  officers  ;  for,  financially. 


284        SUMMARY— PITT,  WINDHAM      chap. 

1814.  it  was  decidedly  ingenious.  But  foisted  suddenly  upon 
a  nation  demoralised  by  more  than  twelve  months 
of  incessant  ballotting  for  over  100,000  men,  it  was  a 
complete  and  dismal  failure.  Nevertheless,  as  has  been 
told,  it  brought  the  Army  into  closer  touch  with  the 
body  of  the  people  ;  and  though,  upon  the  whole, 
Pitt's  military  administration  is  a  blot  upon  his  fame, 
yet  at  the  end  he  did  admirable  work  by  his  staunch 
adherence  to  the  Duke  of  York's  principle  that  every 
battalion  abroad  must  have  a  second  battalion  at  home 
to  maintain  it  at  proper  strength. 

Then  came  Windham,  the  great  reformer,  who  held 
firmly  by  three  sound  principles  :  first,  that  the  Regular 
Army  was  the  ultimate  end  for  which  all  our  military 
organisation  existed  ;  secondly,  that  the  whole  nation 
ought  to  be  trained  to  arms  ;  thirdly,  that  a  Volunteer 
who  received  anything  from  the  State  besides  his  arms 
was  no  Volunteer.  His  practice,  however,  fell  short  of 
his  theory.  He  was  for  training  the  whole  nation  to 
arms  with  practically  no  organisation  ;  and  this  was 
almost  a  contradiction  in  terms.  He  was  for  using 
compulsion  and  yet  mild  compulsion,  ballotting  men  in 
turn  for  a  short  period  of  training,  yet  granting  them 
pay  for  the  few  days  on  which  they  were  to  be  exercised, 
thereby  ensuring  enormous  expense  with  a  very  doubtful 
return.  In  short,  his  Training  Act  broke  down  pre- 
cisely in  the  most  important  province  of  all,  the  training, 
the  problem  of  which  was  still  puzzling  him  when  he 
resigned  office.  His  idea  was  that  this  huge  mass  of 
men,  to  be  trained  no  man  knew  how,  would  turn  out 
like  the  hosts  of  La  Vendue  in  case  of  invasion  ;  and 
that  incidentally,  through  the  kindling  of  its  martial 
ardour,  it  would  furnish  an  endless  supply  of  recruits  to 
the  Regular  Army.  To  tempt  such  recruits  he  intro- 
duced short  service,  in  which  he  had  profound  faith,  with 
increased  pay  for  men  who  re-engaged  for  fresh  terms 
beyond  the  first,  and  with  an  increased  scale  of  pensions. 
His  ideal,  in  fact,  would  have  been  a  trained  nation  for 
defensive,  and  a  Regular  Army  for  offensive  service  ; 