


IV  FAILURE  TO  RAISE  THEM  279 

officers  and  men  tendered  their  service  in  large  numbers  ;  i8n. 
but  they  withdrew  their  offer  unanimously  as  soon  as 
they  learned  that  their  Colonel,  Sir  Watkin  Wynn, 
would  not  be  allowed  to  accompany  them  ;  and  instead 
sent  67  recruits  to  the  Line.^  In  the  South  Devon 
Militia  every  officer  and  most  of  the  non-commissioned 
officers  volunteered  to  go  abroad  if  they  could  do  so 
with  three-fourths  of  their  men  ;  but  the  privates,  who 
were  mostly  substitutes  of  ten  years'  service,  were  dis- 
inclined to  move  unless  they  received  some  reward  for 
all  the  work  that  they  had  done.  The  East  Devon 
Militia,  which  had  long  shown  prejudice  against  enlist- 
ment into  the  Army,  sent  one  man  to  the  Line  only  ; 
and  in  the  North  Devon,  though  1 1  officers  came  forward 
to  form  a  Provisional  Battalion  on  condition  that  300 
men  would  join  them,  only  21  men  were  forthcoming. 
In  Dumfries  14  officers  and  6  men  volunteered  for 
Militia  service  abroad  and  one  man  for  the  Line.^  In 
Forfar  the  officers  presented  themselves  in  a  body,  but 
only  two  men  would  consent  to  serve  abroad  either  as 
Militiamen  or  in  the  Line.^  In  Lancashire  the  men 
would  have  nothing  to  do  with  extended  service  in  the 
Militia,  and  declined  to  enter  the  Line  unless  they 
could  choose  their  own  regiments.*  But  it  is  useless  to 
multiply  instances.  Suffice  it  that,  with  a  few  notable 
exceptions,  the  Militiamen  were  disinclined  for  service, 
as  such,  abroad ;  and  that  ultimately  after  much 
difficulty  and  confusion,  owing  to  the  withdrawal  of 
many  men  upon  second  thoughts  from  their  engage- 
ments, there  were  formed  by  the  end  of  February  only 

1  I.D.  vol.  ccxxxix.  Return  of  Cornish  Mila.  2nd  Dec,  O.C. 
Cornish  Mila.  to  S.S.  12th  Dec.  ;  O.C.  Cumberland  Mila.  to  S.S. 
3rd  Dec.  ;  O.C.  Westmoreland  Mila.  to  S.S.  28th  Nov.  ;  L.L. 
Denbigh,  to  S.S.  nth  Dec.  18 13. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  ccxl.  O.C.  S.  Devon  Mila.  to  S.S.  27th  Nov. ;  Re- 
turns of  East  and  North  Devon  Mila.  27th  Nov.,  1st  Dec.  ;  Returns 
of  Dumfries  Mila.  Nov.  18 1 3. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  ccxli.  O.C.  Forfar  Mila.  to  S.S.  9th  Dec.  1 81 3. 

4  Ibid.  vol.  ccxliii.  O.C.  ist  and  2nd  Lanes  Mila.  to  S.S.  2nd, 
3rd  Dec.  ;  Return  of  Lanes  Mila.  7th  Dec.  18 13. 


28o  IPROVISIONAL  BATTALIONS  FAIL    chap. 

1 813.  three  Provisional  Battalions,  the  First  under  Lord 
Buckingham,  979  of  all  ranks ;  the  Second  under 
Colonel  Bayley,  925  of  all  ranks  ;  and  the  Third  under 
Colonel  Sir  WatkinWynn,  881  of  all  ranks.  This  last, 
it  must  be  noted,  could  not  have  been  completed  unless 
Sir  Watkin  had  been  placed  in  command,  for,  as  has 
been  seen,  not  a  man  of  the  Denbigh  Militia  would  go 
abroad  without  him.^ 