

Two  more  fallacies  may  likewise  be  briefly  dismissed. 
It  is  often  said  that  the  aristocracy,  which  governed 
England  at  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century, 
did  indeed,  by  its  high  spirit  and  stubborn  resolution  to 
continue  the  war,  fairly  wear  Napoleon  down  and  bring 
about  his  fall,  but  that  it  did  not  bear  its  fair  share  of 
the  burden  of  expense.  This  is  conclusively  disproved 
by  the  fact,  abundantly  evident  in  these  pages,  that  the 
expense  of  the  ballot,  and  of  thefines  and  bounties  incident 
to  it,  except  in  rare  instances,  was  thrown  wholly  upon 
the  parochial  rates,  or,  in  other  words,  upon  the  landed 
interest.  So  severe  indeed  was  the  pressure  upon  the 
landowners,  that  many  of  the  less  wealthy  among  them 
were  obliged  to  close  their  country-houses  and  retire 
into  the  towns. 

Again  it  is  averred  and  believed  by  many  good 
Irishmen  that  England's  battles  against  Napoleon, 
especially  in  the  Peninsula,  were  fought  and  won  by 
their  compatriots  ;  and  not  a  few  Scots  are  imbued  with 
precisely  the  same  notion  with  regard  to  their  country- 
men. This,  of  course,  is  simple  nonsense.  England 
produced,  as  indeed  she  ought,  far  more  recruits  than 

u 


290  LESSONS  OF  THE  WAR         chap.v 

1 8 14.  Scotland  and  Ireland  put  together  ;  and,  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  there  were  English  regiments,  as  well  as  the 
Highlanders  and  Irish,  engaged  in  all  of  Wellington's 
actions,  though  they  do  not  talk  so  much  about  it. 
Each  of  the  three  kingdoms,  indeed,  did  its  duty  ;  and 
impartial  observers  at  the  time  were  of  opinion  that  the 
best  regiments  of  all  were  those  which,  like  old  Ninety- 
five,  contained  a  mixture  of  English,  Scots,  and  Irish. 

For  the  rest  the  broad  lessons  to  be  deduced  from 
the  foregoing  pages  seem  to  be  the  following  : — 

England  cannot,  any  more  than  any  other  nation, 
fill  the  ranks  of  her  Army  in  a  great  war  without  com- 
pulsion. 

Compulsion  cannot  be  applied  for  service  outside 
the  British  Isles. 

The  admission  of  the  principle  of  substitution  in 
any  scheme  of  compulsory  service  leads  to  ruinous 
expense,  demoralisation,  and  inefficiency. 

Compulsory  personal  service  for  home-defence  has 
been  tried  and  not  found  wanting. 

The  ultimate  end  for  which  all  our  military  organisa- 
tion must  exist  is  the  maintenance  of  the  Regular 
Army,  our  only  offensive  land  force.     (Windham.) 

The  true  basis  of  such  an  organisation  is  National 
training.     (Windham,  Castlereagh.) 

"  Learning  the  use  of  arms  should  be  imposed  as  a 
positive  duty  upon  all  individuals  within  certain  ages, 
to  be  enforced  by  fine."     (Castlereagh.) 

A  Volunteer  who  asks  more  from  the  State  than  his 
arms,  except  on  active  service,  is  no  Volunteer. 
(Windham.)  False  Volunteers  are  alike  troublesome, 
expensive,  and  useless. 