


INTEODUCTION. 


9 


political  stage  in  a  leading  part  was  nevertheless  des¬ 
tined  to  be  connected  with  the  interests  of  India. 
Two  sessions  had  passed  since  he  and  Mirabeau  stood 
together  at  the  Bar  of  the  House  of  Commons  to 
listen  to  the  great  tribunes  of  England,  when  Sir 
Gilbert  himself  made  his  first  important  effort  in  that 
formidable  assembly,  and  moved  the  Impeachment  of 
Sir  Elijah  Impey  in  a  speech  which  elicited  the  warm 
admiration  of  its  most  illustrious  members. 

In  the  following  year  he  became  one  of  the  man¬ 
agers  in  the  trial  of  Warren  Hastings.  ‘  His  earnest 
desire,’  he  said  in  his  opening  speech  on  that  occasion, 
‘  to  befriend  the  natives  of  India  had  decided  him  to 
undertake  a  business  in  many  respects  most  uncon¬ 
genial  to  his  nature.’  But  another  determining  cause 
was  the  urgency  with  which  Burke  besought  him  to 
throw  off  his  modesty,  ‘  his  only  fault,’  and  the  warmth 
of  encouragement  which  hailed  his  opening  effort.  A 
note,  written  in  December  1787  and  sent  to  Sir  Gilbert 
with  a  book  intended  to  be  of  use  to  him  while  euffaged 
in  the  preparation  of  his  charge  against  Sir  Elijah 
Impey,  ends  thus  : 

‘  God  bless  you  and  forward  your  good  under¬ 
taking.  Stick  to  it.  You  have  years  before  you,  and 
if  I  were  of  your  age,  and  had  your  talents  and  your 
manners,  I  shoidd  not  despair  of  seeing  India  a  happy 
country  in  a  few  years.  Yours  ever, 

‘  E.  Burke.’ 

Having  kept  all  these  things  in  his  heart  he  could 


10 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


not  but  ponder  on  them  at  the  moment  when  his 
destiny  was  about  to  lead  him  among  the  people  to 
whom  his  early  sympathies  had  been  given ;  nothing 
could  be  more  natmal  than  that  a  few  of  his  last  hours 
in  England  should  be  spent  with  all  that  remained  of 
his  old  friend.  ‘  I  paid  my  visit  to  h'lrs.  Burke  yester¬ 
day,’  he  wrote  to  his  wife  a  day  or  two  before  his 
embarkation,  ‘  and  took  leave  of  the  old  groves  as  well 
as  of  herself  by  walking  round  the  place  which  to  me 
and  a  few  other  people  is  sanctified — as  I  am  never 
there  without  feeling.  Sitting  there  alone  I  thought 
of  more  things  than  even  you  would  understand.’ 

From  the  groves  which  crown  the  heights  of 
Beaconsfield  it  was  only  a  pleasant  drive  to  Taplow 
Court,  where  Lord  and  Lady  Thomond  (Sir  Joshua 
Eeynolds’  niece)  owned  one  of  the  loveliest  places  on 
the  Thames  ;  thence  it  was  no  ‘  far  cry  ’  to  Dropmore, 
the  home  of  the  Grrenvilles  ;  nor  to  Park  Place,  that  of 
the  hlalmesburys,  with  the  little  ‘  Lavender  House  ’  ^ 
nestling  under  its  slopes.  Of  each  and  of  all  these 
familiar  haunts  he  took  a  long  farewell.  While  to 
some  of  those,  for  whose  sake  they  were  dear,  the  word 
itself  remained  unspoken. 