

'  His  eldest  son,  Gilbert  Elliot,  afterwards  second  Earl  of  Minto. 


VOYAGE  TO  INDIA. 


13 


CHAPTER  II. 

The  voyage  from  England  to  Madras,  in  the  ‘  Modeste  ’ 
frigate  commanded  by  George  Elliot,  Lord  Minto’s 
second  son,  took  four  months.  As  it  neither  pro¬ 
duced  a  sea  fight  nor  ended  in  disaster  it  was  con¬ 
sidered  to  have  been  favoured  by  fortune.  The  nearest 
ajjproach  to  such  naval  adventures  as  Lord  JMinto  had 
witnessed  in  the  Mediterranean'  was  a  chase  after  a 
couple  of  our  own  merchantmen,  whence  half-a-dozen 
sailors  were  extracted  to  make  up  the  ‘  Alodeste’s  ’  own 
very  deficient  complement,  chiefly  composed  of  raw  lands¬ 
men.  No  less  ill-fitted  than  ill-manned,  the  frigate  after 
weathering  a  severe  gale  reached  IMadeira  in  need  of 
serious  repairs.  ‘  A  little  more  would  have  been  too 
much  for  us,’  wrote  Lord  Minto  in  the  log  kept  for  the 
benefit  of  the  family  circle  at  home  ;  but  he  was  com¬ 
forted  for  the  delay  by  a  sight  of  scenery  that  reminded 
him  of  Nice  and  Bastia,  and  the  enjoyment  of  a  (piiet 
morning,  ‘  rusticating  in  all  the  ways  I  like,  among 
flowering  trees  and  shrubs  regaling  the  air  with  per¬ 
fume.’  A  pathetic  interest  is  lent  to  these  few  lines 
by  the  circumstance  that  never  again  in  his  journal- 
'  When  Viceroy  of  Corsica. 


14 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


like  letters  is  meution  made  of  ‘  ways  ’  hitherto  so  fre¬ 
quently  recorded  as  to  form  part  of  his  habitual  life, 
whether  the  summer  hours  were  spent  on  the  craigs  of 
INIinto,  under  the  chestnuts  of  Sheen,  or  by  the  bright 
Avaters  of  the  Thames, — 

That,  as  they  bicker'd  thro’  the  sunny  glade, 

Tho’  restless  still  themselves,  a  lulling  murmur  made. 

Of  the  log  no  more  need  be  said  than  that  no  one  of 
those  for  whom  it  was  kept  but  could  find  some  con¬ 
genial  topic  there.  For  his  son  there  were  comments 
on  soldiers  and  sailors,  colonists  and  governors ;  for 
his  daughters  bright  little  word-pictures  of  Funchal 
and  Cape  Town — for  the  youngest,  the  only  child  left 
in  the  family,  tales  of  the  mids  that  came  to  his  cabin 
for  their  daily  treat  of  oranges,  and  of  their  pet  play¬ 
fellow,  a  goat  that  was  born  on  board  ship,  rated  her¬ 
self  one  of  them,  and  knew  no  more  of  craigs  than  the 
INIinto  pointers  had  told  her.^  Lastly,  for  his  wife  there 
was  the  constant  recurrence  of  words  showing  how  all 
his  thoughts  ended  in  her.  ‘Cape  Town,  May,  1807. 
In  the  country  I  am  now  driving  through,  there  is  a 
quarter  called  Franzneuk  or  French  corner.  It  is  so 
called  from  some  French  refugees,  expelled  by  the 
edict  of  Nantes,  who  took  refuge  in  South  Africa,  and 
obtained  grants  of  land  where  they  cultivated  the  vine, 
and  I  have  no  doubt  advanced  that  art  very  materially. 
To  what  country  has  that  event  not  brought  some 