

A  pathetic  proof  of  its  bitterness  to  others  as  well 
as  to  himself  is  given  in  a  letter  addressed  to  him  at 
Portsmouth,  by  Lady  Malmesbury. 

*  Belonging  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Culverden,  sister  of  Lady  Palmerston. 


INTKODUCTION. 


11 


‘  Spring  Gardens  :  February  10,  1807. 

‘  I  must  send  you  a  few  lines  to  thank  you  for 
sparing  me  the  most  wretched  of  all  things — a  parting 
scene.  People  feel  so  differently  on  these  points  that 
I  would  not  ask  you  to  do  so,  in  case  you  felt 
differently,  and  no  selfish  feelings  could  be  attended 
to  by  me  on  such  an  occasion.  In  youth  one  rather 
covets  such  things  as  call  forth  the  feelings,  but  in 
later  life  there  is  less  spring  to  support  them,  and  I 
am  inclined  to  believe  that  as  the  passions  weaken  the 
feelings  strengthen.  I  therefore  repeat  that  I  thank 
you  sincerely  for  not  coming  here,  and  that  I  consider 
the  last  squeeze  of  your  hand  as  fully  satisfactory.  .  .  . 
I  hope  and  pray  that  the  sacrifice  you  have  made  may 
be  rewarded  in  every  possible  shape,  and  that  the  in¬ 
terval  may  be  as  little  irksome  as  it  can  be.  I  am 
sure  that  the  retrospect  of  it  will  be  one  of  its  princi¬ 
pal  rewards,  as  the  will  of  doing  good  will  equal  the 
power  in  your  hands,  and  the  latter  is  unequalled 
perhaps  in  any  situation  on  the  globe.’ 

Lord  Malmesbury  wrote  in  like  strain  ; 


‘London  :  February  10,  1807. 

‘  I  really  could  not  make  up  my  mind  to  see  you 
before  you  left  London.  I  even  studiously  avoided  it. 
The  taking  leave  of  an  old  and  affectionate  friend, 
going  for  several  years  to  a  very  distant  country,  at 
my  time  of  life  and  with  my  infirmities,  is  a  very  pain- 


12 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


fill  task,  and  calculated  to  raise  so  many  melancholy 
sensations  that  I  shrank  from  attempting  it. 

‘  I  feel  almost  sure  you  guessed  and  understood  the 
motives  of  my  conduct,  but  there  is  a  satisfaction  in 
writing  them  to  you,  resting  on  the  same  feeling  which 
made  it  so  painful  for  me  to  express  them  personally, 

‘  If  we  do  meet  again,  why  we  shall  smile, 

If  not,  why  then  this  parting  was  well  made.’ 

Before  the  frigate  sailed  which  was  to  convey 
him  to  India,  Lord  Minto  sent  a  few  parting  lines  to 
his  wife,  in  which  the  following  passage  occurs. 

‘  February  6,  1807. 

‘  I  took  leave  of  Grilbert '  yesterday  after  sealing  my 
letter  to  you,  and  I  may  reckon  the  worst  moments  of 
my  probation  over.  The  last  was  one  of  those  of  which 
it  is  impossible  to  say  all  that  is  felt,  and  if  one  could 
it  is  better  to  suppress  it.  Many  people  have  said  of 
their  sons  that  they  have  never  given  them  pain ;  I 
can  say  with  perfect  and  literal  truth  that  there  has 
not  been  an  instant  of  his  life  on  which  I  have  reflected 
without  comfort  and  delight.  So  much  for  that.  The 
Avind  has  not  been  fair.’ 