

On  the  formation  in  1806,  of  the  Whig  Ministry, 
called  that  of  ‘  the  Talents,’  Lord  Minto  became  Presi¬ 
dent  of  the  Board  of  Control,  and  in  that  capacity 
confirmed  ‘  under  reserve  ’  the  succession  of  Sir  George 
Barlow  to  the  office  of  Governor  General  which,  vacated 
by  the  death  of  Lord  Cornwallis,  devolved  as  a  matter 
of  course  upon  Sir  George  as  senior  member  of  Council, 
until  a  fresh  appointment  coidd  be  made  in  England. 

The  death  of  Lord  Cornwallis  had  occurred  almost 
simultaneously  with  the  advent  of  the  Whigs  to  power. 
It  will  be  remembered  that  the  brilliant  administration 
of  Lord  Wellesley  was  brought  to  a  close  by  his  recall. 

B 


2 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


While  he  was  engaged  in  creating  an  empire,  his  mas¬ 
ters  in  Leadenhall  Street  were  learning  to  their  dismay 
that  the  process  was  not  a  paying  one.  Impoverished 
finances  with  augmented  responsibilities  led  them  to 
the  conclnsion  that  the  interests  of  a  trading  company 
might  be  placed  in  safer  if  not  in  abler  hands.  At 
their  urgent  desire  Lord  Cornwallis  was  prevailed  on 
to  return  to  India  to  inaugurate  a  reign  of  peace, 
and  to  observe  a  strict  abstention  from  interference 
in  the  affairs  of  the  Native  States  beyond  the  British 
frontier. 

But  Lord  Cornwallis  was  old  and  infirm ;  he  felt 
that  he  went  out  to  die,  and  his  death  followed 
almost  immediately  on  his  arrival  in  India.  When  his 
authority  fell  to  Sir  Greorge  Barlow,  the  Directors 
were  happy  to  find  in  him,  though  a  quondam  pupil 
of  Lord  Wellesley,  a  thorough-going  supporter  of 
the  policy  which  they  had  committed  to  Lord 
Cornwallis,  and  would  gladly  have  confirmed  him  in 
the  office  of  Grovernor  Greneral ;  but  such  was  not  the 
intention  of  the  Cabinet. 

Early  in  February,  Lord  Minto  was  instructed  to 
inform  Sir  George  Barlow  that  the  permanency  of  his 
appointment  was  not  to  be  considered  as  determined, 
and  on  the  1st  of  April  he  wrote  again  to  announce  to 
Sir  George  the  intended  nomination  of  his  successor; 
remarking  at  the  same  time  that  when  in  his  former 
letter  he  had  stated  the  King’s  Government  to  have 
reserved  their  ulterior  judgment,  he  was  not  aware  it 
was  so  near  the  point  of  decision,  for  had  he  known  it 


INTEODUCTION. 


3 


he  would,  at  once,  have  frankly  and  candidly  imparted 
that  information  to  Sir  Gleorge  himself. 

Writing  to  his  old  friend  Lord  William  Bentinck, 
Governor  of  Madras,  on  the  same  day,  April  1,  Lord 
hlinto  says : — ‘  The  arrangements  with  regard  to  the 
Government  of  Bengal  are  always  considered  as  belong¬ 
ing  to  the  Cabinet,  in  which  I  have  not  a  seat.  But  in 
fact  this  particular  measure  has  been  settled  and  con¬ 
ducted  I  may  say  with  the  entire  exclusion  of  my  voice 
or  judgment  in  the  afhxir.  It  was  determined  upon 
some  weeks  before  it  reached  my  ears,  and  it  was  only 
communicated  to  me  on  the  day  on  which  I  was  de¬ 
sired  to  communicate  it  to  the  Chairs.  I  do  not  say 
this  in  the  way  of  complaint,  being  assured  that  the 
perfect  cordiality  of  Lord  Grenville  towards  me  pre¬ 
cludes  the  possibility  of  intentional  slight.’ 