

On  Lord  Minto’s  arrival  in  India,  he  found  a  con¬ 
dition  bordering  on  anarchy  in  the  newly  ceded 
territories ;  a  barely  suppressed  rebellion  among  the 
newly  subjugated  races ;  discontent  in  the  Company’s 
services ;  and  a  general  objection  to  the  restraints  of 
legality. 

Within  two  years  of  his  instalment  in  the  seat  of 


PREFACE. 


vii 

government,  he  came  into  conflict  with  pretensions  of 
all  others  most  dangerous  to  an  infant  State — those 
engendered  by  religious  bigotry,  and  by  the  spirit  of 
military  ascendancy.  How  unflinchingly  he  asserted 
the  paramount  authority  of  the  civil  power,  while  never 
forgetting  that  law  and  justice  are  the  only  stable 
foundations  of  government,  may  be  seen  in  the  corre¬ 
spondence  now  published. 

\.  .AI. 

Minto  :  Novemlcr  8,  1879. 


Note. — In  the  first  pages  of  the  Introduction  to  this  volume,  Lord 
Minto  is  stated  to  have  left  England  in  February  1807,  whereas 
October  1806  is  given  as  the  date  of  his  departure  in  the  last  volume 
of  his  ‘Life  and  Letters,’  published  by  me  in  1874.  It  had  been 
originally  fixed  for  the  earlier  period,  but  was  subsequently  post¬ 
poned  ; — a  fact  of  which  I  was  ignorant  when  the  volumes  of  his 
European  correspondence  were  brought  to  a  conclusion. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAF'TER 

I.  Introduction* . 1 

11.  VoYAoE  — Madras— Calcutta— Change  of  Ad¬ 
ministration — Lady  Malmesbury's  Letters  .  i:5 

III.  State  of  India  —  External  Policy —Internal 

Policy — The  Native  Races — The  Mission¬ 
aries  . 4!) 

IV.  Family  Correspondence . 83 

V.  Position  of  England — Defence  of  India — Rela¬ 

tions  WITH  Persia  and  Turkey — Mission  to 
Persia . ;)7 

VI.  Mission  to  Lahore . 141 

VII.  Mission  to  Cabul . 15!) 

VHI.  News  fro.m  Europe — May  in  India — Dacoities  .  ITK 

IX.  Mutiny  of  Madras  Ar.my . 1!)7 

X.  Family  Letters— Edinburgh  in  180‘J  .  .  .  228 


X 


CONTENTS. 


CII.VI'TKU  P.\OE 

XI.  Foreign  Policy— Conquest  op  French  Islands  .  239 

XII.  Expedition  to  Java . 24!) 

XIII.  Calcutta — Official  Correspondence — Letters 
FROM  London — from  India-  Ubcali  op  Lord 
Minto—  Earldom . 318 

XR".  Kbvievv  of  Lord  Minto’s  Internal  Administra¬ 
tion —  Finance  —  Schemes  for  IIetrench- 
ment — Free  Trade— Military  Expenditure 
—  Balance  op  Power— College  of  Fort 
William— Scheme  for  Native  Colleges  .  3.52 

XV.  Conclusion— Lord  Minto’s  return  to  England— 

London — Minto — His  Death . 382 


INDEX 


39,5 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


CHAPTER  I. 

TjORD  Minto  assumed  the  reins  of  government  at 
Calcutta  on  July  3,  1807. 

Before  entering  on  this  new  chapter  of  his  life  it 
will  be  desirable  to  cast  a  retrospective  glance  over  the 
circumstances  which  had  led  to  his  appointment  to  the 
government  of  India. 