

‘  This  multitude  of  men  does  not  consist  of  an  abject 
and  barbarous  populace ;  much  less  of  gangs  of  savages, 
like  the  Gruaranis  and  Chiquitos,  who  wander  on  the 
waste  borders  of  the  river  of  Amazons  or  the  Plate  ;  but 
a  people  for  ages  civilised  and  cultivated ;  cultivated 
by  all  the  arts  of  polished  life,  whilst  we  were  yet  in 
the  woods.  There,  have  been  (and  still  the  skeletons 
remain)  princes  once  of  great  dignity,  authority,  and 
opulence.  There,  are  to  be  found  the  chiefs  of  tribes 
and  nations.  There,  is  to  be  found  an  ancient  and 
venerable  priesthood,  the  depositary  of  their  laws,  learn¬ 
ing,  and  industry,  the  guides  of  the  people  whilst  living, 
and  their  consolation  in  death ;  a  nobility  of  great 
antiquity  and  renown;  a  multitude  of  cities,  not  exceeded 
in  population  and  trade  by  those  of  the  first  class  in 
Europe ;  merchants  and  bankers,  individual  houses  of 
whom  have  once  vied  in  capital  with  the  Bank  of 
England  .  .  .  millions  of  ingenious  manufacturers 
and  mechanics ;  millions  of  the  most  diligent,  and  not 
the  least  intelligent,  tillers  of  the  earth.  Here  are  to 
be  found  almost  all  the  religions  professed  by  men ; 


8 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


the  Brahminical,  the  Mussulman,  the  Eastern  and  the 
Western  Christians. 

‘  If  I  were  to  take  the  Avhole  aggregate  of  our  pos¬ 
sessions  there,  I  should  compare  it  as  the  nearest 
parallel  I  could  find  to  the  Empire  of  Giermany ;  om 
immediate  possessions  I  should  compare  with  the 
Austrian  dominions,  and  they  would  not  suffer  in  the 
comparison.  The  Nabob  of  Oude  might  stand  for  the 
King  of  Prussia  ;  the  Nabob  of  Arcot  I  would  compare, 
as  superior  in  territory  and  equal  in  revenue,  to  the 
Elector  of  Saxony.  The  Eajah  of  Benares  might  well 
rank  with  the  Prince  of  Hesse,  at  least;  and  the  Eajah 
of  Tanjore  (though  hardly  equal  in  extent  of  dominion, 
superior  in  revenue)  with  the  Elector  of  Bavaria.  The 
Polygars  and  the  northern  Zemindars  and  other  great 
chiefs  might  well  class  with  the  rest  of  the  princes, 
dukes,  counts,  marquises,  and  bishops  in  the  Empire ; 
all  of  whom  I  mention  to  honour,  and  surely  without 
disparagement  to  any  or  all  of  those  most  respectable 
princes  and  grandees.’  * 

It  was  no  doubt  due  to  Sir  Grilbert’s  ardent  sym¬ 
pathy  with  the  views  and  the  labours  of  his  friend  that 
in  1783  he  was  designated  as  one  of  the  seven  Parlia¬ 
mentary  Directors  (the  Seven  Kings  as  they  were  called) 
to  be  appointed  under  the  provisions  of  ]Mr.  Fox’s  India 
Bill. 

The  measure  was  lost,  and  as  with  it  collapsed  the 
Ministry  and  the  reign  of  the  Whig  party,  the  honour 
was  a  barren  one;  but  his  first  appearance  on  the 
*  Speech  on  the  East  India  Bill.  Burhe's  Worlis,  vol.  i.  p.  338. 