

Whatever  the  reasons  may  have  been  for  the  con 
duct  of  the  Cabinet,  it  certainly  had  an  appearance  of 
want  of  candour  that  sufficiently  accounted  for  the 
irritation  manifested  by  the  Court  of  Directors.  They 
had  not  forgotten  that  the  Prime  INIinister,  Lord  Gren¬ 
ville,  had  warmly  approved  of  the  administration  of 
Lord  Wellesley  which  they  had  condemned,  and  when 
the  name  of  Lord  Lauderdale  was  made  known  as  that 
of  the  chosen  successor  to  Sir  George  Barlow,  they  at 
once  refused  to  consider  the  nomination.  The  Govern¬ 
ment,  persisting  in  their  measure,  exercised  a  power 
given  to  the  King  by  33  Geo.  III.  c.  52,  and  vacated  the 
commission  of  Sir  George.  Both  parties  being  equally 
resolved,  the  quarrel  grew  hot  and  bitter.  Mr.  Fox 


4 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


supported  the  pretensions  of  Lord  Lauderdale  with  that 
passionate  carelessness  of  consequences  where  his  feel¬ 
ings  were  concerned  which  made  him  so  beloved  as  a 
friend  and  so  distrusted  as  a  statesman.  He  positively- 
refused  to  listen  to  any  other  name,  and  somewhat 
autocratically  desired  that  the  Ministry  should  abandon 
the  right  of  nomination  altogether,  rather  than  with¬ 
draw  the  one  they  had  made  in  comphance  with  the 
objections  of  the  Court  of  Directors.  The  discussions 
in  the  Cabinet  were  so  prolonged  and  warm  that  Lord 
Minto  appears  to  have  had  misgivings  as  to  the  extent 
to  Avhich  the  divergences  of  opinion  manifested  there 
might  ultimately  be  carried.  In  the  course  of  the 
summer  he  wrote  to  Lady  Minto  that,  while  believing 
Lord  Lauderdale  to  have  many  qualifications  for  the 
office  of  Grovernor  Greneral  which  would  justify  the 
appointment,  he  should  himself  resign  if  the  Grovern- 
ment  persisted  in  forcing  on  the  Company  an  indivi¬ 
dual  obnoxious  to  them.  A  rupture  between  the 
Directors  and  the  controlling  power  was  imminent 
when  Lord  Lauderdale  suddenly  withdrew  his  preten¬ 
sions,  induced  by  the  serious  illness  of  JMr.  Fox  to 
spare  him  further  agitation  on  the  subject. 

Lord  Grrenville  immediately  nominated  Lord  Minto, 
and  the  appointment  proved  to  be  equally  acceptable 
to  the  Directors  and  to  the  public. 

‘  When  the  appointment  of  Lord  Lauderdale  be¬ 
came  manifestly  impossible,’  wrote  Lord  Minto  to  Lord 
William  Bentinck,  ‘  the  views  of  all  parties  turned  to¬ 
wards  me,  and  the  accidental  union  which  manifested 


INTRODUCTION. 


5 


itself  on  this  choice  seemed  to  make  my  nomination  a 
sort  of  peace-offering  on  both  sides,  and  a  means  of 
compromise  and  reconciliation  which  might  solve  a 
great  difficulty.  Under  this  inducement  I  accepted, 
not  without  a  strong  private  and  domestic  struggle, 
nor  without  an  anxious  distrust  of  my  qualifications 
for  so  weighty  a  burthen,  a  situation  which,  so  far  from 
seeking,  I  thought  a  week  before  no  human  persuasion 
could  have  led  me  to  undertake.’ 