

Though  by  no  means  an  adherent  on  all  points  to 
Lord  Wellesley’s  policy.  Lord  Minto  was,  as  Lord  Gren¬ 
ville  well  knew,  second  to  no  man  in  his  devotion  to 
the  honour  and  interests  of  the  Empire,  while  the 
natural  moderation  of  his  character  convinced  the 
Directors  that  no  hankerings  after  a  showy  policy 
would  prevent  their  instructions  from  being  rigor¬ 
ously  observed.  If  these  were  limited,  as  he  after¬ 
wards  playfully  declared,  to  a  general  recommenda¬ 
tion  to  maintain  a  system  of  non-intervention,  and  a 
more  definite  one  to  control  the  consumption  of  pen¬ 
knives,  we  may  assume  that  their  confidence  in  the 
new  Governor  General  was  complete. 

With  Lord  Grenville  he  had  many  conversations 
in  which  were  foreshadowed  the  main  features  of  the 
policy  that  before  the  close  of  his  administration  left 
Great  Britain  without  a  rival  in  the  Eastern  hemi¬ 
sphere. 

Such  having  been  the  circumstances  that  led  to 
the  appointment  of  Lord  hlinto  to  the  government  of 
India,  a  few  words  may  be  permitted  to  us  on  the  per- 


6 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


sonal  conditions  which  pointed  him  out  as  singularly 
fitted  for  the  post. 

Lord  Minto’s  early  and  intimate  connection  with 
Bmke  was  the  keynote  of  his  political  career.  For  that 
great  man  he  formed  an  enthusiastic  affection  which 
was  returned  with  so  much  tenderness  and  confidence 
that,  when  indulging  after  long  years  in  a  retrospect 
of  their  old  friendship,  he  was  able  to  say,  ‘  I  believe  I 
was  among  those  whom  Burke  loved  best,  and  most 
trusted.’ 

Some  of  Burke’s  finest  orations  were  due  to  the 
profound  interest  he  felt  in  the  relations  of  England 
and  India,  to  the  indignation  with  which  he  saw  the 
interests  of  the  native  princes  and  people  trafficked 
away  by  the  servants  of  a  trading  Company,  and  to  the 
disgust  with  which  he  recognised  that  the  riding  powers 
in  England  had  minds  too  small  for  the  sphere  of  their 
duty.  These  sentiments  were  intensified  by  the  natural 
bias  of  his  intellect.  There  was  an  epic  grandeur  in 
the  dramas  enacting  on  that  most  ancient  stage,  a 
tragic  dignity  in  the  fallen  estate  of  dynasties  as 
ancient,  a  magnitude  in  the  scale  of  the  crimes  and 
triumphs,  the  sorrows  and  sufferings  of  which  India 
was  the  scene,  that  stirred  his  keenest  sympathies,  and 
called  forth  the  scathing  eloquence  that  imparts  to 
those  who  hear  it  something  of  its  divine  fervour. 
Burke  must  be  allowed  the  honour  of  having  been  the 
first  to  awaken  in  the  British  Parliament  and  people 
a  sense  of  their  duty  to  the  native  races  of  India ;  yet 


INTRODUCTION. 


it  cannot  be  denied  that  when  the  light  of  his  imagina¬ 
tion  played  over  the  stores  of  his  knowledge,  an  ideal 
India  was  created,  brilliant  and  unreal  as  the  luminous 
pageants  which  Asiatics  love  to  trace  in  lines  of  fire  on 
midnight  skies.  The  following  passage  from  his  speech 
on  the  East  India  Bill  in  1783,  curious  for  various 
reasons  at  the  present  day,  may  serve  at  once  to  confirm 
this  assertion  and  to  show  the  traditions  of  a  school 
of  which  Burke  was  the  master. 