

‘  There  are  two  sorts  of  distinction  amongst  these 
people  on  perfectly  separate  principles,  but  both  exist¬ 
ing  together  in  their  full  force  ;  one,  as  in  the  rest 
of  the  world,  consists  in  the  difference  of  fortune  and 
power ;  the  other  takes  no  notice  of  these  vulgar  sources 
of  consideration,  but  sets  them  all  at  defiance,  and 


^T.  56] 


MADRAS. 


19 


maintains  itself  in  spite  of  all  worldly  vicissitudes. 
A  Brahmin  of  the  highest  caste  may  be  the  servant  or 
at  least  the  humble  dependant  of  a  man  of  an  inferior 
caste ;  but  the  master,  in  such  cases,  must  not  pre¬ 
sume  to  sit  down  or  to  eat  in  the  presence  of  his 
servant,  and  the  latter  would  think  himself  dishonoured 
by  being  even  looked  at  by  his  rich  superior  while 
cooking  his  rice. 

‘  All  Christians  and  other  pagans  are  classed  with  the 
lowest  or  Pariah  caste.  Sometimes  people  of  this  caste 
enlist  in  the  Sepoy  regiments,  and  Sir  John  Cradock, 
Knight  of  the  Bath  and  Commander-in-chief,  told  me 
that  a  Pariah  Sepoy  had  sometimes  come  to  him  for  a 
furlough  or  some  other  small  favour,  and  by  way  of 
recommending  himself  has  said,  “  Master  know  I  be 
Master’s  caste,”  and  I  daresay  has  paid  master  no  small 
compliment  by  acknowledging  him  even  for  a  Pariah. 

‘  A  thousand  whimsical  consequences,  and  ten  thou¬ 
sand  inconvenient,  often  ruinous,  restraints,  result 
from  these  original  but  firmly  established  institutions. 
One  great  convenience,  however,  of  these  singularities  I 
must  mention,  which  is  that  no  servant  is  fed  or  even 
lodges  in  the  house.  They  receive  so  much  money, 
and  very  little  it  is,  and  provide  for  themselves.  The 
coachmen  alone  wear  liveries,  and  they  are  dressed 
exactly  like  English  postilions ;  but,  as  soon  as  they 
leave  their  box,  they  strip  oflf  their  European  finery, 
and  walk  off  stark  naked  to  their  own  huts  and  dress 
their  rice,  and  have  no  more  to  do  with  you  till  the 
carriage  comes.  The  coachman  would  scorn  to  rub  his 


20 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


horse  down,  and  the  horse-keeper  would  scorn  to  rub 
more  than  one  horse ;  hence  it  is  lucky  that  all  these 
gentlemen  have  no  religious  prejudice  against  low 
wages  :  eight  or  ten  shillings  a  month  pays  all  wages. 

‘  I  suppose  there  are  fifty  things  in  sight  and  hearing 
every  minute  that  would  amuse  you  in  description, 
but  my  eye  is  spoilt  already,  and  I  hardly  know  what  is 
strange  and  what  is  common. 

‘  I  have  told  you  very  little  about  the  Nabob  (of  the 
Carnatic),  although  no  day  passes  without  messengers 
from  him,  in  the  morning  to  enquire  how  I  slept,  and 
in  the  middle  of  the  day  to  present  a  gift  of  fruit  and 
flowers.  He  insists  on  my  seeing  these  messengers 
with  great  silver  sticks  and  returning  my  salaams  by 
them,  which  is  a  great  and  grievous  bore  twice  a  day. 
After  my  first  visit  he  sent  me  a  dinner  of  at  least  fifty 
dishes,  each  of  which  was  brought  on  the  head  of  a 
black  damsel.  This  feast  was  displayed  on  the  floor  of 
the  colonnade,  and  I  was  brought  forth  to  see  the  rich 
embroidered  covers  taken  off,  and  to  admire  the  cook- 
shop.  I  made  my  salaam,  and  the  repast  was  devoured 
by  Lord  William’s  body-guard.  This  present  of  a 
dinner  is  an  established  custom  in  the  East.  The 
Nabob  is  a  very  fat  black-bearded  person  about 
thirty.  At  my  first  visit  he  received  me  at  the  door  of 
my  coach,  having  bargained  that  I  should  do  the  like 
when  he  returned  my  visit.  He  embraced  me  as  soon 
as  I  was  out  of  the  coach  with  most  affectionate  hugs, 
saying  each  time,  “  How  d’ye  do,  Grov'ernor  General  ?  ” 