

'  Lord  Minto  was  carrying  a  couple  of  pointers  to  India  as  a 
present  to  his  son. 


JEt.  56] 


MADRAS. 


15 


precious  acquisition  ?  ’  It  will  be  remembered  that 
Lady  Minto  Avas.  descended  from  a  Huguenot  family. 

After  one  of  these  playful  entries  he  says  :  ‘  Heaven 
knows  I  am  serious  enough  as  the  serious  scene  draAvs 
near.’  "A 

The  next  day  he  was  at  Madras. 

The  ‘  Modeste  ’  anchored  in  the  Madras  roads  on  the 
evening  of  June  20,  1807.  At  six  o’clock  next  morn¬ 
ing  Lord  William  Bent  inch,  and  John  Elliot  ’  came  on 
board  to  Avelcomehim- — ‘both  unchanged, and  unchange¬ 
able.’  Though  Lord  IMinto  Avas  detained  at  IMadras  for  a 
fortnight  by  the  necessity  of  having  a  neAv  foremast  for 
the  ‘  Modeste,’  he  could  take  no  official  part  there  since 
his  commission  could  only  be  opened  on  his  arrival  at 
Calcutta,  but  he  profited  by  the  opportunity  to  ac¬ 
quaint  himself  Avith  the  affairs  of  that  perturbed  Presi¬ 
dency  Avhere  some  of  the  mutineers  of  Vellore  were  still 
under  sentence  awaiting  their  fate.^  As  those  parts  of 
his  letters  which  relate  to  that  disastrous  event  contain 
little  more  than  his  personal  opinion  upon  facts  long 
since  established  they  are  omitted.  His  first  impres¬ 
sions  of  Indian  life  have  more  interest. 

*  John  Edmund  Elliot,  third  son  of  Lord  Minto,  who  had  been 
appointed  to  a  writership  in  1805,  and  now  became  private  secretary 
to  his  father. 

-  The  European  barracks  at  Vellore  had  been  seized  in  the  night 
of  July  10,  1806,  by  two  battalions  of  Sepoys,  in  the  Company’s 
service,  and  their  inmates  put  to  tlie  sword.  The  mutiny  was  put 
down  almost  immediately,  but  a  general  revolt  of  the  native  troops 
was  for  some  time  apprehended.  A  proclamation  of  the  Madras 
Covernment,  dated  December  3,  1806,  states  the  cause  of  the  mutiny 
to  have  been  an  unfounded  belief  that  the  Government  meant  to 
convert  the  native  troops  by  forcible  means  to  Christiatiity. 


16 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


‘  Madras :  June  29. 

‘  The  novelty  of  this  scene  exceeds  even  my  ex¬ 
pectations.  I  have  already  told  you  of  our  safe  arrival 
and  perfect  health.  I  do  not  find  the  heat  at  all 
amiss,  though  it  is  the  hottest  season  of  the  year.  I 
never  go  out  at  all  till  five  o’clock  in  the  afternoon  ; 
it  is  then  cool  enough  to  drive  in  the  curricle.  John 
is  my  coachman.  We  take  a  giro  on  the  Mount  Eoad 
which  is  the  general  resort  at  that  time  of  day,  and 
strike  off  occasionally  for  variety  into  other  roads. 
The  roads  are  all  as  fine  as  the  smoothest  gravel  walks, 
being  composed  of  pounded  brick ;  the  dust  of  this  is 
rather  troublesome.  They  are  extremely  wide,  with 
trees  on  each  side,  and  are  in  effect  handsome  avenues. 
The  whole  of  the  Choultry  plain,  which  extends  seven 
or  eight  miles  from  Madras,  is  divided  into  villas  and 
pleasure-grounds,  and  the  grounds  are  so  extensive 
that  the  houses  are  much  farther  from  each  other  than 
on  Putney  Heath,  or  Wimbledon  Common.  These  are 
the  habitations  of  the  English,  and  the  higher  class  of 
natives.  John  and  I  finish  our  drive  where  we  are 
invited  to  dine,  the  hoirr  being  seven  o’clock.  As  yet 
I  am  in  a  round  of  great  dinners,  at  which  I  meet  the 
same  thirty  or  forty  grandees  every  day. 