

IMost  peojjle  come  and  go  in  their  palanquins,  and 
travel  at  the  rate  of  five  or  six  miles  an  hour,  carried 
by  four  bearers,  and  attended  by  four  more  to  relieve 
each  other,  all  running  and  always  singing  some  ditty 
or  other.  Indeed,  in  carriages,  going  a  good  round 
pace  with  four  horses  on  a  smooth  road,  you  are  always 


jEt.  66] 


MADRAS. 


17 


attended  by  men  on  foot,  one  for  each  horse,  and  oft(m 
more  for  dignity — so  that  it  is  not  one  running 
footman  or  two,  with  a  fine  gentleman  or  fine  lady  ; 
here  and  there  one,  as  in  Glermany  or  Italy,  but  every 
sort  of  person  here  is  followed  by  a  cloud  of  volantes. 
This  annoys  me  extremely,  very  much  to  John’s  amuse¬ 
ment,  who  assures  me  that  they  like  it,  while  I  am 
thinking  how  I  should  like  it  myself  with  my  lungs  in 
this  burning  sun.  They  run  thirty  miles  on  end  with¬ 
out  thinking  much  of  it,  and  will  set  off  back  again 
with  little  or  no  rest.  One  advantage  is  that  they  are 
not  burdened  with  a  heavy  wardrobe.  I  was  not  pre¬ 
pared  for  the  entire  nakedness  of  the  Oentoo  inhabitants. 
I  mean  the  men,  nine  tenths  of  whom  have  literally  no 
clothes  except  only  a  narrow  belt  about  the  waist  from 
which  another  is  passed  between  the  limbs  exactly  as  in 
the  South  Sea  Islands.  In  this  attire  crowds  are  in 
the  streets,  and  in  the  roads,  and  walk  about  your 
house.  It  seems  really  strange  to  a  griffin — the  cant 
word  for  a  European  just  arrived,  and  would,  I  suppose, 
seem  still  stranger  to  our  countrywomen  if  these  men 
were  white  instead  of  black  or  bronze.  The  Queen  (of 
Naples)  might  here  study  figures  without  anything  to 
“  abimer  ”  her  models.  This  race  of  men  are  not 
exactly  Academy  figures,  not  being  very  muscidar,  but 
their  forms  are  remarkably  delicate  and  elegant,  and 
many  of  their  countenances  uncommonly  fine.  .  .  The 
habit  of  walking  without  clothes  gives  them  a  free  and 
manly  as  well  as  a  graceful  gait.  The  rest  of  the  in¬ 
habitants,  who  are  Moors,  and  the  richer  Gentoos,  are 


C 


18 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


dressed  in  varions  degrees  and  fashions,  but  universally 
in  white  muslin,  and  mostly  robed  down  to  the  feet. 
From  that  fortunate  class  to  the  lowest  there  is  a 
reafular  o-radation  of  dishabille.  The  women  are  almost 

O  O 

universally  very  ugly.  They  certainly  have  none  of 
them  livers,  for  the  vertical  sun  makes  them  no  hotter 
than  it  makes  a  cucumber.  They  work  hard  in  his  very 
beams,  and,  when  they  may  rest,  lie  in  them  on  the 
baked  sand  even  when  shade  is  close  to  them. 

‘  The  Hindoos  are  all  marked  with  the  distinctive 
sign  of  their  castes.  These  are  painted  or  rather 
plastered  on  their  foreheads  with  chunam,  a  sort  of 
very  fine  plaster  lime,  for  which  Madras  is  famous.  It 
is  coloured  in  various  ways,  sometimes  gilt,  but  gene¬ 
rally  of  a  yellow  tint.  The  marks  consist  in  a  score 
or  several  scores  upon  the  forehead,  some  horizontal, 
some  vertical,  some  oblique,  according  to  the  caste.  A 
very  frequent  mark  is  a  round  patch  just  above  the 
nose.  They  all  perform  their  ablutions  every  morning 
before  they  eat.  The  marks  of  caste  are  therefore 
effaced.  They  breakfast  without  them  and  renew  them 
immediately  afterwards.  The  best  sort  wash  before 
each  meal,  morning  and  evening- — and  must  renew 
their  decorations  therefore  twice  a  day. 