


JEt.  56] 


MADRAS. 


23 


waste  land  they  like.  The  wind  passes  through  them 
freely,  which  is  all  the  better ;  but  the  rain  enters 
with  as  little  ceremon}' ;  and  in  all  wet  weather  they 
must  go  out  of  their  houses  to  have  any  chance  of 
being  dry.  They  enjoy  the  hottest  sun  and  bask  in 
the  baked  dust  without  shelter  and  for  pleasure  at 
noon-day,  but  they  all  look  as  miserable  as  cats  in  a 
shower. 

‘  One  thing  I  have  forgotten  to  tell  you  of — the 
prickly  heat.  To  give  you  some  notion  of  its  intensity, 
the  placid  Lord  William  has  been  found  sprawling  on 
a  table  on  his  back  ;  and  Sir  Henry  Giwillin,  one  of 
the  Madras  judges,  who  is  a  Welshman  and  a  fiery 
llriton  in  all  senses,  was  discovered  by  a  visitor  rolling 
on  his  own  floor  roaring  like  a  baited  bidl.  Here  I 
must  close  the  iMadras  chapter.  I  have  been  writing 
down  to  July  19,  and  must  embark  to-morrow  morning.’ 

On  Lord  Minto’s  arrival  in  Calcutta  Sir  George 
Barlow  resumed  the  position  of  senior  member  of 
Council  vacated  by  him  while  holding  the  office  of 
Governor  General.  After  his  appointment  to  the 
Government  of  IMadras  which  took  place  a  few  weeks 
later,  Mr.  Lumsden,  an  experienced  public  servant, 
Mr.  Colebrooke,  ‘  a  man  of  extraordinary  talents  and 
extremely  agreeable  manners,’  and  General  Hewitt, 
Commander-in-chief,  constituted  the  Council,  in  which 
there  were  no  further  changes  during  Lord  jMinto’s 
administration.  Mr.  N.  B.  Edmonstone  filled  the 
post  of  Secretary  to  Government.  Sir  Edward  Pellew 


24 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


— aftenvards  Lord  Exmoiitb — held  the  chief  naval 
command,  ‘  a  sailor  of  the  Nelson  school,’  and  there¬ 
fore  particularly  acceptable  to  the  Grovernor  General. 
Ijord  Minto  was  justified  in  saying  that  he  found 
‘  plenty  of  ability  in  all  departments.’ 

‘Calcutta;  July  ill,  1807.' 

‘  To  have  arrived  at  our  destination  and  all  well,  is 
so  material  a  step,  though  the  first  one  of  our  design, 
that  I  feel,  perhaps  more  than  I  ever  did  before,  grateful 
to  Providence  for  this  good  beginning.  ...  To  return 
to  the  fussifications  of  my  arrival  and  accession.  When 
I  found  myself  lost  from  my  cobbler’s  stall  in  Arlington 
Street,  seated  in  full  possession  of  this  noble  and  mag¬ 
nificent  marble  hall,  the  crowds  of  servants  and  attend¬ 
ants  bowing  round  me  in  all  the  forms  of  Eastern 
jirostration,  I  felt  a  little  like  Nell  awaking  in  Lady 
Loverrule’s  bed,  with  the  difference,  however,  that  it  is 
not  at  all  like  my  notions  of  Paradise.’ 

‘Calcutta:  September  15.* 

‘  Notwithstanding  the  awkward  situation  in  which 
Sir  G.  Barlow  and  I  are  placed  with  regard  to  each 
other,  I  find  no  unpleasant  consequences  result  from  it. 
.  .  .  His  good  sense  and  some  other  neutral  qualities 
in  his  character  have  enabled  him  to  act  the  part  he 
had  chosen  with  dignity  and  with  many  marks  of  real 
magnanimity.  His  good  properties  are  of  a  high  class. 