


^T.  56] 


CALCUTTA. 


27 


It  is  a  constant  strain  of  the  ear  to  hear  them  ;  the 
business  is  often  the  heaviest  and  dullest  kind,  the 
voices  monotonous,  and  as  one  small  concern  succeeds 
another,  the  punkah  vibrates  gently  over  my  eyes ;  and 
in  this  warm  atmosphere  the  whole  operation  has  been 
found  in  the  course  of  five  hours  somewhat  composing. 
It  is  often  a  vehement  struggle  to  avoid  a  delec¬ 
table  oblivious  wink.  But  if  the  sovereign  nods,  the 
empire  must  fall  to  pieces  ;  the  fear  of  which  has 
hitherto  kept  my  fond  eyelids  from  kissing  each  other, 
but  not  from  most  loving  dispositions.  However,  if  we 
nod  and  listen  mtich,  we  have  little  occasion  to  write. 
The  secretaries  reduce  all  our  orders  into  minutes  of 
Council,  letters,  instructions,  &c.,  and  the  different 
Boards  and  other  executive  officers  carry  the  measures 
agreed  upon  into  execution.  We  hold  two  Councils  a  I 
week — Monday  and  Friday.  We  meet  at  ten  and  sit  / 
till  three  or  four.  From  Friday  to  Tuesday  I  have  my 
levees,  audiences,  dinners,  and  other  personal  commu¬ 
nications,  besides  the  reading  of  papers  for  Council. 

‘  On  Monday  evening  I  go  to  Barrackpore,  and 
remain  there  till  Friday  morning,  when  I  return  at 
five  o’clock  a.m.  by  water  to  Calcutta,  and  am  there  soon 
after  seven.  This  division  of  the  week,  besides  making 
half  of  it  delicious,  is  of  real  advantage  to  business. 
At  Barrackpore  I  can  read,  and  really  do  so  the  livelong 
day. 

‘  I  can  perceive  nothing  yet  in  any  quarter  that 
indicates  a  spirit  of  party,  and  there  is  certainly  none 


28 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


now  existing  that  leads  to  hostility  towards  me.  If 
8ir  Gr.  Barlow  had  been  a  very  popular  character,  the 
case  might  have  been  different ;  but  he  is  not  popular, 
and  I  believe  his  merits  may  have  been  the  cause  of  it, 
or  at  least  one  among  others.  In  truth,  a  Company’s 
servant  raised  to  the  commanding  height  above  his 
fellows  which  the  Giovernor  Greneral  holds  here,  excites 
envy  rather  than  respect  or  love.  They  are  all  com¬ 
paring  themselves  with  him,  and  their  own  preten¬ 
sions  with  his. 

‘  I  have  never  felt  anything  here  equal  to  the  heat 
of  Bastia  or  even  Vienna  in  summer.  These  are  the 
most  oppressive  and  most  unhealthy  weeks  in  the  year 
— the  end  of  September  and  beginning  of  October. 
Afterwards  come  four,  or  sometimes  five  delectable 
months.  Barrackpore  is  really  delicious,  and  takes  the 
sting  out  of  India.’ 


‘  Calcutta  :  September  20,  1807. ‘ 

‘  The  hours  and  occupations  of  Calcutta  seem  con¬ 
trived  to  exclude  women  from  society ;  and  I  hardly 
know  how  it  can  be  helped ;  for  in  order  to  have  any 
air  or  any  exercise  you  must  be  riding  or  driving  by 
five  in  the  morning.  This  makes  it  necessary  to  most 
of  us  that  we  should  be  in  bed  by  ten.  In  the  evening 
between  five  and  six,  everybody  is  out  again  to  get  a 
gasp,  by  which  means  it  is  difficult  to  dine  before  eight. 
The  only  way  of  seeing  ladies  that  I  have  discovered  is 