


‘  To  Hon.  A.  M.  Elliot. 


Mt.  56] 


CALCUTTA. 


29 


at  table ;  the  moment  the  meal  is  swallowed  it  is  time 
to  part.  At  table  I  have  hitherto  been  allowed  but 
one  dish — namely  the  Burro  Bebee,  or  lady  of  the 
highest  rank,  and  to  her,  therefore,  I  am  wedded,  and 
care  is  taken  that  I  should  be  a  faithful  husband. 
Since  one  cannot  have  one’s  own  wife,  I  should  think  a 
little  variety  not  amiss.  Accordingly  I  am  laying  plans 
for  that  purpose,  and  have  begun  to  invite  small  do¬ 
mestic  sort  of  parties  to  dinner. 

‘  I  drive  out  almost  every  morning  and  evening. 
The  formality  of  these  airings  is  uncomfortable  to  me 
to  a  degree  that  I  cannot  at  all  accustom  myself  to. 
I  am  always  followed  by  an  officer  and  six  troopers 
of  the  body-guard.  These  cannot  be  dispensed  with. 
Four  syces  or  horse-keepers  with  fly-flajopers  ran  along¬ 
side  of  the  horses  till  I  positively  rebelled  against  this 
annoyance.  Everybody,  European  and  native,  salaams 
as  I  pass,  and  the  natives,  who  swarm,  draw  up  in  lines 
and  touch  the  ground  almost  with  their  heads.  The 
consequence  is  that  my  right  hand  is  never  away  from 
my  head.  I  have  had  thoughts  of  sticking  a  wax  hand 
in  my  hat.  It  is  still  worse  with  a  palanquin.  Thirty 
people  go  before  in  two  lines  which  extend  a  great  way 
forward.  They  carry  gold  and  silver  maces  and  hal¬ 
berds,  and  embroidered  fans,  and  cows’  tails  to  keep  the 
flies  off,  besides  two  orderly  Sepoys  and  two  troopers. 
All  these  run  on  foot  at  a  round  trot,  some  of  them 
proclaiming  my  titles ;  which,  as  the  proclamation  is 
rather  long,  I  imagine  must  be  Hindostanee  for  Grilbert 
Elliot,  Murray  of  Melgund,  and  Kynynmound  of  that  ilk. 


30 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


The  worst  of  all  is  the  excessive  annoyance  at  home 
by  the  same  sort  of  crowd  and  incessant  entourage. 
The  first  night  I  went  to  bed  at  Calcutta  I  was  followed 
by  fourteen  persons  in  white  muslin  gowns  into  the 
dressing-room.  One  might  have  hoped  that  some  of 
them  were  ladies ;  but  on  finding  that  there  were  as 
many  turbans  and  black  beards  as  gowns,  I  was  very  de¬ 
sirous  that  these  bearded  handmaids  should  leave  me  to 
single  Tom,  which  with  some  trouble  and  perseverance 
I  accomplished,  and  in  that  one  room  I  enjoy  a  degree 
of  privacy,  but  far  from  perfect.  The  doors  are  open, 
the  partitions  are  open  or  transparent  also,  and  it  is  the 
business  of  a  certain  number  to  keep  an  eye  upon  me, 
and  see  if  I  want  the  particular  service  which  each  is 
allowed  by  his  caste  to  render  me.  It  is  the  same  in 
bed  ;  a  set  of  these  black  men  sleep  and  watch  all 
night  on  the  floor  of  the  passage,  and  an  orderly  man 
of  the  body-guard  mounts  guard  at  the  door  with 
Sepoys  in  almost  all  the  rooms,  and  at  all  the  stair¬ 
cases.  These  give  you  a  regular  military  salute  every 
time  you  stir  out  of  your  room  or  go  up  or  down  stairs, 
besides  four  or  five  with  maces  running  before  you.  I 
have  gradually  got  rid  of  this  troublesome  nonsense, 
but  enough  remains  and  must  remain  to  tease  me  and 
turn  comfort  out  of  doors.  As  to  John,  he  is  oriental¬ 
ised  already,  and  is  mighty  content  to  have  five  fellows 
attend  his  toilet ;  one  holds  a  glass  before  him,  one 
has  hold  of  his  foot,  another  of  his  knee,  his  hair,  his 
body.  I  have  a  barber  to  shave  me  and  a  hair-dresser. 
Tom  thought  he  ought  to  have  some  office  also ;  and 