


^T.  56] 


BARRACKPORE. 


31 


after  the  man  had  dressed  my  hair  he  chose  to  tie  my 
cue,  till  I  prevailed  on  him  to  be  less  oriental,  and 
leave  the  care  of  my  cue  to  the  hairdresser.  I  have 
banished  as  much  of  this  as  possible  from  Barrackpore, 
and  we  are  more  comfortable  there  ;  but  after  all,  I 
believe  the  best  way  will  be  to  endure  what  it  is  im¬ 
possible  here  to  cure  entirely.  Barrackpore  surpasses  all 
my  expectations,  in  the  beauty  of  the  ground,  the 
beauty  of  the  situation,  and  the  comfort  of  its  ways, 
compared  to  Calcutta.  The  grounds  are  a  mixture  of 
park  and  pleasure-grounds.  They  are  laid  out  with 
the  greatest  judgment  and  taste,  and  their  extent 
is  very  considerable.  There  is  a  great  variety  of 
fine  timber  and  curious  ornamental  shrubs  and 
flowering  trees.  Pools  of  water  of  very  pretty  forms 
and  certain  inequalities  of  surface  have  been  artificially 
produced,  but  the  real  beauties  consist  in  the  rich 
verdure  which  covers  the  whole,  the  magnificent  tim¬ 
ber,  and  the  fine  river  which  forms  one  side  of  the 
place  from  end  to  end.  Although  it  is  a  tide  river, 
there  is  no  mud  on  the  sides  ;  the  grass  extends  to  low 
watermark.  The  breadth  of  the  Ganges  here  is  suffi¬ 
cient  for  grandeur,  and  not  too  much  for  beauty.  It 
is  all  alive  with  a  brisk  navigation  of  boats  and  vessels 
of  different  build  and  dimensions,  and  all  of  the  most 
picturesque  forms  and  fashions.  The  present  house  is 
what  is  called  a  bungalow  or  cottage,  and  was  intended 
only  as  a  makeshift  while  the  great  house  was  erecting. 
It  is  a  cottage,  indeed,  but  a  very  considerable  building 
compared  with  the  European  scale.  The  bungalow 


32 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


was  originally  composed  of  three  large  rooms,  which 
opened  into  a  verandah  surrounding  the  whole.  Sir 
George  Barlow,  by  converting  each  corner  of  the 
verandah  into  a  small  room,  has  greatly  improved  the 
comfort  of  the  house.  The  verandah  next  the  room  is 
a  charming  apartment.  It  affords  a  long,  shaded,  airy 
walk  with  a  most  beautiful  prospect,  and  we  find  it  an 
excellent  eating-room.  It  is  within  forty  or  fifty  paces 
of  the  water’s  edge. 

‘  Besides  this  principal  bungalow  there  are  a  number 
of  smaller  ones  like  neat  Swiss  cottages  scattered  about 
the  lawn.  These  afford  accommodation  for  aide-de¬ 
camps,  guests,  &c.,  &c.  A  better  and  more  regular 
house  will  certainly  be  proper.  Such  an  one  there 
was,  but  it  was  pulled  down  to  make  room  for  the  pro¬ 
jected  palace,  of  which  the  ground-floor  walls  are 
finished.  It  would  have  been  magnificent,  I  have  no 
doubt,  but  in  perfect  contradiction  with  every  purpose 
of  the  place.  It  would  have  been  to  come  from  Cal¬ 
cutta  to  Calcutta  again  ;  and  you  must  have  had  the 
same  multitude  of  troublesome  attendants,  and  have 
lived  the  same  full-dress,  intolerable  life  at  your  country 
house  as  in  town.  I  am  extremely  glad  it  has  been 
stopped,  and  am  selling  off  the  materials  which  had 
been  laid  in,  hoping  there  will  be  no  change  in  my 
time.  The  road  from  Calcutta  to  Barrackpore  is  beau¬ 
tiful  the  whole  way.  The  Danish  town  of  Serampore, 
immediately  opposite  to  these  windows,  is  extremely 
ornamental,  the  river  not  appearing  much  wider  than 
the  Thames  at  Westminster,  though  it  is  considerably 