


^T.  56] 


MADEAS. 


21 


This  I  thought  a  very  suitable  salutation  at  our  meet¬ 
ing,  but  it  seemed  less  neat  and  appropriate  at  my 
departure,  when,  at  the  coach  door,  he  repeated  the 
four  embraces  with  “  How  d’ye  do.  Governor  General  ?  ” 
four  times  again.  During  the  reception  he  sat  on  a 
sofa  in  a  great  hall,  in  which  was  also  the  musnud  or 
throne,  I  on  his  right.  Lord  William  on  his  left.  Then 
our  interpreter  made  us  mutually  happy  by  assurances 
of  each  other’s  perfect  health,  and  the  Nabob  returned 
thanks  to  God  for  the  health  of  the  King,  the  Queen, 
the  Prince  of  Wales,  all  the  Princes  and  Princesses, 
the  Court  of  Directors,  the  House  of  Peers,  and  all 
the  Members  of  the  House  of  Commons,  every  one  of 
whom  I  assured  him  I  had  left  in  the  most  blooming 
health.  We  were  then  still  more  deeply  affected  by 
our  extreme  attachment  for  each  other,  and  by  the 
singular  felicity  of  beholding  each  other’s  faces.  Many 
other  similar  affairs  of  state  were  transacted  between 
us,  and  when  the  painful  moment  for  parting  arrived. 
His  Highness  dropt  a  few  drops  of  attar  of  roses  on 
my  handkerchief,  then  sprinkled  me  profusely  all  over 
my  best  Vienna  embroidered  coat  with  rose-water,  say¬ 
ing  affectionately  that  he  knew  he  was  spoiling  my 
coat  (but  what  is  a  coat  to  the  effusions  of  friend¬ 
ship  ?).  Then  he  put  on  my  neck  a  garland  of  white 
flowers  ;  gave  me  two  packets  of  betel-nut  and  then 
two  roses.  After  which  Lord  William  and  all  my 
family  were  treated  in  the  same  manner,  and  we  re¬ 
tired.’ 

The  next  day  the  visit  was  returned,  and  on  the 


22 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


following  one  the  Glovernor  General  was  entertained  at 
a  Nantch — of  which  festivity  he  was  quite  unworthy — ■ 
t  hinking  he  had  never  seen  such  a  collection  of  hideous 
women  in  his  life. 

‘  I  am  sorry  to  say  the  season  has  been  most  cala¬ 
mitous  here,  from  the  entire  failure  of  the  usual  mon¬ 
soon,  and  a  consequent  loss  of  the  crop.  A  sad  famine 
is  at  this  moment  desolating  several  extensive  dis¬ 
tricts  ;  •  •  .  thousands  of  country  people  have  swarmed 
into  Madras  in  quest  of  bread ;  thousands  are  em¬ 
ployed  on  public  works ;  to  thousands  who  can’t  work 
rice  is  distributed  gratis  daily,  by  a  public  subscription. 
But  some  arrive  too  late  and  too  much  exhausted, 
others  refrain  too  long  from  pride  or  scruples  from 
accepting  this  relief,  and  it  has  been  common  to  see 
famished  wretches  broug^ht  at  last  by  friends  to  the 
Choultry,  where  the  distribution  is  made,  expire  after 
the  first  mouthful  of  food  which  their  stomachs  could 
no  longer  receive  in  safety.  It  has  been  worse  in  the 
country.  ...  It  seems  hard  that  the  people  of  this 
country  should  experience  distress,  for  none  can  expe¬ 
rience  fewer  wants  ;  a  little  rice  is  literally  the  only 
necessary  of  life.  The  man  requires  no  clothes,  the 
woman  little  more.  Fuel  to  cook  their  rice  is  all  they 
want,  and  they  need  pay  no  house-rent,  for  their  habi¬ 
tations  are  huts  composed  of  a  few  mats  or  hurdles 
fastened  to  upright  stakes  about  four  feet  high,  and  a 
roof  of  as  light  timbers  thatched  with  large  leaves. 
These  hovels  can  be  run  up  in  an  hour,  and  are  erected 
along  the  sides  of  the  high  roads  or  in  any  corner  of 