


*  To  Lady  Minto. 


*  To  Hon.  Gilbert  Elliot. 


Air.  56] 


CALCUTTA. 


25 


A  real  attachment  to  his  public  duties,  and,  I  have 
every  reason  to  believe,  a  naturally  sincere  and  honour¬ 
able  character,  secure  his  best  advice  as  a  colleague. 
A  constitutional  coldness  and  apathy  of  temper,  which 
has  exposed  him  to  the  reproach  of  indifference  to  the 
interests  of  other  men,  and  has  enabled  him  to  discharge 
many  harsh  duties  pretty  inflexibly,  seems  at  the  same 
time  to  have  kept  his  personal  feelings  in  a  temperate 
state,  and  to  render  a  second  place  less  irksome  and 
irritating  than  it  would  be  to  niuety-niue  men  in  a 
hundred  who  had  filled  the  first.  He  acknowledges, 
also,  the  great  attention  and  delicacy  I  had  shown 
towards  his  feelings  from  the  beginning  of  the  contro¬ 
versy  concerning  his  office  to  the  present  time.  I 
have  omitted  nothing,  which  a  real  and  strong  feeling 
for  the  unpleasantness  of  his  situation  can  suggest,  to 
diminish  his  own  discomfort,  and  create  a  cordial  instead 
of  a  jealous  feeling  between  us. 

‘  The  situation  of  public  affairs  in  this  country  is 
particularly  favourable  to  the  circumstances  in  which  I 
am  placed.  There  is  in  reality  nothing  of  great  moment 
depending,  and  nothing  stirring  in  the  great  scale  of 
politics  on  which  I  should  desire  to  act  on  views  and 
principles  of  my  mvn,  rather  than  on  the  mere  expe¬ 
rience  and  familiarity  of  other  men  with  the  subject. 
I  have  time,  therefore,  to  form  my  views  at  leisure,  and 
to  acquire  a  little  familiarity  of  my  own  with  affairs 
before  I  need  make  free  with  them.  In  the  mean¬ 
while,  my  total  inexperience  iu  the  details  of  current 
business  makes  the  assistance  of  a  colleague  who  has 


26 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


been  living  with  them  on  the  most  intimate  footing  all 
his  life  particnlarly  seasonable.  The  principal  griev¬ 
ance  I  have  to  complain  of  is  that  the  quantity  and 
quick  succession  of  current  business  is  such  as  to  em¬ 
ploy  every  instant  that  I  can  command  from  ceremony, 
and  the  interruption  of  private  solicitation,  without 
affording  any  time  for  reading  back,  or  looking 
forward,  and  acquiring  general  information.  .  .  .  The 
routine  is  this :  the  secretaries  in  the  different  depart¬ 
ments  send  in  circulation  to  me  and  the  members 
of  Council  the  despatches  they  have  received  since 
the  last  Council,  and  the  documents  relating  to  all 
business  which  arises  in  the  interval.  These  are  ex¬ 
tremely  voluminous,  and  would  require  pretty  nearly 
the  whole  interval  for  mere  perusal.  The  number  and 
variety  of  affairs  is  also  immense ;  for  everything,  small 
as  well  as  great,  must  have  the  sanction  of  Govern¬ 
ment,  and  instead  of  being  transacted  by  the  secre¬ 
taries,  as  in  England,  must  be  actually  stated,  and  the 
orders  given  in  Council.  A  declaration  of  war,  and  an  es¬ 
timate  for  an  addition  to  a  barrack  a  thousand  miles  off, 
may  come  next  to  each  other  in  the  secretaries’  bundle. 
You  may  conceive  the  loads  of  such  ware  which  such  a 
country  as  this  produces.  The  secretaries  attend  at 
Council,  each  department  in  its  turn  with  its  mountain 
of  bundles.  The  secretary  reads,  or  often  only  states 
shortly  the  substance  of  each  paper,  and  the  order  is 
given  on  the  spot.  We  are  enabled  to  do  this  by  having 
read  these  bundles  at  home.  Now,  our  secretaries  are 
all  modest  men,  who  scarcely  read  above  their  breath. 