


^T.  56] 


CHANGE  OF  ADMINISTEATION. 


33 


broader.  But  the  clearness  of  the  atmosphere  and  the 
strong  light  make  all  objects  seem  near.  We  have  a 
cantonment  of  two  or  three  thousand  native  troops 
close  to  us,  and  that,  also,  is  very  ornamental,  though  it 
may  not  sound  so.  But  the  officers’  bungalows,  ranged 
along  the  banks  of  the  river,  are  extremely  pretty, 
and  the  men’s  huts  have  the  picturesque  character 
of  all  the  cottages  of  this  country.  The  men  them¬ 
selves  are  still  more  ornamental.  I  never  saw  so 
handsome  a  race.  They  are  much  superior  to  the 
Madras  people,  whose  forms  I  admired  also.  Those 
were  slender ;  these  are  tall,  muscular,  athletic  figures, 
perfectly  shaped,  and  with  the  finest  possible  cast  of 
countenance  and  features.  Their  features  are  of  the 
most  classical  European  models,  with  great  variety  at 
the  same  time ;  but  the  females  seem  still  as  hideous 
as  at  Madras,  and  one  cannot  conceive  that  they  should 
be  the  mothers  of  such  handsome  sons.’ 

The  first  fleet  that  came  out  from  England  after  Lord 
Minto’s  arrival  at  Calcutta  brought  the  unexpected 
news  of  a  change  of  Administration.  Though  it  was 
known  that  Ministers  had  encountered  considerable 
difficulty  in  proceeding  with  the  Catholic  Bill  as  it 
was  called  (a  measure  to  enable  Konian  Catholics  to 
serve  in  the  Army  and  Navy  with  no  other  condition 
than  that  of  taking  an  oath  of  allegiance '),  the  world  was 

’  The  bill,  though  intended  chiefly  for  the  benefit  of  the 
Catholics,  extended  the  proposed  concession  to  persons  of  every 
religious  persuasion. 

n 


34 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


completely  taken  by  surprise  when  it  was  announced 
that,  in  consequence  of  the  irreconcilable  nature  of  tlie 
views  entertained  by  the  King  and  his  Ministers  as  to 
their  constitutional  duty  on  the  matter  in  question, 
Lord  Grenville  and  his  colleagues  had  been  dismissed. 
'In  the  course  of  the  Parliamentary  debates  which 
ensued  it  became  known  that  the  King,  not  content 
with  the  consent  of  IMinisters  to  withdraw  the  objec¬ 
tionable  Bill,  had  required  from  them  a  written  pledge 
that  they  would  never  again  propose  further  concessions 
to  the  Catholics.  This  pledge  they  refused  to  give, 
and  immediately  received  their  dismissal  from  the  King, 
who  desired  the  Duke  of  Portland  and  Mr.  Perceval  to 
form  a  new  Administration. 

The  Duke  was  the  nominal  chief  of  the  new  Cabinet. 
Its  chief  members  were  Lord  Camden,  President  of  the 
Council ;  Lord  Eldon,  Chancellor ;  Lord  Hawkesbury, 
Home  Secretary;  Mr.  Canning,  Foreign  Secretary; 
Lord  Castlereagh,  War  and  Colonial  Secretary;  ]\Ir. 
Perceval,  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer ;  Mr.  Eobert 
Dundas,  President  of  the  Board  of  Control. 