


vEt.  56]  LADY  MALMESBUKY’S  LETTERS. 


47 


discuss  and  decide,  and  the  two  schoolmasters  who 
fell  upon  them  with  their  rods  and  chastised  them 
well,  being  dead  and  gone,  they  run  riot  like  any  other 
schoolboys.’ 

Some  natural  rejoicing  at  Minto  over  the  success 
of  Lord  Milton,  the  Whig  candidate  for  the  'W’^est 
Riding,  brought  down  upon  them  the  following  cold 
water  douche.  ‘  You  have  heard  of  Milton’s  success 
against  Lascelles.  I  hear  there  is  to  he  a  petition. 
All  his  adherents  have  flared  about  London  in  their 
orange  colours.  It  is  curious  enough  that  this  is  the 
true  Anti-Catholic  colour;  the  old  King-William  badge 
against  popery.  Many  of  them,  amongst  the  rest  the 
Cavendishes,  had  the  good  taste  to  go  to  the  Duke  of 
Portland’s  ball  all  over  their  cockades,  and  somebody 
said  they  looked  as  if  they  had  stopped  at  his  stables 
and  taken  his  horses’  accoutrements.  These  are  true 
English  manners.’ 

M’'e  fear  she  must  have  thought  Scotch  prin¬ 
ciples  even  more  olijectionable  than  English  man¬ 
ners,  when  in  her  next  letter  to  Lord  Minto,  after 
congratulating  him  on  the  birth  of  his  first  grandson, 
she  asserted  that  she  had  only  consented  to  become 
his  godmother  on  receiving  a  petition  from  the  infant 
himself  complaining  of  the  hardship  of  his  case.  ‘His 
mother  a  Presbyterian,  his  father  he  could  not  tell 
what,  but  he  was  always  talking  about  Catholics  with 
a  tall  thin  gentleman  supposed  to  be  an  Irish  Jesuit — 
I  consented  to  undertake  the  charge  upon  sole  condi¬ 
tion  he  was  christened  IMartin  Luther,  which  I  think 


48 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


must  secure  him  from  all  principles  of  emancipation. 
I  trust  I  shall  have  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  him  burn 
all  his  family  in  Smithfield  some  future  day.’ 

The  ‘  Irish  Jesuit’  was  no  other  than  her  old  friend 
]\Ir.  Elliot  of  Wells — ‘  Dominie  ’  as  she  herself  had 
named  him — who  after  the  recess  had  escaped  from 
London  to  join  his  relations  at  JNIinto  in  ‘making  love 
to  the  rocks  and  glens,  and  preferring  the  notes  of 
blackbirds,  thrushes,  and  cushat-doos,  to  all  the  Cata- 
lanis  and  Billingtons  in  Europe ;  ’  and  if  he  were  a 
little  tired  of  the  House  of  Commons,  ‘  was  it  wonder¬ 
ful  for  anybody  who  had  outlived  a  Burke,  a  Pitt,  and 
a  Fox  ?  .  .  .  besides  it  has  fallen  into  a  sad  snarling 
sort  of  style.’ 

‘  Wood-pigeons. 

‘  And  the  deep  mellow  crush  of  the  wood-pigeon’s  note 
Made  music  that  sweeten’d  the  calm.’ — Campbell. 


JEt.  56J 


STATE  OF  INDIA 


49 


CHAPTER  in. 


When  the  new  Governor  General  arrived  in  India  ^ 
he  was  to  Indian  politicians  ‘  a  dark  horse.’  Though 
he  had  taken  part  in  all  the  great  parliamentary  ques¬ 
tions  of  his  time,  his  reputation  as  a  public  man  rested 
mainly  on  his  conduct  of  affairs  while  employed  in  the 
Mediterranean  and  at  Vienna. 