

The  new  Ministers  took  their  seats  on  April  8.  On 
April  16  Lord  Grenville  addressed  the  following  letter 
to  Lord  Minto  : — 


‘  Downing  Street:  April  16,  1807. 

‘  You  will  hear  from  other  quarters  of  the  sudden 
revolution  which  has  taken  place  in  the  political  situa¬ 
tion  of  your  friends  here.  I  have  little  doubt  that 
you  will  entirely  agree  in  the  propriety  of  the  conduct 


^T.  56]  COERESPONDENCE  WITH  LORD  GRENVILLE.  35 

which  they  have  held  throughout  the  whole  of  a  very 
difficult  and  delicate  business,  in  which  the  most  un¬ 
fair  advantages  have  been  taken  of  them,  and  a  spirit 
of  low  underhand  intrigue  employed  against  them, 
such  as  I  am  sure  you  had  much  rather  see  them  the 
victims  of,  than  think  it  possible  for  them  to  have 
counteracted  by  similar  means. 

‘  I  remember  nothing  that  I  have  thought  more 
profligate  than  the  attempt  to  excite  in  this  country  a 
spirit  of  religious  dissent  at  a  time  when  we  have  so 
much  need  of  showing  ourselves  as  an  united  people. 
Without  giving  to  our  opponents  too  much  credit  for 
talents  which  they  certainly  do  not  collectively  possess, 
it  is,  however,  difficult  to  think  so  meanly  of  their 
understandings  as  to  believe  that  they  really  are 
themselves  impressed  with  any  belief  of  the  dangers  to 
the  church  establishment  of  this  country  from  enact¬ 
ing  the  same  laws  here  which  have  for  fourteen  years 
been  in  force  in  Ireland,*  or  from  extending  those  laws 
in  so  far  as  was  necessary  to  reconcile  them  to  common 
sense.  All  this  you  will,  I  am  sure,  feel  as  strongly  as 
I  could  express  it,  and  I  need  not  therefore  dwell  upon 
it.  To  a  Grovernment  formed  by  a  Court  intrigue  and 
resting  for  its  support  on  an  hypocritical  attempt  to 

'  By  a  law  passed  in  the  Parliament  of  Ireland  in  1793,  Catholics 
■were  allowed  to  hold  commissions  in  the  army  in  Ireland,  and  to 
attain  to  any  rank  save  that  of  Commander-in-chief  of  the  forces, 
master-general  of  the  Ordnance,  or  General  on  the  Staff.  The 
measure  proposed  by  Lord  Grenville’s  Ministry  in  1807  extended 
to  the  Catholics  of  England  the  privileges  already  conceded  to  their 
Irish  brethren  and  removed  the  restrictions  enforced  by  the  Act  of 
1793, 

n  2 


36 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


excite  a  popular  clamour  in  favour  of  religious  interests 
which  no  man  of  sense  can  believe  in  any  danger,  no 
sentiments  can  exist  in  my  mind  but  those  of  decided 
hostility.  Nor  do  I  think  yonr  own  feelings  on  this 
point  can  be  at  all  different  from  mine.  You  will  hear 
that  the  Directors  have  recalled  Lord  William  Bentinck 
from  Madras ;  a  great  disappointment  as  I  believe  to 
those  who  meant  that  he  should  have  immediately 
superseded  you  in  Bengal.  With  respect  to  your  own 
conduct,  I  know  you  will  allow  me  to  speak  to  you 
with  the  utmost  plainness  and  sincerity.  I  am  far 
from  feeling  that  I  have  any  claim  upon  you  in  such  a 
circumstance,  nor,  if  I  had,  should  I  feel  the  slightest 
wish  to  use  that  claim  for  the  purpose  of  influencing 
in  the  least  degree  the  decision  you  may  take  about 
yourself.  If  you  think  on  a  deliberate  review  of  the 
state  of  things  at  home  and  abroad  that  you  can  remain 
where  you  are  with  advantage  to  the  public  and  with 
satisfaction  to  yourself,  be  assured  that  I  speak  quite 
sincerely  when  I  say  that  I  have  no  wish  that  you 
should  act  otherwise,  and  that  on  the  contrary  I  shall 
feel  sincere  pleasme  in  thinking  that  one  part  at  least, 
and  that  not  the  least  important,  of  the  interests  of 
the  country  is  in  hands  to  which  one  can  look  with 
confidence  and  satisfaction ;  and  that  neither  our 
private  friendship  nor  the  sentiments  I  entertain 
towards  you  as  a  public  man  will  suffer  the  smallest 
diminution  from  your  continuing  to  hold  your  office 
under  the  auspices  of  persons  of  whose  conduct  I  think 