

‘  I  do  not  allude  at  present  to  any  expectation  of  an 
actual  invasion  of  the  British  territories  in  India  by  a 
French  army ;  but  many  circumstances  denote  very 
conclusively  the  extension  of  the  enemy’s  views  to  this 
country. 

‘  There  is  already  a  very  active  French  diplomacy  in 
Persia,  which,  after  establishing  an  actual  connexion 
with  that  kingdom  on  the  subversion  of  our  influence 
there,  is  seeking  we  know  with  great  diligence  the 
means  of  extending  its  intrigues  to  the  Durbars  of 
Hindostan. 

‘ .  .  .  One  of  the  least  doubtful  consequences  of  any 
considerable  success  in  the  quarter  to  which  the  exer¬ 
tions  of  France  are  now  directed,  must  be  to  unsettle 
the  minds  of  the  native  princes  of  India — the  counter¬ 
action  of  which  must  depend  on  the  personal  judg¬ 
ment  and  experience  and  the  established  weight  and 
influence  of  those  entrusted  with  British  interests  at 
the  principal  native  courts. 

‘ .  .  .  I  am  happy  to  think  there  may  as  yet  be  a 
good  deal  of  speculation  in  these  anticipations  of  dis- 


52 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


tant  danger ;  but  when  so  great  an  interest  is  depend¬ 
ing,  prudence  will  look  beyond  the  scene  immediately 
under  our  eye,  and  provide  in  the  midst  of  apparent 
security  against  remote  but  possible  danger.’ 

On  the  very  day  on  which  Malcolm  had  written  to 
Close  to  discover  the  Grovernor  General’s  political 
sentiments,  the  latter  wrote  to  the  President  of  the 
Board  of  Control  a  general  sketch  of  ‘  foreign  affairs,’ 
including  an  account  of  the  aid  he  had  furnished  to 
the  Admiral,  Sir  Edward  Pellew,  towards  an  expedition 
intended  for  the  capture  of  the  Dutch  squadron  off 
Java,  and  the  demolition  of  the  fortifications  of  Crissy. 

Whenever  Bonaparte  annexed  some  European  State 
to  his  Empire  of  the  West,  Great  Britain  instantly 
took  charge  of  that  State’s  colonial  possessions  in  the 
East.  In  1807  Portugal  and  Holland  had  been  con¬ 
quered  by  France.  Plans  for  the  reduction  of  Macao, 
Goa,  and  Batavia  were  at  once  submitted  to  the 
Governor  General.  But  for  the  execution  of  such 
considerable  enterprises  the  hour  had  not  yet  struck. 

Some  of  the  considerations  which  decided  the 
Indian  Government  to  abstain  from  these  are  stated 
by  Lord  Minto  in  a  private  letter  to  Sir  Edward 
Pellew : ' 

‘  The  smallest  relaxation  in  the  economical  system 
which  is  known  to  be  indispensable  both  for  the  per¬ 
manent  restoration  of  our  finances,  and  (which  is  more 
immediately  in  point  at  this  moment)  for  avoiding 


'  Calcutta,  November  1,  1807. 


^T.  56] 


EXTERNAL  POLICY. 


53 


present  distress  or  embarrassment  at  our  treasury, — the 
smallest  departure,  I  say,  from  that  severe  principle 
creates  immediate  speculation  in  the  money  market 
against  us,  and  drives  us  back  from  eight  to  ten  per 
cent,  interest.  This  is  one  principal  consideration,  but 
far  from  the  only  one,  which  restrains  us  from  engaging 
in  plans  which  are  attended  with  expense  and  with  a 
great  display  of  it,  and  which,  although  useful  and  de¬ 
sirable  in  themselves,  are  however  not  absolutely  and 