

‘  If  I  find  a  want  of  support  and  confidence  really 
detrimental  to  the  interests  I  am  charged  with,  and 
if  I  see  reason  to  apprehend  misconstruction  of  my 
conduct  dangerous  to  my  reputation,  in  either  case 
the  remedy  is  in  my  own  hands.  I  shall  not  suffer  in 


Mt.  56]  COEEESPONDENCE  WITH  LOED  GEENVILLE.  41 

the  meanwhile  prudential  considerations  to  weaken  or 
cramp  my  exertions  for  the  public  service,  but  I  may 
be  a  little  more  careful  to  preserve  the  means  and 
documents  of  my  own  justification.’ 

This  letter  produced  the  following  very  hearty  one 
from  Lord  Grenville  : — 


‘  Dropmore :  May  24,  1808. 

‘  ]My  dear  Lord, — I  cannot  express  to  you  the  satis¬ 
faction  which  I  derived  from  your  letter  of  October  10, 
the  only  one  I  have  yet  received  from  you  since  your 
arrival  in  Bengal.  I  had  no  doubt  that  your  opinions 
would  entirely  coincide  with  those  of  your  friends 
here,  both  as  to  the  general  question  which  has  for  the 
second  time  placed  me  at  a  distance  from  the  public 
service  of  my  country,  and  as  to  the  particular  measures 
which  we  adopted  under  the  singular  circumstances 
in  which  we  were  placed  last  year.  The  infatuation 
which  still  prevents  the  adoption  of  conciliatory  mea¬ 
sures  towards  the  mass  of  the  Irish  nation,  and  keeps 
that  island  exposed  to  the  double  peril  of  civil  war  and 
foreign  invasion,  is  indeed  deeply  to  be  lamented,  nor 
is  there  any  other  quarter  in  which  our  prospects, 
alarming  as  they  are  on  every  side,  are  so  gloomy  as 
they  are  in  respect  to  Ireland.  But  I  should  have  still 
more  dejdored  this  calamity  if  it  had  indirectly  led  to 
depriving  us  in  India  of  the  advantage  of  your  energy 
and  abilities  at  a  moment  when  they  are  likely  to  be 
so  much  wanted  there.  All  my  correspondence  will,  I 
trust,  have  sho\vn  you  that,  in  taking  the  resolution  of 


42 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


remaining  there  in  the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  your 
most  important  station,  you  have  done  that  which  on 
every  public  and  private  ground  is  most  agreeable  to 
my  wishes.  But  even  if  you  had  been  led,  from  what¬ 
ever  motive,  to  have  adopted  in  the  first  instance  any 
different  resolution,  you  would,  I  am  confident,  have 
altered  your  sentiments  in  that  respect  as  soon  as  you 
learnt  the  danger  to  which  it  seems  likely  that  our 
Indian  Empire  is  soon  to  be  exposed.  As  I  have  no 
means  in  my  present  situation  to  learn  with  any  detail 
the  information  or  opinions  of  Giovernment  on  that 
subject  (and  indeed  keep  myself  studiously  at  a  dis¬ 
tance  from  both),  I  speak  only  of  what  is  publicly 
known.  It  is  impossible  to  be  without  apprehension 
on  a  matter  of  such  vital  importance  to  the  country, 
but  I  have  great  comfort  in  reflecting  on  the  means  of 
resistance  which  you  possess,  and  on  the  decision  and 
ability  with  which  I  am  certain  those  means  will  be 
employed  by  you.  I  wish  I  could  say  or  think  the 
same  of  this  country,  but  I  verily  believe  I  do  not 
speak  from  party  feelings  when  I  declare  that  no 
nation  was  in  my  judgment  ever  governed  by  councils 
more  deficient  in  every  principle  of  true  wisdom,  or  by 
men  more  bent  on  sacrificing  to  personal  motives  all 
those  considerations  by  which  the  conduct  of  a  Govern¬ 
ment  ought  to  be  directed.  What  the  issue  of  the 
strange  scenes  now  passing  is  ultimately  to  be  no 
man  can  pretend  to  prophesy,  but  it  is  difficult  even 
for  the  most  sanguine  mind  (and  mine  is  not  a  little  so) 
to  augur  good  from  them  to  this  country ;  and  if  evil 