


^T.  56]  COERESPONDENCE  WITH  LORD  GRENVILLE.  39 

political  obligations,  form  no  new  party  engagement  or 
connexion.’ 

The  next  fleet  brought  the  confirmation  of  Lord 
IVIinto’s  powers  from  the  new  Ministers,  coupled  with  ex¬ 
pressions  of  an  earnest  desire  that  he  should  continue  to 
administer  the  government  of  India,  and  a  number  of 
private  letters  from  Windham  and  others  urging  him 
to  remain  in  India.  To  Lord  Grenville  he  replied  : 

‘  Calcutta ;  October  10,  1807. 

‘  My  dear  Lord, — I  feel  most  sensibly  the  kindness 
of  your  letter  of  April  16,  which  I  have  just  received. 

‘  My  sentiments  on  the  scene  that  was  then  passing 

in  England  are  precisely  the  same  as  your  own . 

The  Ministry  which  has  succeeded  you  has  built  not  on 
sand  but  on  dirt,  which  is  a  less  stable  foundation  still.  . 
...  I  need  hardly  say  that  I  have  thought  much  and 
deeply  on  the  part  which  it  becomes  me  to  act  on  the 
present  occasion.  My  first  consideration  was  what 
political  connexion,  cemented  by  personal  attachment, 
required  or  suggested.  If  I  had  entertained  even  a 
doubt  upon  that  subject  I  should  have  considered  that 
doubt  as  amounting  to  a  decision,  and  I  should  have 
arrived  in  England  by  the  ship  which  will  carry  this 
letter.  But  my  judgment  on  that  point  was  clear  and 
immediate.  To  continue  in  the  exercise  of  this  office, 
distinguished  as  it  is  in  so  many  essential  points  from 
any  other  in  the  Empire,  holding  my  appointment  by 
your  express  nomination  and  by  the  authority  of  the 


40 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


Court  of  Directors,  and  deriving  no  new  title  from  your 
successors  that  can  either  dissolve  or  weaken  former 
connexion  or  create  a  new  one,  appears  to  me  entirely 
free  from  any  indication  of  separation  from  friends, 
and  every  profession  of  party  connexion  with  those  who 
are  not  so. 

‘  I  had  determined,  however,  that  there  should  be 
nothing  questionable  on  that  point,  and  accordingly 
I  instructed  my  son  to  resign  for  me  if  there  should 
be  even  a  difference  of  opinion  or  of  feeling  upon  it, 
amonp'st  those  to  whom  I  am  in  heart  as  well  as  in 

O 

opinion  indissolubly  attached.  Your  letter  confirms 
my  own  judgment  on  this  point,  for  I  am  persuaded 
you  would  not  have  contributed  in  any  degree  to  the 
chance  of  subjecting  me  to  a  reproach  so  intolerable  as 
that  of  preferring  office  to  honour,  if  that  delicate 
point  had  appeared  to  you  involved  in  the  question. 

‘  My  opinion,  and  I  presume  the  universal  opinion, 
is  that  frequent  and  light  changes  in  the  local  Grovem- 
ment  of  India  are  extremely  hurtful  to  the  interests 
of  this  country.  ...  If  the  Ministers  have  the  same 
sense  of  their  public  duties  that  I  have  of  mine,  the 
service  will  suffer  no  prejudice  from  the  want  of  political 
connexion  or  even  of  personal  cordiality  between  us. 