

The  few  months  during  which  he  held  the  office  of 
Vresident  of  the  Board  of  Control  had  given  him  a 
certain  knowledge  of  current  Indian  business,  but  had 
hardly  sufficed  to  make  him  known  to  Indian  officials. 

It  was  generally  understood  that  he  had  been  in  the 
front  rank  of  those  members  of  the  Whig  party  who 
had  been  first  to  see  that  the  principles  endorsed  by 
the  French  Jacobins  were  equally  subversive  of  civil 
liberty  and  of  national  independence.  There  were 
disciples  of  the  Wellesley  school  wdio  augured  well  of  a 
Governor  General  sent  out  by  Lord  Grenville,  and 
trained  under  Pitt ;  and  there  were  others  who  gladly 
remembered  that  he  had  sat  at  the  feet  of  Burke  before 
peace  and  retrenchment  had  been  driven  out  of  men’s 
minds  by  dread  of  an  impending  dissolution  of  civil 
society. 

While  he  was  taking  time  as  we  have  seen  to  gain 

E 


50 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


acqiiaintance  with  men  and  things,  he  himself  was 
being  subjected  to  the  closest  scrutiny,  and  very  oppo¬ 
site  interpretations  were  put  on  his  most  insignificant 
words  and  actions. 

Early  in  November  1807,  Colonel  Malcolm  *  wrote  1 
to  his  friend  Colonel  Close  ^  that  he  had  lately  learnt  ' 
from  a  deep  observer  that  Ijord  hlinto’s  character  , 
appeared  to  be  of  a  smooth  and  cautious  rather  than  of 
a  bold  and  enterprising  cast.  He  therefore  wished  to 
know  if  there  were  any  solid  ground  for  a  hint  thrown 
out  by  Colonel  Close  himself,  that  the  French  intrigues 
in  Persia  had  made  a  great  impression  on  Lord  Minto’s 
mind.  Whether  in  reply  Colonel  Close  divulged  his 
authority  or  not  is  unknown  to  us,  but  among  Lord 
Minto’s  MSS.  is  the  draft  of  a  letter  addressed  to  him 
(of  whom  Lord  Minto  in  very  early  days  formed  a  high 
opinion),  dated  a  month  earlier  than  Malcolm’s  enquiry, 
and  strongly  urging  him  to  abandon  a  half-formed 
intention  of  leaving  his  post  at  Poonah  to  return  to 
England,  on  grounds  which  proved  the  Grovernor 
Cleneral  to  be  thoroughly  alive  to  the  dangers  threaten¬ 
ing  India. 

‘  Colonel  Malcolm,  afterwards  General  Sir  John  Malcolm.  Well 
known  as  a  soldier,  diplomatist,  and  author  of 'several  Valuable 
historical  works  on  India  and  Persia. 

^  Colonel,  afterwards  Sir  Barry  Close,  distinguished  for  eminent 
services  in  India  as  a  soldier  and  diplo-matist. 


66] 


STATE  OF  INDIA. 


51 


To  Colonel  Barry  Close. 

‘  October  11,  1807. 

‘  The  views  which  I  entertain,  not  indeed  of  the 
actual  state  of  India  at  the  present  time,  but  of  pros¬ 
pects  which  events  now  in  progress  in  Europe  may 
possibly  unfold,  are  such  as  to  furnish  a  strong  call 
on  qualifications  so  tried  and  approved  in  the  public 
service  as  yours. 