


Mr.  56]  COERESPONDENCE  WITH  LORD  GRENVILLE.  37 

SO  ill.  I  hope  therefore  you  will  judge  for  yourself, 
and  whatever  your  decision  is,  I  beg  you  to  be  persuaded 
that  I  shall  think  it  right,  because  it  depends  in  part 
on  circumstances  of  which  you  alone  can  judge — I 
mean  the  assurances  of  support  which  you  may  receive 
from  the  new  Ministers,  and  the  degree  of  credit  which 
you  may  attach  to  their  assm*ances.  If  your  resolution 
should  be  to  send  a  resignation,  let  me  then  suggest 
the  propriety  of  your  enclosing  it  to  Elliot  *  with  dis¬ 
cretionary  powers  as  to  making  use  of  it.  This  is  not 
said  because  I  believe  much  in  the  expectation  which 
some  entertain  of  another  change  taking  place  before 
long.  I  have  seen  enough  of  the  politics  of  this 
country  to  know  how  very  long  a  very  weak  and  in¬ 
efficient  Government  may  maintain  itself,  if  it  has 
the  Court  favour  with  it,  and  is  willing  to  make  large 
sacrifices  and  compliances  in  order  to  retain  that  favour. 
And  that  this  is  the  case  in  the  present  instance  I 
believe  no  man  doubts.’ 

In  a  letter  of  later  date.  Lord  Grenville  reiterated 
his  earnest  hope  that  Lord  Minto  would  take  no  deter¬ 
mination  to  resign  except  with  the  advice  of  his  friends 
in  England. 

Neither  of  these  letters  reached  him  until  he  had 
adopted  and  acted  upon  a  course  similar  to  that  indi¬ 
cated  by  Lord  Grenville.  He  sent  to  his  son  a  condi¬ 
tional  resignation  to  be  used  or  not,  according  to  the 
judgment  of  his  friends,  and  left  it  to  the  Ministry 

’  Right  Hon.  William  Elliot  of  Wells. 


38 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


and  the  Court  of  Directors  to  decide  whether  or  no  the 
appointment  of  Grovernor  Greneral  of  India  should 
henceforth  be  considered  as  one  of  those  dependent  on 
the  change  of  parties  at  home.  In  his  letter  to  his 
son  he  said  : — 

‘  On  public  grounds  I  am  sure  that  this  distant 
Government  ought  not  to  change  with  every  turn  in 
domestic  politics.  The  contrary  principle  would  be 
productive  of  the  greatest  evil,  and  possibly  danger,  in 
India. 

‘  When  the  political  connexion  of  a  Governor 
General  with  parties  at  home  is  found  to  divert  him 
from  the  duties  of  his  office  it  is  time  enough  to 
remove  him.  On  the  question  of  adherence  to  political 
and  personal  connexion,  I  cannot  think  this  office  at 
all  implicated  in  those  considerations ;  but  I  hold  that 
point  as  so  sacred  that,  if  there  is  a  difference  of 
opinion,  or  the  slightest  feeling  on  the  subject  among 
my  friends  at  home,  I  hereby  authorise  you  to  resign 
for  me.  For  I  will  not  place  myself  or  consent  to 
stand  upon  doubtful  ground  in  that  respect.  I  received 
my  office  at  the  recommendation  of  Lord  Grenville,  in 
very  peculiar  circumstances,  from  the  Court  of  Directors. 
It  was  not  solicited  ;  it  was  to  me  a  real  sacrifice  of 
many  things  that  are  dear  to  me.  It  was  a  public  ac¬ 
commodation  at  the  time,  and  was  generally  gratifying 
to  Government,  to  the  Directors,  and  to  the  public.  If 
I  retain  it,  I  shall  not  hold  it  of  the  favour  or  good 
^vill  of  the  present  Ministers ;  and,  remaining  subject 
to  all  its  public  duties  just  as  before,  I  contract  no  new 