


^T.  56]  LADY  MALMESBURY’S  LETTERS. 


45 


the  Catholics  in  Ireland  have  been  praying  for  Mrs. 
Fitzherbert.  Nobody  is  pleased  except  Lady  Gren¬ 
ville,  who  is  delighted  to  escape  from  London  politics 
to  her  garden  at  Dropmore.’ 

For  a  time  a  more  than  common  bitterness  was 
infused  into  the  relations  of  politicians.  The  Whigs, 
whether  Grenvillites  or  Foxites,  were  bound  together  by 
a  principle  and  a  prejudice.  They  believed  in  the 
justice  of  the  Catholic  claims,  and  they  thoroughly 
mistrusted  Canning ;  their  opponents  asserted  that  the 
safety  of  Protestantism  depended  on  the  King  and 
Lord  Eldon,  and  that  the  mantle  of  Pitt  had  fallen  on 
the  shoulders  of  Canning. 

Even  the  correspondence  interchanged  between 
Spring  Gardens  and  Minto  assumed  a  sharper  tone 
than  was  usual.  ‘  You  are  outrageous,’  wrote  Lady 
Malmesbury  to  her  sister,  in  reply  to  a  letter  brim¬ 
ming  over  with  indignation  at  the  treatment  received 
by  the  dismissed  INIinisters,  and  at  the  loss  of  the 
cause  they  had  espoused.  ‘  You  are  almost  as  bad  as 
INIrs.  Neville,  who  called  my  friends  “  your  fellows,”  to 
my  face  !  ’ 

Some  of  Lady  IMalmesbury’s  most  intimate  friends 
had  come  into  power.  Mr.  Canning  had  taken 
the  seals  of  the  Foreign  Office  ;  her  son.  Lord  Fitz- 
harris,  held  the  appointment  of  Lbider  Secretary  for 
Foreign  Affairs ;  Lord  Palmerston,  whose  footing  in 
the  iNIalmesbury  family  was  almost  that  of  a  son,  was 
in  the  Government ;  and  Lady  INIalmesbury  was  not 
the  woman  to  abstain  from  praise  of  her  friends  lest 


46 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


it  stould  displease  her  opponents,  nor  did  she  conde¬ 
scend  to  the  indifferentism  which  is  content  to  say : 

Tel  sera  mon  hfiros  et  tel  sera  le  votre  ; 

L’aigle  d’nne  maison  est  un  sot  dans  une  autre. 

‘  No  Foreign  Secretary,’  she  wrote  to  Lord  Minto, 
‘has  been  equal  to  Canning — unless  perhaps  Fox.  In 
these  times  when  the  fate  of  Europe  depends  on  the 
Foreign  Office  in  Downing  Street,  the  labour  is  beyond 
belief ;  and  when  you  add  to  this  the  House  of  Com¬ 
mons,  and  being  up  in  that  vile  place  till  two  or  three 
o’clock  every  night,  no  constitution  can  stand  it.  In¬ 
deed  Canning  is  quite  knocked  up,  for  to  bodily  fatigue 
anxiety  of  mind  must  be  added,  which  you  by  experi¬ 
ence  will  know  how  to  appreciate ;  and  Canning  is 
naturally  of  a  most  anxious  nature  and  not  blessed 
with  the  impassibilite  of  a  Grenville.  Although  in 
the  opposite  party,  I  am  sure  you  have  la  chose  puh- 
lique  too  much  at  heart  not  to  rejoice  that,  in  the 
opinion  of  the  very  best  judges,  his  talents  and  judg¬ 
ment  have  far  surpassed  even  the  expectation  of  his 
friends,  and  that  all  that  can  be  done  will  be  done  ; 
but  certainly  we  never  stood  more  alone.  I  think  this 
an  advantage,  as  we  never  yet  have  gained  anything 
from  our  Continental  alliances,  and  have  lost  a  great 
deal  often  and  many  times.  All  our  resources  will 
now  be  applied  to  our  own  use,  and  as  Eamsay  said 
yesterday,  “We  can  make  war  as  well — and  peace 
much  better.”  I  am  glad  to  see  they  have  left  off 
their  childish  quarrels  in  the  House  of  Commons. 
All  the  boys  now  think  they  have  a  right  to  speak  and 