


^T.  56]  LADY  MALMESBUEY’S  LETTERS. 


43 


is  to  come  the  best  consolation  that  can  attend  it  will 
be  the  reflection  of  not  having  contributed  to  it. 

‘  With  my  best  and  most  earnest  wishes  for  your 
health  and  prosperity, 

‘  Believe  me  ever,  most  sincerely  and  faithfully 
yours, 

‘  GrRENVILLE.’ 

In  one  of  Lady  Malmesbury’s  letters  of  this 
period,  addressed  to  her  sister  at  Minto,  she  advised 
her,  ‘  to  collect  and  arrange  all  her  old  letters,  for 
there  is  nothing  so  ciu"ious.  To  consider  letters  as 
the  true  history  of  the  times  you  should  have  them 
on  both  sides  of  the  question,  for  we  know  how  dif¬ 
ferent  is  a  story  told  by  different  people.  Letters 
are  more  the  account  of  prejudices  and  parties  than 
the  truth,  but  it  is  that  very  circumstance  that 
makes  them  so  amusing,  as  they  give  the  history 
of  the  passions  instead  of  passing  judgment  upon 
them.’ 

The  contrast  between  her  version  of  the  circum¬ 
stances  that  led  to  the  dismissal  of  Ministers  in  1807, 
and  that  given  by  Lord  Grenville,  forms  a  most  apt 
illustration  of  her  remark. 

While  his  letters  show  a  natural  resentment  of  the 
unworthy  methods  by  which  his  Administration  had 
been  undermined,  she  saw  nothing  but  folly  and  ob¬ 
stinacy  in  an  attempt  to  uphold  principles  against 
prejudices. 

‘Your  surprise  will  be  equal  to  our  own,’  she  wrote 


44 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


to  Lord  JMinto,  ‘  when  you  learn  the  great  and  wonder¬ 
ful  events  which  have  been  happening  at  home.  To 
account  for  (what  I  must  call  it)  the  infatuation  of 
Lord  Grenville,  in  bringing  forward  again  a  measure 
of  which  he  could  less  than  any  man  hope  for  the 
success  after  the  experience  he  had  had  on  the  sub¬ 
ject,  is  impossible.  Both  he  and  Lord  Howick  have 
admitted  that,  previous  to  this  business,  all  went  on 
smoothly  between  the  King  and  them.  But  even  ad¬ 
mitting  (what  I  do  not  at  all  believe)  that  he  wished 
them  away,  how  very  strange  to  give  him  the  only 
means  that  could  not  fail  ?  It  is  truly  what  Sheridan 
said,  “  they  built  a  wall  against  which  they  might  run 
their  heads,  and  took  care  to  secure  it  by  making  it  of 
the  strongest  materials.”  ’ 

Only  a  few  days  before  the  Ministers  went  out,  she 
had  met  most  of  their  successors  at  Blackheath,  at  a 
dinner  given  by  the  Princess  of  Wales.  The  devotion 
of  Lord  Eldon  and  Mr.  Perceval  to  her  cause  had  long 
since  obtained  for  them  special  favour  in  the  eyes  of 
Lady  Malmesbury.  On  this  occasion  she  described 
Lord  Eldon  as  particularly  agreeable,  and  he  had 
assured  her  that  ‘  he  would  not  take  office  if  he  could.’ 
Le  jpauvre  homme!  Within  a  week  it  was  thrust 
upon  him,  and  Lady  Malmesbury  -wrote  to  her  sister 
with  some  little  bewilderment : — ‘  The  Prince,  who  was 
supposed  to  hate  Lord  Eldon  and  Mr.  Perceval,  as 
friends  of  his  wife,  appears  to  be  very  well  pleased 
with  the  arrangement.  He  is  all  sweetness  about  it. 
This  I  think  proves  he  is  dying,  but  they  do  say  that 