

Dean  Milman,  in  the  opening  chapter  of  his  ‘  History 

'  Letter  to  Kev.  Dr.  Carey,  Feptemher  8,  1807. 

2  Lives  and  Times  of  Carey.  Murslunan,  and  Ward. 


^T.  56] 


THE  MISSIONARIES. 


fi7 

of  Christianity,’  remarks  that  the  Romans  conquered 
like  savages,  but  ruled  like  philosophic  statesmen. 
‘The  kingdoms  which  were  won  by  the  most  unjustifiable 
aggression  were  for  the  most  part  governed  with  a 
judicious  union  of  firmness  and  conciliation,  in  which 
the  conscious  strength  of  irresistible  power  was  tempered 
with  the  wisest  respect  for  national  usages.’ 

Some  such  rule  as  that  under  which  Christianity 
found  its  appointed  time  appeared  to  Lord  INIinto  not 
unworthy  of  a  British  Government  though  deriving  its 
title  from  the  sword. 

When  a  public  man  is  better  liked  than  his  mea¬ 
sures,  it  is  not  uncommon  to  hear  them  ascribed  to  bad 
advisers.  So  it  was  in  this  case.  But  Lord  Minto  was 
not  willing  to  accept  a  defence  based  on  his  ignorance 
of  matters  which  he  was  bound  to  know;  still  less  on 
his  docility  in  accepting  views  inculcated  by  others. 
He  had,  he  said,  after  deliberate  investigation  and  re¬ 
flection,  thought  it  his  duty  to  prohibit,  for  a  time, 
public  preaching  by  natives  for  the  purpose  of  conver¬ 
sion,  and  also  to  prevent  the  dissemination  of  publica¬ 
tions  in  the  native  languages,  containing  scurrilous 
abuse  of  persons  and  things  holy  in  the  estimation  of 
our  Indian  subjects,  whether  Hindoo  or  ■Mahommedaii. 
He  had  not,  he  confessed,  been  aware  of  the  ruin  which 
a  removal  of  the  mission  press  from  Serampore  would 
inflict  on  the  missionaries,  ‘  owing  to  the  peculiar  circum¬ 
stances  of  their  property’ there.  No  sooner  was  this  in¬ 
evitable  consequence  of  the  intended  measure  seen  than 
the  order  for  it  was  rescinded.  It  was  due  to  Dr.  Leyden, 


68 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


the  emiuent  Orientalist,  that  at  this  juncture  the 
Governor  General  and  the  leading  members  of  the 
mission  were  brought  face  to  face,  and  that  the  latter 
were  enabled  to  state  their  case  personally  to  the 
Governor  General.  Dr.  Leyden  stood  high  in  the  esti¬ 
mation  of  Lord  Minto,  by  whom  his  learning  and  his 
energy  of  character  were  fully  appreciated.  Moreover 
there  was  a  link  between  them  of  which  both  acknow¬ 
ledged  the  strength.  Both  came  from  ‘  Teviot-water,’ 
a  fact  held  sacred  even  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges. 
Dr.  Leyden,  as  the  personal  friend  of  iV'Ir.  Marshman 
and  Dr.  Carey,  advised  them  to  lose  no  time  in  crossing 
the  river  to  the  pleasant  park  of  Barrackpore  ;  there  to 
seek  an  interview  with  the  ‘  great  chief,’  for  the  osten¬ 
sible  purpose  of  olfering  him  their  translation  of  the 
Eamayan.  With  knowledge  of  men,  not  always  pos¬ 
sessed  by  students  of  books.  Dr.  Leyden  had  seen  that 
sympathetic  relations  in  one  class  of  subjects  would 
indubitably  lead  to  smoother  ones  in  others.  So  it 
proved.  The  conversation  passed  easily  from  literary 
topics  to  those  specially  interesting  to  the  missionaries, 
and  when  the  interview  was  over,  both  parties  retained 
impressions  of  mutual  good-will.  His  visitors  recog¬ 
nised  in  Lord  Minto  the  candour  and  simplicity  that 
were  natural  to  him ;  he  found  in  them  a  sincerely 
pious  zeal,  tempered  with  discretion,  which  won  his 
respect.  The  Governor  General  declared  that  nothing 
was  further  from  his  intentions,  or  more  foreign  to  the 
views  of  Government,  than  to  affect  in  the  smallest 
degree  either  the  interests  of  the  missionary  body,  or 