


Mt.  56] 


ECCLESIASTICAL  PRETENSIONS. 


73 


of  that  Church  will  be  the  best  qualified  to  advise  the 
State  as  to  the  means  by  which  from  time  to  time 
the  civilisation  of  the  natives  is  to  be  effected.’  The 
belief  that  the  institution  of  a  hierarchy  would  be 
efficacious  in  producing  the  conversion  of  the  Hindoos 
was  so  firmly  held  by  Mr.  Buchanan  that,  as  it  was  re¬ 
lated  at  the  time,  while  rejecting  a  suggestion  that  he 
might  himself  be  the  first  archbishop  of  the  East,  he  ex¬ 
claimed,  ‘  Place  the  mitre  on  any  head.  Never  fear,  it 
will  do  good  among  the  Hindoos  !  ’  To  Lord  Minto,  as 
a  Scotchman,  it  may  have  been  hard  to  perceive  that  the 
placing  of  a  mitre  on  one  head  would  inevitably  infuse 
Christianity  into  another ;  but  he  fully  recognised  the 
meaning  of  the  claim  set  up  by  Mr.  Buchanan  on  behalf 
of  his  fellow-Churchmen  to  advise  the  State  on  the 
means  to  be  adopted  for  the  civilisation  of  the  natives, 
and  he  did  not  therefore  share  the  surprise  of  the 
simple-minded  men  of  Serampore  when  they  discovered, 
at  a  subsequent  period,  that  Mr.  Buchanan  had  never 
been  entirely  reconciled  to  the  influence  obtained  by 
the  press  /or  Dissenters. 

A  memorial,  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Buchanan  for  presen¬ 
tation  to  the  Governor  General  in  Council  in  reference 
to  the  measures  lately  adopted  by  Government  with 
reference  to  the  Serampore  mission,  was  forwarded  to 
the  Court  of  Directors,  with  the  comments  and  expla¬ 
nations  of  the  Governor  General  and  his  colleagues. 
These  appear  to  have  satisfactorily  disposed  of  the 
questions  at  issue.  But  it  is  remarkable  that  while  the 
statements  in  this  memorial  were  categorically  refuted 


74 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


at  the  time,  they  have  reappeared  again  and  again  with 
all  the  virulence  peculiar  to  ecclesiastical  censures.  As 
late  as  June  1845,  the  ‘Calcutta  Eeview  ’  contained 
an  article  entitled  ‘  The  early  or  exclusively  Oriental 
period  of  Government  Education  in  Bengal,’  repeating 
the  three  leading  charges  in  the  paper  of  1807 ; — 
that  the  Government  had  virtually  suppressed  the 
circulation  of  the  Scriptures  and  the  preaching  of 
the  Gospel  ; — that  it  only  consented  with  extreme 
reluctance  to  abandon  an  intended  removal  of  the 
missionary  press  from  Serampore  upon  the  remon¬ 
strances  of  the  Danish  Governor,  who  felt  the  honour 
and  sovereignty  of  his  nation  to  be  involved  in  the 
issue ; — that  the  consequence  of  the  imprimatur 
imposed  by  Government  was  the  submission  of  religious 
works  to  their  native  officers. 

The  charge  of  having  suppressed  the  preaching  of 
the  Gospel  Lord  Minto  disposed  of  as  a  misrepresen¬ 
tation  of  facts.  ‘  I  suspended  the  public  preaching 
of  natives  to  natives  in  the  native  languages  at  the 
seat  of  government,  because,  with  the  zeal  of  proselytes, 
they  preached  the  same  inflammatory  matter  and  the 
same  exhortations  to  civil  dissensions  as  had  been 
printed.  The  press  is  not  suspended,  but  is  kept 
under  regulation.  Preaching  is  suspended,  but  is  not 
intended  to  be  Anally  prohibited.’ 