


^Et.  56]  DESPATCH  FROM  COURT  OF  DIRECTORS.  63 

which  the  agents  traded  was  a  universal  though 
unfounded  dread  that  the  British  Government  was 
about  to  exact  a  forcible  conversion  of  the  Sepoys  to 
Christianity.  What  to  the  natives  could  seem  less 
incredible,  or  indeed  more  natural  ?  Had  not 
Hindoos  seen  their  holy  places  defiled  by  Mahomme- 
dans  ?  Why  should  Christians  spare  either  the  one 
or  the  other  ? 

To  calm  such  apprehensions,  the  Court  of  Directors 
had  declared  in  a  despatch,*  dated  May  1807,  their 
firm  resolve  to  uphold  throughout  their  dominions 
the  most  perfect  toleration  of  all  creeds  and  rites  ;  and 
at  the  same  time  they  clearly  stated  the  position  of 
Government  in  respect  to  the  missionaries. 

‘  In  the  whole  course  of  our  administration  of  the 
Indian  territories  it  has  been  our  known  and  declared 
principle  to  maintain  a  perfect  toleration  of  the  various 
religious  systems  which  prevailed  in  them ;  to  protect  the 
followers  of  each  in  the  undisturbed  enjoyment  of  their 
respective  opinions  and  usages  ;  neither  to  interfere  with 
them  ourselves,  nor  to  suffer  them  to  be  molested  by 
others.  When  we  afforded  our  countenance  and  sanc¬ 
tion  to  missionaries  who  have  from  time  to  time  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  India  for  the  purpose  of  propagating  the 
Christian  religion,  it  was  far  from  being  in  our  contem¬ 
plation  to  add  the  influence  of  our  authority  to  any 
attempts  they  might  make ;  for  on  the  contrary  we 
were  perfectly  aware  that  the  progress  of  such  conver- 

‘  Instructions  addressed  to  the  Governor  of  Fort  St.  George, 
May  29,  1807. 


64 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


sion  will  be  slow  and  gradual,  arising  more  from  a  con¬ 
viction  of  the  principles  of  our  religion  itself,  and  from 
the  pious  examples  of  its  teachers,  than  from  any 
undue  influence  or  from  the  exertions  of  authority, 
which  are  never  to  be  resorted  to  in  such  cases.’ 

In  accordance  with  these  instructions  it  became 
the  duty  of  the  Indian  Glovernment,  not  long  after  the 
Governor  General’s  arrival  in  Calcutta,  to  take  certain 
measures  which  had  the  result  of  embroiling  him  with 
the  missionaries  of  Serampore,  and  with  a  party  in 
Calcutta  and  in  London  of  growing  importance. 

It  is  well  known  that  Christian  missionaries  had 
long  been  familiar  to  the  populations  of  Southern  India. 
Eoman  Catholic  missions  had  been  established  since  the 
beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century  in  the  Portuguese 
and  French  settlements  on  the  west  coast  of  the  Pen¬ 
insula.  In  comparatively  recent  times  some  Protestant 
missionaries,  Danes  and  Germans,  had  established  them¬ 
selves  at  Madras,  whence  a  few  individuals  made  their 
way  to  Bengal.  But  it  was  not  till  the  last  decade  of 
the  eighteenth  century  that  an  Englishman  was  found 
to  carry  the  Gospel  to  the  natives  of  India.  William 
Carey  was  the  first  English  missionary  to  Bengal ;  and 
his  life  is  a  happy  illustration  of  what  may  be  done 
to  overcome  the  most  apparently  insurmountable  ob¬ 
stacles  by  a  noble  enthusiasm  and  an  ardent  character. 
Carey  was  the  son  of  a  shoemaker  in  Northampton¬ 
shire  ;  a  Baptist  by  creed.  Alone  and  destitute  of 
resources  he  arrived  in  Bengal,  where  without  the 
licence  of  the  Company  no  one  was  permitted  to  reside. 