

Lord  Minto  himself  took  great  personal  interest  in 
the  translations  of  the  Scriptiues  proceeding  from  the 
Serampore  press.  In  a  public  and  published  discourse, 
on  the  occasion  of  his  annual  visit  to  the  College  of 
Fort  William,  after  warmly  praising  the  efforts  of  the 
mission  to  cultivate  the  Chinese  language,  he  said :  ‘  I 
must  not  omit  to  recommend  the  learned  and  pious 


^T.  O'j] 


THE  SEKAMPORE  PRESS. 


71 


persons  who  have  accomplished,  for  the  future  benefit, 
we  may  hope,  of  that  immense  and  populous  region, 
Chinese  versions  in  the  Chinese  character  of  the  Gos¬ 
pels  of  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke,  throwing  open  that 
precious  mine  with  all  its  moral  and  religious  trea¬ 
sures  to  the  largest  associated  population  in  the  world.’ 

Not  long  afterwards  a  specimen  of  printing  in  the 
Chinese  characters  by  the  natives  employed  on  the 
Serampore  press  won  Lord  iNIinto’s  hearty  admiration. 
He  would  gladly  have  headed  the  list  of  subscribers  to 
the  first  work  in  the  Chinese  language  to  be  pub¬ 
lished  at  Serampore — a  translation  of  the  Gospel  of  St. 
Matthew  ;  but  on  finding  that  he  could  not  ‘  step  out 
of  himself  and  separate  his  private  from  his  public 
character,’  and  that  objections  were  made  to  his 
appearing  in  the  undertaking  in  his  public  capacity, 
he  subscribed  largely  to  a  copy  of  Confucius  about 
to  emanate  from  that  press,  desiring  that  the  profits 
derived  from  the  sale  of  that  book  should  be  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  publication  of  the  Scriptures.  The  idea 
was  at  once  taken  up,  and  the  friendly  spirit  displayed 
by  Lord  Minto  was  cordially  acknowledged.  In  a  few 
days  subscriptions  to  the  amount  of  2,000^.  were  ob¬ 
tained,  intended  to  be  applied  collectively  to  the  pub¬ 
lication  of  the  Scriptures  ;  besides,  we  are  told,  direct 
contributions  to  the  extent  of  300^.  Every  gentleman 
in  Calcutta  was  ready  to  add  his  name  to  the  list. 
Lord  Minto’s  example  having  ‘  served  to  stimulate  the 
liberality  of  the  community.’  * 

‘  lAves  and  Times  of  Carey,  Marshman,  and  Ward. 


72 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


At  a  later  period  of  his  administration,  the  Grovern- 
ment  subscribed  a  sum  of  10,000  rupees  towards  de¬ 
fraying  the  expense  of  translating  the  Scriptures  into 
the  Malay  language. 

So  much  for  the  prohibition  of  the  sacred  Scriptures 
in  British  India. 

The  good  understanding  arrived  at  with  Dr.  Carey 
and  Mr.  Marshman  was  not  sufficient  to  allay  the  irri¬ 
tation  caused  by  the  censorship  instituted  by  the  Gio- 
vernment  over  the  publications  of  the  Serampore  press. 
There  were  men  in  Calcutta  whose  views  were  of  a 
more  worldly  nature,  and  who  were  by  no  means  un¬ 
willing  to  cause  trouble  to  the  Grovernment  by  assuming 
some  of  its  functions  to  themselves.  The  Kev.  Claudius 
Buchanan,  one  of  the  chaplains  of  the  Presidency,  was 
prominent  among  these.  Though  making  use  of  the 
Serampore  press,  and  in  friendly  relations  with  the 
missionaries,  nothing  could  be  less  like  the  simplicity 
of  their  tenets  than  those  held  by  him.  In  a  memoir, 
‘  on  the  expediency  of  introducing  an  ecclesiastical 
establishment  into  India  for  the  benefit  of  our  own 
countrymen,  and  as  a  foundation  for  the  ultimate 
civilisation  of  the  natives,’  of  which  Mr.  Buchanan  was 
the  author,  he  wrote  :  ‘  An  archbishop  is  wanted  for 
India — a  sacred  and  exalted  character,  surrounded  by 
his  bishops,  of  ample  revenue  and  extensive  sway.  .  .  . 
We  want  something  royal  in  a  spiritual  and  temporal 
sense  for  the  abject  subjects  of  this  great  Eastern  em¬ 
pire  to  look  up  to.’  Again  :  ‘  When  once  our  national 
Church  shall  have  been  confirmed  in  India,  the  members 