

‘  If  these  regions  ever  come  to  he  the  scene  of  our 
contests  Avith  our  European  enemies,  India  will  indeed 
be  the  apple  in  immediate  view  of  the  combatants. 


i?iT.  56] 


EXTERNAL  POLICY. 


57 


but  Europe  herself  will  be  the  real  prize  that  is  fought 
for.  The  struggle  will  be  between  two  mighty  Em¬ 
pires,  and  must  assume  a  character  and  require  an 
effort  far  beyond  the  scope  of  any  contest  which  the 
E.  I.  Company  can  maintain,  with  resources  calculated 
for  a  very  different  state  of  the  world.  P'or  that  occasion 
therefore,  if  it  should  ever  arise,  we  shall  receive  our 
orders,  and  be  supplied  with  proportionate  means  from 
England. 

‘  Consistently,  however,  with  this  view  of  things,  I 
think  it  right  to  apprise  you  that,  if  an  attempt  were 
actually  made  by  France  to  occupy  a  post  on  the  Coast 
of  the  Persian  Gulf,  or  on  any  other  point  so  situated 
as  to  facilitate  any  hostile  enterprise  against  our 
Indian  Empire,  I  should  feel  the  occasion  to  be  so  im¬ 
portant  and  so  urgent  as  to  require  an  immediate  and 
powerful  effort  to  dislodge  the  enemy,  and  to  defeat 
his  purpose,  before  so  serious  an  evil  had  time  to  take 
root.  I  shall  keep  the  possibility  of  such  an  event  in 
mind,  and  shall  endeavour  both  in  my  own  arrange¬ 
ments  and  in  my  suggestions  to  the  Admiral  not  to  be 
found  unprepared  for  it.’ 

In  the  meantime  Lord  Minto  was  able  to  open  his 
official  correspondence  with  the  satisfactory  assurance 
that  he  saw  no  reason  to  fear  interruption  to  the 
system  of  public  economy  on  which  so  much  depended. 
No  symptoms  gave  warning  of  any  impending  necessity 
for  military  intervention  in  the  affairs  of  the  native 
states.  With  all  the  more  powerful  princes  of  India 
the  E.  I.  Company  was  in  alliance ;  the  others  were 


58 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


not  in  a  condition  to  cause  uneasiness.  The  sole  excep¬ 
tion  to  the  general  tranquillity  was  a  province  within 
British  territory  which  had  been  permitted  to  lapse 
into  a  condition  of  anarchy  for  want  ‘  of  good  rule,’ 
to  borrow  an  expression  once  familiar  on  the  Scotch 
Borders. 

The  province  of  Bundelcund '  had  been  added  to 
the  dominions  of  the  Company  a  few  years  before. 
Stretching  from  the  Jumna  to  the  great  mountain 
chain  that  crosses  India  from  the  Granges  to  the  Gulf 
of  Cambay,  it  includes  both  hill  and  plain — therefore 
also  the  human  varieties  which  in  unsettled  times  are 
as  true  to  those  respective  localities  as  vultures  and 
field-mice.  On  the  crests  of  hills  so  high  and  steep 
that  each  hill  is  a  natural  fortress,  stood,  in  the  early 
part  of  this  century,  150  forts  more  or  less  strong, 
held  by  as  many  chiefs,  who  rallied  to  their  standards 
all  the  discontented  spirits  of  the  district,  and  the 
waifs  and  strays  left  behind  by  the  ebbing  tide  of  war. 
Safe  in  the  inaccessibility  of  their  fastnesses  they  spent 
their  time  much  after  the  fashion  of  the  Christian 
Knights  of  Europe,  of  whose  exploits  many  a  ‘  castled 
crag’  remains  to  tell.  They  lived  by  plunder  and  rapine 
on  their  weaker  neighbours — till  at  last  a  great  cry 
went  up  from  throughout  the  land  which  found  a  merci¬ 
ful  hearing  in  the  Council-room  of  Calcutta. 