

Lord  Lake  had  assured  the  Government  of  Sir 
George  Barlow  that  peace  would  never  be  restored  to 

‘  Bundelcund  had  been  ceded  in  exchange  for  some  districts  in 
the  South  Mahratta  country  by  the  treaty  of  Bassein. 


JEt.  56] 


INTEENAL  POLICY. 


59 


the  district  till  the  most  important  of  these  strongholds 
had  surrendered,  and  Sir  Greorge  had  made  answer 
that  ‘  a  certain  extent  of  dominion,  local  power,  and 
revenue  would  be  cheaply  sacrificed  for  tranquillity  and 
security  within  a  more  contracted  circle.’ 

Unhappily  something  more  than  this  was  likely  to 
be  sacrificed — viz.  the  character  of  the  British  Govern¬ 
ment  for  justice,  and  the  very  existence  of  the  popula¬ 
tion  it  was  bound  to  protect.  When  Lord  INIinto  arrived 
in  India  Bundelcund  was  rapidly  becoming  a  desert. 
One  of  his  first  measures,  taken  within  a  few  weeks  of 
his  arrival  at  Calcutta,  was  the  despatch  of  a  military 
force  into  the  disturbed  districts.  It  was  at  the  same 
time  officially  announced  that  ‘  the  Government  con¬ 
sidered  it  essential,  not  only  to  the  preservation  of 
political  influence  over  the  chiefs  of  Bundelcund,  but  to 
the  dignity  and  reputation  of  the  British  Government, 
to  interfere  for  the  suppression  of  internal  disorder.’ 
Writing  to  the  Chairman  *  of  the  E.  I.  Company  he  said  : 
‘These  petty  troubles  have  no  very  distinct  object, 
certainly  none  in  which  the  Company  have  any  other 
interest  than  that  which  they  must  always  feel  in  a 
punctual  and  easy  collection  of  their  revenues,  and  in 
the  discharge  of  a  duty  which  a  Sovereign  owes  to  its 
subjects,  I  mean  that  of  preserving  the  public  peace 
and  protecting  the  weaker  and  more  pacific  part  of  the 
community  against  the  oppression  and  violence  of  the 
stronger. 

‘  The  administration  of  Sir  George  Barlow  has 
'  E.  Parry,  Esq. 


60 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


hitherto  employed  on  such  occasions  the  usual  and 
ordinary  powers  of  legal  government,  aided  by  every 
effort  of  conciliation  and  persuasion  to  repress  the  in¬ 
subordinate  spirit  of  which  I  am  speaking,  and  success 
has  in  general  attended  that  just  and  prudent  system. 
But  in  one  or  two  instances  these  means  have  been 
exhausted  without  accomplishing  the  object,  and  an 
immediate  necessity  has  arisen  of  resorting  to  military 
force,  for  the  double  purpose  of  suppressing  a  rebellious 
resistance  to  law,  and  of  displaying  both  the  power 
and  the  determination  of  Government  to  vindicate  its 
just  authority  in  the  eyes  of  a  people  who  would  wait 
only  for  the  assurance  of  an  opposite  character  in 
Government,  and  of  consequent  impunity,  to  fall  into 
general  disobedience  and  anarchy.’  The  tone  was 
new  to  ears  accustomed  to  that  of  late  assumed  by  the 
supreme  Government,  and  produced  an  immediate  and 
decisive  effect.  Many  a  petty  Kajah  rapidly  discovered 
his  interest  to  lie  on  the  side  of  order,  and  long  before 
the  British  force  succeeded  in  quelling  the  fiercer 
spirits  of  the  hills,  cultivation  and  peace  had  returned 
to  the  plains. 