


^T.  56] 


EXTERNAL  POLICY. 


55 


tonnage  would  be  found  without  difficulty  to  transport 
any  number  of  troops,  and  the  passage  is  short  and 
easy  to  territories  occupied  by  our  professed  enemies 
in  India. 

‘  We  must  not  forget  the  nature  of  our  tenure  in 
this  Empire,  and  that  it  would  not  require  a  great 
European  army  to  disturb  our  security  in  India — 
20,000  French  troops  commanded  by  French  officers, 
supplied  with  all  the  means  which  attend  such  armies, 
would  not,  I  am  firmly  convinced,  subdue  us — but 
would  create  a  struggle  which  must  be  attended  with 
great  present  calamity,  however  successfully  and 
honourably  it  might  be  overcome.  For  these  reasons 
I  should  be  sorry  to  see  half  the  number  of  troops  landed 
in  India. 

‘  An  absolute  ascendancy  at  the  Porte  or  a  positive 
conquest  of  Turkey,  a  confederacy  with  Kussia  in 
Oriental  schemes,  would  tend  to  the  furtherance,  I  do 
not  say  to  the  accomplishment,  of  Bonaparte’s  scheme 
against  India. 

‘The  mission  of  an  able  minister  to  the  Court  of 
Persia  is  one  of  the  first  measures  that  presents  itself. 
On  that  point  I  would  take  the  liberty  of  saying  a  few 
words. 

‘  Whoever  resides  in  Persia  on  the  part  of  England 
should  represent  His  IMajesty  and  receive  his  instruc¬ 
tions  from  his  ministers.  The  interests  of  Persia  are 
now  so  much  connected  with  the  politics  of  Europe, 
that  no  negotiation  with  that  Court  of  a  general  nature 
could  be  carried  on  from  hence.  Yet  India  and  the 


56 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


interests  of  England  in  Asia  are  so  deeply  concerned  in 
the  conduct  of  Persia,  and  so  naturally  implicated  in 
its  affairs,  that  I  trust  I  shall  be  excused  for  suggest¬ 
ing  two  useful  points  in  such  a  mission.  First,  that 
the  English  minister  should  have  a  close,  confidential, 
and  constant  correspondence  with  the  supreme  Grovem- 
ment  in  India,  and  should  receive  from  that  Government 
instructions  in  all  matters  of  local  concern  which  should 
not  commit  his  Government  at  home  on  points  of 
European  policy. 

‘  Next,  that  the  person  for  that  office  should  be 
selected  here,  or  at  least  from  the  servants  of  the 
public  in  this  country.  None  can,  from  their  habits 
and  from  the  peculiar  case  of  their  knowledge  and  expe¬ 
rience,  be  so  well  qualified  for  the  station.  I  confess  I 
have  one  individual  in  my  mind.  I  have  never  seen 
tlfis  gentleman  in  my  life,  but  hazard  the  suggestion  on 
a  certain  knowledge  of  Colonel  Malcolm’s  superior 
qualifications.’ 

Of  the  financial  prospect  Lord  Minto’s  auguries 
were  more  favourable  than  the  Coint  of  Directors  had 
ventured  to  anticipate  when  he  left  England ;  ‘  but,’ 
he  said,  ‘  in  the  event  of  war,  estimates  become  wholly 
fallacious ;  and  the  only  certain  financial  conclusion 
must  be  that,  pending  an  invasion,  no  surplus,  but  on 
the  contrary  a  great  increase  of  debt,  must  be  expected 
and  provided  for. 