

The  reduction  of  the  most  important  of  the  moun¬ 
tain  strongholds  was  not  effected  till  after  several 
campaigns,  nor  without  considerable  losses — ‘  losses 
particularly  in  officers,’  wrote  Lord  Minto,  ‘  for  which 
one  feels  inconsolable  for  such  an  object.  That  object, 
however,  it  had  become  indispensable  to  accomplish, 
and  its  necessity  is  strongly  confirmed  by  the  difficulty 
which  has  attended  it.’ 


^T.  66] 


THE  NATIVE  RACES. 


G1 


While  the  rumours  of  intended  attacks  upon  our 
Eastern  possessions  acquired  with  every  day  greater 
consistency  and  probability,  the  attention  of  the  Govern¬ 
ment  was  earnestly  directed  to  the  maintenance  of  such 
relations  with  their  Indian  subjects  as  would  tend  to 
obtain  their  loyal  support. 

Of  the  races  subject  to  British  nde,  the  most 
adverse  to  our  power  was  necessarily  the  INIahommedan. 
To  the  Hindoos,  though  foreigners  and  conquerors,  we 
were  nevertheless  the  justest  and  gentlest  who  had 
ever  held  sway  over  them.  To  the  Mahrattas  we  were 
a  formidable  danger  indeed,  but  one  the  magnitude 
of  which  they  did  not  as  yet  thoroughly  appreciate. 
Among  the  IMussulmans  alone,  especially  of  the  higher 
class,  there  existed  an  immense  and  weighty  body  of 
irreconcilable  discontent,  the  natural  result  of  the 
establishment  of  the  Company’s  Government  over  a 
great  portion  of  the  Peninsula,  to  the  extinction  of 
the  Mussulman  power  and  the  ruin  of  the  individual 
influence,  consideration,  and  fortunes  of  the  race  in 
which  the  principal  native  energies  reside.  ‘  In  their 
minds  had  been  planted  all  the  hostile  dispositions  that 
are  bred  of  despair.’  Instruments  therefore  could  not 
be  wanting  to  foment  real  discontent,  or  to  create 
artificial  grievances.  Some  of  this  disaffection,  it  was 
hoped,  would  subside  by  the  mere  lapse  of  time,  by  the 
gradual  extinction  of  old  influences  and  the  growth  of 
new  interests  in  the  soil  and  prosperity  of  the  country, 
originating  in  and  dependent  upon  the  British  Govern¬ 
ment.  Such  had  been  the  case  in  Bengal,  where  the  same 


62 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


course  was  run  from  the  demolition  of  the  Mussulman 
power  to  the  steady  establishment  of  our  exclusive 
authority,  and  the  perfect  identification  of  the  mass 
of  the  people,  their  interests  and  feelings,  with  our 
government.  ‘  If  we  avoid,’  wrote  Lord  Minto  to  the 
Chairman  of  the  East  India  Company,'  ‘  as  we  shall 
with  scrupulous  attention,  every  measure  that  might 
furnish  our  enemies  with  even  a  pretence  to  work  upon, 
— if  we  maintain  discipline  with  a  firm  hand,  and  keep 
a  watchful  and  observant  eye  on  every  attempt  to  prac¬ 
tise  on  the  prejudices  of  the  native  soldier — the  danger 
will  be  confined  to  those  general  circumstances  inherent 
in  our  situation,  for  which,  as  there  is  no  remedy,  it  is 
neither  profitable  nor  manly  to  make  them  the  topics 
of  fruitless  dread  and  lamentation.  .  .  .  The  only 
successful  engine  of  sedition  in  any  part  of  India  must 
be  that  of  persuading  the  people  that  our  Government 
entertains  hostile  and  systematic  designs  against  their 
religion.  This  persuasion,  if  it  could  be  established  in 
Bengal,  would  be  as  fatal  there  as  on  the  coast ;  but 
the  difference  is  that  nobody  in  Bengal  is  interested  in 
propagating  that  falsehood,  and  to  incur  danger  here 
we  must  ourselves  furnish  probable  cause  for  sincere 
alarm.’  The  belief  that  ‘this  engine’  could  be  suc¬ 
cessfully  worked  had  been  confirmed  by  recent  events ; 
for  though  the  Vellore  massacres  were  no  doubt  in 
part  attributable  to  the  general  state  of  disaffection 
and  humiliation  of  the  Mahommedan  population  of  the 
country,  it  was  clearly  proved  that  the  sentiment  on 
'  Lord  Minto  to  E.  Parry,  Esq.,  September  1807. 