


Mt.  56] 


THE  SERAMPOEE  PRESS. 


69 


the  personal  comfort  and  convenience  of  those  worthy 
men,  and  he  remained  satisfied  with  their  assurance 
that  the  works  hereafter  to  be  printed  at  Serampore 
should  be  previously  submitted  to  the  revision  and 
sanction  of  Grovernment.  The  press  therefore  remained 
at  Serampore.  It  may  be  that  he  felt  a  little  dis¬ 
appointment  when,  a  few  days  after  these  events,  an 
address  was  presented  by  the  missionaries  to  the 
(Tovernment  of  Serampore,  in  which  the  concessions 
made  to  them  were  ascribed  to  the  particular  interposi¬ 
tion  of  Divine  Providence  and  the  instrumentality  of 
the  Danish  Governor.  ‘  I  confess,’  Lord  Minto  good- 
humouredly  remarked,  ‘  that  I  thought  it  was  to  the 
Governor  General  in  Council  that  gratitude  w’as  due, 
but  I  suppose  I  was  wrong.’ 

Nevertheless  his  kindly  sentiments  towards  the  in- 
dividvials  belonging  to  the  mission  and  his  respect  for 
their  aims  never  altered.  They  are  often  mentioned 
in  his  correspondence  as  his  ‘very  good  friends,’  and 
though  a  sense  of  public  duty  had  imposed  upon  him 
the  obligation  of  checking  their  over-zealous  haste, 
his  personal  feelings  ensured  to  their  literary  efforts 
his  constant  and  warmest  encouragement. 

The  whole  question  as  between  Calcutta  and  Seram¬ 
pore  was  disposed  of  in  less  than  a  month  from  the  date 
of  INIr.  Edmonstone’s  despatch.  In  reply  to  the  me¬ 
morial  of  the  missionaries — drawn  up  after  the  inter¬ 
view  at  Barrackpore — he  was  directed  to  state  that  ‘  the 
Governor  General  in  Council  was  fidly  convinced  of  the 
rectitude  of  the  intentions  of  the  Society  of  Missionaries, 


70 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


and  that  the  precautions  which  Grovemment  deemed  it 
necessary  to  adopt  against  the  unlimited  employment 
of  the  press,  proceed  exclusively  from  the  duty  imposed 
on  Government  of  reserving  to  itself  the  authority  of 
determining  what  publications  may,  or  may  not,  expose 
the  public  tranquillity  to  hazard,  or  involve  a  violation 
of  public  faith,  instead  of  leaving  the  decision  of  such 
important  questions  to  the  judgment  of  others.’ 

But  in  the  meanwhile  ‘  the  Battle  of  the  Missions  ’ 
was  raging  fiercely  in  London,  where  it  occasioned  the 
publication  of  more  than  twenty-five  pamphlets ;  the 
charge,  repeated  again  and  again  in  them,  against  the 
Government  of  India  being  that  of  a  proved  desire 
to  root  up  the  Serampore  mission  and  extirpate  Chris¬ 
tianity  from  India. 

The  Indian  Government  had  distinctly  stated  that 
it  had  no  desire  to  impede  the  circulation  of  the  Scrip¬ 
tures  in  the  native  dialects,  ‘  if  unaccompanied  by  any 
comments  on  the  religions  of  the  country.’  This  was 
construed  into  a  prohibition  to  carry  the  Gospel  among 
the  natives  of  India ;  though  the  missionaries  were 
all  the  time  very  properly  using  the  privilege  accorded 
to  them  to  print  and  circulate  the  Scriptures  freely. 