


^T.  56] 


THE  MISSIONAKIES. 


65 


but  where,  nevertheless,  he  remained  on  sufferance 
until,  being  joined  by  others  who  desired  to  assist  in 
the  good  work,  he  and  they  removed  together  to  the 
Danish  settlement  of  Serampore.  There  they  preached 
in  the  native  languages,  formed  schools  for  the  young, 
set  up  a  printing-press,  and  a  paper  manufactory  (this 
was  the  industry  by  which  they  lived),  and  devoted 
all  their  remaining  time  and  energies  to  the  translation 
of  the  Holy  Scriptures  and  the  dissemination  of  tracts 
in  the  various  native  dialects.  Soon  after  Lord  Minto’s 
arrival,  some  of  these  publications  attracted  the  atten¬ 
tion  of  Government,  and  it  being  undeniable  that  they 
were  calculated  to  ofl’end  the  feelings  of  the  native 
})opulation,  containing  as  they  did  oflensive  attacks  on 
the  Hindoo  mythology  and  the  Mussulman  Prophet,  the 
Secretary  to  Government  received  instructions  to  com¬ 
municate  to  the  Kev.  Dr,  Carey,  the  leading  member  of 
the  mission  at  Serampore,  a  resolution  arrived  at  by 
the  Governor  General  in  Council,  to  place  their  press 
under  regulations,  and  to  suspend  the  practice  of  public 
preaching  by  natives  in  the  native  dialects  at  the  seat 
of  government. 

In  an  official  letter  addressed  by  Mr.  Edmonstone  to 
Dr.  Carey  it  is  stated,  that  ‘  the  issue  of  publications  and 
the  public  delivery  of  discourses  of  the  nature  above 
alluded  to,  are  evidently  calculated  to  produce  conse¬ 
quences  in  the  highest  degree  detrimental  to  the  tran¬ 
quillity  of  the  British  dominions  in  India,  and  it  becomes 
the  indispensable  duty  of  the  British  Govermnent  to 
arrest  the  progress  of  any  proceedings  of  that  nature. 


66 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


In  the  present  instance  this  objection  is  enforced  by 
the  necessity  of  maintaining  the  public  faith,  which 
under  the  express  injunctions  of  the  Legislature  has 
been  repeatedly  pledged  to  leave  the  native  subjects  of 
the  Company  in  India  to  the  full,  free,  and  undisturbed 
exercise  of  their  respective  religions.’  The  letter 
concluded  by  expressing  the  Grovernor  Greneral’s  ex¬ 
pectation  ‘  that  the  press  would  be  removed  to  the 
Presidency,  where  alone  the  same  control  that  is 
established  over  presses  sanctioned  by  the  Government 
can  be  duly  exercised.’ ' 

Though  the  action  of  the  Government  was  in  strict 
accordance  with  the  instructions  issued  by  the  Court  of 
Directors,  it  raised  a  storm  of  angry  feeling  which 
temporarily  obscured  all  sense  of  justice,  and  led  to  a 
remarkable  oblivion  of  the  Apostolical  injunction,  ‘  Be 
pitiful,  be  courteous.’ 

‘  This  is  the  first  instance,’  says  the  author  of  a 
well-known  biographical  work,^  ‘  in  which  the  Govern¬ 
ment  of  India  brought  forward  the  plea  of  being  bound 
by  a  ‘Pledge  to  grant  the  natives  the  undisturbed  exer¬ 
cise  of  their  “  respective  religions.”  No  such  pledge 
was  ever  exacted  by  the  natives  or  granted  by  the 
Government.  British  rule  was  established  in  India  by 
the  sword  and  the  sword  alone,  and  at  no  period  were 
the  conquerors  in  a  position  which  obliged  them  to 
give  pledges  to  the  conquered.’ 