

‘  The  young  men  here  would  be  better  off  if  there 
were  neither  horses  nor  dogs  in  the  world.  ...  A 
hundred  pounds  is  no  violent  price  here  for  a  dog ;  and  as 
for  horses,  I  wanted  a  quiet  pad  for  my  own  hack,  only 
just  to  carry  me  safe  to  cover,  and  a  horse  was  brought 


92 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


for  trial  the  other  day  who  was  nearly  blind,  so  as  to 
start  at  every  bush,  and  not  over  sure.  However  they 
only  asked  300L  for  him,  and  I  should  have  been 
tempted  by  the  bargain  if  John  had  not  advised  me 
against  a  blind  pad.  Yet  a  horse  I  must  have  at  any 
price,  for  I  ride  at  least  twice  a  year.  I  have  just  per¬ 
formed  on  a  charger,  having  presented  honorary  colours 
to  the  1 5th  regiment  of  native  infantry  at  Barrackpore, 
mounted  on  a  war-horse  decorated  with  gold  em¬ 
broidered  housings,  besides  the  ornaments  which  shone 
on  my  own  head  and  heels.  Prince  Esterhazy,  at  the 
head  of  the  Garde  Noble,  is  a  sloven  to  my  resplendence. 
Then,  as  my  respected  friend,  Mr.  Merryman,  would 
sometimes  truly  say,  “  The  riding  is  nothing  ;  speaking 
is  the  thing.”  However,  as  one  ought  not  to  do  two 
things  at  once,  I  thought  it  more  prudent  to  dismount 
before  I  delivered  a  neat  and  appropriate  speech.  This 
part  of  the  ceremony  was  at  sunrise ;  the  officers 
breakfasted  with  me,  and  I  dined  with  them.  Next 
day  they  gave  a  ball ;  but  I  was  best  entertained  with 
a  Nautch  given  by  the  Sepoys.  This  was  much  the 
prettiest  Nautch  I  had  ever  attended,  or  rather  ap¬ 
proached  nearer  to  pretty  than  any  former  specimens 
of  that  amusement  which  I  had  witnessed.  It  was 
performed  in  a  large  tent,  and  was  extremely  scenick. 
The  lights,  which  were  torches  of  hollow  bamboo,  with 
a  thick  wick  on  which  oil  was  poured  every  now  and 
then  by  way  of  snuffers,  were  held  by  men,  black  but 
handsome,  and  almost  as  naked  as  bronze  figures  which 
serve  for  candlesticks  usually  are.  Chairs  were  set  in 


^T.  56] 


FAMILY  CORRESPONDENCE. 


93 


a  semicircle  towards  the  bottom  of  the  pavilion,  on 
which  we  sat,  and  were  plentifully  sluiced  with  rose¬ 
water.  A  circle  was  formed  of  the  Sepoys,  in  their 
own  clothes  (not  in  regimentals),  all  seated  on  their 
hams,  and  making  a  most  picturesque  amphitheatre. 
In  front  the  dance  was  performed  with  the  music,  which 
was  all  national — instruments  as  well  as  airs  and  words 
— behind  the  dancers.  The  dancing  was  much  in  the 
same  monotonous  style  as  I  have  described  in  other 
letters,  but  the  girls  were  Cashmerians,  and  accounted 
very  superior  to  those  of  the  Bengal  provinces.  They 
were  handsomer  than  I  had  seen,  and  were  better 
dressed ;  but  beauty  would  be  a  strong  word  even  for 
these  paragons.  The  music  was  also  Cashmerian,  and 
some  of  the  airs  really  were  very  pretty.  They  danced 
with  something  approaching  occasionally  to  grace,  and 
managed  their  drapery  very  prettily,  so  as  to  remind 
one  for  a  moment  now  and  then  of  the  Etruscan  figures 
or  those  found  at  Pompeii.  But  they  are  over-clothed  ; 
nothing  is  seen  but  the  head,  arms,  and  toes — all  of 
which  are  displayed  for  the  sake  of  the  ornaments — and 
there  is  such  a  quantity  of  clothing  that  it  cannot  well 
take  the  picturesque  sort  of  folds  which  such  flexible 
stuffs  should  take.’ 