


84 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


ferred ;  but  chance  ships  or  single  merchantmen  were 
deemed  too  liable  to  be  captured,  to  be  safe  depositaries 
of  letters.  When  these  were  of  importance  duplicates 
were  generally  sent  by  different  vessels  ;  but,  in  spite  of 
all  precautions,  lamentations  were  perpetually  recurring 
over  the  loss  of  letters,  of  many  a  gift  of  ‘  orient  pearl 
and  barbaric  gold,’  and,  worse  than  all,  of  the  ships 
that  bore  them,  which  found  their  way  to  the  ports  of 
our  enemies  and  still  more  often  to  the  bottom  of  the 
sea 

Some  smaller  inconveniences  there  were  in  the 
slowness  of  communications  that  had  occasionally  a 
comic  aspect,  as  when  letter-writers  in  London,  who  had 
missed  the  May  fleet,  served  up  cold  at  Christmas  the 
materials  which  six  months  before  had  been  far  more 
highly  spiced ;  or  when  their  correspondents  in  India 
congratulated  them  a  year  after  date  on  events  already 
repented  of. 

‘•February  8,  1808.'  Our  last  letters  from  home 
were  still  dated  June,  but  we  expect  a  fleet  very  soon. 
It  will  bring  packets  from  you  all,  I  trust.  I  may  safely 
say  that  the  single  interesting  occupation  I  have  (bating 
my  business,  which  is  becoming  interesting  enough) 
is  thinking  of  you  and  all  your  occupations.  I  am 
ravenous  for  all  details  and  particulars,  especially  such 
as  are  agreeable  to  you,  within  doors  and  without. 

‘  Nothing  has  come  from  England  since  the  June 
fleet  which  sailed  the  23rd  of  that  month,  and  we  are 


To  Lady  Minto. 


^T.  56] 


FAMILY  CORRESPONDENCE. 


85 


wondering  that  some  vessel  or  other  has  not  been  des¬ 
patched  to  tell  us  of  the  events  which  have  happened 
since  that  time.  We  have  had  no  letters  overland,  the 
road  being  shut  that  way  as  you  know,  and  all  the 
news  we  live  upon  is  rumour  and  surmise  from  such 
places  as  Aleppo,  Bagdad,  Bushire,  Muscat,  and  other 
out-of-the-world  regions.  The  war  with  Denmark  came 
from  Aleppo,  where  the  Danish  consul  received  it  from 
Constantinople.’ 

It  was  not  till  April  14  that  the  long  looked-for 
letters  arrived.  ‘  It  is  totally  impossible  to  describe 
the  excessive  delight  which  they  have  bestowed  upon 
us.  In  the  first  place  I  never  received  such  a  num¬ 
ber  of  letters  in  my  life  ;  and  I  never  received  any  more 
precious  in  every  possible  way.  I  have  been  reading 
and  re-re-reading  all  yesterday  and  to-day.  Thank 
tiod  you  were  all  well  on  September  8.  I  assure  you  it 
is  a  nervous  thing  to  open  letters  after  an  interval  of 
several  months.  .  .  .’ 

The  tone  of  the  family  letters  was  especially  jubi¬ 
lant,  for  they  gave  the  news  of  the  birth  of  Lord 
Minto’s  first  grandchild — the  son  of  his  eldest  son — and 
the  answers  from  India  were  no  less  joyful. 