

It  seems  strange  that  this  act  of  grace,  instead  of 
being  grateful  to  the  missionaries,  drew  from  the  Kev, 
—  Ward  the  comment :  ‘  Now  we  are  likely  to  get 
stations  fixed  with  the  public  permission  of  Govern¬ 
ment,  and  we  shall  be  tolerated  like  toads,  and  not 
hunted  down  like  wild  beasts.’ 

a 


82 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


At  that  very  time  no  one,  however  influential,  was 
allowed  to  travel  in  India  without  a  passport,  or  to 
reside  there  without  a  direct  license  from  the  Court  of 
Directors.  There  are  copies  at  Minto  of  several  letters 
in  which  Lord  Minto  expresses  regret  that  he  cannot 
give  the  permission  requested  by  residents  at  Pondi¬ 
cherry  to  travel  in  the  Company’s  dominions ;  and  in  a 
letter  addressed  to  one  of  his  family  he  mentions  the 
receipt  of  a  somewhat  harsh  order  for  the  immediate 
return  of  a  gentleman  to  England,  who  had  gone  out 
in  the  same  ship  as  himself,  had  lived  eight  months 
in  his  house,  and  had  subsequently  held  some  small 
appointment  in  Calcutta.  That  he  had  so  done  with¬ 
out  license  was  no  doubt  an  irregularity,  and  the 
orders  of  the  Court  had  to  be  obeyed  ;  but  no  evidence 
remains  that  the  gentleman,  who  submitted  to  the 
undoubted  authority  of  law,  felt  himself  thereby  to 
have  had  anything  in  common  with  a  wild  beast. 

Yet  when,  in  1811,  some  missionaries  who  had 
arrived  in  India  without  license,  though  not  without 
knowledge  of  the  Company’s  regulations,  were  requested 
to  depart,  an  outcry  was  raised  against  the  persecution 
of  the  Grovernment,  and  the  irreconcilable  enmity  of 
its  members  to  Christianity. 


^T.  56] 


FAMILY  COKRESrONDEXCE. 


83 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Before  the  transactions  described  in  the  last  chapter 
came  to  an  end,  Lord  Minto  had  become  familiar  with 
Indian  life.  He  had  had  experience  of  summer  and 
winter,  had  found  the  cold  weather  delightful,  save  for 
the  insatiable  voracity  of  the  mosqiutoes  that  came  in 
swarms  from  the  cool  air  to  the  warmer  house ;  and  in 
the  heat  of  summer  had  cooled  and  consoled  himself 
‘  by  thinking  of  Minto  and  of  those  who  were  enjoying 
the  green  pleasures  and  calm  comforts  of  that  chosen 
spot.  So  pray  be  as  happy  there  all  of  you  as  ever 
you  can,  for  your  enjoyments  are  my  best  punkahs,  and 
your  repose  is  my  best  recreation  in  this  torrid  zone  of 
trouble  and  fatigue.’ 

One  of  the  greatest  trials  of  absence  in  those  days 
consisted  in  the  long  interval  which  necessarily  elapsed 
between  the  despatch  of  letters  and  their  delivery  in 
distant  lands :  it  was  sensibly  enhanced  by  the  un¬ 
certainty  attending  on  their  ever  reaching  their  desti¬ 
nation.  The  safest  course  was  to  entrust  them  to  the 
Indian  fleets,  which  only  sailed  twice  or  thrice  a  year, 
but  which,  being  escorted  by  a  convoy,  generally  arrived 
in  safety.  Next  to  the  fleet,  a  King’s  ship  was  pre- 