


78 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


risk  of  collision  with  native  sentiment,  but  from  the 
pretensions  of  a  section  of  the  Anglo-Indian  community 
to  a  dictatorial  supremacy  over  the  policy  of  the  State. 
A  private  letter,  addressed  by  Lord  Minto  to  the  Chair¬ 
man  of  the  East  India  Company,  who  was  also  a  mem¬ 
ber  of  the  Society  for  Missions  to  Africa  and  the  East, 
and  who  was  therefore  naturally  to  be  supposed  well 
affected  to  their  cause,  shows  that  the  Governor 
General  was  prepared  uncompromisingly  to  assert  the 
views  on  which  his  Government  had  acted. 

‘  Let  me  recommend  to  your  serious  consideration 
the  principal  publications  which  have  issued  from  the 
Serampore  press,  in  the  native  languages,  the  sole  effect 
of  which  was  not  to  convert,  but  to  alienate,  the  pro¬ 
fessors  of  both  religions  prevalent  amongst  the  natives 
of  this  country.  Pray  read  especially  the  miserable 
stuff  addressed  to  the  Gentoos,  in  which,  without  one 
word  to  convince  or  to  satisfy  the  mind  of  the  heathen 
reader,  without  proof  or  argument  of  any  kind,  the 
pages  are  filled  with  hell  fire,  and  hell  fire,  and  still 
hotter  fire,  denounced  against  a  whole  race  of  men  for 
believing  in  the  religion  which  they  were  taught  by 
their  fathers  and  mothers,  and  the  truth  of  which  it  is 
simply  impossible  it  should  ever  have  entered  into 
their  minds  to  doubt.  Is  this  the  doctrine  of  our 
faith  ?  In  saying  that  it  is  not  mine  I  am  well 
assured  that  I  express  your  sentiments  as  well  as  my 
own.  If  there  are  two  opinions  among  Christians  on 
this  point,  I  can  only  say  that  I  am  of  the  sect  which 
believes  that  a  just  God  will  condemn  no  being  with- 


^T.  66] 


LETTER  FROM  LORD  xMINTO. 


79 


out  individual  guilt.  But  is  this  a  judicious  course  to 
pursue  for  the  purpose  of  conversion  ?  The  remainder 
of  this  tract  seems  to  aim  principally  at  a  general 
massacre  of  the  Brahmins  of  this  country.  A  total 
abolition  of  caste  is  openly  preached.  A  proposal  to 
effiice  a  mark  of  caste  from  the  foreheads  of  soldiers 
on  parade  has  had  its  share  in  a  massacre  of  Chris¬ 
tians.  Is  it  possible  that  your  Government  should  be 
required  to  countenance  public  exhortations  addressed 
to  a  Gentoo  nation  to  eft’ace  at  once,  not  a  little  spot 
of  yellow  paste  from  the  forehead,  but  the  whole  insti¬ 
tution  of  caste  itself,  that  is  to  say,  their  whole  scheme 
of  civil  polity  as  well  as  their  fondest  and  most  rooted 
religious  tenets  ?  This  is  to  be  accomplished  by  coarse 
and  sciirrilous  invective  against  the  most  revered  order 
of  Hindoo  society  and  addressed  to  that  order  itself. 

‘  I  leave  you  to  form  your  own  judgment  on  these 
performances,  which  will  be  that  of  a  Christian  gentle¬ 
man.  ...  1  am  no  enemy  to  the  progress  of  Christi¬ 
anity  in  India.  It  is  the  way,  I  observe,  of  some  who 
are  personally  engaged  in  the  work  of  conversion  to 
confound  any  little  check  in  correction  of  their  own 
errors  with  opposition  or  hostility  to  their  purpose, 
and  to  call  out  Atheism,  Deism,  and  above  all  persecu¬ 
tion,  whenever  a  slip  in  their  own  conduct  has  required 
to  be  rectified.  ...  I  do  not  think  we  shoidd  be  justi¬ 
fied  in  refusing  the  dispensation  of  the  Christian  reve¬ 
lation  to  this  great  country  for  our  interest  or  security, 
but  I  am  not  equally  ready  to  sacrifice  the  great  inte¬ 
rests  which  are  confided  to  me  to  a  blind  principle  of 