

To  Captain  Malcolm  Macleod,  Commanding  at 
Barasiit. 

‘  Barrackpore  :  July  26,  1808. 

‘  Dear  Sir, — You  will  receive  along  with  this  a 
public  letter,  which  will  afford  you  sufficient  support  in 


90 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


carrying  the  proposed  indispensable  reforms  into  im¬ 
mediate  effect.  ...  I  do  not  at  all  agree  with  you  in 
thinking  that  your  first  arrival  at  Barasut  is  an  unfa¬ 
vourable  time  for  correcting  these  abuses  ;  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  it  was  entirely  expected  that  the  change  of  the 
Commanding  Officer  was  to  be  accompanied  by  a  change 
of  management ;  and  the  best  policy  is  to  begin  with 
the  same  system  which  you  are  afterwards  to  pursue. 

‘  I  should  wish,  both  for  your  own  ease  and  for  the 
benefit  of  the  institution,  that  you  may  enjoy  the  good¬ 
will  and  regard  of  the  young  men  under  your  charge. 
But  essential  points  must  not  be  sacrificed  to  that 
object.  Indeed,  it  is  not  the  way  to  obtain  it ;  the 
respect,  and  even  the  regard  of  boys  is  always  lost  by 
concession,  and  by  any  appearance  of  feeble  conduct, 
which  they  are  very  quick  at  perceiving.  Glreat  com¬ 
mand  of  temper  is  necessary  ;  they  should  be  dealt  with 
as  men,  and  as  gentlemen.  But  perfect  steadiness  in 
material  things  is  the  quality  most  sure  of  obtaining 
not  only  their  submission,  but  their  respect  and  affec¬ 
tion.  I  would  not  trouble  and  harass  them  much 
about  trifles,  but  be  inflexible  in  matters  of  importance. 
....  It  will  not  be  enough  to  ‘prohibit  private  enter¬ 
tainments  by  an  order;  you  will  have  to  enforce  the 
prohibition  by  seeing  that  it  is  not  infringed.  Your 
adjutants  must  occasionally  visit  their  quarters,  and 
take  every  other  means  to  know  whether  this  abuse  is 
still  practised. 

‘  I  flatter  myself  that,  with  every  proper  attention 
to  conciliation,  you  will  not  lose  sight  of  that  firmness 


JEt.  t56] 


FAMILY  COKEESPONDENCE. 


91 


without  which  such  a  republic  as  you  have  to  govern  is 
sure  of  running  into  anarchy. 

‘  The  want  of  that  one  quality  was  your  predecessor’s 
only  defect ;  and  that  defect  has  brought  this  important 
institution  into  discredit,  besides  drawing  ruin  upon 
a  number  of  young  men,  and  a  severe  affliction  upon  a 
number  of  families.’ 

In  another  letter  on  the  conduct  of  the  cadets,  he 
wrote :  ‘  I  hear  with  regret  of  cruel  and  oppressive 
conduct  to  the  natives.  This  I  consider  as  ungenerous 
and  unworthy  of  gentlemen.’ 

Occasionally  it  was  the  unreasonable  desires  of 
parents  on  behalf  of  their  sons  which  caused  him 
matter  of  regret.  In  a  letter  to  Lady  Minto  he  says  : 

‘  There  is  nothing  in  this  country  that  a  young  King's 
officer  can  hold  except  an  appointment  as  aide-de- 
camp.  It  is  no  sort  of  advantage  to  him  to  get  it ;  on 
the  contrary,  it  takes  a  young  man  entirely  out  of  his 
profession,  makes  him  idle,  luxurious,  and  expensive, 
the  consequence  of  which,  I  observe,  is  debt  and  dis¬ 
tress.  No  parent  at  a  distance  will  see  the  thing  in 
that  light,  and  I  have  been  obliged  to  place  several 
young  men  in  that  situation,  with  the  consciousness 
that  I  was  doing  them  a  real  injury  in  the  shape  of  a 
very  great  favour.  .  .  . 