

The  second  charge,  according  to  Lord  Minto,  ‘  did 
not  contain  a  particle  of  truth.’  Though  the  press  was 
set  up  in  Danish  territory,  the  only  market  for  its 
publications  was  British  India;  though  the  leading 


-Ht.  56] 


MEMOEIAL  OF  ME.  BUCHANAN. 


75 


missionaries  resided  at  Serampore,  they  were  British 
subjects  ;  Dr.  Carey  holding  moreover  an  official  appoint¬ 
ment  under  Government,  that  of  Professor  of  Sanscrit 
and  Bengalee  in  the  College  of  Fort  William.  Under 
such  conditions  it  never  occurred  to  anyone  concerned 
that  the  honour  of  the  Danish  Government  could  be 
affected  by  the  transactions  that  have  been  related,  nor 
that  the  amicable  relations  between  the  Governor  of 
Serampore  and  the  Government  of  Calcutta  were  en¬ 
dangered  because  the  former  had  made  friendly  repre¬ 
sentations  to  the  latter  concerning  the  peaceable 
demeanour  and  general  good  conduct  of  his  neigh¬ 
bours,  the  British  missionaries  residing  at  Serampore. 

To  the  third  subject  of  complaint,  that  the  impri¬ 
matur  established  by  Government  over  the  publica¬ 
tions  of  the  press  necessitated  the  submission  of  works 
on  the  subject  of  our  holy  religion  to  the  native  agents 
of  the  Government,  Lord  Minto  replied,  that  the 
intervention  of  a  native  was  not  necessary  to  enable 
members  of  Government  to  form  their  own  opinions 
of  writings  produced  in  Persian  and  Bengalee  ;  and 
that  the  regulation  complained  of  already  existed 
towards  all  the  presses  of  Calcutta.  If,  therefore,  the 
right  of  the  Government  to  exercise  an  imprimatur 
over  the  press  of  Serampore  were  denied  on  the  ground 
taken  up  by  Mr.  Buchanan  that  the  civil  power  was 
incompetent  to  form  a  sound  judgment  of  religious 
works.  Lord  INIinto  observed  that  the  next  step  must 
he  an  ecclesiastical  censorship  of  the  press  and  a 
return  to  the  dark  ages.  He  disclaimed  all  desire 


76 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


to  judge  of  the  orthodoxy  or  the  error  involved  in  any 
theological  propositions,  but  he  asserted  that  it  was  in 
the  capacity,  and  that  it  was  the  duty,  of  Government 
to  decide  whether  or  no  the  publication  of  certain 
propositions  under  the  existing  conditions  could  be  con¬ 
tinued  with  safety  to  the  State.  In  illustration  of 
his  opinion  that  they  could  not  be  so,  he  quoted  in  a 
Government  letter  to  the  Secret  Committee  the  follow¬ 
ing  passage  from  a  religious  pamphlet  published  by 
Mr.  Buchanan : — 

‘  The  Mahommedans  profess  a  religion  which  has 
ever  been  characterised  by  political  bigotry  and  intem¬ 
perate  zeal.  In  this  country  that  religion  still  retains 
the  character  of  its  bloody  origin,  particularly  among 
the  higher  classes.  Whenever  the  Mahommedan  feels 
his  religion  touched,  he  grasps  his  dagger.  This  spirit 
was  seen  in  full  operation  under  Tippoo’s  government, 
and  it  is  not  soon  extinguished.’ 