

To  the  young  mother  Lord  Minto  wrote :  ‘  I  have 
so  many  things  to  thank  you  for,  I  hardly  know  where 
to  begin  :  first,  for  dancing  with  me  at  Kelso ;  secondly, 
for  marrying  graceless ;  thirdly,  for  making  him  so 
good  a  wife, — I  really  am  much  obliged  to  you  for 
that ;  fourthly,  for  being  such  a  good,  dutiful,  beautiful 


8G 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


daughter  to  your  good  mother,  Grod  bless  her  !  fifthly 
and  sixthly,  for  two  letters  to  me ;  and  lastly,  but  indeed 
this  is  scarce  worth  mentioning,  for  being  the  mother 
of  Gilbert’s  son. 

‘ It  is  really  hard  upon  me  to  have  been  away 
just  when  all  this  was  about.  I  don’t  believe  any  of 
you  could  be  more  worthy  of  the  occasion,  or  busier,  or 
more  frightened,  or  more  nervous,  or  more  delighted, 
or  a  more  sincere  admirer  of  the  boy’s  fine  figure. 
It  certainly  is  very  hard  upon  me ;  that  you  must 
allow.  Still  this  most  happy  event  has  given  me  many 
a  pleasant  hour,  and  affords  such  a  quiet  dulcifying  sort 
of  satisfaction  of  mind  as  even  the  pains  of  absence 
cannot  sour.  I  may  live  to  toss  him  about  and  break 
his  bones  yet,  though  his  father  will  have  been  before¬ 
hand  with  me.  .  .  .  One  command  that  I  lay  upon 
you  all  is  that  he  shall  on  no  pretence  whatever  go  to  a 
Harlequin  Farce  till  I  return,  and  that  then  he  shall 
sit  between  his  two  grandfathers;  and  three  well-enter¬ 
tained  babes  we  shall  be.  How  we  shall  laugh — all 
three — except  a  few  compassionate  tears  which  I  may 
shed  at  the  cruel  crosses  of  poor  Columbine  and  at  the 
parental  distress  of  Pantaloon. 

‘  Now,  to  be  serious,  I  beg  you  to  make  the  boy  love 
grandpapa  with  all  his  little  baby  heart.  .  .  .’ 

His  letter  to  Lady  Minto  on  the  same  occasion  ends 
thus  :  ‘  The  perfect  happiness  of  the  worthless  pair, 
Gilbert  and  Mary,  is  really  a  sort  of  felicity  to  us  all 
that  makes  me  feel  independent  of  fate  and  fortune. 
Whatever  fall  out,  the  family  bark  seems  in  harbour. 


^T.  56] 


FAMILY  COREESPONDENCE. 


87 


Gilbert  himself  is  happy,  and  the  rest  can  never  want 
a  home  or  friend. 

‘  Guid  angels  keep  young  Minto’s  heir, 

And  a’  thae  lads  and  lasses  spare. 

I’ll  surely  trust  when  I’m  nae  mair, 

The  bairns  shall  prove, 

In  yon  true  fallow’s  bosom  there, 

A  Parent’s  luve.’ 

A  few  extracts  from  his  letters  to  his  family  will 
suffice  to  give  us  a  glimpse  of  what  may  be  called  his 
private  life — in  all  respects  so  different  from  any  of 
the  varied  experiences  of  former  years. 

‘  April  1808. 

‘  I  continue  to  enjoy  Barrackpore,  and  to  find  it  a  real 
consolation.  My  life  would  be  very  comfortless  without 
it.  I  hardly  ever  go  out  at  Calcutta.  There  is  but  one 
dusty  drive,  and  I  have  hardly  time  for  that  .  .  .  All 
that  is  to  be  done  with  people  belongs  to  Calcutta.  At 
Barrackpore  I  may  read  my  despatches  in  peace  and 
quiet  the  livelong  day,  and  write  what  requires  my  own 
pen  without  interruption.  Accordingly  these  are  my 
employments  from  early  in  the  morning  till  dinner  at 
eight,  excepting  only  a  walk  at  sunset  to  catch  the 
breeze  along  the  river-side.  My  walks  are  generally, 
I  may  say  next  to  always,  alone  ;  for  John  and  all  the 
young  party  are  at  that  time  hunting  jackals,  and  very 
fit  they  should.  The  evenings  as  well  as  the  mornings 
have  been  very  delightful,  and  as  the  walk  is  the  prin¬ 
cipal  event  of  my  Barrackpore  day,  it  answers  extremely 
well,  though  it  would  be  improved,  I  confess,  by  a  lady 