


88 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA 


[1807 


of  my  own  age  under  my  arm  to  tell  how  I  like  the 
breeze,  and  the  moon,  and  the  planets,  and  such  pretty 
prattle  .  .  . 

‘  The  principal  defect  in  my  comfort  here  is  the  total 
want  of  anything  that  can  be  called  society  to  me.  I 
am  never  alone,  I  mean  when  out  of  my  shop ;  but  there 
is  seldom  anybody  who,  either  in  age,  tastes,  or  any  other 
article,  has  anything  in  connexion  with  me ;  so  that 
except  on  business  there  is  a  total  and  constant  sus¬ 
pension  of  everything  that  is  properly  myself.  This  is 
nobody’s  fault  but  my  own,  for  what  business  have  I 
to  grow  old  ?  .  .  . 

‘  I  have  lately  had  a  most  agreeable  visit  from 
IVIr.  Smith,  ‘Bobus,’  *  the  Advocate  Gleneral.  Though  he 
is  not  exactly  my  contemporary,  he  has  a  great  deal  of 
excellent  conversation  that  is  a  feast  for  all  ages.  We 
think  alike  too  on  European  politics,  which  is  rare  here ; 
and  for  that  reason,  as  well  as  from  a  sense  of  propriety, 
I  abstain  entirely  from  that  topic ;  but  it  is  not  un¬ 
pleasant  to  be  agreed  with  once  in  a  way  when  one  gets 
into  good  company.’ 

One  of  Lord  Minto’s  most  characteristic  attributes 
was  his  sympathy  with  youth.  He  was  adored  by 
young  people,  and  was  equally  the  confidant  of  their 

*  Mr.  Kobert  Smith,  father  of  the  late  Lord  Lyveden,  and 
brother  of  the  Kev.  Sydney  Smith.  ‘  Bobus,’  though  he  preferred  a 
solitary  to  a  social  life,  was  well  known  to  have  no  small  measure  of 
the  same  gifts  for  which  Sydney  was  celebrated.  One  day  when 
the  Governor  General  complained  of  the  torment  he  suffered  from 
the  mosquitoes  at  dinner,  Bobus  had  a  resource  to  suggest :  ‘  You 

should  always  contrive  to  have  some  blooming  youth  fresh  from 
England  to  sit  next  to  you.  They  are  sure  to  go  to  him. 


jEt.  56] 


FATMILY  COREESPONDENCE. 


89 


pleasures  and  their  troubles.  If  an  imprudent  marriage 
had  to  be  condoned,  it  was  his  part  to  write  a  soothing 
letter  to  an  angry  parent,  and  to  insinuate  as 
gently  as  he  could  that,  ‘  after  all,  a  man  marries  to 
please  himself,  and  not  his  father  :  ’  but  when  by  vice 
and  folly  sons  brought  shame  and  ruin  on  their 
families,  and  cut  themselves  off  from  an  honourable 
career,  though  his  sympathy  with  the  sufferers  never 
failed,  he  was  inflexible  in  the  coiirse  he  deemed  due 
to  the  interests  of  the  public  service.  The  disclosure 
of  some  very  grave  irregularities  in  the  conduct  of  the 
cadets  at  the  military  college  of  Barasut  led  to  the 
ejection  of  some  of  the  offenders  and  the  removal  of 
the  governor.  His  successor  met  with  a  degree  of  re¬ 
sistance  on  his  first  appointment  sufficient  to  daunt  a 
keener  reformer,  whereupon  Lord  Minto  wrote  him  the 
following  letter,  which  inculcates  on  a  public  officer  the 
system  he  always  advocated  in  private  education  : — ‘  As 
few  rules  and  regulations  as  possible,  but  unswerving 
obedience  to  those  that  are  necessary.’  He  was  wont 
to  say  that  good  temper,  more  than  any  other  virtue, 
is  the  result  of  habit,  and  that  half  the  domestic 
unhappiness  in  the  world  is  caused  by  a  captious  and 
irritating  rule  in  early  life. 