

It  might  well  be  asked  whether  such  a  passage 
as  this  should  not  reasonably  induce  the  licenser 
to  withdraw  Iris  imprimatur  from  a  book,  which, 
although  containing  no  proposition  that  is  not  ‘  ortho¬ 
dox  and  true,  and  entitled  on  that  account  to  a  severely 
ecclesiastical  imprimatur,'  might  nevertheless  sharpen 
every  Mahommedan  dagger  and  plunge  them  into  every 
Christian  bosom  in  the  country  ?  ’ 

'  A  somewhat  amusing  instance  of  the  carelessness  as  to  accu¬ 
racy  which  distinguished  the  opposition  to  Lord  Minto’s  measures  is 
to  be  found  in  the  accusation  that  he  had  manifested  an  intention  to 
suppress  the  Christian  prophecies.  The  fact  was  that  an  advertise¬ 
ment,  sent  by  Mr.  Buchanan  to  the  Government  Gazette,  of  the  in¬ 
tended  publication  of  a  series  of  sermons  on  the  Christian  prophecies, 


JEt.  56] 


CORRESPONDENCE  FROM  LONDON. 


77 


Lord  Minto’s  correspondence  from  London  left  him 
no  doubt  as  to  the  fierceness  of  the  controversy  that 
had  arisen  out  of  his  policy  towards  the  missionaries  ;  it 
had  extended  to  the  Court  of  Directors ;  but  he  was  con¬ 
fidentially  informed  that  he  had  not  only  the  entire 
approval,  but  the  warm  admiration,  of  four-fifths  of  the 
Court  for  the  courage  with  which  he  had  adopted  a 
policy  at  once  firm  and  moderate,  though  certain  to 
provoke  rancorous  hostility  to  his  government.  It  has 
been  said  that  to  some  such  hostility  may  be  attri¬ 
buted  the  fact  of  Lord  ]\Iinto’s  administration  having 
failed  to  obtain  the  measure  of  public  approbation 
which  was  its  just  due.  But  at  the  time  not  a  few 
of  those  statesmen  whose  opinions  he  most  highly 
valued  considered  that  he  was  entitled  to  the  warmest 
thanks  of  the  public.  Perhaps  it  was  only  to  states¬ 
men  that  the  full  extent  of  the  danger  to  our  empire 
in  India  was  a])pareut,  not  alone  from  the  immediate 

delivered  by  himself  in  the  Presidency  churches,  was  suspended,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  usual  practice  of  that  paper,  until  the  MS.  had  been 
submitted  lo  the  superintendent  of  the  Company’s  press. 

The  MS.  never  was  so  submitted,  because  Mr.  Buchanan  thought 
it  his  duty  to  protest  against  the  civil  revision  of  any  theological 
work.  He,  however,  represented  his  sermons  to  have  been  suppressed, 
and  then,  ‘  by  a  graceful  negligence  of  style,’  said  Lord  Minto,  ‘  he 
made  it  appear  that  the  prophecies  themselves  had  been  supj)ressed, 
and  the  Government  was  threatened  with  their  accomplishment  as  a 
matter  of  great  alarm  and  affliction  to  themselves.’  What  the  con¬ 
tents  of  the  sermons  might  be.  Lord  Minto  would  not  undertake  to 
say,  as  he  had  had  no  opportunity  of  perusing  them.  The  Christian 
prophecies  would  certainly  not  have  been  objected  to,  and  the  so- 
called  suppression  of  the  sermons  was  due  entirely  to  Mr.  Buchanan’s 
scruples  of  conscience  which  did  not  permit  him  to  submit  them  to 
Government. 