


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


80 


[1807 


complaisance  towards  every  indiscretion  which  zeal 
or  negligence  may  commit. 

‘  In  my  opinion  the  missionaries  would  advance 
better  by  mixing  with  the  people,  by  habituating  them 
individually  to  the  more  amiable  points  of  their  doc¬ 
trine,  and  attracting  to  the  latter  by  its  beneficent  in¬ 
fluences,  rather  than  by  the  mysteries  and  dogmas  of 
their  faith.  I  have  some  reason  to  think  that  the 
press  and  the  puljfit  have  not  worked  well.  In  many 
instances  I  know  that  those  who  have  not  been  made 
angry  have  been  made  merry  by  these  engines  of  con¬ 
version.  When  the  truth  of  his  faith  is  questioned 
the  Mahommedan  frowns  and  the  Hindoo  smiles.’ 

A  more  formal  document — namely,  a  general  letter 
to  the  Secret  Committee — ends  thus  :  ‘  With  regard  to 
translations  of  the  Scriptures  into  all  the  languages  of 
the  world,  it  is  a  work  with  which  we  warmly  sympa¬ 
thise,  and  to  which  every  countenance  will  be  cordially 
afforded  by  us  ;  but  if  the  pupils  of  Mr.  Buchanan  should 
employ  themselves  in  translating  the  wretched  compo¬ 
sitions  which  we  have  transmitted  to  your  Honourable 
Company,  we  shall  not  think  that  they  advance  the 
cause  either  of  religion  or  of  letters,  and  they  must 
expect  no  countenance  from  us  either  as  Christians,  as 
scholars,  as  statesmen,  or  as  gentlemen.’ 

Serampore  passed  from  Danish  into  British  hands 
in  January  1808,  just  a  month  after  the  date  of 
Lord  Minto’s  letter  to  Mr.  Parry.  Immediately  on  the 
receipt  in  India  of  the  intelligence  of  a  rupture  be¬ 
tween  England  and  Denmark,  the  order  to  occupy 


^T.  56]  MISSIONS  IN  NORTH-WEST  INDIA. 


81 


Serampore  was  given  to  the  Company’s  forces.  Writing 
of  this  event  to  Mr.  Parry,  Lord  Minto  said :  ‘  Our 
worthy  neighbours,  the  Serampore  missionaries,  have 
experienced  no  sort  of  inconvenience  from  our  occupa¬ 
tion  of  that  factory.  I  flatter  myself  I  am  on  the  best 
possible  footing  with  them,  at  least  in  temporal  con¬ 
cerns.  If  they  should  be  less  satisfied  on  other  points, 
I  may  hope,  from  the  religion  they  and  I  profess,  that 
charity  will  accompany  zeal,’ 

Two  years  later  he  actively  interfered  to  promote 
the  extension  of  the  ministrations  of  the  missionary 
body  to  the  great  cities  of  Northern  India. 

In  the  course  of  1810,  permission  was  sought  of 
the  Government  to  establish  missions  in  the  N.  W. 
Provinces.  Two  gentlemen  in  the  Serampore  mission 
desired  to  proceed  to  Agra  and  Delhi.  The  Governor 
General  in  Council  stated  that  he  saw  no  objection  to 
allow  them  to  do  so,  but  desired  them  to  make  the 
application  for  leave  to  proceed  there,  saying  nothing 
of  anything  else.  This  sentence  was  understood  to 
mean  that  as  their  objects,  more  distinctly  stated,  might 
provoke  a  prohibition  from  the  Court  of  Directors, 
Lord  Minto  took  it  on  his  own  responsibility  to  give 
them  the  desired  permission. 