

We  should  hardly  have  ventured  to  quote  so  glaring 
a  specimen  of  a  spirit  described  in  the  slang  of  the 
present  day  as  Jingoism  — the  English  language  having 
apparently  no  term  of  reprobation  for  it — had  the 
writer  borne  a  name  less  known  and  honoured  than  that 
of  IMetcalfe. 

It  was,  however,  the  sort  of  spirit  which,  combined 
with  conspicuous  ability  and  strong  character,  had 
attracted  the  attention  of  Lord  Wellesley,  who,  when 
Metcalfe  was  only  nineteen,  sent  him  in  a  political 
capacity  to  the  camp  of  Lord  Lake ;  and  which  in  this 
year,  1808,  marked  him  out  in  the  judgment  of  Lord 
Minto  for  a  still  more  important  mission.  To  appre¬ 
ciate  the  policy  of  the  Indian  Government  at  this 
juncture  it  is  necessary  to  revert  for  a  moment  to  the 
events  of  the  preceding  year. 

At  the  beginning  of  1806  Persia,  being  engaged  in 
hostilities  with  Russia,  sent  an  Ambassador  to  Paris 
to  desire  the  assistance  of  France.  A  cordial  reception 
was  given  him,  and  it  was  announced  that  a  splendid 
mission,  having  authority  to  make  a  treaty  of  alliance 
between  France  and  Persia,  would  be  despatched  from 
Paris  to  Teheran. 

In  order  to  counteract  the  effect  of  these  proceed- 


Mr.  57] 


DEFENCE  OF  INDIA.— PERSIA. 


99 


ings  a  similar  course  was  adopted  by  England.  An 
Envoy  was  appointed  to  Persia,  and,  with  the  object  of 
lending  greater  dignity  and  importance  to  his  creden¬ 
tials,  it  was  suggested  by  the  Court  of  Directors  that, 
while  remaining  their  own  paid  agent,  he  should  be  in¬ 
vested  with  the  character  of  representative  of  the  Crown. 
The  proposal  was  acceded  to  by  the  IMinistry  of  Lord 
Grenville.  There  coidd  be  little  question  that  Persia 
was  only  important  to  France  as  a  weapon  of  offence 
against  Great  Britain.  Hence,  those  who  knew  most 
of  Indian  matters  saw  the  necessity  of  selecting  the 
most  skilful  of  Indian  diplomatists  for  the  task  of 
countermining  the  progress  of  Phance  at  the  Persian 
Court ;  and  the  name  of  Colonel  Malcolm,  already 
known  in  connection  with  a  successful  mission  to 
Persia  in  the  time  of  Lord  Wellesley,  was  pressed  upon 
the  Directors  by  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,’  by  Lord  Minto, 
then  President  of  the  Board  of  Control,  and  by  other 
qualified  judges  : — ‘  but,’  wrote  Sir  Arthur  from  London 
to  Malcolm  himself,  ‘  nobody  here  knows  or  cares  any¬ 
thing  about  Indian  matters,  nor  are  those  considted 
who  could  give  the  information.’  The  Wellesley  school 
of  politicians  was  not  in  favour  in  Leadenhall  Street  ; 
and  thus  it  came  about  that  the  claims  of  Malcolm  were 
ignored,  and  that  Sir  Harford  Jones  ”  was  appointed  to 
the  Persian  IMission,  to  represent  the  Crown  while  re- 