

*  To  Et.  Hon.  R.  Dundas,  President  of  the  Board  of  Control. 


JEt.  57] 


MISSION  TO  PERSIA. 


109 


case  assume  of  Political  Agent  to  the  Governor  General 
— the  political  (not  diplomatic)  representative  of  the 
E.  I.  Company,  and  of  British  affairs  in  India.  He 
might  furnish  essential  aid  to  the  King’s  Envoy.  If 
they  clashed  he  could  be  recalled.’ 

To  Malcolm  himself  he  wrote  '  most  confidentially 
upon  the  point  of  the  military  arrangements  which 
certain  contingencies  might  involve.  ‘  Of  these  trans¬ 
actions  our  opposition  to  Fi’ance  in  Persia  is  the 
anchor  on  which  our  hopes  must  rest ;  for  if  we  per¬ 
mit  that  country  to  be  the  depot  of  her  preparations 
against  us,  and  wait  at  home  till  the  enemy  thinks 
himself  that  he  is  equal  to  the  undertaking,  we  shall 
give  him  a  great,  and,  as  it  appears  to  me,  a  most 
manifest  advantage.  My  first  anxiety,  therefore,  will 
be  to  know  from  you  whether  the  disposition  of  the 
Persian  Court  or  the  state  of  that  country  admits  of  our 
meeting  the  enemy  at  the  very  moment  of  his  arrival 
or  approach  to  the  Persian  frontier.  I  am  aware  that 
this  system  will  require  a  very  considerable  force.  I 
shall  learn  from  you  what  its  amount  must  be,  and 
shall  in  the  meanwhile  make  every  effort  which  the 
state  of  our  resources  admits  of,  to  be  prepared  with  an 
army,  and  the  means  of  transporting  it.  In  the  mean¬ 
while,  I  have  imagined  that  a  force  of  20,000  or 
25,000  men  may  be  necessary.  This  will  be  a  great 
exertion,  and  I  don’t  think  that  we  can  go  further.  .  . 
If  10,000  French  troops  were  to  come  I  conceive  that 


’  This  letter  is  printed  in  Kaye’s  Cvrresjfoiidence  of  Sir  J. 
Malcolm,  vol.  i. 


]10 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


our  force,  which  must  consist  of  Sepoys  in  a  great  pro¬ 
portion,  should  be  double ;  but  if,  instead  of  sending 
such  an  army,  as  has  been  announced,  they  should 
begin  by  collecting  gradually  a  small  force  capable  of 
establishing  a  French  post  on  the  coast,  and  endeavour 
to  take  root  there  before  the  grand  design  is  entered 
upon,  I  think  it  of  the  utmost  moment  to  disappoint 
this  preparatory  measure,  and  to  expel  the  enemy  with 
the  least  possible  delay.  We  shall  be  prepared  to  push 
off  4,000  or  5,000  men  on  the  first  summons.’ 

The  letter  ends  with  the  confession  that  ‘  Sir  H. 
Jones  is  rather  a  marplot  (I  am  writing  confidentially) 
in  our  play.’ 

The  instructions  sent  to  Colonel  IMalcolm  from 
Calcutta  show  that  the  policy  he  was  desired  to  pursue 
was  to  be  of  a  tentative  character. 

‘  First,  to  detach  the  Court  of  Persia  from  the 
French  alliance  ;  and  to  prevail  on  that  Court  to  re¬ 
fuse  the  passage  of  French  troops  through  the  terri¬ 
tories  subject  to  Persia,  or  the  admission  of  French 
troops  into  the  country.  If  that  cannot  be  obtained, 
to  admit  English  troops  with  a  view  of  opposing  the 
French  army  in  its  progress  to  India,  to  prevent  the 
cession  of  any  maritime  port,  and  the  establishment  of 
French  factories  on  the  coast  of  Persia. 