

‘  Second,  to  obtain  authentic  intelligence  on  all 
points  interesting  to  the  Government.  It  is  scarcely 
necessary  to  particularise  those  points,  which  will 
necessarily  suggest  themselves  to  the  mind  of  Colonel 
Malcolm.  The  principal  of  them  are,  the  real  nature  and 


Mt.  57] 


MISSION  TO  PERSIA. 


Ill 


extent  of  the  engagements  entered  into  liy  France  and 
Persia,  and  the  real  disposition  of  Persia  respecting  the 
execution  of  them.  Colonel  IMalcolm’s  opinion  and 
advice  would  also  be  required  by  the  Government  as  to 
the  policy  to  be  adojjted  in  either  of  two  contingencies 
supposed — the  active  hostility  of  Persia,  or  her  neu¬ 
trality.’ 

With  these  instructions,  Malcolm  sailed  for  Persia ; 
but  before  he  left  Bombay,  though  not  in  time  for 
the  most  rapid  express  to  communicate  the  intelligence 
t  o  him,  the  news  reached  Calcutta  of  Sir  Harford  Jones’s 
arrival  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  on  his  way  to 
India,  where  he  expected  to  receive  the  Governor 
General’s  instructions  for  the  mission  with  which  he 
had  been  entrusted  to  Persia. 

Up  to  the  arrival  of  Sir  H.  Jones’s  communication 
from  the  Cape,  everyone  in  India  had  been  in  total  ig¬ 
norance  of  his  movements.  It  was  possible  that 
IMalcolm  might  find  him  in  Persia,  in  which  case.  Lord 
Minto  I'elied  on  his  envoy’s  conciliatory  qualities  and 
magnanimity.  ‘  For  the  first  he  would  find  exercise  in 
his  intercourse  with  Sir  Harford  Jones,  and  for  the 
second  in  dealing  with  himself.’  The  contingency  of 
Sir  Hai'ford’s  arrival  at  Bombay  before  the  departure  of 
Malcolm  had  also  been  foreseen.  ‘  In  that  case,’  -ftTote 
Lord  Minto  to  Sir  George  Barlow,  an  old  and  cordial 
friend  of  Malcolm’s,  ‘  1  have  resolved  to  withdraw  i\Ial- 
colm’s  Persian  mission  altogether  ;  but  to  beg  Colonel 
Malcolm  to  accept  a  mission  to  Bagdad,  and  to  take 
charge  of  our  political  interests  and  affairs  in  all  the 


112 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


countries  westward  of  Persia  even  to  Constantinople. 
This  is  a  wide  and  important  field  ;  it  is  entirely  dis¬ 
tinct  from  the  province  assigned  to  Sir  H.  Jones,  and 
it  requires  judgment,  ability,  and  activity  which  are  not 
to  be  found  there  now.  We  should  lose  the  advantage 
of  Malcolm’s  talents  and  influence  at  the  Court  of 
Persia.  But  this  loss  we  cannot  avoid.  We  shall  gain 
his  exertions  still  nearer  to  the  approaching  danger 
.  .  .  and  his  observation  and  judgment  will  not  be 
confined  to  the  spot  on  which  he  may  reside,  but  will 
embrace  the  whole  range  of  politics  from  the  Indus  to 
Constantinople.*  This  measure  cannot  but  be  attended 
with  expense,  which  no  man  can  wish  to  avoid  more 
earnestly  than  I  do ;  but  to  save  the  expense  of  an 
essential  service,  and  to  lose  an  advantage  affecting  so 
deeply  the  interests  and  even  safety  of  the  State,  would 
be  the  greatest  and  worst  of  prodigalities. 