


Air.  57] 


THE  NATIVE  STATES. 


107 


their  rights,  and  of  our  solicitude  to  maintain  peace.  But 
those  states  of  which  the  power  and  dominion  have 
been  abridged,  or  of  which  the  influence  has  been 
circumscribed,  and  against  which  the  field  of  ambition 
and  enterprise  has  been  closed  by  the  political  position 
of  the  British  power  and  ascendancy  in  India,  cannot 
reasonably  be  supposed  to  entertain  that  sense  of 
common  interest  with  the  British  Oovernment  which 
should  induce  them  to  prefer  the  security  of  their 
actual  condition  to  the  alluring  prospect  of  restored 
possessions,  consequence,  and  authority.  And  demon¬ 
strations  of  the  dangers  to  which  their  authority  and 
independence  would  be  exposed  by  the  ambition  of 
France  would  have  little  weight  when  opposed  to  the 
assurance  of  restoration  to  the  dominion  they  have  lost. 

‘With  states  of  another  description,  engagements  of 
co-operation  might  no  doubt  be  formed,  provided  these 
engagements  should  involve  obligations  of  defensive 
alliance  against  all  enemies.  Of  such  alliances  there  is 
too  much  reason  to  doubt  the  efficiency  and  the  policy.’ 

A  wise  man  will  not  allow  an  enemy  to  approach 
the  gates  behind  which  stand  doubtful  friends.  ‘  I  am 
strongly  of  opinion,’  wrote  Lord  Minto  to  Sir  George 
Barlow,  ‘  that  if  this  great  conflict  is  to  be  maintained, 
we  ought  to  meet  it  as  early  and  as  far  beyond  our  own 
frontiers  as  possible.  We  ought  to  contest  Persia  itself 
with  the  enemy,  and  to  dispute  every  step  of  their  pro¬ 
gress.  The  force  which  we  can  oppose  to  them  in  that 
stage  of  the  contest  is  indeed  much  smaller  than  they 
would  find  assembled  against  them  in  our  own  terrih)- 


108 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


ries ;  but  in  Persia  we  should  have  much  less  to  contend 
with  also,  and  we  should  meet  an  enemy  much  less 
prepared  than  he  will  be  if  we  wait  at  home  till  he  is 
ready  to  face  us. 

‘  This  system,  however,  depends  on  the  disposition 
of  Persia  herself  to  neutrality- — that  is,  to  let  the 
French  and  us  fight  it  out  fairly  between  us.  For  if 
Persia  is  determined  to  support  the  French  with  all  her 
power,  I  acknowledge  that  we  cannot  possibly  detach 
such  a  force  from  our  Indian  Army  as  that  state  of 
things  would  require.  At  least  we  could  not  do  so 
without  finding  some  means  to  divide  Persia  and  to 
have  allies  on  our  side  as  well  as  the  French.’ 

For  the  elucidation  of  such  problems  as  these  the 
presence  of  an  Envoy  gifted  with  special  powers  of 
observation,  as  well  as  with  diplomatic  talents,  was 
imperatively  necessary.  The  state  of  affairs  admitted 
of  no  further  delay.  And  in  absolute  ignorance  of  Sir 
Harford  Jones’s  movements.  Lord  Minto  determined  to 
send  Colonel  Malcolm  on  a  mission  to  Persia.*  ‘  By 
Colonel  Malcolm,  if  by  any  man  living,  we  may  hope  to 
detach  Persia  from  her  hostile  alliance  with  our  enemy  ; 
and,  if  that  benefit  is  no  longer  attainable,  we  shall 
receive  from  Colonel  Malcolm  authentic  information 
and  judicious  advice.  If  Sir  H.  Jones  should  have 
arrived  in  Persia,  Colonel  Malcolm  will  of  course  with¬ 
hold  his  own  credentials  and  diplomatic  powers  in 
Persia,  and  I  do  not  see  any  necessary  and  unavoidable 
inconvenience  from  the  character  which  he  would  in  that 