


‘  Barrackpore  :  May  24,  1808. 

‘  I  often  wonder  at  my  being  able  to  labour  all  day 
and  every  day  in  this  climate  without  ever  flagging, 
much  less  having  any  notion  of  being  ill.  The  weather 
seems  a  dull  topic,  but  it  concerns  one  so  much  here 


94 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


that  I  must  give  it  a  place  in  my  true  and  particular 
history  of  our  lives.  This  year  has  been  uncommonly 
favourable  to  beginners.  The  best  weather  generally 
comes  on  about  the  middle  of  March,  but  our  March 
was  the  finest  month  in  the  year  from  beginning  to 
end.  It  was  delightful.  The  heat  increased  about 
the  middle  of  April,  but  was  quite  endurable  till  the 
end  of  the  first  week  in  May.  By  that  time  the  hot 
winds  had  set  in,  and  their  very  name  is  sufficiently 
descriptive  of  discomfort.  However,  at  this  period  we 
have  relief  a  great  part  of  the  four-and-twenty  hours, 
for  at  sunset  the  wind  cools,  and,  continuing  to  blow, 
one  draws  it  in  luxuriously  and  revives.  The  heat  does 
not  come  on  again  till  next  forenoon.  During  the 
first  days  of  the  very  hot  winds  I  bore  it,  and  thought 
that  patience  would  carry  me  through ;  but  it  was  too 
oppressive  at  last,  and  I  submitted  to  use  the  tatty. 
That  invention  is  quite  effectual,  and  makes  a  temperate 
zone  between  the  tropics.  I  sat  the  livelong  day  be¬ 
hind  the  tatty,  subject  to  no  inconvenience  but  want  of 
light ;  however,  with  spectacles  I  coidd  manage  to  read 
my  book  and  write  my  lesson.  I  began,  nevertheless, 
to  count  the  days  to  the  rains,  which  I  had  fixed  for 
June  10;  when  all  at  once,  without  any  notice,  as  we 
sat  in  Council  on  Friday,  May  20,  it  became  so  dark 
that  we  could  not  see  our  desks,  and  then  came  a  deluge 
with  a  tempest  of  east  wind  that  woffid  have  made 
Elliot  shiver.  From  that  hour  the  climate  has  been 
quite  heavenly,  and  not  the  less  so  in  my  estimation 
for  a  good  pouring  shower  almost  everyday.  You  must 


AiT.  56]  FAMILY  COEEESPONDENCE.  95 

not  imagine  that  these  are  the  rains.  They  are  known 
by  the  name  of  the  small  rains ;  not  that  they  are  small 
while  they  are  falling,  for  they  come  down  in  buckets ; 
but  they  do  not  last  long,  and  there  is  always  an  in¬ 
terval  between  these  little  gentlefolks  and  the  grander 
rains  that  come  in  June.  The  whole  surface  of  the 
country  is  already  soaked,  and  the  wind,  therefore,  is 
cool  and  pleasant.  The  thermometer  was  about  96° 
in  the  shade  during  the  hot  winds. 

‘  28t/i — in  continuation.  I  came  to  town  yesterday  to 
Council.  I  started  at  half  after  five  in  the  morning 
which  is  early  enough  in  this  cool  weather.  An  hour  and 
fifty  minutes  is  the  time  I  generally  pass  on  the  road  ; 
the  distance  sixteen  miles  ;  but  the  road  as  smooth  and 
level  as  the  Mall ;  the  carriage  very  light  with  four 
strong  horses. 