Lord  Minto’s  view  of  the  possible  eventualities 
which  might  ensue  is  given  in  a  private  letter  to 
Lord  Caledon:'  ‘A  partition  of  European  Turkey  is 
a  step  in  the  regular  approach  to  India.  It  seems  to 
facilitate  in  some  points,  though  it  may  retard  that 
enterprise. 

‘  In  other  respects,  I  should  think  it  reasonable  to 
hope  that  the  expulsion  of  the  Turks  from  Europe  may 
create  obstacles  in  the  way  to  India.  It  is  impossible 
that  the  Ottoman  Government  and  the  whole  Turkish 
race  should  not  conceive  the  deepest  and  most  bitter 
resentment  against  such  an  injury.  One  should  look 
for  a  close  communion  between  Great  Britain  and  the 
Turk.  And  if  that  consequence  were  to  follow  the 
partition  of  Turkey,  our  opposition  to  the  progress  of  a 
Erench  army  might  begin  on  the  banks  of  the  Bosphorus 
instead  of  the  Indus.  The  Turks  may  be  terrified,  it  is 
true,  and  grant  a  passage  to  the  French  through  their 
territories  in  Asia.  But  even  in  that  case  the  I'rench 
must  be  deeply  committed  in  countries  which  will 


Governor  of  tlie  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 


106 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


abhor  them,  and  have  conceived  probably  an  affection 
for  our  cause.’ 

On  a  review  of  all  the  circumstances  Lord  Minto 
came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Indian  Government 
would  be  wanting  in  vigilance  and  prudence  if  they  did 
not  put  themselves  in  a  state  of  preparation  to  meet  a 
possible  if  not  probable  struggle  with  France,  or  with 
France  and  Eussia  combined. 

‘  Yet  I  am  not  sure,’  he  wrote  in  a  letter  on  this  sub¬ 
ject  to  Lady  Minto,  ‘  that  I  shall  not  be  blamed ;  for  the 
attack,  though  we  are  strongly  and  positively  warned 
of  it,  is  not  certain,  and  the  most  necessary  preparations 
cannot  be  made  without  expense,  which  naturally  comes 
more  home  to  the  feelings  of  my  masters  than  remote 
dangers,  however  serious.  However,  in  this  as  in  every¬ 
thing  else,  I  shall  do  what  in  my  best  judgment  appears 
right,  and  not  be  led  astray  by  the  fear  of  the  Qu’en 
diror-t-on  ?  In  the  meanwhile  the  French  are  smoothing 
their  way  by  magnificent  embassies  and  numerous 
military  retinues  in  Persia,  and  by  swarms  of  agents  of 
all  ranks,  qualities,  and  countries,  all  over  the  East ; 
and  they  are  beginning  to  be  heard  of  at  the  Courts  of 
our  Indian  princes  and  chieftains.  But  I  think  we 
shall  overtake  them  in  that  race.’ 

To  an  enquiry  concerning  the  disposition  towards  us 
of  the  native  states  he  repHed  :  '  ‘  We  have  every  reason 
to  believe  that  all  the  states  of  India  are  satisfied  of 
our  disinclination  to  extend  our  dominions  or  to  invade 


*  May  16,  1808.  Secret  and  separate  general  letter. 