

'  Afterwards  Duke  of  Wellinoton. 

2  A  baronetcy  was  gnnted  to  Mr.  Harford  Jones  on  Ids  appoint¬ 
ment  to  Persia,  which  was  not  made  till  after  Lord  Minto  had  left 
England. 


100 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


ceiving  instructions  from  the  Company.  Unfortunately, 
Sir  Harford,  though  he  had  lived  for  many  years  in  the 
East  as  a  merchant,  and  latterly  as  consul  at  Bushire, 
was  considered  in  India  to  be  totally  unfit  to  conduct 
so  delicate  a  mission. 

In  January  1808,  rumours  reached  India  of  the 
march  of  a  French  army  under  General  Menou  towards 
Persia  on  the  way  to  India,  while  it  became  known 
that  a  great  military  embassy  attended  by  four-and- 
twenty  French  officers  and  three  hundred  French 
soldiers  had  actually  arrived  there,  giving  it  out  that 
they  were  the  advanced  guard  of  an  army.  ‘  The  first 
project  is  believed  to  be  to  take  possession  of  a  port 
on  the  coast  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  by  which  they  may 
communicate  with  the  Mauritius,  and  receive  supplies 
by  sea,  and  from  whence  they  may  attempt  an  invasion 
of  the  western  coast  of  India,  and  unsettle  the  minds 
of  the  native  princes  by  promises,  menaces,  and  in¬ 
trigue.’  * 

Of  the  English  envoy  to  Persia  nothing  was  known 
at  all.  The  last  act  of  Lord  Grenville’s  administration 
had  been  the  appointment  of  Sir  Harford  Jones,  who 
was  directed  to  proceed  in  the  first  instance  to  St. 
Petersburg  to  offer  to  the  Czar  the  mediation  of  Great 
Britain  between  Eussia  and  Persia. 

The  peace  and  alliance  between  France  and  Eussia 
had  rendered  the  failure  of  this  preliminary  mission  a 
certainty ;  while  the  fall  of  the  Ministry  that  had  en- 


•  Lord  Minto  to  Lady  Minto. 


JEt.  67j 


DEFENCE  OF  INDIA.— PERSIA. 


101 


trusted  it  to  him  made  it  doubtful  whether  Sir  Harford 
Jones  would  be  confirmed  in  the  more  important  ap¬ 
pointment. 

In  the  meanwhile  the  aspect  of  affairs  was  becom¬ 
ing  daily  graver,  as  the  co-operation  of  France  aird 
Russia  in  the  East  grew  more  probable. 

‘  As  long  as  France,’  wrote  Lord  Minto,*  ‘  might  be 
engaged  in  continental  wars  in  Europe,  the  project  of 
directing  her  arms  towards  this  quarter  must  be  con¬ 
sidered  impracticable ;  but  if  her  armies  have  been 
liberated  by  a  pacification  with  Russia  and  by  the 
continued  submission  of  the  Powers  of  Europe,  the 
advance  of  a  considerable  force  of  French  troops  into 
Persia  under  the  acquiescence  of  the  Turkish,  Russian, 
and  Persian  powers,  cannot  be  deemed  an  undertaking 
beyond  the  scope  of  that  energy  and  perseverance 
which  distinguish  the  present  ruler  of  France. 

‘  If  one  body  of  troops  should  succeed  in  penetrating 
as  far  as  the  Persian  dominions,  others  may  be  ex¬ 
pected  to  follow ;  and  it  may  then  be  no  longer  at  the 
option  of  the  Government  of  Persia  to  prevent  the 
complete  establishment  of  the  French  power  and  as¬ 
cendancy  in  Persia. 