

‘  2dth. — I  have  been  at  church  to-day,  which  is  being 
a  very  good  Christian,  for  it  is  close  and  warm,  notwith¬ 
standing  punkahs  which  are  pulled  by  INIahommedans 
in  turbans  looking  on  their  masters  with  the  contempt 
which  the  faithfid  bestow  upon  infidels  performing  the 
impious  rites  of  a  false  religion.  There  are  few  coun¬ 
tries  in  which  thei'e  is  such  a  quantity  of  reciprocal 
contempt,  from  the  mixture  of  so  many  different  races ' 
professing  different  religions,  and  in  general  extremely 
bigoted  each  to  his  own.  However,  as  a  Christian,  I 
am  charitable  enough  to  despise  none  of  them,  but  only 
wish  some  of  their  superstitions  were  not  so  bloody 
and  cruel.  Human  sacrifices  are  kept  down  with  some 
difficulty,  and  particularly  infanticide.  Widow-burning 


96 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


is  extremely  prevalent,  especially  in  this  neighbour¬ 
hood,  I  am  sorry  to  say.  The  Brahmins  have  some 
profit  from  it,  and  it  relieves  the  heir  of  the  jointure 
or  maintenance  of  the  dowager  ;  so  that,  to  be  sure,  one 
ought  not  to  wonder  at  Brahmins  and  heirs  for  encour¬ 
aging  the  practice.  The  odd  thing  is  that  it  prevails 
in  the  lowest  condition  of  life.  When  a  poor  miserable 
peasant’s  wife  happens  to  be  of  a  good  caste,  which  is 
often  the  case,  nothing  in  the  world  will  prevent  her 
burning  from  pure  gentility.’ 


f 


i^T.  57] 


POSITION  OF  ENGLAND. 


97 


CHAPTER  V. 

The  year  1808  was  memorable  in  the  annals  of  Eu¬ 
rope  as  that  of  a  supreme  crisis  in  her  fortunes.  It 
found  all  the  nations,  save  one,  enthralled  in  the  chains 
of  the  greatest  military  despotism  recorded  in  history. 
It  beheld  the  first  link  give  way,  when  the  spirit  of 
national  independence  burst  into  vigorous  life  on  the 
wild  hills  of  Spain. 

The  position  of  England  relatively  to  Europe  after 
the  Peace  of  Tilsit  (June  1807)  is  thus  commented  on 
in  a  letter  from  a  young  Englishman  in  India  to  a  friend. 
‘  What  an  unexampled  and  surprising  picture  the  state 
of  Europe  now  presents ;  France,  Russia,  Austria, 
Prussia,  Germany,  Holland,  Spain,  Portugal,  Denmark, 
Italy,  Turkey — all  Europe,  save  little  Sweden — com¬ 
bined  against  our  country.  We  may  truly  call  ourselves 
“  divisos  orbe  Britannos.”  Although  this  is  a  state  of 
things  which  no  one  could  ever  have  wished  to  see,  I 
confess  that  I  feel  a  pride  in  it.  ...  I  hope  that  we 
shall  do  as  well  as  possible  under  such  strange  circum¬ 
stances. 

‘  We  have  at  different  times  paid  Austria,  Prussia, 

H 


98 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


France,  and  Germany;  we  preserved  to  Turkey  a  great 
portion  of  its  empire,  driving  out  its  enemies,  the 
French ;  we  have  constantly  fought  the  battles  of 
'  Europe  against  France ;  and  all  Powers  are  now  ranged 
on  the  side  of  France  against  us.  Hurrah  for  the  tight 
little  Island !  ’ 