

‘  The  ascendancy  of  France  being  once  established 
in  the  territories  of  Persia  in  the  manner  described,  it 
may  justly  be  expected  that,  from  that  centre  of  local 
power  they  may  be  enabled  gradually  to  extend  their 
influence  by  conciliation  or  by  conquest  towards  the 


'  Secret  and  separate  general  letter,  February  2,  1808,  par.  24. 


102 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


region  of  Hindostan,  and  ultimately  open  a  passage 
for  their  troops  into  the  dominion  of  the  Company. 

‘  Arduous  as  such  an  undertaking  must  necessarily 
be,  we  are  not  warranted  in  deeming  it  in  the  present 
situation  of  affairs  to  be  altogether  chimerical  and 
impracticable  under  the  guidance  of  a  man  whose 
energy  and  success  appear  almost  commensurate  with 
his  ambition.  We  deem  it  our  duty  to  act  under  a 
supposition  of  its  practicabihty,  and  to  adopt  whatever 
measures  are  in  our  judgment  calculated  to  counter¬ 
act  it,  even  at  the  hazard  of  injury  to  some  local  and 
immediate  interests.’ 

In  a  private  letter  he  wrote  :  ‘  What  would  have 
seemed  impossible  has  become  scarcely  improbable, 
since  we  have  seen  one  State  after  another  in  Europe, 
among  them  those  we  deemed  most  stable  and  secure, 
fall  like  a  house  of  cards  before  the  genius  of  one 
man.’ 

Before  long,  the  vague  rumours  that  had  filled  the 
world  ever  since  the  interview  of  Tilsit  assumed  more 
definite  proportions.  Though  all  that  was  possible  had 
been  done  to  secure  secrecy,  and  though  no  written 
records  have  ever  come  to  light  of  the  personal  com¬ 
munications  interchanged  without  witnesses  between 
the  two  sovereigns,  it  is  now  pretty  well  ascertained 
that  the  surmises  hazarded  from  the  first  by  those 
accustomed  to  watch  the  political  skies,  were  nearly,  if 
not  absolutely,  correct.  Like  those  happy  strokes  of 
divination  by  which  great  discoveries  have  been  made. 


^T.  57]  DEFENCE  OF  INDIA.— PERSIA.  103 

what  seemed  to  be  the  intuitions  of  statesmen  were 
sagacious  deductions  from  certified  facts. 

The  indiflference  in  England  as  to  the  dangers  threat¬ 
ening  India,  of  which  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  complained 
two  years  before,  now  gave  way  to  grave  apprehensions. 
He  himself  wrote  again  to  his  former  correspondent, 
Colonel  Malcolm,  that  ‘  the  state  of  affairs  caused 
great  anxiety,  but  it  is  of  that  nature  which  you  have 
occasionally  witnessed  in  timid  and  undecided  men 
who  fear  something,  they  know  not  what,  and  are  more 
afraid  of  the  remedy  than  they  are  of  the  danger  to 
which  they  are  exposed.’  This  was  in  February  1808. 
In  the  course  of  the  spring  Lord  Grenville,  in  a  letter 
to  Lord  Min  to  already  given,  alluded  to  ‘  dangers  to 
our  Indian  Empire,  in  presence  of  which  Lord  Minto 
could  hardly  have  executed  an  intention,  had  it  been 
formed,  to  resign  his  important  functions  there ;  ’  and 
the  official  correspondence  from  London  showed  that 
an  invasion  of  India  was  looked  upon  by  the  ministers 
as  a  very  serious  danger. 