

It  was  believed,  on  what  was  considered  to  be  good 
authority,  that,  in  pursuance  of  an  arrangement  made 
at  Tilsit,  a  Persian  army  of  30,000  men,  with  a  body 
of  Cossacks,  was  to  assemble  early  in  the  spring  of 
1808  at  Astrachan,  to  penetrate  thence  through  the 
northern  provinces  of  Persia,  and  support  the  opera¬ 
tions  of  a  French  army,  advancing  simultaneously 
through  the  Turkish  dominions,  for  which  permission 
had  been  obtained  from  the  Porte.  To  these  projects 


104 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


seemingly  pretty  generally  known,  was  added  the 
‘  secret  information,  to  be,  however,  received  with 
caution,’  that  advices  from  Paris  described  ‘  Bonaparte 
as  considerably  chagrined  at  learning  that  the  Kussians 
had  entirely  failed  in  their  engagement  to  assemble  a 
force  at  Astrachan,  alleging  the  impossibility  of  pro¬ 
viding  supplies  for  an  army  in  that  country,  and  the 
unwillingness  of  the  Cossacks  to  march  (possibly  in  a 
direction  where  there  was  no  plunder) ;  that  in  con¬ 
sequence  he  had  ordered  Caulaincourt  to  remonstrate 
most  strongly  with  the  Emperor  on  the  necessity  of 
fulfilling  his  engagement.  From  the  same  source  it  is 
stated  that  Sebastiani  has  written  from  Constantinople 
that  the  Pasha  of  Bagdad  (whom  he  accuses  of  being 
gained  over  to  the  English)  has  declared  his  resolution 
of  opposing  the  entrance  of  any  foreign  forces  into  his 
territory,  and  that,  the  Porte  having  obtained  informa¬ 
tion  (possibly  from  Mr.  Adair  at  Vienna)  that  by  the 
secret  articles  of  Tilsit '  Moldavia  and  Wallachia  were 
ceded  to  Kussia,  Servia  and  Bosnia  to  Austria,  and 
Greece  and  the  Islands  of  the  Archipelago  to  France, 
the  Turks  must  be  considered  as  either  secret  or  open 
enemies,  and  therefore  he  (Sebastiani)  presses  the 
immediate  march  of  the  French  troops  into  Macedonia, 

'  If  Turkey  resisted,  the  two  Powers  were  to  divide  her  do¬ 
minions.  ‘  Si  de  son  cote  la  Porte  n’acceptait  pas,  on  s’obligerait  A 
soustraire  au  joug  des  Turcs  toutes  les  provinces  ottomanes,  Con¬ 
stantinople  et  la  Roum61ie  except^es.’  Lanfrey,  from  whose  history 
of  Napoleon  the  quotation  is  made,  adds  that  the  authenticity  of 
these  stipulations  is  ‘  indiscutable.’ — Histirire  de  Napoleon, 
tome  iv. 


^T.  o7] 


KELATIONS  WITH  TUEKEY. 


105 


as  well  as  the  throwing  forces  into  the  islands,  when¬ 
ever  any  opportunity  of  escaping  the  English  fleet 
should  occur.’ 

The  sudden  revolution  in  the  Emperor  Napoleon’s 
policy  towards  the  Turk,  whom  he  had  so  lately  called 
his  best  ally,  was  an  essential  element  in  the  considera¬ 
tions  upon  which  the  policy  of  the  Indian  Government 
was  shaped. 

