

‘  This  may  be  true,  and  our  position  and  preparations 
in  the  Gulf  may  not  impossibly  become  the  cause  of 
their  own  apparent  inutility,  by  diverting  the  enemy 
from  the  attempt  in  that  direction.  But  in  the  first 
place  this  is  not  certain,  and  we  should  leave  an  im¬ 
portant  post  unguarded  if,  on  any  such  speculation,  we 
should  abandon  that  great  means  of  our  defence,  and 


^T.  57] 


MEASUEES  OF  DEFENCE. 


125 


resign  the  whole  of  the  southern  route  to  fortune,  or, 
to  speak  more  justly,  to  the  uudisturbed  progress 
of  the  enemy.  In  the  next  place,  as  I  have  already 
hinted,  these  measures  may  accomplish  their  purpose 
by  impression  alone,  which,  though  its  operation  is 
less  perceptible,  may  not  be  less  efficient  to  its  end, 
and  the  actual  contest  may  be  precluded  by  these 
demonstrations  alone  that  we  are  prepared  to  main¬ 
tain  it.’  ‘ 

‘  There  are  so  many  turns  and  chances  in  human 
affairs  that  I  should  think  it  highly  imprudent  to 
abandon  all  connexion  with  the  countries  bordering  on 
the  Grulf  of  Persia.  If  a  partition  of  Turkey  in  Europe 
were  to  take  place,  it  would  become  advisable  that  we 
should  take  some  part  in  the  affairs  of  Asiatic  Turkey. 
I  should  not  play  the  whole  game  in  this  great  match 
if  I  neglected  to  provide  a  secure  station  for  that  pur¬ 
pose.’ 

General  INIalcolm  appeared  to  Lord  IMinto  singularly 
qualified  for  the  execution  of  measures  of  this  undefined 
but  eventually  active,  enterprising,  and  complicated 
nature ;  and  to  him  direction  of  fhem  was  therefore  to 
be  entrusted.  ‘  Particular  instructions  cannot  well  be 
framed  for  cases  which  are  only  seen  in  anticipation, 
and  may  assume  an  almost  infinite  variety  of  forms  and 
modifications ;  the  defect  must  be  supplied  by  the 
known  talents,  activity,  and  judgment  of  the  man  ;  and 
next  by  general  principles  laid  down  for  his  guidance 
which  will  embrace  many  particular  points  of  conduct, 
‘  To  the  Eight  Hon.  R.  Dundas, 


126 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


and  serve  to  regulate  at  least  the  general  character  of 
the  system  ;  the  particulars  of  which  will  thus  in  its 
execution  be  more  easily  directed  by  himself. 

‘  In  the  result,  as  I  fear  no  want  of  energy  in 
General  Malcolm,  so  I  am  not  apprehensive  that  those 
restrictive  principles  by  which  it  ought  to  be  regulated, 
and  which  have  been  fully  inculcated  both  by  written 
instructions  and  by  frequent  personal  advice  and  ad¬ 
monition,  will  be  in  any  degree  forgotten.’ 

It  is  remarkable  that,  among  the  possible  contin¬ 
gencies  commanding  the  attention  of  Indian  statesmen, 
the  one  never  contemplated  was  that  which  actually 
occurred, — namely,  a  check  to  the  power  of  France  in 
Europe,  decided  enough  to  cause  the  abandoning  of  her 
views  on  the  East,  and  the  withdrawal  of  her  troops  from 
Persia.  That  France  might  do  as  she  listed  seemed  to 
have  become  an  axiom  in  the  pohtics  of  the  time. 