

‘  If  India  is  invaded  by  a  French  and  Kussian  army, 
that  event  cannot  be  ascribed  to  the  character  or  coun¬ 
sels  of  the  Indian  Grovernment.  It  is  to  the  disasters 
of  Europe,  to  battles  in  Poland,  to  the  Peace  of  Tilsit, 
that  the  necessity  of  waging  a  burdensome  war  in  India 
must  be  traced.  This  is  a  consideration  very  fit,  in  my 
opinion,  to  weigh  in  the  councils  of  the  British  Empire, 
and  one  which  constitutes  a  strong  claim  on  the  policy 
of  the  British  nation  for  whatever  support  and  co¬ 
operation  the  defence  of  India  may  be  found  to  require.’  ^ 

This  was  written  on  April  2 1 ;  on  the  following  day 

’  To  Sir  George  Barlow. 

*  To  the  Chairman  of  the  East  India  Company,  April  21,  1808. 


JEt.  57] 


MALCOLM  IN  PERSIA. 


113 


came  the  letter  of  Sir  Harford  Jones,  announcing  his 
arrival  at  the  Cape.  On  the  23rd  Lord  Minto  wrote  to 
inform  Colonel  Malcolm  of  this  event. 

‘  After  perusing  all  that  has  been  written  to  us  from 
England  on  the  subject  of  the  mission,  and  after  con¬ 
sidering  the  authorities  (the  East  India  Company  as 
well  as  Grovernment)  from  which  his  powers  are  derived, 
I  confess  I  feel  that  no  authority  in  this  country  can  be 
competent  to  delegate  similar  powers  for  precisely  the 
same  purpose  to  any  other  person.  You  know  enough 
of  my  opinions  on  the  whole  of  this  important  subject 
to  make  it  unnecessary  for  me  to  describe  the  regret, 
public  and  private,  which  I  experience  in  renouncing  a 
measure  on  which  I  rested  my  chief  hope  of  a  successful 
issue  to  the  struggle  iir  which  we  are  engaging  ;  but 
there  is  no  deceiving  oneself  on  this  point,  and  it  is 
clear  that  your  mission  to  Persia  must  be  abandoned 
in  the  event  of  Sir  Harford  Jones’s  arrival  in  that 
country.’  The  letter  concluded  by  offering  Malcolm  in 
the  most  urgent  and  flattering  terms  the  commission 
to  Bagdad,  adding  that  his  information  and  counsels 
would  be  required  respecting  all  the  territories  from  the 
Indus  to  Constantinople. 

Of  the  success  of  his  mission  to  Persia,  or  at  all 
events  of  the  diplomatic  tact  and  skill  which  his  measures 
would  evince,  none  of  Malcolm’s  Indian  friends  permitted 
themselves  to  doubt.  Hence  it  was  with  equal  surprise 
and  consternation  that  his  first  despatches  from  Bushire 
were  received.  Lord  INIinto  has  told  the  story  many 
times  in  despatches,  letters,  and  minutes,  but  the  most 

I 


114 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


informal,  and  therefore  the  best  version  of  it  is  that  in 
the  following  letter  to  Greneral  Hewitt,  the  Commander- 
in-chief. 


To  Lieutenant  General  Hewitt. 

‘  July  30,  1808. 

‘  I  am  sorry  to  say  in  strict  confidence  that  Malcolm 
has  disappointed  me  exceedingly  at  the  beginning  of  his 
mission.  Instead  of  facilitating  the  commencement 
of  his  negotiation,  he  has  begun  by  creating,  I  fear,  in- 
suiTnountable  obstacles  to  his  own  progress. 