

We  must  now  revert  to  Sir  Harford  Jones. 

He  had  arrived  at  Bombay  in  April,  following 
rapidly  on  his  letter  addressed  from  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope  to  the  Governor  General,  yet  not  rapidly  enough 
to  arrest  the  departure  of  General  Malcolm,  which  had 
taken  place  before  his  arrival.  He  therefore  remained 
at  Bombay  to  await  the  result  of  Malcolm’s  mission — 
a  course  warmly  approved  and  encouraged  by  Sir  James 
Mackintosh,  then  Eecorder  of  Bombay,  and  a  hearty 
admirer  of  General  Malcolm.' 

When  intelligence  reached  Calcutta  of  the  probable 

'  Colonel  Malcolm  received  the  rank  of  a  Brigadier  General 
before  his  departure  for  Persia. 


^r.  67] 


SIE  HARFORD  JONES. 


127 


failure  of  Malcolm’s  negotiation  and  of  his  withdrawal 
from  Persia,  the  Governor  General  saw  no  further  reason 
for  detaining  Sir  Harford  in  India,  and  he,  to  whom  every¬ 
thing  relating  to  Persia  had  been  unreservedly  commu¬ 
nicated,  now  received  Lord  Minto’s  authority  to  depart 
on  the  mission  to  which  he  had  been  appointed  in 
England.  This  was  on  August  12.  On  the  22nd, 
JMalcolm  reached  Calcutta,  and  on  the  same  day,  before 
the  Governor  General  in  Council  had  finished  reading 
the  despatches  forwarded  from  the  mouth  of  the 
Hooghly  a  few  hours  before  IMalcolm’s  arrival,  orders 
were  sent  to  Sir  H.  Jones  to  await  fiu’ther  instructions 
at  Bombay. 

They  appear  to  have  had  the  effect  of  quickening 
his  movements.  He  stood  not  on  the  order  of  his 
going,  but  went  at  once.  On  the  29th  a  still  more 
urgent  communication  was  addressed  to  him,  after  the 
decision  to  occupy  Carrack  had  been  arrived  at ;  but, 
when  it  reached  Bombay,  Sir  Harford  was  on  the  high 
seas.  Letters  at  that  period  seem  usually  to  have  taken 
from  eighteen  to  twenty  days  on  the  road  between  Cal¬ 
cutta  and  Bombay.  On  this  occasion  the  rains  caused 
a  delay  of  five  days  in  the  arrival  of  the  express.  From 
Bombay  it  was  despatched  with  great  expedition  after 
Sir  Harford  in  a  quick  sailing  vessel,  and  would  have 
come  up  with  him  if  she  had  not  sprung  a  mast  and 
been  constrained  to  return  to  Bombay  to  repair. 

Fortune  at  this  juncture  decidedly  favoured  Sir 
Harford.  It  was  obvious  that  the  measures  in  contem¬ 
plation  could  not  be  proceeded  with  while  an  Envoy, 


128 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


representing  His  Majesty,  was  on  his  way  to  Persia, 
Some  sanguine  spirits  entertained  the  belief  that  on 
the  receipt  of  Lord  Minto’s  despatches,  Sir  Harford’s 
re-embarkation  would  immediately  follow  on  his  arrival. 
Jjord  Minto  thought  otherwise ;  and  when,  at  the  end 
of  September,  he  acquired  intelligence  that  Sir  Harford’s 
determination  to  proceed  on  his  embassy  had  not  been 
shaken  by  the  first  despatch  from  Calcutta,  relating 
the  circumstances  under  which  Malcolm  had  withdrawn 
from  Persia,  Lord  Minto  did  not  hesitate  to  suspend 
the  preparations  which  Malcolm  had  gone  to  Bombay 
to  superintend.  On  September  30  the  Grovernor 
General  wrote  to  Malcolm  that  he  had  abandoned  all 
hope  of  arresting  Sir  Harford’s  departure,  and  that  in 
their  ignorance  of  the  reception  he  might  meet  with  in 
Persia  the  expedition  to  Carrack  must  be  necessarily 
suspended,  ‘  We  cannot  commit  hostilities  in  Persia 
while  the  King  of  England  is  negotiating  with  the 
King  of  Persia.  .  .  .  You  will  have  to  withdraw 
Captain  Pasley  and  all  your  establishment  from  Bushire. 
There  should  be  no  possibility  oi  jostling  between  any¬ 
thing  that  is  yours  and  Sir  Harford  Jones’s — I  mean, 
no  possibility  of  its  being  suspected  or  imputed  by 
him.’  The  letter  ends  with  the  remark  that  he  had 
great  doubts  of  being  able  to  control  Sir  Harford  from 
Bengal,  but  that  he  had  the  right  to  do  so,  and  should 
assert  it. 