

‘  It  is  impossible  to  attempt  in  a  letter  even  a 
summary  of  the  proceedings  to  which  I  allude ;  but  the 
general  features  are  these.  He  charged  Captain  Pasley 
with  a  letter  to  the  King,  containing  little  more  than 
the  usual  complimentary  matter.  But  he  charged  him 
at  the  same  time  with  a  negotiation  to  be  conducted 
by  Captain  Pasley  with  the  principal  Ministers  of  the 
King  at  Teheran,*  the  professed  object  of  which  was  to 
obtain  certain  concessions,  in  the  way  of  prehminaries 
to  all  negotiations,  in  consideration  of  which  General 
Malcolm  might  be  prevailed  upon  to  advance.  Failing 
such  concessions,  he  threatened  the  immediate  vengeance 
of  the  British  Power,  and  declared  his  own  determination 
to  retire  immediately  from  the  Persian  territory.  You 
will  be,  I  daresay,  as  much  surprised  as  we  have  been 
to  learn  that  the  first  condition  required  by  Malcolm 
was  the  immediate  expulsion  from  Persia  of  the  French 

'  The  King  of  Persia  held  his  court  at  Teheran. 


^T.  57] 


MALCOLM  IN  PERSIA. 


115 


embassy  with  every  man  of  that  nation,  and  this 
Captain  Pasley  was  authorised  to  modify  only  by  ad¬ 
mitting  the  temporary  residence  of  a  few  French 
individuals  who  are  engaged  in  works  useful  to  Persia, 
but  the  whole  mission  was  to  he  peremptorily  dismissed. 
If  Malcolm  had  obtained  this  object  after  a  considerable 
residence  in  Persia,  and  after  the  utmost  exertion  of  his 
own  uncommon  talents,  I  should  have  thought  him 
eminently  successful.  But  I  am  compelled  to  say  that 
my  confidence  is  entirely  shaken  by  the  injudicious 
course  he  has  pursued,  and  the  disadvantageous  ground 
he  has  taken.  Persia  is  in  the  hands  of  France,  and 
was  only  to  be  weaned  from  that  connection  by  good 
and  convincing  reasons  urged  in  a  conciliatory  form. 
Intimidation,  which  INIalcolm  has  chosen  as  the  character 
of  his  negotiation,  cannot  succeed  against  the  united 
force  of  the  French  and  Russian  empires,  the  vengeance 
of  which  jNIalcolm  would  induce  Persia  to  provoke  by 
menaces  which  she  cannot  think  so  formidable. 

‘  Malcolm  was  received  with  every  mark  of  distinction 
at  Bushire  by  orders  from  Court,  and  Captain  Pasley 
no  less  so  at  Shiraz,  where  the  Prince’s  Court  professes 
to  be  entirely  English.  The  fact  is  that  Persia  is 
puzzled  between  the  two  great  candidates  for  her  fiivour, 
and  while  the  French  are  well  received  at  Teheran,  the 
intention  was  that  the  English  officers  should  be  con¬ 
ducted  with  similar  demonstrations  of  favour  to  Shiraz. 
A  Russian  Embassy  has  entered  the  Persian  provinces 
from  Georgia.’ 

‘  Malcolm’s  proceeding  at  Muscat,’  wrote  Lord  Minto 


116 