


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


to  Mr,  Edmonstone,  ‘  has  been  affected  with  the 
original  sin  of  his  whole  system.’  What  that  was  may 
be  inferred  from  certain  passages  of  a  memorandum 
addressed  by  Lord  Minto  to  Gleneral  Malcolm,  contain¬ 
ing  an  explicit  condemnation  of  the  policy  adopted 
towards  Persia.  This  memorandum,  docketed  by  him¬ 
self  as  ‘  a  rough  draft  of  a  minute  to  be  forwarded 
immediately  to  General  Malcolm,  July  21,  1808,’ 
begins  by  expressing  the  great  concern  caused  him  by 
the  perusal  of  Malcolm’s  despatches  from  Bushire, 
setting  forth  the  line  of  conduct  which  had  resulted  in 
his  immediate  departure  from  Persia.  The  difference 
between  his  own  and  General  Malcolm’s  sentiments  on 
the  subject  of  the  mission  appeared  so  great,  as  to  touch 
the  general  principles  of  the  policy  to  be  pursued  at  the 
present  conjuncture.  Lord  Minto  therefore  felt  that 
he  must  not  from  motives  of  personal  delicacy  shrink 
from  the  duties  of  his  station,  but  must  endeavour  to 
provide  for  the  public  interests  by  recurring  to  methods 
more  likely  to  lead  to  the  important  objects  which  he 
desired  to  attain.  The  grand  and  ultimate  purpose  of 
the  mission  to  Persia  was  to  withdraw  that  Court  from 
its  new  and  dangerous  connection  with  France.  Mal¬ 
colm’s  peremptory  demand  for  the  expulsion  of  the 
French  mission  had  left  no  room  for  consideration. 

‘  The  demand  cannot  be  supported  on  any  ground 
of  justice.  Persia,  as  an  independent  Government,  has 
a  right  to  receive  accredited  ministers  from  any  other 
Court,  and  to  enter  into  any  negotiation  she  may  think 
advisable.  She  may  be  indeed  precluded  by  previous 


^T.  67] 


MINUTE  BY  LORD  MINTO. 


117 


treaties  with  us  from  contracting  engagements  in  con¬ 
tradiction  to  them  ;  bnt  if  our  claim  to  exclude  the 
French  mission  were  better  supported  on  the  point  of 
right,  it  would  still  in  the  actual  circumstances  of  the 
case  be-  unreasonable  to  insist  on  it  as  a  23reliminary. 
Persia  was  and  continnes  to  be  exposed  to  an  invasion, 
from  Pnssia,  which  is  to  her  a  subject  of  great  and 
reasonable  alarm.  She  first  applied  to  us  for  assistance. 
It  was  impossible  for  us,  consistently  with  the  relations 
in  which  we  stood  to  Russia,  to  afford  the  aid  she  asked. 
She  therefore  gave  us  fair  notice  that,  although  she 
would  have  preferred  our  co-operation  to  every  other, 
she  ■was  constrained  to  provide  for  her  safety,  by  look¬ 
ing  elsewhere  for  the  aid  which  she  could  not  obtain 
from  us. 

‘  Upon  this  ground  her  connection  with  France  has 
been  formed.  France  has  promised  on  certain  condi¬ 
tions  to  protect  her  against  a  Russian  invasion;  the 
promised  service  was  to  have  been  performed  by  military 
force.  France  is  now  in  alliance  with  Russia,  and  is  to 
employ  her  influence  instead  of  her  arms  for  the  pro¬ 
tection  of  Persia.  If  Persia  in  these  circnmstances 
suddenly  and  offensively  breaks  off  the  subsisting  nego¬ 
tiations  with  France,  instead  of  a  contest  3vith  Russia 
alone,  or  instead  of  being  protected  by  France  against 
Russia,  she  must  prepare  for  a  conflict  with  the  united 
force  of  those  two  Phnpires. 