

It  must  be  remembered  that  at  this  time  the 
Government  at  Calcutta  was  convinced  of  the  futility  of 
any  negotiation  with  Persia,  and  of  the  reality  of  the 


^T.  57] 


CHANGE  OF  POLICY. 


120 


designs  against  India  entertained  by  those  who  guided 
the  counsels  of  the  Persian  Court.  It  followed  that, 
in  their  judgment,  Sir  Harford’s  proceedings  were 
simply  obstructive,  causing  loss  of  precious  time. 
But  in  the  course  of  the  winter  a  change  came  over 
the  views  of  Indian  statesmen.  The  apprehension 
of  a  French  invasion  had  diminished,  if  it  was  not 
altogether  removed,  and  in  March  1809  Lord  Minto 
was  able  to  write  to  General  Malcolm,  with  many 
expressions  of  regard  and  of  regret  at  the  inevitable 
disappointment  the  announcement  he  was  about  to 
make  must  cause  him,  that  he  had  determined  to 
abandon  the  expedition  to  the  Persian  Gulf ;  the  last 
information  from  England  having  satisfied  him  that 
the  affairs  of  Europe  were  sufficiently  agitated  to 
preclude  for  a  time,  on  the  part  of  the  French, 
such  difficult  and  distant  projects  as  had  called  forth 
the  late  policy  and  measures  of  the  Indian  Govern¬ 
ment. 

‘  He  knew  that  a  struggle  was  to  be  maintained  for 
Spain,  and  had  great  hope,  thank  God,  of  that  great 
and  noble  cause.’ 

With  this  letter  the  story  of  the  Persian  mission 
would  have  fitly  ended,  but  the  conduct  pursued  by  Sir 
Harford  Jones,  on  receiving  in  Persia  the  despatches 
forwarded  to  him  after  his  hasty  departure  from  Bom¬ 
bay,  produced  results  which  cannot  be  passed  over  in 
silence.  All  disputes  are  unpleasant  to  relate,  more 
especially  when  in  such  a  life  as  Lord  Minto’s  they  jar 
upon  one  like  a  false  note  in  music ;  but  as  this  episode 

K. 


130 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


has  been  frequently,  and  not  always  accurately  related, 
it  is  necessary  to  treat  of  it  in  some  detail. 

It  has  been  represented  that  the  despatch  of  two 
missions  to  Persia  had  arisen  from  the  jealousy  enter¬ 
tained  by  the  Indian  Grovernment  of  an  Envoy  from 
the  Crown.  This  was  not  the  case.  The  resolution  to 
appoint  an  Envoy  to  represent  both  Crown  and  Com¬ 
pany  had  been  taken  with  Lord  Minto’s  knowledge  and 
participation,  before  he  left  England.  He  had  doubt¬ 
less  strongly  urged  the  propriety  of  selecting  the  in¬ 
dividual  to  fill  the  office  from  the  Indian  service,  which 
contained  many  eminent  men  well  qualified  for 
the  post;  but  the  advice  related  to  the  choice  of 
the  individual  Envoy,  not  to  the  nature  or  source  of 
his  powers;  concerning  these  there  had  been  no  discus¬ 
sion  or  difference  of  opinion.  For  nine  months  after 
his  arrival  in  India  Lord  Minto  heard  no  word  of  Sir 
Harford  Jones,  beyond  the  fact  of  his  having  been 
selected  for  the  mission  to  Persia,  to  include  a  prelimi¬ 
nary  mission  to  St.  Petersburg.  In  the  meanwhile 
events  were  hurrying  on :  the  circumstances  under 
which  the  appointment  had  been  made,  and  the  Ministry 
who  made  it,  had  changed.  The  state  of  affairs  in  Persia 
was  urgent.  It  caused,  as  we  have  seen,  great  anxiety 
in  England  as  well  as  in  India.  Lord  Minto  conse¬ 
quently  deemed  it  his  duty  to  send  a  mission  from 
India  to  Persia  on  the  distinct  understanding  that 
Colonel  Malcolm,  to  whom  he  entrusted  it,  was  not  to 
present  his  credentials  if  he  found  Sir  Harford  Jones 
there.  In  that  case  he  was  to  subside  into  the  agent 