

‘  The  dignity  of  our  Sovereign  and  of  our  national 
character  will  not  be  impaired  by  forbearance,  which  is 
due  from  the  strong  towards  the  weak. 

‘  In  my  opinion  the  most  dignified  basis  on  which  we 
can  treat  with  Persia  is  that  of  common  interest.  The 
measures  we  have  to  propose  to  Persia  are  those  which 
I  sincerely  think  can  alone  afford  her  any  prospect  of 
escaping  from  the  pressing  danger  of  being  involved  in 
the  general  scheme  of  French  conquest.  I  would  avow 
at  the  same  time,  without  scruple  or  disguise,  that  we 
also  have  an  interest  in  securing  Persia  against  its  occu¬ 
pation  by  French  armies,  and  that  the  defence  of  Persia 
will  be  an  additional  means  of  security  to  ourselves. 


120 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


‘  From  this  avowal  they  will  learn  nothing  that  the 
French  Ambassador  has  not  long  since  taught  them. 
But  we  shall  obtain  better  credit  in  the  advice  we 
prolfer  to  them  for  their  own  interests,  when  they 
know  we  have  at  least  no  hidden  motive,  and  when  we 
shall  have  given  this  pledge  of  our  friendship  and 
sincerity.’ 

The  minute  concludes  with  a  hope  that  a  door  may 
still  be  left  open  to  negotiation. 

INIalcolm  meanwhile  had  convinced  himself  that  the 
Persian  Court  was  under  the  absolute  control  of  the 
French  Ambassador.  It  had  issued  the  most  positive 
orders,  dictated  jointly  by  the  French  Ambassador  and 
by  an  Envoy  lately  arrived  from  the  Eussian  camp  on 
the  frontiers,  prohibiting  the  advance  of  Malcolm  or  of 
any  individual  of  his  mission  towards  the  capital.  It 
was  suspected,  and  the  fact  was  afterwards  admitted, 
that  designs  were  entertained  of  preventing  the  depar¬ 
ture  of  the  mission,  or  of  retaining  the  chief  members 
of  it  as  hostages.  Malcolm  therefore  took  the  resolu¬ 
tion  of  leaving  Bushire  without  awaiting  orders,  and 
of  proceeding  in  all  haste  to  Calcutta  to  make  his  ex¬ 
planations  and  to  receive  further  instructions. 

The  mission  from  which  so  much  had  been  expected 
had  failed.  It  is  possible,  even  probable,  that  a  more 
conciliatory  course  than  that  adopted  by  the  British 
Envoy  might  have  enabled  him  to  remain  in  Persia 
until  a  change  of  circumstances  produced  a  change  of 
sentiments  on  the  part  of  the  Persian  Grovernment, 
when  his  personal  popularity  and  his  conspicuous 


^T.  57] 


MALCOLM  KETURNS  TO  INDIA. 


121 


talents  might  have  restored  the  prestige  of  the  British 
name,  and  enabled  him  to  conduct  his  negotiations 
with  better  effect  than  Sir  Harford  Jones  ;  but  the 
neglect  with  which  the  Indian  Grovernment  had  treated 
Persia  during  the  years  that  had  elapsed  since 
Malcolm’s  first  mission,  had  perhaps  a  greater  share  in 
producing  the  present  disappointment  than  his  some¬ 
what  ill-timed  arrogance.* 