

The  first  intimation  of  Malcolm’s  return  to  India 
was  given  by  the  despatches  which  he  brought  himself, 
and  forwarded  to  Calcutta  from  the  north  of  the 
Hooghly. 

It  appears  from  his  own  journals  that  he  was  some¬ 
what  doubtful  as  to  what  his  reception  might  be, 
and  was  proportionably  relieved  and  gratified  by  it? 
warmth. 

'  ‘  Malcolm,’  says  his  biographer,  ‘  found  our  enemies  supreme 
at  the  Persian  capital.  Whilst  we  had  been  sleeping  they  had 
been  striving.  We  had  left  the  field  of  action  clear  for  them,  and 
they  had  occupied  it  with  vigour  and  address. 

‘  Malcolm  had  not  estimated  aright  the  extent  of  this  occupa¬ 
tion.  He  had  relied  too  much  on  the  influence  we  had  established 
eight  years  before  at  the  Persian  Court,  and  had  not  sufficiently 
taken  into  account  the  alteration  of  circumstance  and  feeling  re¬ 
sulting  from  the  progress  of  Russian  arm.s  in  that  momentous 
interval.  The  Persians  believed  that  we  had  deserted  them.  We 
had  at  all  events  looked  unconcernedly  on,  or  purposely  turned  our 
backs  upon  them,  whilst  they  had  been  spoliated  by  the  Northern 
conqueror. 

‘  What,  they  asked,  had  we  done  for  them  ?  who  were  we  that 
we  should  now  expect  a  single  word  from  us  to  dissolve  a  promising 
alliance,  and  to  disperse  a  magnificent  embassy,  strong  in  all  those 
external  attributes  best  calculated  to  rivet  the  confidence  of  the 
Persians  in  the  military  strength  and  national  greatness  of  their 
energetic  allies  ?  ’ — Kaye’s  Life  of  Sir  John  Malcolm. 


122 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


Lord  Minto  rejoiced  in  his  arrival  as  enabling  them 
to  discuss  future  measures  by  personal  communication, 
and  as  an  opportunity  given  to  Malcolm  ‘  to  acquire  a 
juster  notion’  of  his  sentiments. 

‘  I  confess  I  have  not  seen  reason  to  recall  the 
sentiments  I  entertained  concerning  the  general  policy 
adopted  by  him  in  Persia,  but  I  note  with  satisfaction 
that  what  appears  to  have  been  the  least  prudent  and 
judicious  course  has  proved,  as  often  happens  in  human 
affairs,  the  most  useful  and  advantageous. 

‘  Since  success  was  impossible,  it  is  satisfactory  to 
have  arrived  at  the  knowledge  of  that  fact  as  early  as 
possible,  and  since  moderation  and  forbearance  could 
have  made  no  difference  in  the  result,  it  is  well  that 
his  line  of  conduct  has  asserted  the  power  of  our 
country,  and  made  manifest  our  knowledge  of  the 
influence  under  which  Persia  had  adopted  so  hostile  a 
course.’ ' 

General  Malcolm’s  information  convinced  the  Indian 
Government  that  Persia  was  so  entirely  dependent  on 
France  and  Russia  as  to  give  no  mission  from  England 
a  chance  of  success.  This  state  of  things  was  not  occa¬ 
sioned  by  General  Malcolm’s  conduct,  as  was  proved 
by  the  plain  avowal  at  Shiraz  of  orders  issued  in  the 
most  peremptory  terms,  before  Malcolm’s  letters  had 
been  received,  to  prohibit  his  advance.  The  motive 
was  no  less  clearly  demonstrated — the  i/nsistanee  of  the 
French  and  Russian  Ambassadors,  accompanied  with 
menaces  of  an  immediate  rupture  if  the  King’s  unwill- 
’  To  General  Hewitt,  Commander-in-chief. 