


iliT.  57] 


MALCOLM  AT  CALCUTTA. 


123 


ingness  to  break  altogether  with  England  were  not 
overcome. 

Terror  governed  the  conduct  of  Persia. 

A  French  Ambassador  could  not  but  be  absolute 
when  France  offered  the  only  visible  and  imaginable 
protection  against  Kussia. 

All  preparations  for  the  despatch  of  military  forces 
to  Persia,  on  a  large  scale,  and  for  the  purposes  de¬ 
tailed  in  the  instructions  carried  with  him  by  Malcolm,, 
were  now  set  aside ;  but  Lord  Minto  did  not  think  it 
advisable  to  renounce  altogether  ‘  that  interesting 
(quarter.’  While  refusing  to  entertain  the  whole  scheme 
elaborated  by  Malcolm  on  his  sea  voyage,  for  the  con¬ 
fusion  of  his  enemies.  Lord  Minto,  on  the  assumption 
that  Persia  was  fairly  entangled  in  the  schemes  of 
France  and  Kussia,  accepted  the  suggestion  that  a 
station  on  her  coast  might  under  the  circumstances  be 
usefully  occupied  by  British  troops.  This  station,  ‘  to 
serve  as  a  rendezvous,  a  depot,  a  point  of  departure 
and  a  point  of  retreat,  as  well  as  a  centre  of  observa¬ 
tion,’  was  to  be  the  Island  of  Carrack,  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Bassora  river.  It  contained  only  twelve  square 
miles,  was  healthy,  and  well  supplied  with  water,  and  on 
it  Malcolm  had  long  cast  covetous  eyes. 

‘  The  primary  inducement  to  the  adoption  of  that 
plan  (the  occupation  of  Carrack)  is  that  of  placing 
ourselves  in  such  a  posture  as  might  enable  us  to  pursue 
whatever  system  of  measures  the  progress  of  events 
and  the  many  possible  turns  and  changes  in  the  con¬ 
duct  of  the  adjacent  countries  might  render  expedient. 


124 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


‘  The  separation  of  Persia  from  the  cause  of  our 
enemy  is  obviously  hopeless  at  present.  ...  If  Persia 
remains  hostile  to  the  last,  and  nothing  is  left  but 
to  impede  and  obstruct  the  joint  operations  of  that 
Government  and  France,  the  post  of  Carrack  can  alone 
furnish  the  possibility  of  putting  to  profit  such  oppor¬ 
tunities  as  may  offer  to  make  that  attempt. 

‘  To  follow  any  other  course  would  be  to  withdraw 
ourselves  from  the  whole  of  that  important  scene, 
without  divesting  ourselves  of  the  deep  interest  which 
attaches  to  it.  It  would  be  to  throw  up  the  game 
without  withdrawing  our  stake,  because  the  first  deal 
has  not  been  favourable  to  our  wishes. 

‘  Views  of  a  similar  nature,  but  applied  to  Bagdad, 
recommend  the  same  measure  of  an  independent  foot¬ 
ing  in  the  Gulf.  It  must  at  present  no  doubt  be 
considered  as  uncertain  whether  occasions  will  arise  or 
not  to  call  forth  our  exertions  in  the  quarter  now  under 
consideration.  The  route  of  the  French  army  may  be 
very  remote  from  the  shores  of  the  Gulf,  and  it  may 
happen  that  no  effort  of  ours,  either  in  the  southern 
provinces  of  Persia  or  in  the  territories  of  Bagdad,  can 
have  any  influence  on  the  actual  defence  of  India. 