

‘  It  is  therefore  reasonable  that,  before  she  accedes  to 
a  demand  involving  her  in  such  consecpiences,  she  should 
be  informed  of  the  means  by  which  we  propose  to  ])ro- 


118 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


tect  her  against  them.  This  is  matter  of  negotiation, 
not  for  a  preliminary,  &c.  &c. 

‘  Greneral  Malcolm,  knowing  the  political  complexion 
of  the  Court,  seems  to  have  conceived  that  timidity  was 
the  quality  on  which  he  had  the  best  chance  of  opera¬ 
ting,  and  that  the  fear  of  France  and  Eussia  could  only 
be  combated  by  a  still  stronger  apprehension  of  British 
power. 

‘  Intimidation,  therefore,  was  the  engine  he  proposed 
to  employ  in  the  first  stages  of  his  mission.  I  confess 
that  I  should  have  thought  it  more  advantageous  to 
give  an  entirely  different  character  to  the  negotiation. 
I  can  easily  believe  that  the  arrival  of  our  Envoy  in 
I'ersia  in  circumstances  which  would  justify  hostile 
measures  on  our  part  must  have  created  solicitude  con¬ 
cerning  the  intentions  of  this  Government,  and  that  the 
menace  of  some  great  measure  of  coercion  or  resentment 
on  our  part,  to  follow  on  General  Malcolm’s  retreat  from 
Persia,  might  operate  favourably  to  his  views  in  some  of 
the  minor  points  under  discussion ;  but  it  cannot  pro¬ 
duce  any  substantial  benefit,  because  in  truth  we  find 
I^ersia  herself  under  circumstances  of  extreme  difficulty 
from  which  she  cannot  be  driven  violently,  but  from 
which  she  requires  the  hand  of  friendship  to  extricate 
her  gradually.  I  regret  that  this  expedient  was  resorted 
to  ;  for  not  being  founded  in  truth  it  savours  more  of 
artifice  than  I  think  suits  the  true  dignity  of  this 
Government.  If  Persia  is  found  to  be  decidedly  hostile, 
it  does  not  enter  into  our  views  to  weaken  our  force  and 
resources,  in  the  fruitless  endeavour  to  subdue  that 


^T.  57] 


MINUTE  BY  LOED  MINTO. 


119 


great  country,  whether  supported  or  not  by  a  great 
European  army.  I  regret  it  also  because,  whether  any 
short  advantage  is  obtained  by  this  species  of  intimida¬ 
tion  or  not,  it  must  create  irritation  and  disgust,  and 
so  far  retard  the  desirable  work  of  conciliation  and  of 
union  which  we  have  in  hand. 

‘  I  should  certainly  not  think  it  either  becoming  or 
politic  to  approach  the  Persian  Court  in  a  posture  of 
supplication ;  on  the  contrary,  we  have  ground  for 
remonstrance  against  the  more  than  unfriendly  conduct 
of  that  Court.  But  we  have  not  now  to  learn  that  a 
temporising  compromising  policy  is  the  frequent  refuge 
of  weak  governments,  implicated  in  the  disputes  of 
more  powerful  States  ;  and  our  intercourse  with  her 
should  be  tempered  with  indulgence  for  those  obstacles 
to  a  cordial  demeanour  which  we  know  exist. 