

It  was  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  Courts  of 
Lahore  and  Cabul  would  consider  such  missions  as 
were  in  contemplation  as  a  peculiar  distinction  calcula¬ 
ted  to  give  them  consequence  in  the  eyes  of  surrounding 
'  Despatch  to  the  Secret  Committee,  par.  91. 


^T.  o7j  MINUTE  BY  GOVERNOR  GENERAL. 


147 


powers;  nevertheless  the  Governor  General  did  not 
consider  it  either  necessary  or  expedient  to  sufi'er  the 
prosecution  of  the  measure  to  depend  upon  the  result 
of  a  previous  reference  to  those  Courts.  He  therefore 
proposed  to  despatch  envoys  to  both  Courts  without 
delay. 

The  personal  solicitude  with  which  he  watched  over 
the  preparatory  arrangements  for  the  missions  is  shown 
by  a  minute  in  his  handwriting,  stating  the  grounds 
on  which  he  deemed  it  his  duty  to  disallow  a  measure 
proposed  by  the  Commander-in-chief,  General  Hewitt, 
namely,  the  appointment  of  two  officers  of  high  rank 
to  accompany  the  missions  for  the  purpose  of  making 
a  survey  of  the  country  for  military  purposes. 

‘June  1808.' 

‘  It  must  always  be  with  much  concern  that  I  find 
myself  under  the  necessity  of  objecting  to  any  mea¬ 
sure  proposed  by  the  Commander-in-chief,  especially 
on  occasions  of  importance,  and  on  points  on  which 
his  Kxcellency  appears  to  have  formed  a  decided 
ojiinion.  It  is  the  importance  of  the  proposition,  how¬ 
ever,  recommended  by  his  Excellency’s  minute,  which 
constrains  me,  after  a  full  and  anxious  consideration  of 
the  subject,  to  state  the  objections  which  in  my  mind 
oppose  its  immediate  adoption.  .  .  .  For  a  due  con¬ 
sideration  of  this  subject  it  is  necessary  to  keep  in 
mind  the  proper  object  which  is  proposed  by  these 


Minute  on  propo.sal  made  by  Commauder-iii-cliief, 


148 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


missions,  and  the  particular  circumstances  under  which 
they  are  undertaken. 

‘The  object  proposed  is  to  conciliate  the  Princes 
who  govern  the  States  of  Cahul  and  Lahore,  to  obtain 
their  consent  to  the  passage  of  our  troops  through 
their  country,  or  their  admission  into  their  territories, 
for  the  purpose  of  opposing  a  French  army  in  their 
projected  invasion  of  Hindostan ;  and  our  hope  also  is 
to  establish  such  defensive  engagements  with  those 
Governments  as  may  obtain  their  co-operation,  or  at 
least  their  friendly  aid  and  assistance,  to  our  military 
operations  and  to  our  cause  generally. 

‘  I  am  persuaded  that  the  Commander-in-chief  will 
agree  with  me  in  considering  it  at  least  as  questionable 
whether,  in  the  event  of  Cabul  and  Lahore  proving 
hostile  or  becoming  so,  it  would  be  advisable  to  pene¬ 
trate  through  their  countries  or  to  enter  them  at  all. 