


Mt.  57] 


MISSION  TO  LAUOEE. 


145 


formidable  military  power  on  our  frontier.  ‘  Eunjeet,’ 
wrote  Lord  Minto,  ‘  had  alone  been  induced  to  meditate 
the  extension  of  his  dominions  over  the  territories 
between  the  Sutlege  and  Jumna,  by  a  manifestation  of 
our  intention  not  to  exercise  those  rights  of  supremacy 
over  the  southern  Sikhs  which  had  been  exercised  by 
the  Mahrattas.  If  we  had  not  at  an  early  period  of 
time  declared  the  Sikh  chiefs  to  be  entirely  independent 
of  our  control ;  if  at  the  time  when  the  Eajah  pro¬ 
jected  his  first  invasion  of  those  territories  we  had 
declared  a  resolution  to  protect  them ;  or  even  if  we 
had  attended  to  the  united  solicitations  of  the  chiefs 
of  those  territories  about  the  middle  of  last  year  to 
protect  them  against  a  second  projected  invasion,  by 
announcing  that  resolution,  no  doubt  can  be  entertained 
that  the  mere  declaration  of  it  would  have  been  suf¬ 
ficient  to  deter  Eunjeet  Singh  from  the  execution  of  his 
design.’ 

To  prevent  him  from  carrying  it  out  was  an  impe¬ 
rative  duty  on  the  part  of  the  Government,  which  Lord 
Minto  did  not  hesitate  to  acknowledge ;  but  the  im¬ 
mediate  importance  of  securing  his  co-operation  in  a 
system  of  common  resistance  to  an  invading  force 
made  it  unadvisable  to  proceed  to  extremities  on  behalf 
of  the  southern  Sikhs,  until  all  diplomatic  methods  had 
been  exhausted  to  obtain  his  renunciation  of  further 
conquests  in  the  direction  of  Hindostan. 


L 


146 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


‘  March  lf08.’ 

‘  Although  as  a  general  principle  we  cordially  recog¬ 
nise  the  wisdom  and  the  justice  of  abstaining  from  all 
interference  in  the  contests,  disputes,  and  concerns  of 
States  with  which  we  are  unconnected  by  the  obli¬ 
gations  of  alliance,  and  are  fully  convinced  of  the 
embarrassments  and  inconvenience  of  extending  our 
protection  to  petty  chieftains,  who  are  unable  to  protect 
their  territories  from  the  aggressions  of  more  powerful 
neighbours,  yet  we  are  disposed  to  think  that  cases 
may  occur  in  which  a  temporary  deviation  from  these 
general  principles  may  be  a  measure  of  defensive 
policy,  the  neglect  of  which  might  be  productive  of 
much  more  danger  and  embarrassment  than  the 
prosecution  of  it,  and  that  the  certain  resolution  of 
the  Rajah  of  Lahore  to  subjugate  the  States  situated 
between  the  Sutlege  and  the  frontier  of  our  dominion 
would,  under  other  circumstances  than  the  present, 
constitute  a  case  on  which,  on  grounds  of  self-defence, 
the  interposition  of  the  British  power,  for  the  purpose 
of  preventing  the  execution  of  such  a  project,  would  be 
equally  just  and  prudent.  Yet  the  accomplishment 
of  the  more  important  views  already  described  seems 
evidently  incompatible  with  a  rupture  with  him.’ 