

‘  To  despise  is  to  weaken.  Eeputation  is  Power’ — 
said  an  English  writer  well  versed  in  the  knowledge 
of  courts  and  men.  So  thinking.  Lord  Minto  asked 

‘  The  chief  points  of  the  treaty  were,  that  any  treaty  made  with 
other  European  powers  should  be  considered  void  ;  that  no  force 
commanded  by  Europeans  should  be  permitted  to  march  through 
Persia  towards  India;  and  that,  if  any  European  army  invaded 
Persian  territory,  the  British  Government  should  afford  the  aid  of  a 
military  force  or  subsidy,  ‘  The  last  point  is  the  only  one  of  im¬ 
portance,’  wrote  Lord  Minto  to  Sir  Gore  Ouseley,  ‘and  in  my 
judgment  it  is  fraught  with  mischievous  consequences  and  may 
entail  very  grave  ones.’  This  opinion  w^  justified  by  the  events  of 
1826-7,  when,  Russia  and  Persia  being  at  war,  these  stipulations 
were  not  fulfilled  by  England  ;  Mr.  Canning  being  War  Secretary  at 
Die  time,  Russia  was  allowed  largely  to  extend  her  territories  at  the 
expense  of  the  State  which  by  the  treaty  of  Teheran  England  was 
bound  to  defend. 


iEx.  58]  MALCOLM’S  SECOND  MISSION.  139 

Colonel  Malcolm  once  more  to  undertake  a  mission  to 
Persia,  from  whence  it  was  believed  that  Sir  H.  Jones 
had  retired  in  pursuance  of  the  orders  from  Calcutta. 
He,  however,  had  received  orders  from  the  Foreign 
Office  in  England  to  await  the  arrival  of  an  Ambassador 
from  His  Majesty — Sir  Gore  Ouseley,  who  in  pursu¬ 
ance  of  the  new  arrangement,  was  on  his  way  to  Persia. 
Thus  it  happened  that  IMalcolm  and  Sir  Harford  Jones 
met  at  last  in  Persia.  To  Malcolm  were  given  the 
honours  of  the  situation  by  the  King,  who  had  a  pei- 
sonal  regard  for  him,  and  created  for  his  special  behoof 
a  new  order  of  knighthood,  entitled  that  of  the  ‘  IJon 
and  the  Sun.’ 

But  Sir  Harford  Jones  carried  away  the  more  sid)- 
stantial  satisfaction  of  having  execmted  a  treaty,  which 
though  it  received  much  criticism  from  the  Indian 
Government,  was  accepted  and  ratified.* 

One  of  the  disadvantages  which  could  not  but  accrue 
to  the  diplomacy  of  the  Company’s  Government  by 
the  withdrawal  of  Persia  from  the  sphere  of  its  opera¬ 
tions,  was  seen  when  it  appeared  that,  by  an  article  of 
the  treaty  negotiated  at  Teheran  by  Sir  Harford  Jones, 
it  was  stipulated  that,  in  case  of  war  between  Persia  and 
Afghanistan,  ‘  His  IVIajesty  the  King  of  Great  Britain 
should  not  take  any  part  therein,  unless  at  the  desire 
of  both  parties;’  while,  in  ignorance  of  the  existence 
of  any  such  agreement,  Mr.  Elphinstone  had  been  au¬ 
thorised  to  form  a  defensive  alliance  with  Afghanistan 

'  It  was  not  finally  executed  till  1814,  when  the  name  of  Russia 
was  substituted  for  that  of  France. 