


JEt.  57] 


MALCOLM  RECALLED. 


131 


of  the  Governor  General.  Bnt  even  this  secondary 
position  originally  assigned  to  him  was  cancelled  im¬ 
mediately  on  the  receipt  of  Sir  Harford  Jones’s  commu¬ 
nication  from  the  Cape. 

Instructions  were  sent  forthwith  to  Malcolm  to 
abandon  Persia,  and  undertake  the  mission  to  Bagdad. 
But  in  those  days  weeks  were  requisite  for  the  transit 
of  letters  to  Persia,  and  it  does  not  appear  that  the 
orders  of  recall  had  reached  IMalcolm  before  his  hurried 
departure  from  Bushire.  When,  at  a  subsequent 
period.  Lord  IMinto  sought  to  arrest  Sir  Harford’s  em¬ 
barkation  at  Bombay,  it  was  under  the  conviction  that, 
the  time  for  profitable  negotiation  was  past.  His  desire 
that  there  should  be  no  clashing  or  jostling  between 
Malcolm  and  Jones  has  been  stated.  AMiat  then  was 
the  cause  of  the  bitter  strife  which  reams  of  paper  still 
exist  to  prove,  if  not  the  action  of  Sir  H.  Jones  in  re¬ 
pudiating  the  authority  of  the  Government  of  India, 
in  the  higher  character  of  rejjresentative  of  His 
Majesty  ?  On  his  arrival  in  Persia  he  found  that  the 
aspect  of  things  had  entirely  changed  during  the  three 
months  which  had  elapsed  since  IMalcolm’s  departure. 
French  promises  had  not  been  followed  by  performance  ; 
the  Persian  Court  had  cooled  towards  their  new  friends, 
and  had  grown  alarmed  at  the  prospect  of  a  rupture 
with  their  powerful  neighbour  in  India.  On  the  receipt 
of  the  intelligence  contained  in  the  despatches  to  Sir 
Harford  Jones  from  Calcutta,  of  the  intended  expedition 
against  Carrack,  anger  was  added  to  a})prehension. 
Thereupon  Sir  Harford  saw  no  better  wav  of  restoring 


132 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


the  equanimity  of  the  Persian  Court,  and  of  smoothing 
his  own  advance  to  Teheran,  than  to  give  them  the 
assurance  that  a  greater  than  the  Governor  General 
stood  before  them  in  his  own  person.  Throwing  off  all 
allegiance  to  the  Indian  Government  he  proceeded  to 
give  a  solemn  pledge  that  no  aggression  should  be 
committed  on  the  dominions  of  the  King  of  Persia  as 
long  as  he  displayed  a  wish  to  jjreserve  amicable  rela¬ 
tions  with  the  King  of  Great  Britain. 

How  these  pretensions  were  viewed  at  Calcutta  will 
be  best  shown  in  the  following  extracts  from  the  corre¬ 
spondence  of  the  Governor  General  in  Council  with  the 
Secret  Committee.  They  distinctly  state  the  nature  of 
the  powers  with  which  Sir  H.  Jones  had  been  invested, 
and  also  the  responsibilities  which  attached  to  the 
Indian  Government.' 

‘  As  we  have  already  observed  in  our  despatch  to 
yoim  Honourable  Committee  of  January  20,  we  conceive 
that  it  was  the  express  intention  of  Government  in 
England  in  acceding  to  the  request  of  the  Honomable 
the  Court  of  Directors,  that  Sir  Harford  Jones  might 
be  vested  with  diplomatic  functions  on  the  part  of  the 
Crown,  to  add  weight  and  consequence  to  the  authority 
of  the  local  Government  of  India,  and  that  it  was  the 
special  duty  of  Sir  H.  Jones  rather  to  combine  than  to 
■separate  the  two  anthorities,  and  to  employ  the  one  as 
the  means  of  adding  dignity  and  efficiency  to  the  other. 
We  conceive  that  though  Sir  H.  Jones  was  vested  with 
a  commission  from  the  throne,  he  was  bound  by  the 
‘  Extract  from  secret  and  separate  general  letter,  April  3,  1809. 