


vEt.  58] 


TREATY  WITH  PERSIA. 


137 


In  the  meanwhile  Sir  Harford  had  succeeded  in 
negotiating  a  preliminary  treaty,  and  had  prevailed  on 
the  King  of  Persia  to  send  an  Ambassador  to  England 
in  company  with  Air.  IMorier.' 

The.  draft  of  this  treaty  was  sent  to  the  Indian 
(iovernment  for  ratification,  accompanied  by  a  letter 
from  the  King  of  Persia  to  the  Governor  General,  which 
was  couched  in  language  that  the  Indian  authorities 
deemed  to  be  intentionally  disrespectful.  Writing  to 
jVlalcolm  on  June  27,  1809,  Lord  iMinto  said:  ‘  iMr. 
Kdnionstoue  tells  me  that  in  every  circumstance  and 
form  of  language  it  is  wanting  in  the  respect  which  has 
till  now  been  rendered  to  the  station  of  Governor  General. 
It  acquaints  me  with  the  arrival  of  an  Envoy  from 
the  King  of  England,  and  the  conclusion  of  a  treaty  of 
alliance  between  the  two  Crowns.  It  therefore  requires 
me  to  give  effect  to  the  intentions  of  the  two  monar¬ 
chies  and  of  my  Sovereign,  by  attending  to  the  due 
and  strong  execution  of  all  the  conditions  agi-eed  on.* 

This  letter  was  looked  upon  as  amounting  to  a 

'  In  a  letter  of  the  following  year  Miss  Elliot  wrote  to  her 
father  that  ‘  the  new  Persian  Ambassador  wlio  came  home  with  Mr. 
Morier  is  very  handsome  and  extrc'mely  admired  by  the  ladies. 
Some  people  stispect  he  is  “  no  rvoAter,  hut  a  Knhjld  Templar  in  dis¬ 
guise”  or  rather  no  Ambassador,  but  a  renegade  Jew.  Some  wise 
man  asked  him  if  he  adored  the  sun  in  Persia;  he  said,  “  No,  not  in 
Persia,  but  he  should  adore  it  in  England  if  he  happened  to  see  it.” 
Ihere  is  only  one  lady  who  can  speak  Persian  to  him,  a  Miss 
Metcalfe,  who  cracks  Persian  jokes  to  him,  and  lauglis  in  Persian, 
just  as  if  it  was  English.  They  say  of  course  he  is  in  love  with  her, 
but  having  two  or  three  dozen  wives  already,  there  is  no  room  for 
her,  the  more’s  the  pit}'.’ — This  Persian  Envoy  is  the  hero  of  Mr. 
Morier’s  entertaining  work.  The  Adventures  of  llajji  Bala. 


138 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


deposition  of  the  Government  of  India  from  the  sovereign 
powers  with  which  it  had  been  invested. 

Lord  iMinto  did  not  hesitate  to  ratify  the  treaty, 
knowing  that  the  public  faith  of  England  was  thereby 
engaged,  but  he  sent  instructions  to  Persia  disavowing 
the  jDublic  character  of  the  Ambassador,  and  desiring 
him  to  quit  Persia  immediately,  on  pain  of  having  his 
bills  dishonoured.* 

This  was  in  the  summer  of  1809,  but  so  slow  were 
the  communications  with  England,  that  a  twelvemonth 
elapsed  before  the  final  decision  of  the  Home  Govern¬ 
ment  to  assume  the  sole  direction  of  diplomatic  rela¬ 
tions  with  Persia,  reached  India.  While  still  believing 
the  conduct  of  affairs  in  Persia  to  remain  with  the 
Government  of  India,  Lord  Minto  thought  it  his  duty 
to  re-assert  their  claim  to  supreme  authority  over  all 
their  agents  in  the  East. 