


140 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


against  an  attack  from  Persia,  as  was  stated  in  the  treaty 
signed  at  Calcutta  on  June  17,  of  the  same  year,  1809. 
Yet  Persia  and  Cabul  were  both  necessary  members  of 
the  confederacy  with  which  the  Indian  G-overnment 
had  proposed  to  resist  an  invasion  of  India. 


^T.  58] 


DEFENCE  OF  INDIA. 


141 


CHAPTER  VL 

LAHORE. 

In  order  to  obtain  an  nninterrupted  view  of  all  the 
circumstances  connected  with  the  Persian  mission,  they 
have  been  related  without  reference  to  other  measures, 
which  were  simnltaneously  cai’ried  out  and  directed  to 
the  same  object — namely,  the  formation  of  defensive 
alliances  with  the  independent  States  on  the  North- 
Western  frontier  of  India. 

In  a  minute  by  the  Giovernor  Ceneral,  September 
15,  1808,  it  is  remarked  that  even  should  France 
succeed  in  establishing  an  ascendancy  in  Persia,  much 
would  remain  to  be  accomplished  before  India  could  be 
successfully  invaded,  and  the  hostility  of  the  interjacent 
States,  especially  if  seconded  by  the  co-operation  of  the 
British  power,  might  yet  be  expected  to  frustrate  the 
design,  or  at  least  to  reduce  the  invading  army  to  a  de¬ 
gree  of  debility  which  would  give  our  troops  a  decided 
superiority  in  the  field.  The  importance  to  our  interests 
of  previously  establishing  with  these  States  a  direct 
conunnnication  was  obvious. 

It  was  therefore  proposed  to  send  missions  to  the 
States  lying  on  and  beyond  the  Indus — Lahore,  Cabul, 


142 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


and  Scinde — for  the  purpose  of  organising  a  system  of 
defensive  alliances,  based  on  a  common  interest  in  re¬ 
sisting  the  advance  of  an  invading  force. 

The  Home  Government  had  been  prepared  by 
despatches  of  a  previous  date  for  the  measures  carried 
out  in  the  summer  of  1808.  In  a  letter  to  the  Pre¬ 
sident  of  the  Board  of  Control,  February  10  of  that 
year.  Lord  Minto  had  written  : 

‘  If  the  views  of  the  enemy  should  extend  to  the 
direct  invasion  of  India  by  an  army  proportioned  to  that 
undertaking,  their  march  must  probably  be  to  the  Indus, 
and  must  lead  through  the  kingdom  of  Cabul  and  the 
territbries  of  Lahore,  as  well  as  through  the  countries  of 
several  independent  chiefs  situated  between  Persia  and 
the  Company’s  possessions.  It  has  appeared  to  be  ex¬ 
tremely  desirable  to  push  forward  a  British  agency  as 
far  beyond  our  own  frontiers,  and  as  near  the  countries 
from  which  the  enemy  is  to  take  his  departure,  as  pos¬ 
sible.  We  have  not,  till  of  late,  had  much  inducement 
to  frequent  or  to  make  much  enquiry  concerning  the 
countries  beyond  the  Indus  ;  and  there  are  difficulties 
attending  the  usual  means  of  establishing  an  amicable 
intercourse  with  those  governments  or  their  subjects. 
We  cannot  safely  rely  on  the  fidelity  or  discernment 
of  native  agents,  either  for  furnishing  information 
or  accomplishing  any  political  objects  our  interests 
might  require.  I  understand  that  the  employment  of 
Europeans  in  such  services  would  be  subject  to  great 
difficulties.  Regular  and  avowed  embassies,  which  would 
furnish  occasion  to  the  fixed  residence,  dui'ing  periods 