


JEt.  58]  LETTER  TO  SECRET  COMMITTEE. 


133 


spirit  and  letter  of  the  orders  which  accompanied  that 
commission  to  act  exclusively  under  the  instructions  of 
your  Honourable  Committee  and  of  the  Honourable 
Company’s  Government  in  India. 

‘  In  Mr.  Secretary  Canning’s  instructions  to  Sir 
H.  Jones  of  August  28,  1807,  it  is  stated  that  “  the 
Court  of  Directors  of  the  E.  I.  Company,  having  repre¬ 
sented  to  His  Majesty’s  ministers,  through  the  President 
of  the  Commissioners  for  the  affairs  of  India,  that  the 
mission  with  which  Sir  II.  Jones  was  charged  to  the 
Court  of  Persia  would  be  likely  to  experience  a  more 
favourable  reception  at  that  Court  if  he  were  directly 
accredited  from  His  Majesty,  and  enabled  to  bring 
forward  in  His  IMajesty’s  name  the  different  propo¬ 
sitions  which  he  might  be  instructed  to  submit  to 
the  consideration  of  the  Persian  Government.  IMr. 
Secretary  Canning  had  received  His  Majesty’s  com¬ 
mands  to  authorise  Sir  H.  Jones  to  assume  the  character 
of  His  jMajesty’s  Envoy  to  the  Court  of  Persia.’’  It  is 
further  distinctly  stated  in  the  same  letter,  that  the  in¬ 
structions  by  which  Sir  H.  Jones’s  conduct  in  the  execu¬ 
tion  of  his  mission  was  to  be  guided,  he  would  receive 
from  the  Court  of  Directors  of  the  E.  1.  Company,  or 
the  Secret  Committee,  or  from  their  Government  in 
India ;  and  to  those  instriictions  Sir  H.  Jones  was 
desired  to  conform.  Sir  H.  Jones  was  at  the  same 
time  authorised  to  sign  in  His  Majesty’s  name  any 
treaty  which  in  pursuance  of  these  instructions  he 
might  have  occasion  to  negotiate  with  the  ministers  of 
the  King  of  Persia,  but  was  informed  that,  in  the  event 


134 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


of  his  being  directed  to  hold  out  any  promise  of  pecu¬ 
niary  or  military  assistance,  such  engagements  were  to 
be  made  only  in  reference  to  the  forces  actually  in 
India,  and  to  the  funds  of  the  E.  I.  Company,  by  whom 
all  the  expenses  attending  his  mission  were  to  be 
defrayed. 

‘  Your  Honourable  Company  did  at  the  same  time 
communicate  to  Sir  H.  Jones  the  general  objects  of  his 
mission,  and  direct  him  as  prescribed  in  Mr.  Secretary 
Canning’s  letter  to  conform  to  such  instructions  as  he 
might  receive  from  their  Company’s  Government  in 
India  for  the  accomplishment  of  these  objects. 

‘  It  cannot  be  necessary  to  enter  into  any  discus¬ 
sion  for  the  purpose  of  demonstrating  the  inconsist¬ 
ency  of  our  being  charged  with  the  defence  and  security 
of  India  against  the  dangers  in  which  the  mission  to 
Persia  originated,  without  possessing  power  to  direct 
the  negotiation  with  that  Court,  or  to  control  the  con¬ 
duct  of  the  minister  deputed  there ;  mthout  being  at 
liberty  to  determine  the  point  of  time  at  which  negotia¬ 
tion  should  be  undertaken  ;  to  judge  whether  or  not 
the  prosecution  of  it  is  compatible  with  the  honour  and 
interests  of  the  Government  committed  to  our  charge, 
or  to  limit  or  extend  the  engagement  for  which  Ave  are 
exclusively  responsible. 