

‘  It  is  well  known  that  the  habitual  and  undistin¬ 
guishing  jealousy  which  is  the  personal  character  of 
Runjeet  Singh,  and  is  said  to  characterise  also  the 
regions  in  which  his  territories  are  situated,  has  been 
directed  specifically  against  the  British  Government. 
He  is  aware  that  our  interests  and  principles  are  un¬ 
favourable  to  some  of  the  chief  objects  of  his  ambition  ; 
and,  in  addition  to  this  particular  cause  of  distrust, 
means  have  been  found  to  create  in  his  mind  a  still 
stronger  jealousy — amounting  almost  to  personal  ap¬ 
prehension. 

‘  It  is  certain  that  our  endeavours  to  open  a  com- 


-SiT.  57]  MINUTE  BY  GOVERNOR  GENERAL. 


149 


munication  with  Cabul,  and  to  establish  intimate 
relations  with  that  State,  will  furnish  abundant  matter 
of  uneasiness,  and  supply  fresh  food  to  the  jealousy 
already  entertained  by  Kunjeet  Singh,  both  of  Cabul 
and  of  our  Government. 

‘  It  is  the  business  of  the  proposed  mission  of  ]Mr. 
jNIetealfe  to  remove  these  suspicions,  and  to  plant  in 
their  room  the  seeds  of  confidence  and  union.  This 
must  be  done  in  my  opinion  by  a  frank,  open,  and  sin¬ 
cere  avowal  of  our  ultimate  objects ;  and  the  best  sup¬ 
port  which  can  be  given  to  our  negotiation  must  be  a 
scrupulous  and  delicate  conduct  in  every  point  of  our 
intercourse  with  him.  .  .  .  The  progress  of  two 
officers,  especially  of  the  distinguished  rank  and  station 
proposed  in  his  Excellency’s  minute,  through  the  terri¬ 
tories  of  Lahore,  without  permission  or  even  any  inti¬ 
mation  of  their  intention,  for  the  avowed  purpose,  or,  if 
not  avowed,  for  a  purpose  which  cannot  be  otherwise 
than  obvious,  if  the  jnission  is  to  have  any  effect,  would 
be  an  occurrence  calculated  to  awaken  the  suspicion  of 
less  jealous  governments  than  that  of  Kunjeet  Singh. 
I  confess  it  appears  to  me  highly  improbable  that  these 
officers  woidd  be  allowed  to  advance  a  step,  after  the 
intelligence  of  their  operations  shoidd  have  reached  the 
ears  of  Eunjeet  Singh  ;  nor  could  anyone,  in  my  opinion, 
answer  for  the  personal  safety  of  these  gentlemen.  If 
they  should  attempt  to  cover  their  proceedings  under 
any  connection  with  the  political  mission,  it  would  only 
make  the  case  worse ;  because  it  would  give  to  the 
whole  measure  an  air  of  artifice  and  deception  which 


150 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


must  preclude  all  hopes  of  conciliating  the  confidence 
of  Runjeet  Singh. 

‘With  regard  to  Cabul  the  objection  is  jorecisely 
similar.  With  the  King  of  that  country  we  have 
never  had  any  intercourse  whatever.  I  hope  that  a 
sense  of  common  danger,  and  a  real  identity  of  interests, 
may  in  the  very  able  hands  to  which  that  mission 
is  committed,  become  a  foundation  of  solid  union  and 
of  zealous  and  efficient  co-operation.  But  here  the 
work  of  confidence  is  to  begin.  All  is  yet  to  do, 
and  I  rely  for  success — here  as  at  Lahore — only  on 
the  candid  explanation  of  our  true  and  real  purpose, 
countenanced  and  supported  by  a  general  sincerity  of 
demeanour  and  by  the  absence  of  all  those  traces  of 
indirect  and  collateral  design  which,  while  they 
frequently  fail  in  their  own  object,  are  very  apt  to 
frustrate  and  disappoint  every  other  with  which  they 
are  in  any  way  connected.’ 