

‘  A  state  of  affairs  may  readily  be  supposed  which 
woidd  render  the  prosecution  of  a  mission  to  Persia  on 
the  part  of  the  British  power,  utterly  subversive  of  the 
dearest  interests  of  this  country.  In  such  a  case  it 
cannot  be  contended  that  the  apppointment  of  a 


JKt.  58]  LETTER  TO  SECRET  COMMITTEE.  135 

minister  accredited  to  the  Court  of  Persia  by  the  au¬ 
thorities  in  England,  under  the  contemplation  of  a 
ditferent  condition  of  affairs,  should  supersede  a  discre¬ 
tionary  power,  on  the  part  of  the  local  Government, 
to  require  him  to  suspend  the  exercise  of  his  ministerial 
functions  ;  or  that  a  minister  so  appointed,  proceeding 
without  the  authority  of  this  Government,  or  in  direct 
opposition  to  it,  is  empowered  by  his  commission  to 
pledge  its  faith  to  the  adoption  of  a  course  of  measures, 
not  only  unsanctioned  by  the  Government  on  which 
the  execution  of  those  measures  must  depend,  but 
expressly  declared  to  be  incompatible  with  its  honour 
and  interest.  The  assumption  of  such  a  power  is  the 
assumption  of  the  government  of  this  country,  not  the 
exercise  of  the  ministerial  powers  delegated  by  the 
Crown  to  its  accredited  envoy.  It  is  the  assumption 
of  power  which  the  throne  itself  never  claimed  ;  and  it 
is  a  direct  opposition,  not  only  to  the  spirit,  but  to  the 
very  letter  of  His  ^Majesty’s  commands.’ 

Lord  Hinto,  describing  the  grounds  on  which  the 
supreme  Government  of  India  had  hitherto  carried  on 
the  connection  with  Persia,  continues  :  ‘By  the  , laws 
which  have  been  framed  for  the  management  of  the 
honourable  Company’s  affairs,  the  local  Government  of 
this  country  is  vested  with  the  power  attached  to 
sovereignty.  It  is  empowered  to  administer  civil  and 
criminal  justice,  to  levy  war,  and  to  conclude  peace. 
It  is  equally  essential  to  the  preservation  of  this  valu¬ 
able  branch  of  the  British  Em})ire  that  the  States  of 
Asia  should  consider  the  British  establishment  in  India 


136 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


in  the  light  of  a  sovereign  State,  as  that  the  G-overn- 
ment  should  actually  exercise  the  powers  annexed 
to  it. 

‘  In  this  character,  the  Company’s  Government  has 
legitimately  negotiated  by  means  of  ambassadors,  and 
concluded  treaties  with  the  State  of  Persia  on  a  footing 
of  equality.  In  this  character,  the  State  of  Persia  has 
been  accustomed  to  consider  the  British  Government 
in  India  as  vested  with  absolute  authority  to  employ 
its  resources  in  aid  of  the  Persian  monarch  as  an 
ally,  or  to  direct  its  power  against  him  as  an  enemy. 
It  is  in  this  character  alone  that  we  have  been  enabled 
to  obtain  those  manifestations  of  respect,  that  regard 
to  the  claims  of  dignity,  which,  amongst  all  nations  of 
the  world,  but  in  a  special  degree  among  Asiatic  States, 
are  essential  to  the  maintenance  of  real  power  in  the 
scale  of  political  interest.  This  acknowledged  character, 
as  it  constituted  the  basis,  so  it  must  form  the  cement 
of  our  external  relations.  To  depreciate  therefore  that 
estimation  of  the  power,  and  the  dignity  of  the  British 
Government  in  India,  which,  under  a  sense  of  its  im¬ 
portance,  we  have  successfully  laboured  to  preserve 
amongst  neighbouring  States,  is  to  fix  upon  the  British 
Government  the  stigma  of  deceit,  to  affect  the  reputa¬ 
tion  of  our  public  faith,  and  to  expose  us  to  much  of  the 
danger  arising  from  a  real  loss  of  power  and  authority, 
by  diminishing  that  awe  and  respect  with  which  this 
Government  has  hitherto  been  contemplated,  and  on 
which  the  tranquillity  and  security  of  the  Britisfi 
dominion  in  India  mainly  depend.’ 