


Mt.  o7] 


MISSION  TO  LAHORE. 


143 


like  the  present,  of  Europeans  properly  qualified  in  those 
countries,  would  undoubtedly  be  best  calculated  to  fulfil 
my  present  views,  which  aim,  first  at  obtaining  early 
intelligence  of  the  enemy’s  designs,  and  secondly  at 
casting  obstacles  to  his  progress.  The  practicability  of 
obtaining  a  reception  for  such  embassies  as  1  have 
alluded  to,  at  any  Court  beyond  the  Indus,  is  still  to  be 
enquired  into.’ 

The  most  formidable  obstacle  to  any  successful 
combination  with  the  Western  States  was  to  be  found 
in  their  mutual  jealousies  and  conflicting  interests. 
Iletween  the  Jumna — at  that  time  the  British  frontier 
— and  the  Sutlege,  the  country  was  occupied  by  inde¬ 
pendent  principalities  belonging  to  the  semi-religions, 
semi-military  commonwealth  of  the  Sikhs.  Beyond 
the  Sutlege,  the  territory  known  as  the  Punjaub,  also 
occupied  by  Sikhs,  was  under  the  rule  of  Kunjeet 
Singh,  Eajah,  or  rather  INIaharajah,  of  Lahore — a  prince 
distinguished  for  military  capacity  and  ambition,  whose 
dominions  had  rapidly  increased  since  the  downfall  of 
the  Mahratta  power,  and  whose  intention  of  extending 
them  by  further  conquests  over  the  Sikh  chieftains 
eastward  of  the  Sutlege  had  roused  the  watchfulness  of 
the  Indian  Government.  Beyond  the  Indus  lay  the 
kingdom  of  Cabid — the  remains  of  a  once  splendid 
empire,  which  had  extended  from  the  Jumna  to  tlie 
Caspian  Sea,  from  the  Oxus  to  the  Persian  Gulf.  Of 
this  country  scarcely  anything  was  known  before  Lord 
Minto  sent  to  it  the  embassy  of  Mr.  Mountstuart 
Elphinstone.  The  States  immediately  surrounding  it 


144 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


had  been  carved  out  of  its  ancient  dominions,  and  Persia, 
Tiahore,  and  Scinde  were  therefore  equally  the  objects 
of  its  open  or  covert  hostility.  Among  these  rival  po¬ 
tentates  it  became  the  duty  of  the  Indian  Grovernment 
to  decide  whose  alliance  would  be  the  most  valuable, 
and  to  discover  Avhether  any  of  their  conflicting  interests 
Avere  inveterately  antagonistic  to  our  own.  Unluckily 
it  proved  that  the  Eajah  of  Lahore,  whose  territory  lay 
in  the  track  of  every  invader  of  India,  was  at  once  our 
most  necessary  ally  and  our  most  dangerous  neigh¬ 
bour. 

In  the  stringent  instructions  given  to  Lord  Minto 
by  the  Company,  to  observe  a  policy  of  non-intervention 
in  the  affairs  of  States  beyond  our  borders,  it  does  not 
appear  that  any  rules  were  laid  doAvn  for  the  case  of 
an  urgent  appeal  by  them  for  such  intervention.  A 
claim,  based  on  the  right  of  the  weak  powers  to  obtain 
protection  from  the  stronger,  had  been  made  during  the 
administration  of  Sir  G.  BarloAv,  by  the  Sikh  principal¬ 
ities  lying  between  the  British  frontiers  and  the  Punjaub, 
Avhich,  after  the  overthrow  of  the  Mahratta  supremacy 
in  those  regions  by  the  arms  of  Lord  Wellesley,  were 
unable  to  protect  themselves  against  the  encroachments 
of  Runjeet  Singh.  The  appeal  had  been  met  Avith  a 
refusal ;  and  what  appears  to  be  the  inevitable  result 
among  populations  in  similar  conditions,  had  ensued 
— the  poAver  and  influence  resigned  by  the  Indian 
(rovemment  Avere  transferred  to  another.  The  Rajah 
of  Lahore,  in  his  character  of  protector  over  his  brother 
Sikhs,  now  threatened  us  with  the  establishment  of  a 