

'  Mr.  Mountstuart  Elphinstone  to  Lord  Minto,  Mooltan,  Deccniher 
14,  1808. 


1G6 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


is  desirable  in  the  present  situation  of  affairs,  and  under 
any  circumstances  the  Government  would  approve  of 
the  Envoy  endeavouring  to  limit  the  aid  to  be  eventually 
afforded  to  the  object  of  defensive  engagements  as 
much  as  possible,  and  consenting  to  afford  assistance 
in  ai'ms,  ordnance,  and  military  stores  rather  than  in 
troops.’  ’ 

The  instructions  from  which  the  above  extract  is 
made,  were  not  written  when  Mr.  Elphinstone  entei'ed 
Peshawur,  where  the  King  had  determined  to  receive 
him. 

On  leaving  Mooltan  the  mission  proceeded  up  the 
Indus,  with  much  discourse  of  Alexander,  whose  ex¬ 
ploits  appear  to  have  been  singularly  mixed  up  in  the 
traditions  of  the  people  with  those  of  Solomon  and 
of  Lord  Lake.  After  crossing  the  great  river  they 
followed  pretty  closely  the  line  of  the  late  frontier  at 
the  foot  of  the  Suleiman  mountains.  Encamping  at 
the  mouth  of  the  Kurrum,  where  English  troops  now 
hold  the  ascending  valley,  they  rested  later  on  by  the 
springs  and  the  sycamores  of  Kohat, — a  name  grown 
familiar  to  us  as  a  place  of  arms,  of  convoys,  and  of 


'  This  passage  of  the  despatch  to  Mr.  Elphinstoneis  an  adaptation 
of  the  suggestions  made  by  himself  in  a  pajrer  addressed  to  Lord 
Minto  some  time  before.  ‘  The  practicability  of  assisting  the 
King  with  troops  would  be  very  doubtful.  But  a  present  of  guns, 
stores,  &c.,  and  some  instruction  in  the  use  of  artillery  might  have 
the  best  effect.  Such  an  arrrangement  would  strengthen  the  King 
of  Cabul,  and  would  give  him  confidence  in  us  and  remove  any  sus¬ 
picions  he  may  be  persuaded  to  harbour  that  we  have  designs  on  his 
country,  and  would  show  him  that  we  take  a  lively  interest  in  his 
welfare.’ 


57] 


MISSION  TO  CABUL. 


167 


staff-officers,  but  to  the  Elphinstone  mission  suggest¬ 
ing  gentler  thoughts,  for  there  their  hearts  were  glad¬ 
dened  by  an  unexpected  meeting  with  wanderers  like 
themselves  from  English  lanes  and  fields.  The  songs 
of  thrushes  and  blackbirds  were  in  the  air;  wild 
raspberry  and  blackberry  bushes,  ‘  all  the  better  for 
being  out  of  leaf,  were  putting  forth  new  buds ;  ’ 
clover  and  chickweed,  and  golden  disks  of  dandelions, 
peered  up  among  the  ‘  soft  fresh  verdure  ’  of  the  early 
year;  and,  far  more  grateful  to  their  eyes  than  the 
monotonous  splendour  of  Indian  vegetation,  was  last 
year’s  brown  leaf,  and  the  willow’s  soft  and  scented 
buds. 

At  Kohat  to-day,  the  humble  English  flowers  may 
grow  by  English  graves,  in  the  shadow  of  the  church 
where  are  preserved  the  names  of  a  long  list  of  officers 
who  have  fallen  since  the  frontier  force  was  started 
about  thirty  years  ago  —  ‘names  scarcely  heard  of  in 
England,  but  acknowledged  out  here  to  be  those  of 
first-rate  leaders,  first-rate  soldiers,  who  have  fallen 
like  heroes,  one  after  the  other,  in  these  frontier  fights. 
The  Englishmen  we  have  on  this  frontier  are  a  race  to 
be  proud  of.’  ‘ 