


^T.  58] 


RUNJEET  SINGH. 


157 


described  the  action  as  one  of  ‘  surpassing  levity :  ’  it  was 
more  probably  the  instinct  of  a  proud  and  fierce  nature 
aiming  at  self-mastery.  But  the  struggle  was  not  over  ; 
many  weary  months  were  still  to  pass,  and  many  were 
the  shiftings  of  purpose  and  of  place,  before,  on  April  25, 
1809,  the  treaty  was  signed  which  advanced  the  frontier 
of  British  India  from  the  Jumna  to  the  Sutlege. 

By  it  the  contracting  parties  bound  themselves  to 
respect  each  other’s  territories,  and  the  treaty  was  never 
infringed  to  the  day  of  the  Rajah’s  death. 

This  was  perhaps  the  most  decisive  moment  of 
Kunjeet’s  career.  The  last  great  event  of  his  life  was 
the  splendid  reception  given  by  him  to  the  Governor 
General,  Lord  Auckland,  when  he,  with  his  sisters, 
visited  Lahore  in  1838.  They,  the  nephew  and  nieces 
of  Lord  Minto,  were  in  the  Upper  Provinces  when  the 
old  man  died ;  and  our  last  sight  of  the  great  Sikh  is  in 
Miss  Kden’s  letters  from  ‘  Up  the  Country.’ 

Thirty  years  had  brought  about  many  changes. 
The  tide  of  Runjeet’s  conquests,  forcibly  arrested  in  the 
east,  had  rolled  back  over  the  territories  of  many  a 
chief  whose  palaces  had  been  made  desolate,  whose  holy 
places  waste.  Nor  had  those  of  the  great  King  of  Cabul 
been  spared ;  from  Peshawnr  to  JMooltau  all  was  the 
Sikh’s.  With  the  increase  of  dominion  and  dignity  had 
increased  the  Oriental  magnificence  of  his  surroundings. 
Gold  and  gems  wei’e  spread  with  lavish  hands  on  all 
things  pertaining  to  him — from  the  sacred  temple  of 
his  holy  city  to  the  trappings  of  his  steeds.  But  if 
there  was  less  of  martial  simplicity  than  in  his  early 


158 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


habits  and  surroundings,  there  was  far  more  of  warlike 
pomp  in  the  display  in  which  his  eye  delighted ;  the 
English  visitors  were  not  left  in  doubt  that  the  Sikhs 
and  their  Ruler  were  more  even  than  of  yore  what 
their  great  teacher  had  proposed  to  make  them — Lions 
of  the  Punjanb — ‘  Lions  of  Giod  like  the  lion-like  men 
of  Moab.’  *  But  thirty  years  before,  the  facts  would 
not  have  been  recorded  by  an  English  lady  after  a 
morning  spent  in  quietly  sketching  under  the  limes  and 
the  oranges  of  the  Shalimar  gardens. 

Metcalfe’s  relations  with  Lord  Minto  during  his 
mission  to  Lahore  passed  rapidly  into  those  of  mutual 
regard.  On  his  return  to  the  seat  of  Grovernment  he 
was  added  to  the  establishment  as  deputy  to  Mr. 
Edmonstone — ‘for ’wrote  Lord  Minto  to  his  wife,  ‘  I 
have  lately  conceived  a  very  high  opinion  of  his  talents 
and  character,  and  particularly  of  his  cool  judgment 
and  conciliatory  disposition.’  And  a  little  later  on, 
when  Metcalfe  had  fallen  into  habits  of  intimacy  in  the 
society  of  Grovernment  House  he  wote  again — ‘he 
really  is  the  ugliest  and  most  agreeable  clever  person — 
except  Lady  GHenbervie — in  Europe  or  Asia.’ 