

The  dissensions,  of  which  the  King  of  Cabul 
had  made  mention,  were  many  and  serious.  With 
Persia,  with  Lahore,  with  Scinde,  with  Cashmere,  the 
King’s  relations  were  troubled  ;  within  his  gates  his 
rebellious  brothers  had  raised  the  standard  of  a  civil 
war.  In  the  event  of  the  British  proposals  being  found 
acceptable  to  him,  there  could  be  little  doubt  that  he 
would  meet  them  with  conditions  which  would  secure 
assistance  from  the  Company  against  his  enemies,  and 


^T.  57j 


MISSION  TO  CAEUL. 


1(;3 


that  this  assistance  would  be  demanded  in  the  shape  of 
money,  troops,  and  ordnance. 

To  send  an  army  to  Cabul  Mr.  Elphinstone  thought 
would  be  impolitic,  ‘  because  it  would  be  to  meet  the 
French  on  equal  terms,  and  to  waive  the  advantage  of  the 
strong  frontier  to  the  westward  presented  by  the  rivers 
of  the  Punjaub,  the  Indus,  and  the  desert.  In  the 
present  state  of  the  intermediate  country,  I  fear  it  will 
be  found  impossible  to  defend  Cabul ;  it  is,  however, 
very  much  to  be  wished  that  it  were  practicable  for  us 
to  contribute  more  directly  to  prevent  that  country 
falling  into  the  hands  of  the  French ;  for  if  they  were 
once  in  possession  of  it,  their  invasion  of  our  territories 
would  no  longer  be  a  great  and  desperate  enterprise, 
but  an  attempt  which  they  might  make  without  risk 
when  they  pleased,  and  repeat  whenever  the  state  of 
our  affairs  gave  a  prospect  of  success.'  It  is  also  very 
desirable  that  we  should  be  able  to  hold  out  some 
advantage  to  the  King  of  Cabul  more  attractive  than 
that  of  mere  safety  from  the  French. 

‘  If  that  specious  people  send  an  emissary  to  the 
King  of  Cabul,  he  will  probably  assume  His  Majesty’s 
entire  safety  from  the  f'rench,  offer  protection  against 
the  designs  of  the  English,  and  promise  in  the  course 
of  the  operations  against  India  to  reduce  this  Soubah, 
Phawul  Khan’s  country,  and  Scinde,  entirely  under  the 
King’s  authority ;  perhaps  he  may  also  promise  tlie 

'  We  are  informed  that  papers  exist  to  prove  tiiat  Bonaparte 
iiad  fixed  on  the  Gomnl  Pass,  leading  from  Glniznee  to  Dera  Ismael 
Khan,  as  the  line  of  his  advance  from  Afghanistan  into  India. 


164 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


Punjaub,  Cutch,  Griizerat,  or  some  other  country  on 
this  side  of  the  Indus ;  or  he  may  engage  to  procure  a 
desirable  settlement  of  the  disputes  about  the  Wharasan, 
getting  over  all  difficulties  by  promised  indemnities  in 
India. 

‘  Amidst  all  these  dazzling  prospects  I  fear  an  Eastern 
monarch  might  lose  sight  of  the  danger  to  which  he 
exposes  his  crown  by  associating  with  such  a  nation  of 
military  adventurers,  and  would  not  give  a  very  favour¬ 
able  hearing  to  a  person  who  could  only  offer  to  destroy 
the  illusion. 