

When  the  mission  reached  the  fine  old  city  of 

'  Lord  Melgund  to  the  Editor.  Kohat,  February  1879. 

The  frontier  force  is  under  the  Government  of  the  Punjaub,  and 
has  held,  at  a  fearful  cost  of  life,  a  frontier  which  it  is  hoped  will 
now  be  exchanged  for  a  better.  This  force  is  composed  of  native 
troops  under  a  handful  of  British  officers,  and  its  duty  has  been  to 
keep  at  bay  all  the  wild  tribes  of  the  mountains,  over  a  line  ex¬ 
tending  many  hundred  miles. 


168 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


Peshawur,  croAviied  with  its  palace,  shady  Avith  gardens 
and  oA^erflowing  AAnth  population,  the  surrounding  plain 
Avore  the  first  greenery  of  spring ;  and,  in  the  glory  of 
blossoming  orchards  and  young  leaves,  Asia  wore  to 
them  the  hues  of  England.  A  remark  to  that  effect 
having  been  repeated  to  the  King,  he  courteously  replied 
that  Avhere  there  Avas  such  affinity  betAveen  countries 
there  should  be  friendship  betAveen  their  peoples.  It 
was  no  doubt  politic  to  overlook  some  other  features  in 
the  scene  which  suggested  widely  different  thoughts ; 
for,  as  unlike  anything  English  as  the  barren  hills  that 
girded  the  plain,  Avas  a  sight  that  gave  the  Envoy  ‘  a 
strange  notion  of  the  system  of  manners  in  CabuL’ 

Perched  like  birds  of  prey  upon  the  rugged  rocks 
sat  ‘  a  number  of  armed  banditti,  the  fierce  clan  of 
the  Khyberees,’  appraising  the  worth  and  the  strength 
of  the  approaching  mission.  Nor  could  it  proceed  in 
safety  till  terms  had  been  made  with  the  leaders  of 
the  hand  by  the  Afghan  nobleman  deputed  to  conduct 
the  strangers  into  the  town,  Avho,  in  his  rich  dress  and 
golden  armour,  ventured,  almost  unattended,  into  the 
midst  of  their  matchlocks. 

At  this  very  time  the  Punjaub  was  quite  safe  for 
travellers.  ‘  The  Maharajah,’  says  one  of  Lord 
^linto’s  correspondents,  ‘  has  instituted  a  good  police, 
and  has  made  severe  examples  of  the  districts  in  which 
capital  crimes  and  robberies  have  been  committed,  by 
putting  to  death  all  the  iuhahitants  of  the  neighbour¬ 
ing  toAvns  and  villages.’ 

The  reception  of  the  embassy  by  the  king  took 


JEt.  58] 


MISSION  TO  CABUL. 


169 


place  on  March  5.  It  is  described  as  magnificent. 
After  passing  through  courts  filled  with  guards,  and 
halls  with  courtiers,  over  rich  carpets  and  under  silken 
draperies,  they  reached  the  presence  of  the  King,  Shah 
Soojah,  a  handsome  man  of  about  thirty  years  of  age, 
who  received  them  seated  on  a  throne  covered  with 
cloth  of  gold  and  pearls,  himself  a  blaze  of  emeralds 
and  diamonds,  the  fiimous  Kohinoor  being  conspicuous 
above  all. 

On  subsequent  occasions  the  Envoy  was  admitted 
to  more  private  interviews  with  the  King,  ‘when  it 
would  scarcely  be  believed  how  much  he  had  the  man¬ 
ners  of  a  gentleman,  and  how  well  he  preserved  his 
dignity,  while  he  seemed  only  anxious  to  please.’  The 
Afghan  nobility  struck  Mr.  Elphinstone  as  superior  in 
refinement  and  tastes  to  the  great  men  of  India — their 
jnanners  were  more  simple  and  their  knowledge  greater. 
It  soon  appeared  that  they  were  shrewd  enough  to 
perceive  that  dangers,  against  which  the  British  sought 
their  co-operation,  must  be  of  considerable  magnitude, 
and  that  an  advantageous  bargain  might  therefore,  not 
inq)robably,  be  struck  between  themselves  and  the 
C'ompany.  They  remarked  that,  before  making  common 
cause  with  either  of  the  European  powers,  they  ought 
to  hear  what  Erance  as  well  as  England  had  to  say. 