

These  more  extensive  designs,  depending  on  the 
contingency  of  a  failure  in  the  negotiations  with  Runjeet 
Singh,  were  not  destined  to  be  carried  out.  When  from 
Europe  came  assurance  that  the  arch-disturber  of  the 
world’s  peace  had  turned  his  mind  from  Asiatic  conquests 
to  others  nearer  home,  the  Indian  Government  prepared 
to  withdraw  from  the  more  considerable  undertakings 
which  were  required  for  the  security  of  our  Indian 
'  Calcutta,  November  15,  1808. 


AiT.  57]  DECISION  OF  THE  INDIAN  GOVERNMENT.  155 

frontier.  But  with  the  cessation  of  their  apprehensions 
on  the  larger  question,  ceased  also  the  necessity  for  an 
alliance  with  Runjeet  Singh  at  the  expense  of  those  it 
was  the  desire  and  the  interest  of  the  Government  to 
])rotect.  l\Ir.  Metcalfe  was  informed  that  the  Govern¬ 
ment  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  approxima¬ 
tion  of  the  Rajah  of  Lahore’s  military  dominion  to  the 
( ’ompany’s  possessions,  and  the  introduction  of  his  power 
into  Hindostan,  wordd  expose  to  imminent  hazard  the 
tranquillity  and  security  of  the  British  possessions. 
Upon  principles  purely  defensive,  the  Government  con¬ 
sidered  it  incumbent  upon  them  ‘  to  oppose  the  extension 
on  the  Indian  side  of  the  Sutlege  of  an  ambitious  and 
military  power,  which  would  be  substituted  upon  our 
frontier  for  a  confederacy  of  friendly  chiefs  rendered 
grateful  by  our  protection  and  interested  in  our  cause.’ 
He  was  desired  to  declare,  and  enforce,  if  necessary,  the 
resolution  of  the  Government  to  confine  the  dominions 
of  Lahore  within  their  ancient  limits,  and  to  inform  the 
Rajah  that  it  was  the  design  of  the  Indian  Government 
to  establish  a  military  post  near  the  frontier  of  the 
Punjaub,  not  only  for  the  security  of  the  independent 
Sikhs,  but,  as  our  advanced  post,  to  be  connected  mth 
future  defensive  arrangements  against  the  approach  of 
an  enemy  from  the  quarter  of  Persia. 

The  sacrifices  demanded  of  Runjeet  were  not  to  be 
wholly  without  compensation.  It  had  long  been  his 
desire  to  form  a  treaty  of  general  amity  with  the 
(lovernment  of  Calcutta,  by  which  the  territories  of 
each  Power  should  be  respected  by  the  other.  ‘  Although 


156 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


he  mistrusted  the  sincerity  of  verbal  professions  of 
amity,  he  believed  that  implicit  confidence  might  be 
reposed  on  the  validity  of  our  ■written  engagements.’ 
Lord  IVIinto  was  not  of  those,  who,  according  to  the 
Eastern  proverb,  show  nothing  of  the  lion  but  his  claws  ; 
INIr.  Metcalfe  was  therefore  instructed  to  conclude  the 
desired  treaty  with  the  Kajah  whenever  the  previously 
stated  conditions  were  accepted. 

When  the  final  decision  of  the  Council  of  Calcutta 
reached  their  Envoy,  he  was  at  U mritsur,  where  the  Eaj  ah 
had  betaken  himself  to  rest  and  recreation  after  the 
fatigues  of  war.  Eevellings  and  feastings  had  succeeded 
to  military  conflicts,  and  it  became  as  difficult  to  And 
the  Eajah  sober  as  it  had  been  to  overtake  him  at  all. 
When  at  last  the  communication  of  the  Glovernment 
was  conveyed  to  him,  the  immediate  effect  upon  him 
was  that  of  ‘  a  shock  which  sobered  him  at  once.’ 
Next  day  he  took  advantage  of  a  disturbance  between 
the  Hindoos  and  Mussulmans  of  his  holy  city  to  remove 
to  Lahore ;  but  there  too  Metcalfe  followed  him,  and 
at  last  the  Eajah  was  brought  to  bay.  The  time  for 
defiance  as  well  as  for  conciliation  was  past.  He  must 
submit  to  retire  to  his  ancient  limits,  to  restore  his 
late  conquests,  and  to  learn  that  a  British  force  was 
advancing  to  see  that  the  work  was  done.  With  praise¬ 
worthy  self-restraint  Eunjeet  received  the  decree  in 
silence  ;  then,  turning  on  his  heel,  left  the  room.  A  few 
minntes  more,  and  the  astonished  Envoy,  looking  from 
the  window,  saw  him  madly  galloping  his  favourite  horse 
round  and  round  the  courts  of  the  palace.  Metcalfe 