

The  minute  ends  thus : — ‘  Speaking  purely  of  mili¬ 
tary  advantages,  my  opinion,  I  confess,  is  that  the 
movement  and  operation  of  troops,  as  well  as  the 
success  of  a  campaign,  would  be  more  facilitated  and 
favoured  by  the  friendship  and  assistance  of  the  country 
which  is  the  theatre  of  their  operations  without  a  pre¬ 
vious  topographical  knowledge  of  the  ground,  or  niifitary 
report  of  its  condition  and  resources,  than  by  the  pos¬ 
session  of  that  knowledge  in  a  hostile  country.’ 

Mr.  Metcalfe  '  was  the  envoy  selected  for  the  mission 

'  Afterwards  Lord  Metcalfe.  Late  Governor  General  of  India, 
Governor  of  Jamaica,  and  Governor  General  of  Canada. 


iRr.  57] 


CHARLES  METCALFE. 


151 


to  the  Punjaub,  and  a  more  difficult  task  than  that 
entrusted  to  him  can  hardly  be  conceived — to  woo  the 
great  Eajah  to  an  alliance,  while  refusing  him  the 
increase  of  territory  on  which  he  had  set  his  heart, 
(diaries  Metcalfe  was  at  this  time  twenty-three  years  of 
age  ;  he  was  a  lad  of  nineteen  when  Lord  Wellesley  sent 
him  as  political  officer  to  the  head-quarters  of  Lord 
I/ike,  wffiere  a  combination  of  tact  and  spirit  had 
established  his  reputation  as  one  of  the  most  promising 
of  the  younger  civilians.  On  Lord  Minto’s  arrival  in 
India  no  name  was  brought  before  him  with  higher 
encomiums ;  and  when  selected  for  the  most  delicate 
of  political  missions,  it  was  entrusted  to  his  sole 
charge.  He  ‘  was  to  move  ’  we  are  told  ‘  without 
secretaries,  assistants,  or  attaches;  a  military  escort 
was  to  be  provided,  and  a  proper  establishment 
of  moonshees,  writers,  and  servants  was  to  be  fur¬ 
nished.  But  the  work  of  diplomacy  was  left  entirely 
to  his  unaided  counsels.’  ‘  He  was  to  be  the  pioneer 
of  the  mission  to  Cabul.  Besides  collecting  and  com¬ 
municating  every  information,  political,  geographical, 
and  topographical,  concerning  the  country  he  was 
despatched  to,  together  with  the  real  disposition  of  its 
ruler,  the  state  of  his  government,  troops,  resources, 
tkc.,  he  was  to  push  his  reconnaissances,  by  means  of 
secret  news-writers,  to  Cabul,  Cashmere,  Peshawur, 
Candahar,  Herat,  and  as  far  as  possible  into  the  in¬ 
terior  of  Persia. 


Kaye's  Correspondence  of  Lord  Metcalfe, 


r 


152  LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA.  [1808 

It  was  not  the  magnitude  of  an  undertaking  which 
would  have  daunted  the  men  of  those  days. 

IMetcalfe  left  Delhi  on  August  12,  during  the  monsoon 
of  1808  ;  on  September  12  he  reached  Runjeet’s  camp 
near  the  Sutlege,  after  a  weary  march  over  a  country 
under  water.  Eains  from  above,  quagmires  below,  had 
reduced  the  appearance  of  his  escort  to  that  with  which 
Sir  John  Falstaff  objected  to  march  through  Coventry, 
and  IMetcalfe  was  not  without  some  similar  sentiments. 
Rut  when  the  Eajah  contented  himself  with  sending 
his  Prime  Minister  and  an  escort  of  2,000  men  to  meet 
him  on  his  arrival,  the  young  Envoy  thought  he  might 
have  come  himself,  and  was  careful  to  let  it  be  under¬ 
stood  that,  whether  in  purple  or  in  rags,  he  came  to 
treat  as  the  representative  of  British  power ;  and  Eun- 
jeet — who  possibly  experienced  some  such  feeling  as  that 
expressed  by  Hyder  Ali  to  General  IMalcolm,  ‘  It  is 
not  what  I  see,  but  what  I  do  not  see,  that  I  fear  ’ — 
received  him  ever  after  as  became  his  ambassadorial 
character. 