

The  uncertainty  of  their  relations  with  Persia  and 
Lahore  had  obliged  the  Indian  Government  to  give 
very  indefinite  instructions  to  Mr.  Elphinstone  when,  in 


^T.  57] 


MISSION  TO  CABUL. 


161 


the  month  of  October  1808,  he  set  out  from  Delhi  on 
his  mission  to  the  King  of  Cabul ;  and  the  same 
uncertainty  as  to  the  disposition  of  Kuujeet  Singh  had 
led  Lord  yMinto  to  advise  the  adoption  of  a  route  by 
the  Cabul  mission  which,  though  longer  than  that 
through  the  Punjaub,  would  avoid  the  dominions  of 
Kunjeet,  and  would  also  give  an  opportunity  of  gaining 
information  concerning  a  part  of  the  country  unknown 
to  travellers. 

The  line  of  march  adopted  took  them  over  part  of 
the  desert — at  that  time  untrodden  by  Europeans  — 
which  lies  between  Delhi  and  the  Indus,  and  led  them 
by  the  great  town  of  Bikaneer,  where,  before  the  vast 
circumference  of  the  encircling  walls,  five  besieging 
armies  lay  encamped.  As  the  English  caught  sight  of 
the  high  battlements  and  forts,  the  cupolas,  domes, 
and  spires,  they  were  nigh  believing  that  the  delusions 
of  the  desert  accompanied  them  still,  and  that  the 
proud  city,  as  big  as  Delhi,  was  no  less  the  baseless 
fabric  of  a  vision  than  the  lovely  lakes  of  seemingly 
clear  and  transparent  water,  reflecting  in  their  jmre 
depths  every  passing  object,  every  tint  of  colour,  with 
which  the  mirage  had  adorned  the  barren  scene 
where  no  water  was.  From  Bikaneer,  where  they  were 
well  received,  though  with  great  astonishment,  they 
passed  on  through  dependencies  of  the  King  of  Cabul, 
till  they  reached  Mooltan,  five  hundred  miles  from 
Delhi. 

At  this  point  of  their  journey  they  were  detained 
for  some  time  while  communications  were  carried  on 

M 


162 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


by  letter  witb  the  King  of  Cabul,  then  at  Candahar. 
Without  his  consent,  and  the  protection  of  a  guard 
from  His  Majesty,  ‘  it  would  be  impossible,’  wrote  Mr. 
Elphinstone,  ‘  to  travel  among  the  tribes  beyond  the 
Indus.’  The  answer  to  Mr.  Elphinstone’s  application 
was  long  in  coming,  for,  as  they  afterwards  learned, 
the  news  of  the  approach  of  the  mission  was  at  first 
regarded  with  strong  prejudice  and  distrust;  the 
Afghan  nobles  disliked  the  idea  of  an  alliance  between 
the  King  and  the  British  power,  as  likely  to  strengthen 
him  to  their  detriment ;  and  the  King  himself  thought 
it  ‘very  natural  that  the  British  should  seek  to  profit  by 
the  internal  dissensions  of  a  neighbouring  kingdom, 
and  endeavour  to  annex  it  to  their  empire.’  Curiosity 
is  said  to  have  had  much  to  do  with  the  final  decision 
to  receive  the  mission  at  Peshawur  ;  but  before  it  was 
made  known  to  Mr.  Elphinstone,  he  wrote  a  long 
letter  to  the  Grovernor  Greneral,  stating  fully  the  reasons 
which  appeared  to  him  to  necessitate  an  enlargement 
of  his  powers  and  authority  to  negotiate  with  the  Afghan 
Court. 