

‘  The  state  of  our  affairs  may  hereafter  admit  of 
our  holding  out  many  attractions  to  the  King  of  Cabul, 
but  at  present  we  can  only  display  that  of  money.  It 
might  be  expedient  to  instruct  me  how  far  to  offer  pe¬ 
cuniary  aid,  in  case  I  found  it  necessary  to  counteract 
French  promises,  and  what  assistance  we  could  give  in 
ordnance,  stores,  and  officers.  It  is  desirable  that  I 
should  be  furnished  with  those  materials  to  treat  on  as 
soon  as  possible,  as  some  open  negotiation  will  probably 
be  required  as  a  pretence  for  my  remaining  at  Cabul. 
The  Asiatics  know  nothing  of  the  character  of  a  resident 
minister,  and  so  much  are  the  Afghans  impressed  with 
the  idea  of  an  ambassador  being  always  charged  with 
some  important  communication,  that  their  etiquette 
allows  him  only  one  audience  to  deliver  his  message, 
receive  a  reply,  and  take  his  leave.  I  have  to  beg  your 
Lordship’s  forgiveness  for  obtruding  the  above  questions 
on  you,  but  great  importance  appears  to  me  to  attach 
to  their  early  decision.  I  am  afraid  it  will  appear  to 


JEt.  57] 


MISSION  TO  CABUL. 


165 


your  Lordship  that  my  progress  towards  Cahul  has 
hitherto  been  very  slow  ;  but  the  delays  which  have 
occurred  have  been  unavoidable,  and  they  are  of  the 
less  consequence,  as  1  must  remain  at  this  place  till  I 
receive  an  answer  to  my  letter  to  the  King.  It  would 
be  quite  impossible  to  travel  among  the  tribes  beyond 
the  Indus  without  a  guard  froin  Ilis  IMajesty.  I  expect 
to  receive  an  answer  in  course  of  a  week,  and  if  he  con¬ 
tinues  at  Candahar,  where  the  last  accounts  left  him, 
I  shall  be  able  to  join  him  in  a  month  from  the  time  I 
leave  INI ooltan.  Keport  states  his  intention  to  be  to 
move  to  Peshore,  in  which  case  I  should  probably 
meet  him  within  a  fortnight  after  I  leave  this  place.’  ‘ 
Before  this  letter  was  received,  the  policy  at  Cal¬ 
cutta  had  undergone  considerable  modifications,  and 
the  reply  informed  INlr.  Elphinstone  that  no  thought  of 
offensive  operations  against  Persia  was  any  longer  en¬ 
tertained.  He  was,  however,  authorised  to  accede  to 
engagements  of  a  purely  defensive  character  against 
her  in  the  event  of  her  aggression  against  the  State  of 
Cabul ;  in  this  case  military  stores,  arms,  and  ordnance 
would  be  furnished  to  the  King  on  condition  of  his 
readiness  to  oppose  the  advance  of  a  French  army  on 
India.  ‘  It  would  probably,’  said  the  despatch,  ‘  be 
found  impracticable  to  obtain  the  King’s  cordial 
attachment  to  our  views  and  interests  without  some 
sacrifice  to  his.’  These  instructions  were  stated  ‘with 
a  view  to  point  out  rather  what  is  admissible  than  what 