

Before  the  purpose  of  the  mission  was  opened,  its 
mere  arrival  had  sufficed  to  awaken  the  jealousy  and 
suspicions  of  Eunjeet  Singh.  When  its  object  appeared 
to  be  to  gain  his  aid  in  counteracting  the  advance  of 
hostile  armies  into  India,  the  Eajah  made  it  manifest 
that  his  co-operation,  against  a  danger  which  produced 
no  great  impression  on  his  mind,  was  only  to  be  secured 
by  the  furtherance  on  the  part  of  the  Company  of  his 
own  designs  against  the  territories  of  the  independent 
Sikhs.  On  finding  that  no  promise  of  countenance  to 


^T.  57] 


CHARLES  METCALFE. 


153 


these  designs  formed  part,  of  Mr.  INIetcalfe’s  instruc¬ 
tions,  the  Sikh  Prince  suddenly  broke  up  his  camp  and 
proceeded  to  cross  the  river  and  attack  the  coveted 
territories.  Then  began  a  weary  period  of  marching 
and  counter-marcliing, — of  fruitless  negotiations  and 
helpless  acquiescence  in  the  spoliation  of  those  whom 
]\Ietcalfe’s  employers  proposed  ultimately  to  protect  ; 
while  the  Government  at  Calcutta  looked  on,  not  without 
anger,  but  with  the  determination  to  avoid  a  rupture 
while  it  was  yet  uncertain  whether  the  big  cloud  in 
the  distant  horizon  was  to  burst  upon  them  or  to  dis¬ 
perse. 

During  this  period  of  doubt  and  suspense  IMetcalfe’s 
qualifications  as  a  first-rate  diplomatist  were  brought 
to  the  test.  Nothing  could  exceed,  we  are  told,  the 
lucidity  of  his  despatches,  or  the  tact,  skill,  patience, 
and  dignity  with  which  he  conducted  these  critical 
negotiations  and  finally  carried  all  his  points.  It  is 
impossible  not  to  be  struck  by  the  respectful  attention, 
the  warm  approbation,  with  which  the  practised  states¬ 
men  of  Calcutta  received  the  reports  and  adopted  the 
suggestions  of  a  youth  of  twenty-three. 

We  have  largely  developed  since  then  our  systems 
of  education,  but  it  is  questionable  whether  any  system 
of  mental  training  can  equal  that  of  early  initiation  int() 
important  and  responsible  business.  As  (loethe  says  : — 

Es  bildcf  sicli  ein  Talent  in  der  Stille, 

Sich  ein  Cliaracter  in  dem  Strom  der  Welt. 

Had  the  Government  at  this  juncture  taken  a  more 
decided  course,  and  prohibited  the  further  acquisitions 


154 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


of  Runjeet  Singh,  ‘  they  must,’  %Yrote  Lord  Minto,’  ‘  have 
proceeded  at  once  to  employ  a  military  force  for  the 
purpose  of  affording  open  and  immediate  protection  to 
the  Sikhs.  For  to  declare  that  we  do  not  consent  to 
the  proposed  conquests,  and  at  the  same  time  to  look 
on  while  they  are  achieved,  is  a  contradiction  calculated 
alike  to  alienate  the  Sikhs  and  to  provoke  the  enmity 
of  Runjeet  Singh.’  But  though  temporising,  they  were 
not  idle.  The  Commander-in-chief  received  orders  to 
prepare  for  an  advance,  and  a  private  letter  to  him 
from  Lord  IMinto  shows  that  in  the  event  of  serious 
resistance  from  Runjeet,  it  was  in  the  contemplation  of 
Government  to  substitute  a  friendly  for  a  hostile  power 
between  our  frontier  and  the  Indus.  ‘  There  is  reason 
to  beheve  that  a  considerable  portion  of  the  country 
usurped  by  Runjeet  Singh  is  strongly  disaffected,  and 
should  any  grand  effort  be  made,  and  be  crowned  with 
success,  nothing  would  be  more  advantageous  to  our 
interests  than  the  substitution  of  friends  and  dependants 
hu’  hostile  and  rival  powers  throughout  the  country 
between  our  frontier  and  the  Indus.’ 