

Lord  Minto’s  warm  regard  for  him  was  shown  in 
many  a  kindly  letter,  some  of  which  are  preserved  in 
his  biography ;  while  the  estimation  in  which  he  held 
the  young  diplomatist  was  evidenced  by  the  high 
appointments  in  which  he  placed  him ;  and  we  know 
from  private  sources  that  these  cordial  feelings  were 
returned  with  an  almost  filial  veneration. 


’  2  Samuel,  xxiii.  20 


JEt.  58] 


DEFENCE  OF  INDIA. — CABUL. 


159 


CHAPTEK  Vir. 

Of  the  three  great  missions  sent  ont  from  Britisli 
India  in  the  course  of  1808,  the  last — to  the  King  of 
Cabnl — was  by  no  means  the  least  interesting  to  the 
Governor  General.  Personally  unacquainted  with  Mr. 
Monntstnart  Elphinstone,  Lord  Minto  had  formed  a 
very  high  opinion  of  his  character  and  attainments. 
All  men  agreed  that  no  better  choice  could  have  been 
made  for  an  Envoy  to  what  was  still  one  of  the  most 
polished  of  Asiatic  Courts,  iMr.  Elphinstone  being 
as  distinguished  for  his  courteous  and  sympathetii- 
bearing  as  for  his  wide  accpiaintance  with  Oriental 
languages  and  literature.  By  Lord  IMinto’s  request  he 
was  to  correspond  freely  and  fully  with  the  Governor 
General ;  unluckily  only  a  few  out  of  a  large  number  of 
his  letters  are  preserved  at  Minto.  The  members  of 
his  mission  were  specially  chosen  for  their  fitness  to 
acquire  information  concerning  the  nature  of  countries 
and  populations  almost  unknown  to  us.  In  his  delight¬ 
ful  introduction  to  the  ‘  History  of  Cabul  ’  Mr.  Elphin¬ 
stone  says  :  ‘  The  countries  under  the  King  of  Cabul  had 
once  extended  sixteen  degrees  in  longitude  from  Sii’hind 
about  150  miles,  from  Delhi  to  Meshed  about  an  equal 
distance  from  the  Caspian  Sea.  In  breadth  they  reached 


160 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


from  the  Oxus  to  the  Persian  Gulf,  a  space  including 
thirteen  degrees  of  latitude,  or  920  miles.’  This  great 
kingdom  had  suffered  considerable  diminution  before 
the  days  of  our  embassy  to  it,  but  there  was  a  stamp  of 
grandeur  about  it  still.  To  the  King  of  Cabul  not  only 
had  the  Mahommedan  Sovereigns  of  India  addressed 
their  complaints,  but  the  Mahratta  princes  had  done 
the  same.  Eunjeet  Singh,  though  himself  the  chief  de¬ 
spoiler  of  the  Douranee  power,  manifested  much  jealousy 
of  the  British  approach  to  the  throne  of  the  great 
King.  To  confront  this  potentate  with  due  dignity  the 
mission  had  been  fitted  out  with  considerable  care  and 
splendour. 

The  Envoy’s  staff,  suite,  and  escort,  were  unusually 
numerous  ;  nothing  was  neglected  to  ensure  its  success, 
or  at  all  events  to  give  a  proper  impression  of  the 
Power  whence  it  came. 

A  very  serious  obstacle  to  the  success  of  a  scheme  of 
co-operation  between  British  India  and  the  States  on 
her  north-western  frontier  lay  in  the  difficulty  of  com¬ 
munication.  The  length  of  time  required  to  move  from 
point  to  point  over  unsettled  districts,  imperfectly 
known  to  the  English,  could  not  be  calculated  upon 
beforehand,  and  each  Envoy  had  to  carry  on  his  nego¬ 
tiations  in  ignorance  of  the  success  of  those  simul¬ 
taneously  proceeding  in  countries  which  were  to  form 
part  of  a  combined  system. 