


Air.  58] 


MAY  IN  INDIA. 


183 


pen  sable  equipment  s  of  a  great  European  force  do  not 
exist  on  this  side  of  Vienna,  and  can  neither  be  kept 
up  nor,  if  lost  or  wasted,  can  be  renewed  in  Asia, 
excepting  only  in  our  own  provinces,  where  all  the 
r(*sources  of  war  abound,  and  are  to  us  at  hand.’ 

It  must  have  been  grateful  to  him  to  learn  from 
Lady  Minto  that  his  Indian  administration  had  won 
the  warmest  approbation  of  Lord  Wellesley.  ‘  He  highly 
approves  of  all  you  have  been  doing  in  your  kingdom. 
We  are  now  enjoying  Minto,’  she  goes  on,  ‘  in  its  greatest 
beauty.  Everything  looks  fresh  and  delightful :  you 
know  I  enjoy  this  season  (May),  and  this  year  it  affords 
me  double  pleasure,  for  I  have  learnt  to  look  with  com¬ 
posure  from  Minto  to  India,  and  without  the  misery 
which  made  even  green  leaves  look  dusky  and  the 
clear  streams  troubled.  I  believe  you  all  to  be  well 
and  happy,  and  I  hear  from  every  quarter,  and  in  every 
account  of  India,  nothing  but  praise  of  you  and  your 
government.  If  Burke  could  look  down  and  see  you 
at  the  head  of  that  oppressed  people,  it  would  increase 
even  the  happiness  of  heaven.’ 

May  in  India  wore  a  very  diiferent  aspect  from 
that  with  which  it  smiled  on  Minto. 

‘  I  do  remember  a  time,’  wrote  Lord  Minto,'  ‘w’hen 
iNlay  was  a  season  of  tempered  pleasures.  Here  it 
brings  rains  so  perpetual  and  heavy,  that  if  in  June 
greater  rains  come,  I  don’t  know  how  we  shall  get  our 


May  15,  IBCJ. 


184 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


house  repaired,  which  is  already  leaking  at  every  pore. 
The  country  is  one  sheet  of  water.  Here  and  there 
you  see  a  little  island  about  the  size  of  half  an  acre, 
which  happens  to  stand  a  few  feet  higher  than  the  rest. 
It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  persons  now  pass  in 
boats  across  the  country  which  they  were  ploughing 
two  or  three  days  back ;  but  the  crops  will  be  im¬ 
proved  by  this  operation,  for  paddy  rejoices  in  water. 
The  native  children,  I  mean  the  young  ones,  are  all 
stark  naked,  and,  most  of  the  habitations  being  on  the 
edge  of  ponds,  are  not  very  nnlike  tadpoles ;  they  are 
uncommonly  Lively  merry  monkeys,  and  I  am  not  at  all 
annoyed  by  their  black  skins.  You  never  saw  a  country 
so  swarming  with  population.  .  .  .  Business  here  ap¬ 
pears  to  me  to  breed  in  the  boxes,  as  Lady  Palmerston 
used  to  say  of  keys  in  a  lady’s  pocket.  However,  the 
business  is  pleasant  now,  consisting  principally  of 
orders  to  countermand  military  operations  and  prepa¬ 
rations,  and  to  save  Johnny  Company’s  cash.’ 

The  two  years  1808  and  1809  were,  perhaps,  the 
1  busiest  of  Lord  Minto’s  administration.  India  was 
supposed  to  be  at  peace ;  but  that  word  must  be  taken 
in  a  relative  sense,  for  in  India  the  public  peace  was 
kept  by  armies.  If  certain  feudal  chiefs  rejected  the 
authority  of  their  lord  paramount,  their  relations  with 
whom  had  been  recognised  by  the  Government  of 
Bengal,  British  troops  brought  them  to  reason.  If  an 
ambitious  Rajah  cast  a  covetous  glance  on  his  neigh¬ 
bour’s  territory,  a  British  detachment  gave  him  an 
unmistakable  reading  of  the  dictum,  ‘  Cursed  is  he 