

‘  We  are  aware,  and  have  frequently  advanced  the 
principle  as  a  rule  of  action  in  the  prosecution  of  the 
late  measures  for  the  formation  of  defensive  alliances 
against  a  European  invasion,  that  a  sense  of  common 
interest  and  common  danger  must  form  the  basis  of 
such  alliances.  At  the  same  time,  a  rigid  exclusion 
on  our  part  of  all  acts  of  concession,  and  of  all  assist¬ 
ance  to  the  views  of  the  other  party,  though  not  directly 


172 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


tending  to  the  main  purposes  of  the  alliance,  is  adverse 
to  the  successful  cultivation  of  mutual  harmony  and 
good-will.  Such  acts  of  concession  or  assistance  may 
influence  a  disposition  balancing  between  the  advan¬ 
tages  and  the  hazard  of  accepting  or  rejecting  the  pro¬ 
posed  connection ;  and  a  seasonable  aid  may  afford  to 
the  other  party  that  latitude  of  choice  which  is  alone 
compatible  with  the  power  of  action,  by  enabling  it  to 
maintain  its  independence  and  preserve  the  means  of 
resistance  against  a  foreign  force,  which,  however  dan¬ 
gerous  as  an  ally,  a  conscious  sense  of  weakness  and 
the  dictates  of  a  temporising  policy  might  compel  it  to 
conciliate.’ 

In  the  instructions  forwarded  to  Mr.  Elphinstone 
himself,  of  which  the  substance  is  embodied  in  the 
above  despatch,  it  is  stated  that,  ‘  although  there  is  not 
now  the  same  immediate  exigency  for  forming  a  friendly 
connection  with  the  Court  of  Cabul,  yet  that  measure 
is  of  importance,  and  contains  an  object  of  sound  policy, 
in  the  event,  however  remote,  of  either  the  French  or 
any  other  European  Power  endeavouring  to  approach 
India  by  that  route.’ 

Almost  on  the  same  day  when  these  paragraphs 
were  being  written  at  Calcutta,  Mr.  Eljihinstone  was 
addressing  the  Governor  General  in  a  private  letter  as 
follows  : ' 

‘  A  very  xmfavourable  turn  has  taken  place  in  the 
King  of  Cabul’s  affairs.  For  some  time  past  his  pro¬ 
spects  had  appeared  to  be  much  improved.  During 
'  April  26,  1809. 


Mt.  58] 


MISSION  TO  CABUL. 


173 


this  period  the  negotiations  continued,  and  the  treaty 
was  signed  on  the  19th  inst.  It  merely  binds  your 
Lordship  to  assist  the  King  of  Cabul  with  money 
against  a  confederacy  of  French  and  Persians,  and 
the  King  of  Cabul  to  resist  these  Powers  while 
their  confederacy  lasts,  and  to  exclude  all  brenchmen 
from  his  country  for  ever. 

‘  A  few  days  ago  intelligence  was  received  of  the 
approach  of  Shah  jMahommed  s  troops  to  Cabul,  and 
of  the  entire  failure  of  Ameer  Ool  Moolk's  attack  on 
Cashmere,  and  of  the  loss  or  defection  of  the  greater 
part  of  his  army. 

‘There  are  many  contradictory  accounts  of  this 
affair,  but  it  seems  certain  that  Ameer  Ool  Moolk  had 
advanced  very  far  into  the  passes  when  his  supplies 
were  cut  off  by  one  of  the  Rajahs  on  the  hills  on  the 
way  to  Cashmere,  who  had  afforded  a  passage  to  his 
army,  but  whom  the  Minister  had  afterwards  disobliged. 
The  army  which  had  before  been  discontented  for  want 
of  pay,  being  now  reduced  to  much  distress,  and  the 
most  liberal  promises  being  held  out  to  deserters,  a 
considerable  number  of  the  troops  went  over  to  the 
enemy. 