

The  most  important  result  of  the  policy  adopted  by 
the  Indian  Government  towards  the  frontier  States 
during  Lord  Minto’s  administration,  was  the  treaty 
with  Runjeet  Singh,  which  for  thirty  years  maintained 
peace  between  the  British  power  and  the  most  energetic 
and  powerful  of  native  rulers. 

The  treaty  with  Persia,  in  so  far  as  it  pledged  Great 
Britain  to  subsidise  Persia  in  the  event  of  her  being 
engaged  in  ‘  an  unprovoked  war  with  any  European 
State,’  was,  in  Lord  Minto’s  opinion,  calculated  to  pro¬ 
duce  grave  complications  in  the  future. 

The  treaty  with  Clabul  was  rendered  nugatory  by 
the  fall  from  power  of  one  of  the  contracting  parties 
who  signed  it.* 

'  An  original  copy  of  the  treaty  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Mountstuart 
Elphinstone  and  sigaied  at  Calcutta  in  1809,  is  still  inexistence,  and 


176 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


It  may  nevertheless  remain  an  open  question 
whether  the  friendly  relations  established  between 
the  Company’s  Government  and  Afghanistan  might 
not  have  been  cultivated  with  better  success  if  the 
far-sighted  policy  iuaugm’ated  by  Lord  Minto  had 
been  pursued  and  developed,  and  due  importance 
attached  to  the  movements  of  European  States  in 
that  quarter :  in  such  a  course  there  might  have  been 
more  of  statesmanship  and  less  of  saltpetre. 

One  undeniable  and  important  result  of  the  scheme 
for  the  defence  of  India  was  the  greater  knowledge 
obtained  by  the  missions  of  the  countries  and  popula¬ 
tions  to  which  they  were  sent,  and  Mr.  Elphinstone’s 
‘  History  of  Cabul,’  Colonel  Malcolm’s  ‘  Persian  History  ’ 
and  ‘  Sketches  of  Persia,’  and  Sir  Henry  Pottinger’s  work 
on  Beloochistan  were  conceived  during  the  embassies 
sent  out  by  Lord  Minto.  The  first  two  works  were 
compiled  and  published  at  the  expense  of,  or  with  the 
assistance  of  ample  and  liberal  aid  from,  the  Indian 
Government,  at  the  instigation  of  the  Governor 
General. 

is  in  the  possession  of  Mir  Hasliam  Khan,  native  officer  in  the  12th 
Bengal  Cavalry,  and  grandson  of  the  Vizier  of  Shah  Soojah.  The 
fact  became  accidentally  known  to  Lord  Melgund,  the  great-grand¬ 
son  of  Lord  Minto,  while  with  the  column  of  General  Eoberts  in  the 
Kurrum  vallej’  in  the  spring  of  1879.  He  did  not  see  the  treaty, 
but  he  was  informed  that  the  original  signature  of  Lord  Minto  was 
attached  to  it.  MirHasham  Khan  is  described  as  a  very  smart  officer 
in  one  of  our  best  cavalry  regiments.  This  rapprochement  between  the 
descendant  of  the  Governor  General  and  of  the  Afghan  statesman, 
was  related  in  a  letter  from  India  while  the  foregoing  pages  were 
being  written. 


58] 


DEFENSIVE  ALLIANCES. 