


Mt.  58] 


THE  DACOITS. 


185 


who  removeth  his  neighliour’s  landmark.’  If  tlie  free 
lances  of  the  hills  showed  too  great  a  fondness  for  the 
mango  groves  and  rice  fields  of  the  plain,  English 
colonels  and  their  soldiers  appeared  rapidly  on  the 
scene,  and  the  depredators  were  chased  Tip  the  high 
hills  and  expelled  from  their  strongholds  on  their 
summits.  From  such  operations  as  these  there  was 
no  rest.' 

The  internal  safety  of  Bengal,  how^ever,  remained 
intact  from  open  enemies,  and  it  was  with  equal  dismay 
and  surprise  that  it  was  found  necessary,  in  the  course 
of  1809,  to  employ  the  regular  forces  to  extirpate  the 
gangs  of  banditti  or  dacoits  who  had  penetrated  into 
the  heart  of  the  Presidency,  and  with  whom  the  native 
j)()lice  were  accused  of  being  in  league. 

‘  They  have  of  late  come  within  thirty  miles  of 
Karrackpore.''  The  crime  of  gang  robbery  has  at  all 
times,  though  in  different  degrees,  obtained  a  footing  in 
Bengal.  The  prevalence  of  the  offence  occasioned  by 
its  success  and  impunity,  has  been  much  greater  in 
this  civilised  and  flourishing  part  of  India,  than  in  the 
wilder  territories  adjoining,  which  have  not  enjoyed  so 
long  the  advantages  of  a  regular  and  legal  government ; 
and  it  appears  at  first  sight  mortifying  to  the  English 
administration  of  these  jirovinces,  that  our  ohlest 

'  In  1812-18  several  Rajahs  and  Chiefs,  such  as  the  Prince  of 
Rewa  and  the  Rajah  of  Machery,  were  punished  for  high-handed  deal¬ 
ings  wilh  their  neiglibours.  In  reference  to  such  oj>erations, Malcolm 
in  his  History  of  India  remarks  :  ‘  All  these  acts  of  consideration  and, 
vigour  kej)t  the  smaller  dependencies  of  the  State  in  good  humour. 

*  Lord  Minto  to  Lady  Minto. 


186 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


possessions  should  be  the  worst  protected  against  the 
evils  of  lawless  violence. 

‘  It  has  been  said  that  the  prosperity  and  undis¬ 
turbed  tranquillity  of  these  lower  provinces,  which  have 
never  seen  war  within  their  limits  during  the  present 
generation  of  their  inhabitants,  that  is  to  say,  for  half 
a  century,  have  afforded  two  inducements  to  the  despe¬ 
rate  associations  which  have  so  constantly  harassed 
them  under  the  name  of  dacoits.  First,  the  riches  of 
the  country  have  presented  the  temptation  of  good 
plunder.  Second,  the  long  security  which  the  country 
has  enjoyed  from  foreign  enemies,  and  the  consequent 
loss  of  martial  habits  and  character,  have  made  the 
people  of  Bengal  so  timid  and  enervated,  that  no  re¬ 
sistance  is  to  be  apprehended  in  the  act,  nor  punish¬ 
ment  afterwards.  There  have,  however,  certainly  been 
other  more  specific  causes  for  the  extraordinary  preva¬ 
lence  of  the  crime  at  particular  times  or  in  particular 
quarters.  Among  these  has  been  the  nature  of  our 
judicial  and  police  establishments.  The  judge  and 
magistrate  is  an  English  gentleman ;  but  all  his  sub¬ 
ordinate  officers  and  instruments  are  necessarily 
The  probity  and  good  intentions  of  the  English  magis¬ 
trate  may  in  general  be  relied  upon  ;  but  his  vigilance, 
personal  activity,  intelligence,  or  talents,  are  not  equal 
in  all  cases  to  his  integrity.  The  consequence  often  is, 
that  the  practical  and  efficient  part  of  the  police  is 
cast  upon  the  black  subaltern  officers,  amongst  whom 
it  is  hardly  too  much  to  say,  although  it  sounds  like 
an  uncharitable  partiality  to  my  own  fair  complexion, 