


^T.  58] 


THE  DACOITS. 


187 


that  there  is  scarcely  an  example  of  fidelity  to  any 
trust,  and  scarcely  an  exception  to  universal  venality 
and  corruption.  The  magistrate  derives  his  informa¬ 
tion  of  the  crimes  committed  in  his  zillah  from  this 
corrupt  source,  and  trusts  for  the  detection,  apprehen¬ 
sion,  and  punishment  of  the  criminals  to  these  venal 
agents.  The  consequence  has  in  many  instances  been, 
as  it  has  been  lately  ascertained  by  the  most  minute 
and  authentic  investigations,  that  the  magistrate  has 
remained  entirely  ignorant  of  a  very  large  proportion 
of  the  offences  committed  within  his  jurisdiction,  and 
has  congratulated  himself  on  the  good  order  and  exact 
police  of  a  country  in  which  the  inhabitants  could  not 
sleep  securely  in  their  houses,  and  in  which  great 
bodies  of  armed  banditti  have  been  robbing  and  burn¬ 
ing  the  villages,  and  murdering  and  torturing  the 
people  all  round  him.  The  native  officers  of  police 
have  very  generally  been  connected  with  the  gangs, 
and  I  may  say  universally  silenced  either  by  bribes  or 
intimidation.  Another  pecidiarity  in  India  is  the 
total  absence  of  a  local  gentry  to  whom  the  charge  of 
the  local  police  and  other  local  interests  may,  as  in 
England,  be  at  least  in  part  committed.  8o  far  from 
aid  in  these  objects,  (xovernment  has  often  to  contend 
with  the  counteraction  of  the  landed  interest.  The 
zemindars,  or  gentlemen  of  landed  property,  have  very 
commonly  no  other  idea  of  an  estate  than  as  a  field  to 
plunder  in,  nor  of  the  influence  which  property  gives, 
than  as  a  power  to  extort  and  pillage  amongst  the 
peo])le  subject  to  them.  The  leaders  of  the  dacoits 


188 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


find  it  their  interest  to  conciliate  this  class  of  people, 
and  by  a  participation  in  the  plunder,  or  by  other  in¬ 
ducements,  obtain  a  secure  refuge  and  protection  in 
their  estates.  The  best  security  of  all,  however,  en¬ 
joyed  by  the  dacoits,  has  been  the  intimidation  of  the 
unhappy  people  who  are  the  objects  of  their  rapine 
and  cruelty.  It  is  impossible  to  imagine,  without  see¬ 
ing  it,  the  horrid  ascendancy  they  had  obtained  over 
the  inhabitants  at  large  of  the  countries  which  have 
been  the  principal  scene  of  their  atrocities.  They  had 
established  a  terrorism  as  perfect  as  that  which  was 
the  foundation  of  the  French  republican  power,  and 
in  truth  the  sirdars,  or  captains  of  the  band,  were 
esteemed  and  even  called  the  hakim  or  ruling  power, 
while  the  real  Government  did  not  possess  either 
authority  or  influence  enough  to  obtain  from  the  people 
the  smallest  aid  towards  their  own  protection.  If  a 
whole  village  was  destroyed,  not  a  man  was  found  to 
complain.  If  a  family  was  half  murdered,  and  half 
tortured,  the  tortured  survivors  could  not  be  prevailed 
upon  to  appear  against  the  criminals.  Men  have  been 
found  with  their  limbs  and  half  the  flesh  of  their 
bodies  consumed  by  slow  fire,  who  persisted  in  saying 
that  they  had  fallen  into  their  own  fire,  or  otherwise 
denying  all  knowledge  of  the  event  that  could  tend  to 
the  conviction  or  detection  of  the  offenders.  They 
knew,  if  they  spoke,  they  would  either  themselves  or 
the  remaining  members  of  their  families  be  dispatched 
the  same  evening.  By  these  measures  such  a  vigorous 
efficient  government  was  erected  by  the  banditti  in 