

Some  among  them  were  by  no  means  ill-informed 
as  to  the  object  of  the  mission,  and  even  as  to  the 
events  of  recent  history.  IMr.  Elphinstone  having 
stated  in  conversation  with  the  Khans  that,  since  1745. 
there  had  been  no  rebellion  against  the  Government  of 


iro 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


England,  one  of  those  gentlemen  smilingly  replied 
that  Mr.  Elphinstone  had  forgotten  the  American 
War ;  and  then  ‘  asked  seriously  why  the  insurance  of 
ships  should  be  raised  so  high  by  the  French  privateers 
when  we  had  so  manifest  a  superiority  at  sea.’  * 

A  despatch  ^  from  Mr.  Elphinstone,  written  some 
weeks  after  his  arrival  at  Peshawur,  gave  every  reason 
to  hope  that  a  treaty  of  alliance  against  the  common 
enemy  would  be  executed ;  but  it  was  rapidly  followed 
by  a  second  containing  far  less  favourable  intelligence. 
In  consequence  of  a  renewal  of  insurrectionary  move¬ 
ments,  the  King  earnestly  solicited  pecuniary  aid  from 
the  Company.  The  sum  said  to  be  required  by  him 
to  ensure  his  success  was  not  less  than  fifteen 
lacs  of  rupees.  The  Envoy,  however,  intimated  that  a 
much  smaller  sum  would  be  of  the  most  essential  con¬ 
sequence  to  the  King’s  affairs,  and  that,  if  he  were  at 
that  moment  authorised  to  offer  two  lacs  of  rupees,  he 
had  no  doubt  that,  for  the  mere  purpose  of  the  alliance, 
he  could  obtain  all  the  security  that  promises  and  treaties 
could  give  for  the  King’s  co-operation. 

‘  The  condition  of  the  King’s  affairs  as  represented 
in  these  despatches,  appeared  pregnant  with  danger, 

‘  The  knowledge  possessed  by  the  Afghan  nobleman  sinks  into 
insignificance  before  that  of  a  Caffre  chief  as  related  to  me  by  a  cor¬ 
respondent.  ‘  A  friend  of  mine  who  fought  in  one  of  the  early  Caffre 
campaigns  soon  after  1840,  I  think,  told  me  that,  when  after  some 
internecine  struggles  they  came  to  parley  with  their  native  foe, 
they  were  astonished  to  be  addressed  by  the  half-naked  chief  with 
the  remark  that  he  respected  the  British  infantry,  but  that  lie  had 
tieen  looking  into  Napier’s  Peninsula/)'  Ika?',  and  could  not  say  that 
either  then  or  now  he  thought  so  much  of  the  British  cavalry.’ 

Secret  and  separate  general  letter,  April  20,  1809. 


iEr.  58] 


MISSION  TO  CABUL, 


171 


and  it  seemed  probable  that  before  onr  instructions 
would  reach  the  Envoy  in  reply,  the  crisis  would  be 
j)assed,  and  the  King’s  dominion  be  either  confirmed 
or  subverted.  We  judged  it  proper,  however,  to  decide, 
and  communicate  immediately  our  decision,  on  the 
case  submitted  to  our  consideration,  and  we  observed 
that,  under  present  circumstances,  no  advantages  could 
be  obtained  from  the  state  of  Cabul,  so  important,  solid, 
and  permanent  as  would  warrant  a  pecuniary  sacrifice 
so  large  as  that  which  our  Envoy  had  represented  that 
the  King  would  require  to  ensure  success ;  that  the 
suspension  of  the  projects  of  h^rance,  and  the  alienation 
from  her  alliance  of  the  Persian  Court,  had  removed 
the  immediate  importance  of  an  alliance  between  the 
Indian  Government  and  Cabul ;  but  that,  if  the  Envoy 
had  reason  to  believe  that  a  sum  of  money  not  exceed¬ 
ing  three  lacs  of  rupees  would  produce  a  disposition 
(ui  the  part  of  the  King  of  Cabul  to  co-operate  cordi¬ 
ally  at  a  future  season  in  repelling  a  contemplated  in¬ 
vasion — in  other  words,  if  morally  assured  of  correspond¬ 
ing  benefit  to  the  British  interests — the  Envoy  was 
authorised  to  advance  that  sum. 