

‘  Shah  Ool  INIoolk  is  making  what  preparations  he 
can  to  oppose  his  enemies,  but  he  is  almost  destitute 
of  money  ;  and  though  several  of  his  ministers  are  rich, 
the  habitual  covetousness  of  the  Douranees  prevents 
their  giving  him  any  assistance.  Ameer  Ool  Moolk, 
who  is  said  to  be  possessed  of  a  crore  of  rupees,  has 
never  assisted  the  King  in  any  of  his  distresses,  and  is 


174 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


not  expected  to  do  so  in  this  extremity.  The  King’s 
forces,  it  is  said,  will  be  sent  out  immediately,  and  I 
suppose  he  will  march  as  soon  as  Ameer  Ool  Moolk 
arrives  on  the  way  to  Cabul. 

‘  He  is  reported  to  have  sent  off  some  of  his  jewels 
to  a  fort  of  Akran  Khan’s  among  the  Eusafzyes.  The 
Khybers,  in  whose  hills  he  formerly  took  refuge,  are  now 
divided,  and  part  of  them  have  refused  him  an  asylum 
in  case  he  is  defeated.  The  tribes  in  this  neighbour¬ 
hood  are  all  arming  and  assembling,  to  be  ready  to,  act 
as  the  times  may  require:  some  of  them  are  connected 
with  Mahommed,  but  the  greater  part  of  them  are  in¬ 
different  to  both  parties.  This  city  and  the  country 
round  it  continue  in  perfect  tranquillity. 

‘  As  the  battle  between  the  two  Kings  will  probably 
be  fought  at  no  great  distance  from  this,  I  shall,  for 
the  reasons  I  have  formerly  stated,  desire  to  have  my 
audience  of  leave,  which  it  was  always  understood  I 
should  have  when  the  King  marched  towards  Cabul. 
I  shall  then  repair  to  Attock,  and  wait  the  event  of 
the  struggle.  If  Mahommed  is  victorious,  I  shall  wait 
the  orders  of  Government,  unless  I  find  a  speedy  ac¬ 
knowledgment  of  the  new  King  necessary.  I  do  not 
conceive  that  it  will  be  difficult  to  prevail  on  Shah 
Mahommed  to  agree  to  the  same  terms  as  those  settled 
with  Shah  Soojah,  but  it  appears  to  me  that  to  do  so 
will  require  an  extra  expense  of  about  three  lacs  of 
rupees.  For  this  reason  in  particular  I  am  anxious  to 
receive  the  orders  of  Government  before  I  enter  on  any 
negotiation  with  him.’ 


^T.  58] 


MISSION  TO  CABUL. 


175 


On  June  14  the  mission  retired  from  Peshawur, 
leaving  its  cool  and  shady  gardens  and  sparkling 
fountains  with  regret.  On  June  17  the  treaty  men¬ 
tioned  in  Mr.  Elphinstone’s  letter  was  signed  at  Cal¬ 
cutta.  Before  the  month  had  expired  Shah  Soojah 
had  been  completely  defeated  and  had  fled  from  his 
dominions. 

With  his  successor  the  Envoy  was  not  authorised  to 
treat.  The  changed  aspect  of  affairs  in  Europe,  and 
the  friendly  relations  established  by  Mr.  Metcalfe’s 
diplomacy  with  Runjeet  Singh,  had  brought  the  Indian 
(lovernment  to  the  determination  not  to  risk  consider¬ 
able  expenditure  upon  uncertain  and  unprofitable 
alliances. 