


177 


NOTE. 

The  State  of  Scinde  had  come  within  the  scope  of  the 
defensive  arrangements  pi'oposed  i)y  the  British  Government, 
but  the  indiscretion  of  theii'  agent,  Captain  Seton,  led  to  the 
annulling  of  the  treaty  concluded  by  him  with  the  Ameer 
of  Scinde. 

It  was  found  that  Persian  agents  were  negotiating  with 
the  Government  of  Scinde  at  the  same  time  as  the  Envoy  of 
the  Indian  Government;  that  they  had  authority  to  act  for 
both  France  and  Persia,  and  that  the  bait  held  out  to  the 
Govei'nment  of  Scinde  was  military  aid  to  throw  off  the  yoke 
of  the  King  of  Cabul,  to  whom  they  owed  a  nominal  allegi¬ 
ance,  and  the  possession  of  the  Afghan  fortress  of  Candahar. 
‘The  cliief  ruler  of  Scinde  informed  Captain  Seton  distinctly 
that,  despairing  of  the  good-will  of  the  British  Government, 
he  had  intended  to  close  with  the  offers  of  the  French  and 
Persians,  but  preferred  the  British  alliance  on  the  same 
terms.’  These  terms,  agreed  to  by  Captain  Seton,  were  not 
consistent  with  the  endeavours  making  to  secui’e  the  friend¬ 
ship  of  the  King  of  Cabul ;  hence  the  Indian  Government 
repudiated  the  engagements  made  by  Captain  Seton,  and 
sent  another  Envoy  (Mr.  II.  Smith)  to  Scinde,  to  renew 
the  negotiations  with  that  Government,  on  the  footing 
on  which  alone  Captain  Seton  had  been  empowered  to 
treat — namely,  the  admission,  as  a  preliminary  step  to  all 
further  transactions,  of  a  resident  agent  of  the  British 
Government  (the  commercial  resident  having  been  expelled 
in  1802). 

‘  Tins  measure  is  necessarily  preliminary  to  the  acccm- 
N 


178 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


plishment  of  our  ultimate  purpose,  that  of  withholding  or 
detaching  the  Government  of  Seinde  from  connections  with 
our  enemies,  as  wmll  as  the  more  proximate  purpose  of 
securing  an  authentic  channel  of  information  and  intelli¬ 
gence  on  points  of  the  utmost  importance  to  our  interests.’ 
‘  No  specific  engagement  coiild  be  entered  into  with  that 
Government  without  the  establishment  of  direct  intercourse 
on  a  permanent  footing,’  ‘  the  attainment  of  which  will 
afibrd  the  means  of  watching  its  proceedings  and  of  obtain¬ 
ing  authentic  intelligence  concerning  the  designs  of  our 
enemies.’  * 

The  conditions  pi'oposed  by  the  British  Government 
were  ultimately  accepted  as  the  basis  of  a  treaty  of  general 
amity  between  the  Company’s  Government  and  that  of  the 
Ameer. 

'  Secret  and  separate  general  letter. 


AZt.  58J 


NiiWS  FKOM  EUKOPE. 


179 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

The  news  from  Europe  which  exercised  so  decisive  an 
influence  over  the  course  of  events  in  India  was  that 
of  the  determined  resistance  of  Spain  to  the  French 
invasion,  and  the  first  successes  of  the  British  army  in 
Portugal  under  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 