

The  Battle  of  Vimiero  '  was  hailed  as  the  ‘  trumj)et 
of  a  prophecy.’  So  unbroken  had  been  the  tide  of 
Napoleon’s  prosperity  that  the  defeat  of  one  of  his 
lieutenants,  Junot,  by  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,  was  magical 
in  its  effect  on  the  temper  of  the  nation.  ‘  All  the 
Whigs,  as  well  as  Tories,  down  to  democrats  and 
Methodists,  are  eager  to  send  English  troops  and  money 
to  the  assistance  of  that  oppressed  nation.  .  .  .  Tlie 
Princess  of  Wales  gave  a  dinner  to  the  Spanish  patriots. 
It  was  a  mixed  party,  but  none  the  worse  for  that,  as 
all  parties  there  were  united  in  the  grand  cause.’  ^ 

'  Auga^st  1808. 

^  Lady  Crewe  to  Lord  Minto,  December  1808.  She  goes  on  d 
propos  of  the  Princess's  dinner-party  :  ‘  You  would  have  smiled  if 
you  had  heard  the  Pindaric  jokes  which  flew  across  the  table  from 
our  Royal  hostess  to  Mr.  Windham  across  Mr.  Frere,  and  then  across 
other  people  to  Sir  William  Scott,  for  she  spared  no  one  of  the  party. 
There  is  nothing  more  propitious  to  mental  coquetry  than  a  dis¬ 
union  among  statesmen.’ 


180 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


The  rejoicing  was  not  less  in  India.  ‘  Great  news 
is  come  to  town,’  wrote  Lord  Minto  on  February  2, 
1809.  ‘  A  ship  has  just  arrived  from  England  which 

she  left  on  September  17.  She  has  brought  us  the 
triumphs  of  Sir  A.  Wellesley  in  Portugal.  What  a 
sunshine  has  broken  upon  the  Avorld !  I  feel  now  as 
if  Gilbert  the  Sixth  *  might  have  a  chance  to  cut  the 
trees  which  you  are  planting,  which,  let  me  tell  you,  is 
a  comfortable  reflection.’  The  tidings  of  Wellesley’s 
victoi'y  swept  over  India  to  Metcalfe’s  little  camp  on 
the  distant  Sutlege,  and  were  sounded  again  from 
every  gun,  great  and  small,  as  they  poured  forth  a 
Koyal  salute.  On  learning  its  cause,  Kunjeet  desired 
his  guns  to  take  up  the  tale,  and  a  second  salute  from 
the  Sikh  Latteries  proclaimed  the  participation  of  the 
Eajah  in  the  British  rejoicing — an  act  of  courtesy  which 
was  much  appreciated  at  the  time. 

‘  The  news  continues  good  from  Spain,’  wrote  Lord 
INlinto,  ‘  yet  I  hope  the  rest  of  the  world  will  not  let  this 
occasion  slip  once  more ;  for,  if  they  give  him  leisure, 
the  monster  will  collect  his  rage,  and  it  may  go  hard 
with  the  beautiful  Spanish  cause  yet.  Oh  !  that  the 

In  his  reply  to  this  letter,  Lord  Minto  says  of  the  Princess  :  ‘She 
has  been  badly  treated,  for  the  stones  cast  at  her  do  not  come  from 
hands  entitled  to  throw  them.  One  bad  thing,  however,  she  is  guilty 
of — ingratitude  to  Windham.  I  say  nothing  of  myself,  though  she 
entertained  me  the  day  I  took  leave  of  her  not  only  with  the  wish 
that  Windham  might  be  turned  out  of  Norfolk  with  some  great 
personal  disgrace,  but  with  the  hope  that  Lord  Melville  would  dis¬ 
turb  me  in  India.  However,  I  continue  to  lament  her  discomforts  and 
to  wish  for  her  welfare.’ 