

*  His  infant  grandson. 


JEt.  68]  CONDITION  OF  FEELING  IN  ENGLAND.  181 


fable  of  the  bundle  of  sticks  bad  ever  been  translated 
into  any  of  the  modern  languages,  for  want  of  wbicb, 
alas !  it  has  become  sad  sober  history  instead  of  fable.' 
The  first  fleet  that  arrived  in  India  after  these  lines 
were  written  told  that  the  pride  and  rejoicing  called 
forth  by  the  brilliant  campaign  of  Talavera  had  been 
severely  checked  by  the  retreat  of  our  armies  from 
Spain,  and  the  Convention  of  Cintra.  ‘  I  grieve,’  wrote 
Mr.  Windham,  ‘over  the  circumstances  that  prevented 
the  complete  defeat  of  Junot’s  army,  which  I  believe 
would  have  happened  if  Wellesley  had  been  left  to 
himself ;  though  no  doubt  the  insolence  of  the  Minis¬ 
ters,  founded  on  merits  not  their  own,  would  not  less 
have  excited  in  one’s  mind  great  impatience.’ 

‘  It  has  been  a  disastrous  month,’  wrote  Lady 
Malmesbury  in  February  1809  ;  ‘  but  after  all  the  French 
have  had  a  practical  lesson  as  to  our  fighting,  and  the 
world  has  seen  they  are  not  invincible.’  Lord  Minto’s 
correspondents  in  general  betook  themselves  to  the  usual 
consolation  of  Englishmen  in  disaster,  and  abused  the 
leaders  of  parties  all  round. 

‘  There  is  not  a  statesman  endowed  with  superior 
talents.  The  deaths  of  Pitt  and  Fox  have  produced  the 
same  effect  on  the  public  as  that  of  Garrick  did  on  the 
stage.  Stars  will  not  do  when  we  are  used  to  the  light 
of  the  sun.’ 

‘The  Hollands  are  in  Spain,’ wrote  Lady  Crewe; 
‘  but  Miss  Fox  wrote  to  me  some  months  ago  that  her 
brother  was  very  angry  with  his  Spanish  friends  for 
their  absurdity  in  supposing  that  they  shall  be  able  to 


182 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


restore  their  present  King,  and  that  they  ought  to  feel 
gratitude  to  Bonaparte  for  having  rid  them  of  so  weak 
a  prince.  “  Is  it  possible,”  she  said,  “  that  we  are  to 
light  in  so  bad  a  cause  ?  ”  When  I  read  this,  I  could 
not  help  thinking  that  we  should  always  have  something 
to  dread  of  the  republican  hobby-horse  in  the  part  of 
opposition  !  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  I  see  this  tendency 
prevail  much  more  since  the  last  defeats  than  it  did 
before.  Mr.  Whitbrea,d,  however,  met  with  no  encour¬ 
agement  at  the  time  he  published  a  pamphlet  to  advise 
peace  with  Bonajaarte  in  the  summer,  and  Heaven 
grant  that  IMr.  Canning  may  have  influence  enough  over 
the  present  Parliament  to  prevent  that  experiment  for 
a  year.’ 

To  these  letters  Lord  Minto  replied :  ‘  Spain  is 
indeed  a  lamentable  tale.  As  to  the  invasion  of  India, 
I  presume  if  Europe  is  entirely  subdued,  the  King  of 
Men  may  carry  his  views  to  the  eastward,  but  I  am 
strongly  inclined  to  believe  that  they  would  be  limited 
to  disturbing  us  by  inciting  some  of  the  Asiatic  States 
to  make  incursions  into  Hindostan,  supported  and 
directed  by  partial  aid  in  small  bodies  of  French  and 
perhaps  Eussian  troops,  and  good  European  officers. 
The  difficulties  in  the  way  of  an  advance  by  a  lai'ge 
European  army  are  scarcely  surmountable.  However, 
we  should  always  have  ample  notice  ;  for  rapidity  is 
practicable  in  the  invasion  of  Spain  or  Italy,  but  is 
simply  impossible  in  transporting  a  French  army  to  the 
Indus,  with  all  its  artillery,  stores,  and  apparatus,  the 
whole  of  which  must  attend  it,  for  the  most  indis- 