


^T.  58] 


THE  DACOITS. 


189 


these  districts,  that  they  could  send  a  single  messenger 
through  the  villages  with  regular  lists  of  requisitions 
from  the  different  houses  and  families, — some  to  fur¬ 
nish  grain,  some  forage,  some  horses,  some  two  sons  to 
join  the  gangs,  some  labourers  to  carry  the  plunder,  or 
to  bear  torches,  or  to  act  as  scouts ;  some  were  to  send 
a  wife  or  daughter  to  attend  the  gangs. 

‘  I  was  not  a  little  shocked,  and  could  not  heljj  feel¬ 
ing  some  shame,  when  1  became  fully  apprised  of  the 
dreadful  disorders  which  afflicted  countries  under  the 
very  eye  of  Government ;  and  for  many  months  past  it 
has  been  one  of  the  principal  objects  to  put  this  mon¬ 
strous  evil  down.  Partly  by  a  new  selection  of  magis¬ 
trates,  who  appeared  peculiarly  qualified  for  that  species 
of  service,  by  new  regulations  and  additional  penalties, 
and  by  the  employment  of  the  most  active  efforts, 
supported  by  regular  force,  to  seize  the  sirdars  and 
make  some  signal  examples,  I  am  happy  to  say  that 
hitherto  the  success  has  even  exceeded  my  expecta¬ 
tions.  In  Nuddeah,  which  was  the  principal  seat  of 
this  evil,  there  has  not  been  a  single  dacoity  during  the 
last  months ;  and  it  is  in  that  one  district  that  the 
computed  average  of  persons  })ut  to  death  in  torture 
was  seventy  a  month.  Nine  sirdars  have  been  executed 
at  one  spot,  and  the  impression  of  that  example  was 
remarkable.  The  people  had  come  to  think  it  impos¬ 
sible  that  the  leader  of  an  established  gang  should  be 
punished,  or  at  least  capitally  punishtxi,  and  they 
looked  on  with  fidly  as  much  awe  as  satisfaction  on 
this  proof  of  the  supreme  power  of  Government.  The 


190 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


consequence  of  these  examples,  and  of  the  determina¬ 
tion  Grovernment  has  evinced  to  subdue  these  villains, 
has  been  the  breaking  up  of  the  gangs,  the  flight  or 
seizure  of  the  captains,  and  a  sufficient  return  of  cour¬ 
age  and  of  confidence  in  the  protection  of  Government 
amongst  the  people  to  procure  both  prosecutors  and 
witnesses  for  the  detection  and  punishment  of  these 
and  all  other  crimes.  It  will  require  a  continuous 
exertion,  however,  with  such  improvements  in  the 
general  system  as  events  and  reflection  may  suggest,  to 
enable  us  to  triumph  finally  and  permanently  over  this 
deep-rooted  mischief.’ 

The  dacoits  unhappily  still  ply  their  trade  in  cer¬ 
tain  parts  of  India,  under  much  the  same  circumstances 
as  those  in  which  flourish  their  congeners,  the  ban¬ 
ditti  of  Europe  ;  but,  unlike  them,  they  follow  peaceful 
occupations  by  day,  and  their  own  peculiar  industry 
by  night.  Both  dacoit  and  brigand  are  at  the  lowest 
depth  of  their  respective  civilisations,  the  essential 
distinction  between  them  being  that  the  dacoit  begins 
his  campaign  by  a  propitiatory  sacrifice,  and  the  brigand 
ends  his  with  an  expiatory  offering. 