

He  found  in  India  a  state  of  atfairs  peculiarly 
favourable  to  the  developinent  of  strife  between  the 
civil  and  military  authorities.  A  recently  conquered 
and  imperfectly  settled  country  had  been  brought  under 
the  influence  of  the  civil  Government  within  the 
memory  of  the  senior  officers  of  the  army,  leaving  some 
chagrin  and  jealousy  with  those  who  had  been  used  to 
wield  both  political  and  military  authority.  Since 
1765,  when  Clive  put  do\vn  a  mutiny  of  the  officers  of 
the  Dengal  army,  scarce  a  decade  had  passed  without 
an  open  struggle  between  the  military  and  the  civil 
{)ower ; '  and  only  ten  years  before  Lord  IMinto’s  arrival 
in  India  a  mutiny  of  the  Bengal  officers,  which  had  la  st('d 
upwards  of  two  years,  had  ended  in  complete  victory. 
Sir  John  Shore,  afterwards  Lord  Teignmouth,  the  Go- 

'  In  an  able  article  on  the  mutiny  of  1809  which  appeared 
in  the  Qunrterhj  Berien'  for  May  1811  (vol.  v.),  the  following 
summary  of  the  various  mutinies  of  the  Company’s  officers,  from 
178.5  to  1798,  is  quoted  from  a  published  paper  entitled,  ‘  lieiilj"  to 
the  publication  of  William  I’etrie,  Esq.,  regarding  the  late  transac¬ 
tions  at  iMadras.’ 

‘  X  mutiny  of  the  officers  took  place  in  the  year  1766  ;  which  was 
only  suppressed  by  the  firmness  of  Lord  Clive. 


202 


LOrxD  JUNTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


^•ernor  Greneral  at  the  time,  had  no  doubt  been  recalled ; 
but  the  fact  that  open  resistance  to  regular  authority 
had  successfully  wrung  from  a  weak  Government  more 
than  it  had  contended  for,  justified  the  belief  that 
representations  made  by  numbers  and  supported  by 
clamour  would  not  fail  to  obtain  their  ends.  Lord 
Wellesley’s  commanding  character  and  his  brilliant 
military  achievements  had  suppressed  any  open  ex¬ 
pression  during  his  government  of  military  discontent, 
but  there  still  I’einained  the  fact  that  India  had  been 
won  by  the  sword  and  was  held  by  the  sword.  Lord 

‘  At  an  earlier  period,  in  Bombay,  the  military  rose  upon  the 
civil  power,  and  assumed  the  government  which  they  held  and  re¬ 
tained  in  their  hands  for  two  years.  In  or  about  the  year  1776, 
Major-General  Stuart  at  the  head  of  the  army  seized  on  the  then 
Governor  of  Madras,  Lord  Pigot,  confined  his  person  and  subverted 
his  government.  In  the  year  1783  the  army  of  Madras  compelled 
the  Governor,  Lord  Macartney,  to  revoke  his  orders,  and  to  re-estab¬ 
lish  some  allowances  which  he  had  found  it  neoessaiw  to  discontinue. 
Actual  violence  was  not  indeed  resorted  to,  but  the  receipt  of  three 
addresses  on  the  same  day  on  the  subject  from  the  three  principal 
stations  of  the  army  convinced  his  lordship  of  the  necessity  of  giving 
up  the  point.  At  a  more  recent  period  in  Bengal,  in  or  about  the 
year  1796,  the  countenance  which  the  army  assumed  must  be  fresh  in 
the  recollection  of  everyone. 