

‘  But  the  interest  and  security  of  the  public  are  the 
first  and  highest  care  of  those  to  whom  that  public  has 
committed  the  trust  of  exercising  authority  in  its 
name,  and  that  great  charge  constitutes  the  primary 
duty  of  governments, — a  duty,  indeed,  in  which  all  those 
participate  to  whom  their  country  has  in  any  rank  or 
condition  confided  any  portion  of  its  power,  whether 
civil  or  military.  These  are  indeed,  very  trite  and 
general  principles,  but  they  are  none  the  less  those 
which  must  govern  my  conduct. 

‘  In  the  application  of  them,  therefore,  if  a  regiment 
is  to  be  added  to  the  Company’s  establishment,  the  first 
point  to  be  considered  in  the  mode  of  its  formation 
must  be  the  public  interest;  next,  but  subordinate 
to  that  consideration,  the  interest  and  pretensions  of 
individuals  or  bodies  connected  with  the  measure.  .  .  . 
Our  military  arrangements  in  all  circumstances  must 
be  determined  by  the  exigencies  of  the  State. 

‘  As  to  menace,  or  any  attempt  at  intimidation, 
the  case  is  not  to  be  supposed ;  the  suj)position  alone 
would  constitute  an  injury  and  insult  to  the  honourable 


ililT.  58] 


MUTINY  OF  OFFICERS. 


205 


men  who  compose  the  Bombay  army.  But  if  in  any 
(piarter  of  the  world,  where  I  might  happen  to  be  the 
depositary  of  public  authority,  such  a  case  should  arise, 
my  mind  is  settled  on  the  only  principle  adapted  in 
any  circumstances  to  that  exigency,— to  admit  of  no 
compromise  with  an  evil  far  greater  than  any  that  can 
be  incurred,  even  by  a  defeat,  in  resisting  it ;  but  to 
maintain  the  full  and  unqualified  sovereignty  which  is 
in  reality  the  safety  of  the  State,  by  combating  either 
the  seditious  combinations  and  cabals,  or  the  criminal 
violence,  of  its  servants,  to  the  last  and  utmost  extre¬ 
mity.  I  am  clear  that  if  such  an  event  could  be 
imagined,  it  would  be  better  for  the  public  interest  to 
be  fairly  subdued  than  to  yield.  The  former  would 
lx;  a  single,  local,  and  very  transient  evil,  quickly 
and  certainly  repaired.  The  latter  never  happens 
without  operating  a  general  and  permanent  re¬ 
laxation  of  authority  and  diminution  of  all  the 
public  energies  throughout  the  empire  in  which  it 
occurs. 

‘  I  take  the  two  great  pillars  of  every  human  govern¬ 
ment  to  be — first,  that  all  its  measures  be  directed  to 
the  public  good ;  next,  that  its  authority,  thus  exer¬ 
cised,  be  maintained  with  unshaken  firmness  and  reso¬ 
lution.’ 

This  warning  note  had  a  graver  significance  wdien, 
in  the  following  year  of  1809,  the  mutiny  of  the  officers 
of  the  iVIadras  army  broke  out.  It  was  no  doubt 
attributable  to  a  variety  of  causes,  among  which  must 
be  acknowledged  certain  real  grievances  on  the  part  of 