

‘  It  appears  further,  from  the  Parliament  ary  papers  before  us,  that 
even  at  the  commencement  of  the  late  mutiny,  180!),  the  notion  of 
the  rif/his  of  the  army,  and  that  of  forming  associations  to  plead 
these  rights,  were  familiar  to  the  Madras  officers.  In  notions  of 
this  kind  the  officers  of  the  Indian  army,  in  general,  seem  to  have 
been  encouraged  by  the  British  Government.  .  .  .  Persons  avowedly 
acting  in  the  capacity  of  agents  of  the  Indian  army  have  been  ad¬ 
mitted  to  a  formal  audience  by  Her  Majesty's  ministers  in  England. 
On  what  principle  men  of  the  highest  ability,  political  knowledge, 
and  patriotism,  for  such  these  ministers  were,  could  consent  thus  to 
recognise  in  the  arm)' an  independent  and  substantive  power,  we  are 
at  a  loss  to  imagine.’ 


^T.  58]  DISCONTENTS  AT  BOMBAY.  20.*? 

jNIinto  was  resolved  that  India  should  not  be  governed 
by  the  sword. 

In  the  course  of  1808  when  an  expedition  to  Persia 
was  under  consideration,  the  supreme  Government 
announced  to  that  of  Bombay  an  intention  of  raising 
a  cavalry  regiment  on  the  Bombay  establishment ;  it 
was  subsequently  found  that  this  might  be  done  with 
greater  facility  at  Madras,  and  the  first  plan  was 
therefore  abandoned ;  but  not  without  exciting  the 
resentment  of  the  officers  of  the  Bombay  army,  dhey 
considered  their  honour  and  dignity  to  be  wounded  by 
the  course  the  Government  had  adopted.  How  Lord 
Minto  received  their  complaints,  his  letter  in  reply 
to  Jonathan  Duncan,  Esq.,  Governor  of  Bombay,  will 
show. 

‘  I  enter,  I  assure  you,  warmly  into  every  feeling 
which  belongs  to  the  disappointment  of  expectations 
reasonably  entertained,  and  necessarily  near  the  hearts 
of  those  concerned,  although  I  cauuot  with  the  same 
truth  and  sincerity  consent  to  their  aggravation  by 
pressing  into  their  alliance  imaginary,  or,  at  best, 
gratuitous  sentiments  of  offended  honour  which  have 
no  room  in  the  case. 

‘  Our  option  lay  between  the  course  which  was 
evidently  the  best  for  the  public  advantage  and  secu¬ 
rity,  and  that  by  which  we  might  desire  to  gratify  a 
few  officers  of  the  Bombay  army  by  a  deliberate  sacri¬ 
fice  of  higher  interests.  We  made  the  choice  which 
our  duty  required,  and  which  must  obtain,  I  have 


204 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


no  doubt,  when  clearly  explained,  tbe  suffrages  of 
the  Bombay  army  itself ;  a  body  as  much  distin¬ 
guished  for  genuine  public  spirit  as  for  mihtary 
excellence. 

‘  I  consider  the  interests  of  all  the  servants  of  the 
public,  and  more  especially  of  that  honourable  class 
vphich  provides  for  the  safety  and  prosperity  of  the 
country  by  their  own  dangers  and  privations. 