

‘The  introduction,  for  example,  of  the  judicial  sys¬ 
tem,  that  is  to  say,  the  administration  of  civil  justice 
l)etween  man  and  man,  and  the  supj)ression  of  jjublic 
disorder  and  crime  by  a  regular  magistracy,  has  been 
objected  to  and  resented  as  a  degradation  of  the  military 
chai’acter,  and  an  unjust  diminution  of  its  influence 
and  authority  in  India,  where  it  once  stood  in  the  place 
of  law,  and  was  more  suited,  as  it  is  contended,  to  the 
habits  and  tastes  of  the  people  than  civil  justice  admin¬ 
istered  judicially  by  magistrates.  This  doctrine  will 
sound  so  strange  in  English  ears  that  the  fact  of  its 
being  maintained  will  scarcely  meet  with  credit.  These 
sentiments,  however,  have  been  distinctly  recorded  in 
the  enclosed  pamphlet  which  Sir  John  C'radock  left 
beliind  him,  and,  1  am  sorry  to  learn,  are  not  less 


200 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


warmly  professed  by  General  McDowell  .  .  .  The  in¬ 
conveniences  which  have  been  in  some  instances  felt 
from  the  Commander-in-chief  holding  officially  a  seat, 
in  Council,  have  I  believe  been  very  real,  but  I  confess 
I  donbt  the  expediency  of  adopting  the  particular 
remedy  proposed.  I  am  disinclined  to  it  as  a  very 
considerable  change,  and  as  one  calculated  to  separate 
still  more  from  the  general  government  of  the  country, 
and  not  only  to  alienate  but  to  irritate  in  a  high  de¬ 
gree,  the  mind  of  the  army,  a  great  and  powerful  body 
in  India,  whose  cordiality  and  co-operation  in  the  views 
of  Government  is  extremely  essential. 

‘  There  is  little  doubt  that  the  measure  in  question 
would  produce  this  effect.  It  appears  to  me  that  other 
remedies,  not  liable  to  the  same  objection,  might  be 
applied  in  most  instances  to  the  inconvenience  com¬ 
plained  of.  The  first  is  a  careful  and  fit  choice  of  the 
man  for  the  office  of  Commander-in-chief.  Military 
endowments  he  ought  certainly  to  have.  He  should 
possess  also  a  sound  judgment  and  a  conciliatory  dis¬ 
position.  He  should  come  out  penetrated  with,  and 
well  instructed  in,  the  indispensable  subordination  of  the 
military  power  to  the  superintending  superiority  of  the 
civil  Government.’ 

The  Court  of  Directors  nevertheless  decided  on 
excluding  the  Commanders-in-chief  of  the  minor  Presi¬ 
dencies  from  Council,  and  appointed  General  McDowell 
to  the  post  of  Commander-in-chief  vacated  by  the  recall 
of  Sir  J.  Cradock. 

Thus  early  in  his  Indian  career  did  Lord  Minto 


JEt.  58] 


MILITARY  DISCONTENTS. 


201 


impress  on  the  Court  of  Directors  the  necessity  of  an 
unfaltering  insistance  on  the  supremacy  of  the  civil 
over  the  military  power.  His  own  experience  in  Cor¬ 
sica  had  shown  him  the  inconveniences  arising  from 
excessive  military  pretensions.  He  had  learnt  at 
Vienna  to  attribute  the  misfortunes  which  had  befallen 
Austria  to  ‘  a  military  faction  which  sidistituted  party 
spirit  in  the  room  of  all  the  duties  of  soldiers  or  citizens 
— that  party  spirit  spread  through  the  Empire.’  • 