

A  more  complete  exoneration  of  the  Wellesley 
policy,  so  violently  assailed  a  few  years  before,  coidd 
hardly  be  required  ;  nor  a  more  instructive  commentary 
on  Talleyrand’s  celebrated  reply  to  one  who  asked  him 
the  meaning  of  the  term  ‘  non-intervention  ’ :  ‘  C’est  un 
mot  politique  et  metaphysique  qui  vent  dire  a  peu  pres 
la  meme  chose  qu’  intervention.’ 

Lord  Minto  was  in  Java  when  this  despatch  was 
addressed  to  him  :  after  his  return  to  Tndia  questions 
of  a  more  pressing  nature  occupied  his  attention,  but 


JEt.  68]  EXPEDITION  TO  THE  PEKSIAN  GOLF. 


195 


almost  his  last  letter  to  the  Secret  Committee  related 
to  the  increasing  importance  of  the  Pindarics. 

The  last  and  not  least  important  measure  of  this 
year  (1809)  consisted  in  a  naval  expedition  against  a 
formidable  horde  of  pirates  on  the  Persian  Gxdf. 
Their  settlements  extended  for  a  stretch  of  400  miles 
along  the  coast,  whence  these  sea  brigands  scoured 
the  Indian  seas,  their  small  fleets  carrying  off  the 
inhabitants  of  the  villages  of  the  shore,  destroying 
the  coasting  trade,  and  capturing,  not  only  small 
vessels,  but  any  stray  merchantmen  that  came  in 
their  way.  One  such  capture,  accompanied  with 
circumstances  of  great  barbarity,  was  an  exploit 
which  drew  upon  them  the  signal  vengeance  of  the 
Indian  Government.  A  formidable  expedition  con¬ 
sisting  of  two  frigates,  six  armed  vessels,  900  Euro¬ 
pean  troops,  and  500  Sepoys,  was  sent  to  their  coasts, 
and,  after  a  desperate  resistance,  their  settlements  and 
fleets  were  captured  and  destroyed,  and  the  commerce 
of  the  Persian  Gulf  was  rescued  from  their  depreda¬ 
tions. 

Thus,  by  land  and  sea,  the  Company  s  dominions 
were  preserved  intact,  and  its  power  upheld.  And 
every  despatch  to  England  contained  well-deserved 
encomiums  of  the  skill  and  valour  and  discipline  of 
the  forces  employed  in  defending  the  frontiers,  or 
in  protecting  the  subjects  of  the  Empire.  And  yet, 
while  the  events  described  were  in  progress,  a  cloud 
had  appeared  on  the  horizon  of  more  portentous  dimen- 


196 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA,. 


[1809 


sions  than  any  of  its  predecessors  in  those  stonny 
regions.  ‘  I  have  determined  to  go  to  Madras  as  soon 
as  possible,’  wrote  Lord  Minto  in  June  1809.  ‘The 
differences  between  the  Madras  army  and  Sir  George 
Barlow’s  Government  have  risen  to  a  most  violent 
height,  and  more  suddenly  than  I  imagined.’ 


^T.  58] 


MUTINY  IN  THE  MADRAS  ARMA". 


197 


CHAPTEE  IX. 

The  troubles  in  the  coast  army  require  to  be  dealt 
with  in  some  detail,  because  Lord  Minto’s  share  in  their 
final  reduction  has  been  scarcely  appreciated,  while  he 
himself  considered  it  second  to  no  other  part  of  his 
administration  in  the  importance  of  its  results.  When 
he  arrived  in  India  in  1807,  he  found  Madras  still  sim¬ 
mering  in  the  dregs  of  the  agitation  produced  by  the 
mutiny  and  massacre  of  Vellore.  The  danger  frojn  the 
native  soldiery  was  past,  but  there  remained  a  state  of 
excited  feeling  and'  of  bitter  antagonism  among  the 
higher  officials  of  the  Presidency  that  boded  future 
mischief. 