


206 


LORI)  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


the  army,  and  certain  serions  mistakes  on  the  part  of 
Sir  Greorge  Barlow,  Governor  of  Madras.  A  considera¬ 
tion  of  these  lies  beyond  our  province,  which  is  simply 
to  relate  the  position  assumed  by  Lord  Minto  witli 
regard  to  the  powers  in  conflict — always  bearing  in 
mind  that  his  active  interference,  by  written  and 
personal  advice  and  support,  only  began  after  the  dis¬ 
content  of  the  officers  had  taken  the  form  of  insubor¬ 
dinate  opposition  to  the  Government.  The  immediate 
cause  of  the  disturbances  at  Madras  is  stated  in 
IMarshman’s  ‘  History  of  India  ’  as  follows  :  *  ‘  After  the 
Mahratta  War  the  Court  of  Directors  had  been  fierce 
for  retrenchment,  and  had  threatened  to  take  the 
pruning  knife  into  their  own  hands,’  if  the  Madras 
Government  hesitated  to  use  it.  ‘  Among  the  plans 
suggested  for  reducing  the  military  charges  was  the 
abolition  of  the  tent  conti'act,  which  furnished  the 
officers  in  command  of  regiments  with  a  fixed  monthly 
allowance  to  provide  the  men  ^vith  camp  equipage 
whether  they  were  in  the  field  or  in  cantonments. 
The  system  was  essentially  vicious,  .  .  .  the  Quarter¬ 
master  General,  Colonel  Munro,  had  been  requested  to 
draw  up  a  report,  and  both  Sir  John  Cradock  and  Lord 
William  Bentinck  had  come  to  the  determination  to 
abolish  the  contract,  when  they  were  suddenly  recalled. 
It  fell  to  the  unhappy  lot  of  Sir  George  Barlow, 
already  sufficiently  unpopular,  to  carry  this  resolution 
into  effect.  This  retrenchment  increased  the  resent- 


‘  Vol.  ii.  p.  240. 


^T.  58] 


MUTINY  OF  OFFICERS. 


207 


nient  of  the  officers,  and  they  determined  to  wreak  their 
vengeance  on  the  Qnarterinaster  General,  who  had 
stated  in  his  report  that  the  result  of  granting  the 
same  allowance  in  peace  and  in  war  for  the  tentage  of 
the  native  regiments,  while  the  expenses  incidental  to 
it  varied  with  circumstances,  had  been  found  by  experi¬ 
ence  to  place  the  interest  and  the  duty  of  commanding 
officers  in  opposition  to  each  other.  .  .  .  The  officers 
called  on  the  Commander-in-chief  to  bring  Colonel 
INIunro  to  a  court  martial  for  aspersions  on  their 
character  as  officers  and  gentlemen.  The  Judge 
Advocate  General  to  whom  the  question  was  fidly 
referred,  considered  that  the  officers  had  neither  right 
nor  reason  on  their  side;  but  General  McDowell,  then 
on  the  eve  of  retiring  from  the  serGce,  yielded  to 
their  wishes,  and  at  once  placed  him  under  arrest. 
He  appealed  to  the  Governor  in  Council,  under  whose 
authority  he  had  acted,  and  the  Commander-in-chief 
was  ordered  to  release  him.’ 

‘The  battle  was  then  joined,’  wrote  Lord  Minto  in 
a  private  letter  to  the  Chairman  of  the  East  India 
Company.'  ‘  The  Commander-in-chief  committed  open 
sedition,  and  sent  forth  an  inflammatory  appeal  from 
the  acts  of  Government,’  the  effect  of  which,  as  described 
by  Colonel  IMalcolm,  was  that  of  ‘  waving  a  torch  over  a 
powder  magazine.’  To  General  IMcDowell’s  unwearied 
efforts  ‘to  establish  a  confederacy  between  his  own 
resentment  at  his  exclusion  from  Council,  and  the 