


JEt.  58]  MINUTE  BY  THE  GOVERNOR  GENERAL.  193 


Lord  Minto’s  Groverninent.  He  himself  said  of  it  that 
‘  the  extent  of  the  political  arrangements,  as  well  as  of 
the  military  operations,  to  which  the  prosecution  of  these 
views  would  lead,  together  with  the  great  increase  of 
expenditure  which  must  ensue,’  had  determined  him  to 
content  himself  with  the  immediate  object  of  arresting 
the  invasion  which  threatened  the  integrity  of  our  own 
dominions. 

In  Enndelcund,  where  the  military  operations,  begun 
two  years  before,  were  not  yet  completed  ;  in  Mariana, 
a  territory  which  more  lately  the  Indian  Government 
was  forced  to  annex  in  the  interests  of  civilisation  and 
hnmanity,  ‘  because  nobody  else  woidd  have  it,’  he 
had  had  occasion  to  experience  the  truth  of  a  leading 
principle  in  the  government  of  semi-civilised  popula¬ 
tions — that  where  one  rule  is  destroyed,  another  must 
be  substituted. 

He  was  not  prepared  to  pursue  the  defeat  of  Ameer 
Khan  to  the  point  of  assuming  new  and  permanent 
responsibilities;  but  in  a  minute  dated  December  1, 
1809,  he  observed  that  ‘it  has  not  perhaps  been  suffi¬ 
ciently  considered  that  every  native  State  in  India  is  a 
military  despotism  ;  that  war  and  conquest  are  avowed 
as  the  first  and  legitimate  j)ursuit  of  every  sovereign 
or  cliief,  and  the  sole  S(nirce  of  glory  and  renown ;  it  is 
not  therefore  a  mere  conjecture  deduced  from  the 
natural  bias  of  the  human  mind,  and  the  test  of  general 
experience,  but  a  certain  conviction  founded  on  avowed 
principles  of  action  and  systematic  views,  that  among 
the  military  states  and  chiefs  of  India  the  pursuits  of 


o 


194 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


ambition  can  alone  be  bounded  by  the  inability  to 
prosecute  them.  It  was  for  the  Grovernment  of  England 
to  decide  whether  it  was  expedient  to  observe  a  strict 
neutrality  amidst  these  scenes  of  disorder  and  outrage 
which  were  passing  under  our  eyes  in  the  north  of 
Hiudostan,  or  whether  we  should  listen  to  the  calls 
of  suffering  humanity,  and  interfere  for  the  protection 
of  those  weak  and  defenceless  States  who  implore 
our  assistance,  to  deliver  them  from  the  violence 
and  oppression  of  an  ambitious  and  lawless  upstart.’ 
When  these  observations  were  answered,  it  was  found 
that  a  considerable  change  had  come  over  the  policy 
of  the  Court  of  Directors.  They  stated  that  ‘  they  did 
not  conceive  that  measures  of  defensive  policy  could 
be  construed  into  acts  of  unnecessary  interference  in 
the  affairs  of  foreign  States,’  and  they  expressed  them¬ 
selves  ‘  not  satisfied  with  the  expediency  of  abstaining 
from  disabling  any  Power  against  whom  we  have  been 
compelled  to  take  up  arms,  from  renewing  its  aggres¬ 
sion’  (September  1811). 