

Their  controversies  produced  a  general  spirit  of 
cabal  and  combination,  and  violent  attacks  made  by 
high  functionaries  on  each  other  diminished  the  respect 
due  to  them  in  their  pidilic  capacity.  While  the 
question  of  the  recall  of  Lord  William  Bentinck  was 
still  pending.  Lord  Alinto  gave  his  opinion  as  opposed 
to  that  measure.  lie  thought  that  the  conduct  of 
individuals  on  that  occasion  (the  Vellore  mutiny)  had 
been  blamed  with  too  little  attention  to  the  different 
points  of  conduct  under  consideration  in  connection  with 
tlie  precise  circumstances  of  the  time  when  they  took 


198 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


})lace.  ‘  I  am  apprehensive  also  that  these  occurrences 
may  not  be  favourable  to  the  restoration  either  of  civil  or 
military  authority.  The  mutiny  was  completely  sub¬ 
dued,  opinions  were  settled,  and  men’s  minds  were  com¬ 
posed  on  these  questions.  Those  who  had  suffered  the 
sentence  of  the  law  were  regarded  as  criminals  justly 
punished  for  atrocious  offences.  Now  that  a  Grovernor 
and  Commander-in-chief  are  publicly  condemned  and 
punished,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  view  of  the  very 
mutineers  and  their  adherents,  the  public  mind  may 
perhaps  be  unhinged  again,  and  those  who  were  hanged 
and  shot  by  the  subordinate  local  authorities  for  mutiny 
and  murder,  may  seem  to  have  been  justified  by  still 
higher  tribunals,  and  may  start  up  under  our  sanction 
into  saints  and  martyrs.  I  do  not  say  this  reasoning 
would  be  just,  but  worse  reasoning  has  often  satisfied 
men’s  passions  in  their  own  cause.’  ' 

These  representations  were  disregarded,  and  some 
of  the  consequences  foreseen  by  the  Governor  General 
took  place.  The  native  soldiery,  indeed,  do  not  appear 
to  have  been  affected  as  he  had  conceived  it  possible 
they  might  be  ;  but  the  dissensions  in  the  European 
society  were  aggravated,  and  the  Government  of  P’ort 
St.  George  necessarily  suffered  in  the  estimation  of  the 
Presidency. 

In  the  same  despatch  of  November  26,  1807,  Lord 
Minto  answered  in  the  following  terms  a  question  that 
had  been  addressed  to  him  by  the  Court  of  Directors  con- 

‘  To  the  Right  Hon.  R.  Duudas,  President  of  the  Board  of  Control, 
November  26,  1807. 


Mr.  58] 


DISSENSIONS  AT  MADRAS. 


199 


cerning  the  expediency  of  excluding  tlie  Coininanders- 
in-chief  of  the  two  minor  Presidencies  from  seats  in 
(’ouncil. 

‘The  point  is  so  entirely  new  that  I  cannot,  on 
the  sudden,  offer  any  opinion  worthy  of  attention.  I 
])resume  that  measure  may  have  been  suggested  to  the 
t’ourt  of  Directors  by  the  experience  they  have  so  fre¬ 
quently  had,  especially  at  Fort  St.  (leorge,  of  long 
controversial  and  often  warm  and  intemperate  dis¬ 
cussions  in  Council  between  the  civil  and  military 
authorities.  It  has  happened  also  in  late  instances 
that  notions  concerning  military  ascendancy  have  beeii 
entertained  and  asserted  which  are  wholly  incompatible 
with  the  received  and  established  principles  of  a  govern¬ 
ment  by  law. 