

About  the  same  time,  the  early  part  of  1809, 
troubles  suddenly  broke  out  beyond  the  British  fron¬ 
tier,  which  brought  the  Indian  Government  face  to 
face  with  the  problem  how  to  reconcile  the  interests  of 
India  with  the  peremptory  instructions  issued  by  their 
chiefs  at  home  on  the  subject  of  non-interference  with 
the  internal  affairs  of  States  so  situated. 

One  of  the  consequences  which  had  followed  on  the 


JEt.  58] 


A  PATHAN  INVASION. 


191 


defeat  of  the  great  native  States  of  the  peninsula, 
before  the  British  power  was  far-stretching  enough  to 
assume  their  lost  authority,  was  an  increase  of  audacity 
on  the  part  of  the  semi-civilised  tribes  whose  home  was 
in  the  wild  recesses  of  the  Grhauts,  or  on  the  table-lands 
of  the  Deccan.  The  Pathans,  Pindarics,  and  others, 
with  more  or  less  countenance  from  the  Mahrattas, 
became  exceedingly  dangerous  to  their  weaker  neigh¬ 
bours. 

In  the  early  part  of  1809,  Ameer  Khan,*  a  Pathau 
chief,  at  the  head  of  a  numerous  army  invaded  the 
territories  of  the  Rajah  of  Berar — who,  though  not  an 
ally  of  the  British,  was  in  close  contiguity  with  their 
frontier — and  threatened  the  whole  country  of  Nag- 
pore.  Here  was  a  case  in  which  the  instructions  of  the 
Court  of  Directors  as  to  the  duty  of  non-interventioji 
could  only  be  observed  to  the  detriment  of  British  power. 

‘  The  question  was  not,’  observed  I.ord  Minto, 


'  Tliis  adventurer  made  himself  hateful  throughout  India  when 
in  the  following  year  he  instigated  a  murder  which  would  have 
seemed  less  unnatural  in  the  annals  of  antiquity  than  in  those  of  the 
nineteenth  century.  The  most  ancient  of  the  Rajpoot  Princes,  the 
Rajah  of  Oodypore,  had  a  daughter  so  young  and  fair  that,  like  a 
second  Helen,  she  set  the  world  on  fire.  Rajpootana  was  distracted 
by  the  wars  of  her  suitors,  till  one  fatal  day  it  was  suggested  to  her 
father  by  Ameer  Khan  that  peace  could  only  be  restored  to  his  dis¬ 
tracted  country  by  her  death.  Ameer  Khan's  power  lent  weight  to 
his  words ;  the  counsel  was  listened  to,  and  finally  accepted.  The 
elder  sister  of  the  ill-fated  princess  was  deputed  to  present  her  with 
a  poisoned  bowl,  desiring  her  to  save  her  country  by  the  sacrifice  of 
her  own  life.  iShe,  a  young  and  lovely  girl  of  sixteen,  is  .said  to  have 
accepted  the  decree  in  all  meekness,  and  to  have  drunk  off  the  fatal 
potion,  exclaiming,  ‘  This  is  the  marriage  to  which  I  was  fore¬ 
doomed.’ 


192 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


‘  whether  it  was  just  and  expedient  to  aid  the  Rajah 
in  the  defence  and  recovery  of  his  dominions  ;  although 
in  point  of  policy  the  essential  change  in  the  political 
state  of  India  which  would  be  occasioned  by  the 
extinction  of  one  of  the  substantive  Powers  of  the 
Deccan,  might  warrant  our  interference ;  but  whether 
an  enterprising  and  ambitious  Mussulman  chief,  at 
the  head  of  a  numerous  army,  irresistible  by  any 
power  except  that  of  the  Company,  should  be  per¬ 
mitted  to  establish  his  authority  on  the  ruins  of  the 
Rajah’s  dominions,  over  territories  contiguous  to  those 
of  our  ally,  the  Nizam,  with  whom  community  of 
religion,  combined  with  local  power  and  resources, 
might  lead  to  the  formation  of  projects  for  the  subver¬ 
sion  of  the  British  alliance :  of  such  a  question  there 
can  be  but  one  solution.’  That  solution  was  the 
immediate  expidsion  by  the  Company’s  troops  of  the 
invader  from  Berar,  whose  Rajah  must  have  been 
agreeably  surprised  to  find  that  the  assistance  of  the 
British,  being  designed  for  the  preservation  of  their 
own  interests,  was  to  be  gratuitously  given.  Colonel 
t'lose,  who  commanded  the  troops  employed  in  the 
operation,  not  only  carried  it  out  successfully,  but 
proceeded  to  occupy  the  capital  and  territory  of  Ameer 
Khan,  who  retired  rapidly  before  the  British  advance. 
Its  arrest,  by  order  of  the  Grovernment,  at  the  moment 
when  the  annihilation  of  Ameer  Khan’s  power,  and 
the  dispersion  if  not  destruction  of  his  army,  were 
seemingly  within  the  grasp  of  the  English  commander, 
has  been  criticised  as  an  error  of  policy  on  the  part  of 