

‘  If,’  he  wrote  in  a  despatch  to  the  Secret  Com¬ 
mittee,  ‘  they  had  in  truth,  as  their  officers  appear 
never  to  have  allowed  themselves  to  doubt,  adhered  to 
their  cause,  and  had  been  thereby  betrayed  to  their 
ruin  in  the  pursuit  of  criminal  designs  totally  foreign 
to  their  own  interests  and  concerns,  it  is  impossible  to 
foresee  the  dreadful  extremities  to  which  they  might 
have  been  impelled  against  those  who  would  have  been 
justly  responsible  for  these  disasters.’ 

Lord  Minto  had  intended  to  go  to  Madras  in  July  ; 
but  the  confident  assurance  of  Sir  Gi.  Barlow  that 
matters  were  quieting  down,  added  to  his  own  wish  to 

'  Sir  J.  Mackintosh  to  Colonel  Malcolm.  Bombay,  August  20, 
180!),  published  in  Corres2>ondcnee  of  Sir  J.  Malcolm,. 

-  In  the  article  on  the  Madras  mutiny,  already  quoted  (  QuaM.crltf 
Revieiv,  Jlay  1811),  the  following  passage  occurs:  ‘The  policy 
of  detaching  the  Sepoys  from  their  rebellious  officers  had  been 
adopted  by  Lord  Clive,  the  father  of  our  Indian  dominion,  on  the 
mutiny  of  the  Bengal  officers  in  the  year  176.5.  In  truth,  he  in  1765 
carried  his  policy  to  a  much  further  extent  than  Sir  George  Barlow 
in  1 800  ;  for  the  former,  finding  that  the  refractory  officers  whom  he 
had  discarded,  showed  some  disposition  to  continue  embodied  in  his 
neighbourhood,  actually  dispatched  a  corps  of  Sepoys  to  disperse 
these  officers  or  to  laring  them  prisoners  into  the  camp.’ 


^T.  58] 


LORD  MINTO  AT  MADRAS. 


219 


let  tile  minor  Gmernment  do  its  own  work  if  it  could, 
caused  him  to  delay  his  departure,  until  the  news  of 
the  revolt  at  iNlasulipatam  reached  him,  when  he  at 
once  embarked  for  Madras  on  August  5.  Before  leaving 
Bengal  he  wrote  to  Gleneral  Hewitt,  who  was  at  Agra, 
to  prepare  himself  for  civil  war.  The  monsoon  delayed 
his  passage,  and  when  he  arrived  he  found  to  his  sincere 
satisfaction  that  the  crisis  was  at  an  end. 

Sir  J.  Alackintosh  was  not  disappointed  in  the  ex¬ 
pectation  he  expressed  in  a  letter  to  Colonel  Malcolm 
that  Lord  iMinto’s  great  abilities  and  humane  character 
would  dispose  him  to  conciliation.  On  his  arrival  at 
Aladras  he  was  informed  that  the  officers  had  made 
their  submission,  and  addressed  on  August  1 1  ‘  a  peni¬ 
tential  letter  ’  to  himself.  His  own  letter,  nominally 
addressed  to  Sir  (leorge  Barlow,  but  substantially  to 
the  army,  had  been  pidilished  by  order  of  the  IMadras 
Government  at  every  military  station  in  the  Presidency ; 
and  though  too  late  to  stay  the  seditious  proceedings 
then  on  the  point  of  breaking  out,  it  seems,  neverthe¬ 
less,  not  to  have  failed  altogether  of  effect  ;  for  it  was 
remarked  at  the  time  that  their  general  confidence  in 
Lord  Minto’s  justice  and  moderation  caused  the  news 
of  his  approach  to  be  welcomed  even  by  those  who  knew 
how  unflinching  had  been  his  support  of  Sir  George 
Barlow.  Lord  IMinto  desired  to  weaken  as  little  as  pos¬ 
sible  the  Government  of  Fort  St.  George  ;  he  therefore, 
on  arriving  at  ^Madras,  announced  his  determination  to 
interfere  in  no  degree  in  the  government  of  the  Pn'si- 
dency,  which  was  in  all  respects  to  be  carried  on  as  if 