

‘  ‘  There  are  men  now  living,’  writes  Sir  J.  Kaye,  in  the  Corre¬ 
spondence  of  Sir  J.  Malcolm,  ‘  who  look  back  with  astonishment, 
almost  with  incredulity,  to  that  period  of  mutinous  excitement.  At 
many  of  the  large  army  stations  the  officers  of  the  Company’s  regi¬ 
ments  avowed  themselves  ready  for  any  act  of  daring  revolt.  They 
encouraged  one  another  in  treason  ;  they  talked  of  fighting  against 
a  tyrannical  Government  in  defence  of  their  rights  to  the  last  drop 


Mr.  58] 


MUTINY  OF  OFFICEES. 


217 


‘  History  of  India,’  '  ‘  if  necessary,  to  march  the  loyal 
portion  of  the  army  against  the  disaffected.  The 
fidelity  of  the  King’s  troops  coidd  be  relied  on.  To 
test  the  loyalty  of  the  officers  he  demanded  the  signa¬ 
ture  of  all,  without  distinction,  to  a  pledge  to  obey  the 
orders  and  support  the  authority  of  the  Government  in 
Council  at  Fort  St.  George  on  pain  of  removal  from 
their  stations  on  the  coast,  though  without  forfeiture  of 
rank  or  pay.  This  measure,  however,  did  not  produce 
the  intended  effect,  as  not  a  tenth  of  the  whole  body 
of  officers  consented  to  affix  their  signatures  ;  lastly, 
he  directed  the  commanders  of  native  regiments  to 
assemble  the  Sepoys  and  assure  them  that  the  discon¬ 
tent  of  the  officers  was  a  personal  affair,  and  that  the 
Government  had  no  intention  to  diminish  the  advan¬ 
tages  which  they  had  enjoyed,  but  were  rather  anxious 
to  improve  them.  The  Sepoys  and  native  officers  re¬ 
mained  faithful  to  their  salt.’ 

In  Lord  Minto’s  opinion  this  measure  was  as  wise 
and  bold  as  it  proved  to  be  decisive.  Without  their 
instruments  the  officers  were  ])owerless ;  they  had  not 
doubted  the  readiness  of  their  soldiers  to  adhere  to  them  ; 
inability  to  proceed  in  their  criminal  designs  was  the  real 

of  their  blood.  Seditious  toasts  were  given  at  the  mess  tables,  and 
drunk  with  uproarious  applause.  From  day  to  day  t  idings  went  forth 
from  one  excited  station  to  another-  tidings  of  progi'essive  insubor¬ 
dination  which  fortified  with  assurances  of  sympathy  and  support 
the  insane  resolves  of  liie  scattered  mutineers.  The  arrival  of  every 
post  raised  a  fever  of  expectancy.  Letters  from  tlie  disaffected  can¬ 
tonments  were  eagcrl}^  read  and  instantly  circulated.  The  moral 
intoxication  pervaded  all  ranks  from  the  colonel  to  the  ensign.’ 

'  Vol.  ii.  p.  243. 


218  LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA.  [180i) 

ground  of  the  collapse  which  ensued.  Sir  James  Mack¬ 
intosh  took  a  different  view.  Writing  of  these  events 
to  Colonel  Malcolm  he  ‘  confessed  that  were  he  asked 
whether  the  deposition  of  a  Grovernor  by  military  force 
or  an  appeal  to  private  soldiers  against  their  officers  be 
the  greater  evil,  I  am  compelled  to  own  that  I  must 
hesitate.’  ’  Lord  Minto  did  not  hesitate  to  declare 
his  conviction  that  the  power  which  entrusts  to  the 
soldier  his  sword  has  a  supreme  claim  to  his  fidelity.^ 