

‘  In  these  circumstances  the  safety  of  India  must 
depend  upon  the  support  given  to  the  local  Government 
by  the  authorities  in  England.  I  can  have  no  right  to 
dictate  any  judgment  to  those  to  whom  I  am  myself 
subordinate,  but  my  duty  requires  that  I  should  state 
my  opinion. 

‘  An  army,  that  is  not  subordinate  to  the  Govern¬ 
ment  of  the  country  in  which  it  serves,  is  its  master ; 
and,  while  this  inverted  order  of  things  continues,  no 
Government  can  be  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  affairs 
of  which  they  are  in  reality  divested.  The  present  is  a 
fair  trial  of  strength  between  legal  government  and  its 
most  formitliible  rival.  Feeble  measures  will  not  decide 
the  contest,  and  a  mere  negative  to  the  pretensions  of 
the  factions  will  not  prevent  the  frequent  repetition  of 
the  experiment  which  is  now  making.  That  can  be 
effected  only,  not  by  demonstrating  the  vanity,  but  by 
showing  the  dangers,  of  such  transgressions.  The  two 
leading  points,  therefore,  in  the  measures  which  I  re¬ 
commend  at  home  are,— first,  a  clear  and  distinct 
support  of  the  Government  of  Fort  St.  George  ;  second, 
the  signal  punishment  of  the  principal  offenders 

‘One  essential  point  is  to  take  care  that  the  present 
factions  be  not  enabled  to  claim  the  slightest  degree  of 


212 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


Ll80» 


success  in  any  of  their  real  or  professed  objects.  What¬ 
ever  may  be  thought  of  the  question  concerning  the 
restoration  of  the  Commander-in-chief  to  Council,  it 
could  not,  I  think,  be  adopted  at  the  present  moment 
Avithout  great  and  important  mischief.’  * 

When  Lord  Minto  wrote  these  lines  he  evidently 
thought  the  crisis  over.  Nothing  was  further  from  the 
truth.  Within  two  days,  on  May  11,  an  order,  issued  by 
Sir  Greorge  Barlow,  for  the  removal  of  four  officers  from 
their  commands,  and  the  suspension  of  eight  others, 
caused  the  scarcely  smothered  flames  of  disaffection  to 
burst  out  with  renewed  fierceness.  The  grounds  of  this 
summary  proceeding  were  stated  to  be  the  discovery  by 
the  Giovernor  of  the  existence  of  combinations  and  cabals 
among  the  officers ;  in  proof  of  this  a  memorial  was 
produced,  confessedly  drawn  up  by  the  officers  and  for 
private  circulation  among  them,  stating  their  grievances 
and  demands,  and  appealing  from  the  Grovemment  of 
Fort  St.  Gieorge  to  the  Grovernor  Greneral  to  whom  it 
was  addressed.  This  memorial,  having  been  obtained 
by  the  Government  of  Madras  from  sources  not  divulged, 
was  forwarded  to  Calcutta.  There  appears  to  have 
been  no  question  as  to  its  authenticity,  and  though  it 
had  not  reached  him  by  the  channel  intended  by  the 
memorialists,  the  Governor  General  answered  it  point 
by  point  in  a  letter  to  Sir  George  Barlow,  who  was 
directed  to  publish  it  to  the  Madras  army. 