

In  the  letter  he  addressed  from  Madras  to  the 
Secret  Committee,  congratulating  them  on  the  ter¬ 
mination  of  the  dangerous  troubles  which  had  agitated 


222 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


the  Presidency  since  the  month  of  January,  he 
says  : — 

‘  Greater  perils  have,  perhaps,  never  threatened 
the  possessions  of  the  Honourable  Company,  or  the 
British  empire  in  India  ;  and  so  great  an  alarm  has 
seldom  subsided  so  suddenly,  so  entirely,  and  with  so 
fair  a  prospect  not  only  of  the  permanent  restoration 
of  former  security  and  tranquillity,  but  of  the  improve¬ 
ment  of  these  blessings.  .  .  .  When  I  embarked  at 
Fort  William  on  August  5,  the  most  recent  events  were 
the  mutiny  and  revolt  at  Masulipatam.  I  received 
also  with  considerable  uneasiness  casual  accounts  of 
an  engagement  between  the  King’s  and  the  Company’s 
troops  at  Seringapatam. 

‘  The  only  certain  and  infallible  issue  of  a  contest  so 
unnatural  and  so  lamentable  as  that  which  we  might 
have  had  to  maintain  was  the  total  and  irretrievable 
ruin  of  thirteen  hundred  English  gentlemen,  who  were 
engaged  in  an  enterprise  equally  criminal  and  hope¬ 
less. 

‘  In  a  case  of  such  general  participation  by  a  nu¬ 
merous  body  in  the  offence  which  is  to  be  punished,  it 
is  obvious  that  the  penalty  cannot  be  extended  to  all, 
and  that  some  must  be  selected  for  examples ;  .  .  . 
that  these  examples  need  not  be  numerous  is  my 
opinion.’ 

In  a  later  letter,  describing  his  final  measures,  he 
wrote : 

‘  I  considered  that  the  mass  of  the  offending  officers 


^T.  58] 


OFFICIAL  CORRESPONDENCE, 


223 


were  to  be  necessarily  replaced  in  stations  of  trust ; 
that  our  native  armies  were  still  to  be  commanded  by 
them,  and  that,  whether  the  penalty  should  fall  on  few 
or  comparatively  on  many,  our  army  was  still  to  be 
composed  of  associates  in  the  common  offence. 

‘  Policy,  therefore,  if  not  a  more  generous  principle, 
points  to  conciliation  as  the  most  expedient  as  well  as, 
in  other  points  of  view,  the  most  commendable  founda¬ 
tion  of  our  measures.  The  change  in  events  has  changed 
the  principle. 

‘  \Miile  revolt  was  on  foot,  conciliation  which  would 
have  been  mistaken,  or  perhaps  justly  taken  for  weak¬ 
ness,  must  have  impaired  both  dignity  and  power. 
After  submission,  a  conciliatory  course  becomes  a 
point  not  merely  of  prudence  but  of  magnanimity.’ 

It  had  been  Lord  INIinto’s  anxious  wish  that  a  Com¬ 
mander-in-chief  should  arrive  at  Madras  from  England 
before  his  own  departure  took  place ;  when  that  was 
found  impracticable,  he  invited  General  Hewitt  to 
Madras.  ‘  The  fit  moment  had  arrived  for  the  important 
work  of  reviving  discipline.  The  power  of  Government 
and  of  the  Commander-in-chief  cannot  at  present  be 
disputed  or  opposed.  Futurity  is  so  impenetrable  that 
the  favourable  moment  ought  not  to  be  lost.  The  task 
will  not,  I  think,  be  difficult,  but  it  requires  prudence 
and  judgment  as  well  as  firmness  and  power,  for  the 
disease  is  pretty  much  fixed  in  the  habit.  It  is  one  of 
those  imdertakings  which  precipitation  has  a  tendency 
to  retard.  The  art  of  government  consists  in  distin¬ 
guishing  between  the  course  which  is  suited  to  extra- 