

This  paper  in  its  entirety  is  too  long  to  be  inserted 


'  April  25,  1809. 


jEt.  58] 


MUTINY  OF  OFFICEES. 


213 


here ;  it  is  too  good  to  be  mutilated.  It  is,  in  fact,  an  ex¬ 
haustive  statement  of  the  questions  at  issue  between  the 
officers  and  the  Madras  Government,  and  likewise  of  the 
general  principles  which  necessitated  the  subordination 
of  the  army  to  the  State.  When  in  due  time  it  reached 
England,  Lord  Malmesbury  described  it  as  the  finest 
and  ablest  State  paper  he  had  ever  read.  Lord  Minto 
himself  thought  it  far  too  long ;  but  he  desired,  he  said, 
‘  to  conGnce  the  reason  of  the  younger  officers  as  well 
as  to  enforce  their  obedience,  and  to  lay  a  statement 
before  the  army  of  principles  he  thought  ill  understood.’ 
While  Sir  George  Barlow  was  content  to  reiterate  that 
the  first  attribute  of  the  executive  is  strength.  Lord 
Minto  insisted  also  on  what  he  considered  to  be  the 
corollary  of  the  same  principle — that  the  strength  of 
the  executive  lies  in  its  being  derived  from  the  national 
will,  whence  its  rightful  claim  on  the  obedience  of  all 
classes  of  men.  The  antagonism  displayed  to  the 
executive  at  Madras  arose  in  its  seeming  to  be  the  will 
of  Sir  George  Barlow. 

It  was  a  habit  of  mind  with  Lord  IMinto  to  look  for 
the  causes  of  things  below  the  surface.  In  this  case 
he  saw  in  the  majority  of  the  officers  very  young  and 
half-instructed  men  (‘  and  who  so  confident  of  himself 
as  a  half-instructed  man  ?  ).  He  saw  them  brought  to¬ 
gether  in  a  distant  corner  of  the  Empire,  removed  from 
the  influence  of  such  pidilic  opinion  as  exists  in  all  large 
and  mixed  societies,  tempted  by  the  circumstances  of 
their  case  to  exaggerate  their  own  importance,  till  the 
interests  of  a  few  officers  became  in  their  eyes  the 


214 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


cause  of  an  army,  and  till  the  reciprocal  duties  of 
brother  officers  became  more  to  them  than  the  primary 
relations  which  knit  together  the  citizens  of  a  common 
State.  He  entertained,  therefore,  a  sanguine  hope  that 
the  promulgation  of  sounder  principles  would  check  the 
progress  of  error.  From  the  letter  to  Sir  Gleorge 
Barlow  we  propose  to  quote  only  one  passage,  from 
which  the  general  tone  and  spirit  of  the  argument  may 
be  inferred. 

‘  We  are  accustomed  in  England,  without  distinc¬ 
tion  of  profession  or  degree,  to  speak  with  pride  and 
reverence  of  that  nice  and  scrupulous  solicitude  which 
pervades  the  constitutional  policy  of  Great  Britain  on 
every  point  that  affects,, however  remotely,  the  great 
and  primary  concerns  of  civil  liberty  and  domestic 
security, — blessings  which  it  is  natural  to  value  most 
highly  in  a  country  where  they  are  best  known  and  ex¬ 
perienced.  It  is  this  great  national  sentiment  which 
requires,  as  the  main  and  most  indispensable  provision 
for  civil  security,  the  absolute  unqualified  subordination 
of  the  army  to  the  State,  or  in  other  words  to  the 
Government  of  the  country.  Out  of  the  same  principle 
springs  the  necessity  of  peculiar  restraints  on  the 
military  body,  and  the  abridgment  in  their  case  of  some 
privileges  and  practices  which  are  permitted,  because- 
they  are  not  deemed  hazardous,  in  other  parts  of  life. 