


'  April  25,  I80y. 


208 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


imaginary  grievances  of  the  army,’  Lord  Minto  ascribed 
tlie  state  of  feeling  that  displayed  itself  in  the  absurd 
attempt  to  try  Colonel  Munro  for  his  report  on  the 
tent  contract.  The  arrest  of  Colonel  Munro  on  those 
scandalous  charges  was  a  gross  abuse  of  his  authority. 
‘  I  consider  the  standard  to  have  been  set  up  against 
the  Groverument  by  that  act,  the  scope  of  which  was 
to  bring  a  military  regulation  solemnly  adopted  by  the 
Government  of  Fort  St.  George  and  by  the  supreme 
Government,  under  the  cognisance  of  a  band  of  officers 
to  be  tried  as  a  base  and  scandalous  crime. 

‘  The  attempt  was  to  wrest  the  regulation  of  the 
army,  and  the  control  of  military  arrangements  and 
economy,  out  of  the  hands  of  Government,  in  which 
the  constitution  of  these  Provinces  and  of  e\'ery  other 
country  in  the  world,  and,  above  all  the  rest,  of  Great 
Britain,  has  anxiously  and  jealously  placed  it,  and  com¬ 
mit  it  to  the  officers  of  the  army  themselves.’ 

Up  to  this  point  there  seems  to  ha  ve  been  no  differ¬ 
ence  of  opinion  among  calm  men  as  to  which  party  in 
the  conflict  had  right  on  its  side  ;  but  a  change  became 
apparent  when  the  violent  order  of  the  Connnander-in- 
chief  was  immediately  followed  by  a  counter  order  no  less 
intemperate  from  the  Government,  coupled  with  the 
dismissal  of  two  officers  of  high  rank  who  had  counter¬ 
signed  and  published  the  order  of  their  superior.  Lord 
Minto,  true  to  his  principle  that  the  specific  questions 
iti  the  controversy  were  of  very  minor  importance  com¬ 
pared  with  the  fundamental  and  most  important  con¬ 
sideration  of  the  permanent  relations  between  the  civil 


.lilT.  58] 


MUTINY  OF  OFFICERS. 


209 


and  military  powers,  publicly  and  steadily  supported 
the  Government  of  P’ort  St.  George.  That  he  did  not  do 
so  in  a  spirit  of  blind  partiality  to  the  proceedings  of 
Sir  George  Barlow,  is  proved  by  a  confidential  letter  to 
his  son,  in  which  he  confessed  his  real  sentiments  and 
the  reasons  for  their  suppression. 

‘  This  measure — the  removal  of  the  Adjutant  and 
the  Deputy  Adjutant  General  for  giving  circulation  to 
General  McDowell’s  general  order  of  January  28 — 
started  a  question  likely  to  unite  military  opinions 
against  the  Government  of  Fort  St.  George.  It  became 
the  immediate  ground  of  the  general  combination  of 
the  army,  and  furnished  the  first  questionable  matter 
in  the  struggle  Sir  George  had  to  maintain  against 
a  military  faction  already  determined  to  carry  their 
personal  opposition  against  him  to  extremity.  It  was 
made  the  hinge  of  these  dissensions. 