


224 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA 


[1803' 


ordinary  conjnnctnres,  and  the  permanent  policy  by 
which  men  are  to  be  governed.’ ' 

‘  Revolt  must  first  be  subdued  ;  the  next  care  is  tO' 
prevent  a  return  of  that  evil.  No  doubt  the  strong  and 
successful  repression  of  the  late  seditions  would  tend 
to  discourage  similar  dispositions  in  the  future ;  but 
other  means  yet  more  efficacious  should  be  combined 
with  these,  for  the  actions  of  men  being  prompted  as 
much  by  their  passions  and  tempers  as  by  their  reason, 
a  sense  of  danger  will  not  always  restrain  them.  That 
real  grievances  must  be  redressed  will  not  be  disputed ; 
liut  it  appears  to  me  that  a  Government  should  study 
even  the  passions,  the  temper,  the  prejudices,  and  the 
errors  of  those  who  are  subject  to  their  rule.  It  would 
follow  from  this  principle  that  if  any  peculiar  circum¬ 
stances  in  the  late  events  should  appear  to  have  pro¬ 
moted  them,  or  to  have  increased  the  difficulty  of  re¬ 
straining  them,  and  that  these  circumstances  should 
be  capable  of  alteration,  it  should  be  done. 

‘  If  there  be  reason  to  think  that  any  obstacle  to  the 
restoration  not  merely  of  discipline,  but  of  temper  and 
harmony,  now  stands  in  the  way,  that  obstacle,  although 
it  should  be  connected  with  the  most  unreasonable  and 
most  unjustifiable  passions  and  prejudices  of  the  time, 
had  better  be  removed,  provided  the  measures  taken 
for  that  purpose  can  be  ascribed  to  a  spirit  of  wise 
conciliation,  and  cannot  by  any  possibility  be  set  down 
to  motives  of  intimidation — and  this  advantage  does 


*  Lord  Minto  to  the  Secret  Committee. 


jEt.  59] 


FAMILY  LETTERS. 


225 


belong  to  the  stronger  party  after  victory — with  a  view 
to  promote  future  harmony  with  a  subdued  adver¬ 
sary.’  * 

‘  Madras :  February  3,  1810.’ 

‘  It  is  quite  uncertain  when  I  shall  get  home  (to 
Bengal).  I  intended  to  go  about  the  middle  of  this 
month.  But  although  the  army  is  in  a  perfectly  safe 
state,  it  is  not  like  any  other  army  or  any  other  set 
of  people  that  ever  was.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  irri¬ 
tation  kept  up  by  the  courts  martial ;  and  different 
incidents  in  the  late  troubles  are  still  fresh  enough 
to  make  bad  blood  between  one  corps  and  another. 
Wherever  there  is  any  agitation  at  all,  the  Company’s 
officers  cut  the  King’s,  who  make  them  very  welcome 
and  hold  them  mighty  cheap,  as  well  they  may,  being 
in  the  right  and  the  others  in  the  wrong.  This  is  not 
like  discipline,  nor  like  an  entire  return  to  tranquillity, 
but  it  is  not  quite  out  of  nature ;  and  I  think  myself 
that  all  will  get  right,  provided  jthere  is  a  little  temper 
and  patience  with  this  temporary  evil.  Eegular  and 
steady  discipline  must  certainly  be  restored,  or  rather 
created,  for  it  never  existed  here ;  but  these  wild 
steeds  must  be  handled  and  bitted,  and  not  backed  in 
a  moment  by  a  rough-rider.  Everything  is  so  per¬ 
fectly  secure  on  material  points,  that  a  quiet  process 
may  be  tried,  without  danger  from  new  mischief.  As 
discipline  ^aust  be  enforced,  however,  quicker  or  slower, 