

‘  You  will  see  that  I  have  given  unqualified  support 
to  the  Government  of  Fort  St.  George  on  this  delicate 
point.  I  was  not  and  could  not  be  consulted  when  the 
measure  was  adopted.  If  my  judgment  had  been  to  be 
given  in  that  stage  1  should  certainly  have  dissuaded 
it ;  and  in  truth  both  I  and  my  colleagues  in  Bengal 
learnt  the  occurrence  with  the  greatest  possible  regret. 
Y'e  felt  distinctly  all  the  consequences  that  were  to 
follow  ;  a  general  bond  of  union  among  the  disaffected, 
and  a  plausible  pretext,  which  had  not  before  existed, 
for  discontent  and  clamour,  was  now  furnished  liy  this 
most  unfortunate  and  impolitic  measure.  I  am  making 
this  confession  most  confidentially  to  you  and  my  very 

p 


210 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


few  confidants.  In  India  it  is  a  secret  to  everybody  but 
Mr.  Lninsden,  ]\Ir.  Colebroke,  and  Greneral  Hewitt. 

‘  I  had  to  consider,  however,  not  whether  the 
measure  was  to  be  taken,  but,  being  already  taken, 
whether  it  should  be  reversed.  To  put  Sir  Cleorge  in 
the  Avrong  on  any  point,  but  especially  on  the  main 
point,  was  to  overthrow  his  Groveminent  and  give  a 
complete  triumph  to  military  combination  for  all  time 
to  come  :  for  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  success¬ 
ful  combination  of  the  Bengal  officers  in  1796,  when 
Government  at  home  took  fright,  is  the  real  root  of 
the  late  insubordination  in  the  army  of  the  JMadras 
Presidency. 

‘  I  had  nevertheless  to  satisfy  myself  upon  the 
abstract  merits  of  the  question  :  for,  although  the  pubhc 
safety  might  require  that  I  should  support  an  impolitic 
measure,  nothing  could  have  induced  me  to  strain  the 
point  of  justice  ;  and  if  these  officers  had  appeared  to 
me  unjustly  removed,  or  if  military  principles  had  in 
my  judgment  been  really  violated  on  this  occasion,  I 
must  have  restored  the  officers,  and  disavoAved  the 
principle,  Avithout  regard  to  consequences.’ 

The  letter  goes  on  to  state  at  considerable  length 
the  incontrovertible  gTounds  or  arguments  by  which 
Lord  IMinto  satisfied  himself  that  the  action  of  the 
Adjutant  and  Deputy  Adjutant  General,  in  publishing 
and  disseminating  the  general  order  of  the  Commander- 
in-chief,  in  defiance  of  the  regulation  that  all  orders 
should  be  in  the  first  instance  submitted  to  the  Govern¬ 
ment,  Avas  a  dereliction  of  duty  that  justified  their 


68] 


MUTINY  OF  OFFICERS. 


211 


dismissal  by  Sir  George  Barlow  from  a  legal,  though 
not  from  a  politic,  point  of  view.  Having  reached 
which  conclusion  he  did  not  hesitate  to  give  his  un¬ 
qualified  support  to  the  Government  of  Fort  St.  George. 
In  a  letter  to  the  Secret  Committee  he  urged  upon  them 
the  adoption  of  a  similar  course. 