

‘  Among  the  chief  of  these  restraints  are  to  be  placed 
the  strict  prohibition  of  military  combination  for  the 
furtherance  of  professional  views  or  wishes,  and  of 
open  and  concerted  opposition  by  military  men  in  their 


^T.  58] 


MUTINY  OF  OFFICEKS. 


215 


military  character  to  the  Government  or  the  persons 
who  administer  it.  .  .  . 

‘  It  were  to  be  lamented,  and  little  to  the  credit 
of  military  men,  if,  on  points  which  touch  so  nearly  all 
that  is  most  dear  to  their  country,  they  should  cease 
to  think  and  feel  as  Englishmen  when  they  become 
soldiers,  and  should  suffer  the  partial  spirit  of  a  pro¬ 
fession  to  wean  them  from  those  sentiments  and  sym¬ 
pathies  which,  like  their  brethren  in  civil  life,  they 
imbibed  with  their  milk,  and  which  distinguish  and 
illustrate  their  nation.’ 

Though  this  paper,  dated  Fort  William,  May  27, 
1809,  purported  to  emanate  from  the  Governor  General 
in  Council,  and  was  therefore  signed  by  the  members  of 
Council  generally,  he  himself  said  of  it :  ‘  Whether  it 
is  thought  good  or  bad,  prosy  or  otherwise,  it  is  cer¬ 
tainly  my  own,  for  I  wrote  every  word  of  it  myself.’ 

Several  of  the  suspended  officers  went  to  Calcutta 
and  laid  their  grievances  before  Lord  Minto.  From 
them,  and  by  letter  from  Colonels  Malcolm  and  Close 
and  Sir  George  Barlow,  he  was  kept  aware  of  the  pro¬ 
gress  of  events.  INIalcolm  wrote  that  Barlow’s  blind¬ 
ness  to  the  increasing  dangers  amounted  to  a  disease 
of  mind  :  Barlow,  that  Malcolm’s  love  of  popidarity 
prompted  him  to  recommend  concessions  which  the 
honour  of  the  Government  forbad  it  to  grant.  Colonel 
Close  agreed  with  I..ord  Minto  that  submission  must 
precede  concession.  But  of  the  former  there  was  no  sign. 
A  regular  organisation  of  revolt  was  framed.  The  open 


216 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


revolt  of  Masulipatam  (where  the  officers  seized  the 
fortress  and  put  their  commanding  officer  under  arrest) 
left  no  doubt  as  to  the  lengths  to  which  they  were 
prepared  to  go.  It  was  quickly  followed  by  the  mutiny 
of  Seringapatam.  From  Masulipatam,  where  he  had 
been  sent  by  Sir  Greorge  Barlow  on  a  mission,  Malcolm 
wrote  ‘  that  there  was  not  a  Company’s  corps  from 
■Cape  Comorin  to  Glanjam  that  was  not  implicated  in 
the  general  guilt — that  is  not  pledged  to  rise  against 
Government  unless  what  they  call  their  grievances  are 
redressed.’  Colonel  Close,  who,  on  account  of  his  great 
popularity  with  the  army,  had  been  sent  to  Hyderabad 
to  take  command  of  the  subsidiary  force,  was  met  at 
the  camp  by  the  whole  of  the  troops  under  arms  and 
prepared  for  action.  Plans  were  formed  for  concentra¬ 
ting  the  rebel  force ;  all  concealment  Avas  throAvn  off, 
and  menaces  were  heard  that  30,000  men  would  march 
upon  Madras.  The  Jaulna  detachment  actually  quitted 
their  station  in  the  execution  of  that  plan.  Public 
treasure  was  seized,  correspondence  interrupted — in  a 
word,  civil  war  had  commenced.  At  this  juncture  the 
cool  courage  and  energy  of  Sir  George  BarloAV  saved  the 
Empire  from  what  at  best  must  have  been  a  disastrous 
struggle.'  ‘  He  determined,’  says  Marshman  in  his 