


■220  LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA.  [180S> 

Calcutta  ■were  still  the  seat  of  the  supreme  authority ; 
but  he  felt  that  he  should  discharge  imperfectly  the 
extraordinary  powers  entrusted  to  him  if  he  contented 
himself  ■with  professing  a  blind  concurrence  in  counsels 
over  which  he  had  come  to  preside.  He  determined 
therefore  ‘  to  pursue  a  personal  investigation  of  the 
facts,  followed  by  a  mature  deliberation  on  their  results, 
before  committing  himself  to  any  of  the  principal 
points  depending.’ 

An  order,  dated  September  25,  1809,  conveyed  the 
judgment  at  which  he  arrived  after  the  most  search¬ 
ing  enquiry  and  anxious  consideration.  It  stated  in 
■clear  but  most  moderate  terms  the  offence  against  the 
just  authority  of  Government,  of  which  the  coast  army 
had  been  guilty,  and  then  proceeded  to  make  a  selection 
of  the  offenders  for  punishment. 

‘  The  selection,’  says  the  order,  ‘  is  to  consist  of  the 
officers  in  command  of  stations,  or  bodies  of  troops ; 
commandants  of  corps ;  and  persons  peculiarly  distin¬ 
guished  for  a  foi’Avard  and  violent  part  in  the  most 
criminal  acts  or  proceedings  of  the  army.  Officers  in¬ 
cluded  in  the  two  first  categories  would  be  sent  for 
trial  to  courts  martial,  the  number  not  exceeding 
twenty-one.’  Those  in  the  last  Avere  permitted  to  take 
their  choice  of  trial  or  dismissal  from  the  service.  To 
the  rest  of  the  army  a  general  and  unqualified  amnesty 
was  granted.  The  language  of  this  general  order  ad¬ 
mirably  reflected  the  spirit  of  its  author.  It  was  at 
once  firm  and  generous.  It  demonstrated  the  Governor 
General’s  determination  to  do  no  more  than  was  neces- 


JEt.  58] 


OEDER  TO  THE  ARIO^'. 


221 


sary  for  the  vindication  of  justice.  It  firmly  reasserted 
the  principles  of  military  sidiordination  to  legal  au¬ 
thority,  which  the  proceedings  of  the  army  had  set 
at  defiance,  and  it  did  not  shrink  from  a  tribute  to 
Sir  George  Barlow,  to  whose  firmness  and  energy  it  was 
due  that  a  monstrous  conflict  had  been  avoided  between 
the  coast  army  and  their  country.  The  order  ended 
by  an  earnest  exhortation  to  the  officers  to  think  less 
lightly  than  they  had  been  accustomed  to  do  of  violating 
the  first,  the  most  sacred,  and  the  most  characteristic 
duty  of  a  soldier,  fidelity  to  the  power  he  serves.  ‘  I 
entreat  them  to  be  persuaded  that  no  man  of  honour 
at  the  head  of  a  Government  will  ever  compromise  Avith 
revolt,  and  that  in  every  case  the  conflict  must  be 
carried  to  the  last  extremity.  ]My  sentiments  on  that 
subject  are  not  equivocal,  and  are  not  assumed  for  the 
occasion.  They  have  been  pronounced  long  since,  and 
previous  to  any  indication  of  troubles  on  the  coast.  JMy 
fixed  and  firm  principle  is,  that  the  utmost  e\dls  that  can 
flow  from  a  contest  with  revolt,  and  even  from  defeat,  are 
much  inferior  to  the  greater,  more  permanent,  and  more 
extensive  mischief  of  concession.  In  such  cases  the 
revolted  party  may  recede,  and  will  always  do  so  with 
honour,  sacrificing  nothing  but  passions  and  crimes. 
The  Government  against  which  the  revolt  is  made,  has 
no  option  but  to  maintain  the  contest  or  abandon  its 
trust  and  fly  from  its  duty.’ 