

The  first  step  in  this  great  scheme  was  not  the 
most  successful.  On  the  conquest  of  Portugal  by  the 
French,  the  Indian  Government  received  orders  to 
occupy  the  Portuguese  settlements  in  the  East.  Goa 


^40 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1810 


was  already  protected  by  British  troops,  though  the 
civil  administration  was  still  carried  on  by  Portuguese. 
It  was  intimated  that  Macao  should  in  similar  manner 
be  protected  by  a  British  occupation  from  annexation 
to  France.  A  small  expedition  was  sent  from  India  to 
Macao  in  September  1809  ;  but,  though  it  effected  a 
landing,  it  was  met  with  such  firm  though  courteous 
opposition  by  the  Chinese  authorities,  that  it  was  deemed 
expedient  to  re-embark  the  troops  and  to  abstain  from 
any  further  designs  in  that  quarter,  leaving  the  Chinese 
to  guard  their  own  coasts,  which  they  appeared  well 
prepared  to  do. 

About  the  same  time,  three  ships  of  the  line,  car¬ 
rying  troops,  took  possession  of  Amboyna,  the  chief  of 
the  Dutch  Spice  Islands,  or  Moluccas,  and  early  in  the 
spring  of  1810  the  whole  of  the  group  was  annexed 
to  the  British  crown.  These  small  expeditions  were 
despatched  from  India  while  Lord  Minto  was  at  Madras. 
Immediately  on  his  return  to  Calcutta  preparations  were 
commenced  for  more  important  enterprises. 

It  -will  be  remembered  that  within  a  few  weeks 
after  Lord  Minto’s  assumption  of  the  reins  of  govern¬ 
ment  in  1807,  plans  were  submitted  to  him  for  the 
reduction  of  the  islands  of  Bourbon  and  Mauritius,  and 
of  Java,  which  the  fortune  of  war  had  transferred,  along 
with  the  Moluccas  and  other  settlements  eastward  of 
India,  from  the  possession  of  the  Dutch  to  that  of  the 
French. 

These  plans  had  been  laid  aside  on  the  ground 
that  the  time  for  their  execution  was  not  come  ;  first, 


^T.  59] 


FOEEIGN  POLICY. 


241 


because  of  the  financial  difficulties  in  which  the  Com¬ 
pany’s  affairs  were  then  involved ;  secondly,  because 
of  some  uncertainty  as  to  the  approval  of  the  Minis¬ 
try  which  had  lately  taken  office  in  England.  The 
Whig  Ministers,  Lords  Grenville  and  Grey,  while  yield¬ 
ing  to  none  in  their  desire  to  promote  a  system  of 
public  economy,  had  entertained  and  discussed  such 
‘  plans  ’  with  Lord  IMinto  before  he  left  England  ;  but 
the  Ministers  who  succeeded  them  were  believed  to  have 
other  views.  Lord  Castlereagh,  who  had  become  War 
Secretary,  had  in  1800  forbidden  any  operations  east¬ 
ward  of  India,  and  expeditions  against  the  French 
islands  had  been  positively  interdicted  to  the  Indian 
Government,  in  spite  of  the  severe  damage  sustained  by 
their  merchant  trade  from  French  cruisers. 