

In  one  of  his  first  letters  from  India  to  the  Chair¬ 
man  of  the  East  India  Company,  Lord  Minto  had 
pointed  out  the  importance  of  a  concpiest  of  the  Isle  of 
France  or  IMauritius,  and  the  Isle  of  Bourbon  : — ‘  The 
Mauritius  aftbrds  a  secure  port  for  equipping  and  re¬ 
fitting  ships  of  war  and  other  cruisers  against  our 
trade,  and  a  place  of  refuge  and  safety  for  them  and 
their  prizes.  Every  project  of  the  enemy  which  re¬ 
quires  a  naval  and  military  force,  will  find  facilities  in 
the  possession  of  the  'Mauritius.  Troops,  stores,  and 
shipping  may  be  almost  imperceptibly  assembled  there, 
separately  and  in  detail,  which  could  not  without  ex¬ 
treme  hazard  of  failure,  be  dispatched  in  a  body  from 
France.’  Twice  during  the  administration  of  Lord 
Wellesley,  had  expeditions  to  the  Coast  of  Malabar 

K 


242 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1810. 


been  sent  out  from  the  Mauritius,  and  the  capture  of 
British  merchantmen  even  in  the  Bay  of  Bengal  had 
grievously  humiliated  the  Grovernment  of  India,  which 
would  at  once  have  resented  the  injury  by  a  descent 
upon  the  islands,  but  for  the  refusal  of  the  Admiral  on 
the  station  to  act  under  any  orders  unless  issued 
through  the  Admiralty.' 

In  1809  no  fewer  than  six  Indiamen  were  taken 
on  their  voyage.  It  was  then  felt  to  be  high  time  to 
protect  our  maritime  trade  from  further  depredations, 
and  early  in  1810  an  expedition  sailed  from  India  to 
the  P’rench  islands  under  circumstances  which  Lord 
INIinto’s  letters  will  best  describe. 

‘  On  the  first  occasion,  a  frigate  from  the  Mauritius  landed  a 
number  of  French  troops  and  others  at  Mangalore  on  the  coast  of 
Malabar,  who  joined  the  standard  of  Sultan  Tippoo,  dignified  him 
with  the  title  of  Citizen  Tippoo,  declared  his  dominions  a  republic, 
U7ie  et  indivisible,  and  planted  a  tree  of  liberty.  On  the  second  oc¬ 
casion  a  large  armament  arrived  off  Pondicherry,  consisting  of  two 
ships  of  the  line,  two  frigates,  and  two  corvettes,  with  a  large  staff  of 
officers  and  1,400  European  troops,  destined  to  re-occupy  Pondicherry 
after  the  Peace  of  Amiens  had  restored  that  dependency  to  France. 
On  the  appearance  of  the  French  squadron  in  the  roadstead  of  Pon¬ 
dicherry  they  were  informed  that  the  Governor  General  had  resolved 
not  to  give  up  the  French  settlements  (as  he  had  nevertheless  been 
ordered  by  Royal  warrant  to  do)  until  he  had  had  time  to  communi¬ 
cate  with  the  English  ministry.  The  fleet  returned  to  Mamitius, 
and  before  a  reply  to  Lord  Wellesley  was  received,  England  and 
France  had  resumed  hostilities.  Lord  Wellesley  had  designed  an 
exjjedition  against  the  French  islands  which  was  frustrated  by  the 
jealousy  of  the  Admiral.  The  troops  intended  for  the  pm-pose  were 
the  contingent  of  4,000  Europeans  and  5,000  Sepoys  afterwards  sent 
to  co-operate  with  Sir  R.  Abercromby  in  Eg3rpt,  and  who  encamped  on 
the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  on  August  27,  1800.  This  exjsedition 
— for  the  troops  marched  120  miles  over  the  desert  to  the  Nile — was 
thought  at  the  time  a  feat  to  be  projd  of,  and  greatly  to  illustrate 
the  resources  of  the  Empire. 