


JEt.  69] 


EDINBURGH  IN  1809. 


233 


himself  because  he  has  bullied  us  all  (Jjord  Webb,'  and 
I  can’t  tell  you  who)  about  Crabbe ;  who  has  just 
published  a  new  volume,  full  of  horrors  of  all  kinds 
which  he  chooses  to  admire ;  and  we  expect  a  very 
favourable  review  of  it  in  the  next  number.  I  have 
not  much  objection  to  this  ;  but  if  he  is  not  more  re¬ 
spectful  in  his  review  of  ‘  The  Lady  ’  than  he  was  in  that 
of  ‘  Marmion,’  I  shall  vow  vengeance  on  his  little  head. 
How  to  execute  it  will  be  the  most  difficult  job  ;  for  he 
cares  for  nothing  that  anybody  can  say  or  do,  unless 
perhaps  one  was  to  gag  him  ;  but  then  death  would  soon 
put  an  end  to  his  torments,  and  he  woidd  die  of  a  reple¬ 
tion  of  words.’ 

The  winter  of  1809-10  was  a  very  pleasant  one  in 
Edinburgh.  Dugald  Stewart  had  not  yet  quitted  the 
chair  of  IMoral  Philosophy ;  and  the  influence  of  his 
character,  manners,  and  taste,  gave  a  tone  to  the  College 
which  was  said  to  be  of  even  greater  iidvantage  to  the 
students  than  that  they  derived  from  attendance  at  his 
lectures.  Playfair  still  occupied  the  chair  of  Natural 
Philosophy,  and  found  time  to  fall  into  the  chains  of 
the  lively  IMrs.  Apreece,  better  known  in  after  years  as 
Lady  Davy,  but  Avho  in  1810  made  the  world  of  Edin¬ 
burgh  stare  when  intn)duced  to  it  under  the  aus])ices  of 
the  Duchess  of  tlordon  as  the  true  Corinne.  Where 
Playfair  was,  generally  came  Lord  Webb  Seymour,  the 
gentle  and  the  wise,  the  two  friends  being  so  inseparable 
as  to  be  dubbed  husband  and  wife.  These  were  intimate 
friends  of  the  IMinto  family,  as  were  also  ‘John  Murray 
‘  Lord  Webl)  Seymour. 


234 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1810 


and  Henry  Cockbnrn,  as  full  of  fun  and  sense  as  an  egg 
is  full  of  meat,’  Thomas  Thomson,  ‘the  oldest,  the 
gra^’est,  and  the  most  learned  of  all,’  and  the  Clerks 
of  Eldin,  ‘  a  family  of  geniuses  ’  revolving  round  their 
aged  father,  irreverently  nicknamed  ‘  old  Tactics.’  ^  On 
this  foundation  Lady  IMinto  and  her  cousin.  Lady 
Carnegie,  had  in  a  former  year  instituted  a  coterie, 
dignified  by  the  name  of  the  ‘  Bro'wn  Toast  Club,’  in 
allusion  to  one  of  its  fundamental  laws — that  the  mem¬ 
bers  should  trust  to  ‘  the  cup  which  cheers  and  not 
inebriates  ’  for  their  exhilaration,  and  to  buttered  toast 
for  their  support.  So  popular  were  these  meetings  that 
hard-worked  lawyers  sat  up  all  night  to  prepare  their 
work  in  Court  next  day  rather  than  lose  the  evening 
hours  with  the  Brown  Toasters.  ‘  Jeffrey  is  most  enter¬ 
taining  with  his  miseries  of  Avriting  reviews  with  his 
head  full  of  bad  law,  and  his  law  with  his  head  full  of 
reviews,  and  passing  his  nights  scribbling  and  being 
abused  for  his  pains.  He  is  so  smitten  just  now  with 
M.’s  beauty  that  his  friends  say  she  must  cover  her  face 
if  he  is  to  write  any  more  reviews.  Many  people  would 
in  that  case  bid  her  show  it  for  humanity’s  sake.’  ^  To 
one  of  these  ‘  small  parties  ’  came  Madame  Catalani. 
‘  She  sang  one  song  delightfully,’  wrote  Lady  IMinto ; 
‘  then,  having  a  cold,  would  not  sing  again,  bnt  consented 
to  show  attitudes, — as  Lady  Hamilton  did  in  her  days  of 
beauty, — and  we  were  all  in  ecstasies.  I  think  her  beau- 