


^T.  59]  EXPEDITION  TO  THE  FRENCH  ISLANDS.  243 


‘  March  26,  1810.' 

‘  I  am  just  sending  an  expedition  to  make  the  con¬ 
quest  of  the  Isle  of  Kourhon.  There  is  the  fairest  pros¬ 
pect  of  success.  I  propose  to  follow  up  the  blow  hy 
attacking  the  Mauritius,  generally  called  the  Isle  of 
f'rance.  These  two  acquisitions  will  be  of  extreme  im¬ 
portance  :  they  are  the  only  French  possessions  east  of 
the  Cape,  and  furnish  the  only  means  our  arch-enemy  can 
command  for  annoying  us  in  this  quarter  of  the  world, 
till  an  army  can  come  here  in  its  shoes.  From  the  Isle 
of  France  all  the  cruisers  have  been  sent  out  against 
our  trade ;  against  which  a  very  large  squadron  have 
done  little  to  protect  us.  The  losses  of  the  Company, 
as  well  as  of  the  general  trade,  have  been  enormous. 
The  Islands  have  been  blockaded  by  a  squadron  under 
Admiral  Bertie  who  commands  at  the  Cape,  and  they 
have  experienced  some  distress  from  that  measure, 
but  none  sufficient  to  produce  a  chance,  as  it  appears 
to  me,  of  their  surrender.  In  the  meanwhile  the  small 
island  of  Rodriguez  was,  in  consequence  of  orders  from 
England,  taken  possession  of  by  a  detachment  of 
European  and  native  troops  from  Bombay.  The  in¬ 
tention  was  merely  to  secure  water  and  send  refresh¬ 
ments  to  the  blockading  squadron.  The  command  of 
the  troops  was  given  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Keating. 
Two  captured  Indiamen  were  taken  by  the  P’rench 
frigate  Caroline  into  Port  St.  Paul  on  the  Island  of 
Bourbon.  This  tempted  Commodore  Rowley,  who 


To  Lady  Jlinto. 

K  2 


244 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1810 


commanded  the  blockading  ships,  and  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Keating  to  attack  Port  St.  Paul,  an  enterprise 
which  was  conducted  and  executed  in  a  very  masterly 
manner,  and  with  entire  success.  .  .  The  success  of 
this  operation  induced  them  (these  officers)  to  recom¬ 
mend  that  a  reinforcement  of  about  2,000  men  should 
be  sent  from  India  with  which  addition  to  the  force  at 
Kodriguez  they  had  a  confident  expectation  of  being 
able  to  make  the  entire  conquest  of  Bourbon ;  which 
they  consider  as  an  important  step  towards  the  reduc¬ 
tion  of  the  Isle  of  France.  It  is  upon  these  grounds  that 
I  have  fitted  out  the  present  expedition,  which  I  have 
made  somewhat  stronger  than  was  desired,  in  order  to 
provide  against  the  preparations  for  defence  which  may 
have  been  made  since  the  attack  on  Port  St.  Paul. 

‘  A  second  expedition  must  be  sent  against  the  Isle 
of  France,  and  a  much  larger  force:  including  those 
going  now  about  10,000  men.  The  first  will  sail  from 
IMadras  about  May  1  ;  the  second  will  probably  depart 
from  India  in  August. 