

■  Third  daughter  of  James  Henry  Casamaijor,  Esq.,  of  Madras. 


Mt.  59] 


FAMILY  LETTEES. 


229 


tributed  to  the  cheerfulness  and  comfort  of  Lord  Minto’s 
life  in  India. 

After  describing  the  wedding,  he  wrote  to  his  wife, 

‘  December  20,  1809. 

‘  My  domestic  longings  are  becoming  every  month 
more  importunate  and  unreasonable.  I  first  deter¬ 
mined  not  to  reckon  for  many  years  to  come,  well 
knowing  that  the  hours  of  expectation  would  not  be 
made  fewer  by  any  sort  of  computation  I  could  con¬ 
trive,  but  that  they  would  be  much  increased  in  length 
and  retarded  in  velocity.  Then  I  compromised  for 
quarters  of  a  year.  Then  it  came  to  months,  and  now 
I  grieve  to  say  that  I  am  actually  counting  days,  with 
all  the  exactness  of  a  clock.  The  days  are  innumer¬ 
able  indeed,  yet,  being  a  good  arithmetician,  I  actually 
know  their  number.  It  is  a  long  line  of  march  in 
which  one  rank  seems  to  stop  another,  and  the  whole 
column  seems  to  stand  still.  It  would  be  a  great  joy 
to  skip  a  day,  but  that  never  happens.  I  reckon 
this  diurnal  reckoning  one  of  the  most  improvi¬ 
dent  acts  of  my  life,  and  I  must  go  on  counting  and 
longing  to  the  end  of  the  chapter.  One  of  my  common 
vigils  is  performing  the  voyage  home,  and  then  the 
journey  from  one  well-known  sign-post  to  another, 
from  the  Ked  Lion,  Barnet,  to  Minto.  As  I  have  a 
perfectly  fair  wind,  and  plenty  of  it  all  the  way  to 
Portsmouth,  and  good  roads  and  horses  to  iMinto,  I 
meet  with  no  let  or  hindrance  till  I  come  to  the  Lower 
Lodge,  and  from  thence  to  the  Lilly  Law  is  a  tedious 


230 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1810 


distressing  job.  I  always  go  the  Cornhill  Eoad,  for 
the  sake  of  touching  at  Lennel,*  and  sometimes  I  meet 
a  Mintonian  there,  looking  out  for  me.’ 

‘March  29,  1810. 

‘I  shall  be  happy,  I  confess,  to  find  myself  at 
Barrackpore  once  more.  I  think  I  have  the  business 
in  as  favourable  a  state  here  as  it  is  reasonable  to  ex¬ 
pect.  The  ways  of  thinking  of  this  army  are  radically 
bad ;  but  there  is  not  a  shadow  of  danger  left,  and  I 
feel  great  confidence  in  the  efficacy  of  all  that  has  been 
done,  in  preventing  any  return  of  the  confederating, 
that  is  to  say,  in  truth,  mutinous  practices,  which  have 
been  witnessed  on  so  many  other  occasions,  There  is 
still,  however,  a  great  deal  more  petty  indiscipline, 
such  as  Coventry  and  insults  to  obnoxious  individuals, 
than  can  be  accounted  military  or  suffered  to  continue. 
But  these  irregular  habits  are  naturally  cultivated  in 
times  of  trouble,  and  they  have  been  kept  in  more  than 
their  usual  or  natural  activity  by  the  irritation  of  the 
courts  martial  sitting  on  the  comrades,  associates,  and 
only  the  other  day  accomplices,  of  those  who  witnessed 
their  proceedings.  The  trials  are  now  all  concluded  ; 
and  that  exciting  cause  being  removed,  a  steady  and 
temperate  course  of  alterative  remedies,  that  is  to  say, 
a  gradual  but  uniform  introduction  of  regular  discipline, 
and  inculcation  of  sound  military  principles,  of  which 
I  have  not  been  sparing,  may  in  my  opinion  accom¬ 
plish  the  object.  The  courts  martial  have  been  very 