

The  operation  mentioned  by  Lady  Malmesbury, 
which  appears  to  have  been  very  doubtfully  neces- 


Ml.  59]  DEATH  OF  WINDHAM.  237 

sary,  was  occasioned  by  the  results  of  an  accident  met 
with  by  Mr.  Windham  in  the  preceding  year. 

‘  One  night,’  wrote  another  correspondent,  ‘  in  the 
beginning  of  July  1809,  as  he  was  returning  home 
alone  and  on  foot  from  the  Miss  Berrys’,  where  he  was 
spending  the  evening,  he  perceived  a  fire ;  and  after 
tracing  it  found  it  next  door  to  the  house  of  his 
friend,  Mr.  North.  The  exertions  he  made  to  save 
different  articles  of  value  showed  all  his  characteristic 
energy.  In  carrying  a  load  of  books  he  fell,  and 
received  a  contusion  on  the  hip.  A  tumour  was  the 
consequence,  and  an  operation  the  conclusion.  His 
constitution  did  not  rally.  He  saw  the  approach 
of  dissolution  without  the  least  unmanly  repining, 
though  he  owned  he  had  many  reasons  for  •wishing  the 
prolongation  of  life,  particularly  in  so  far  as  affected 
Mrs.  Windham.  On  the  evening  before  he  died  he 
signed  a  codicil  to  his  will,  and,  having  done  so,  shook 
hands  with  the  witnesses  with  a  smile  on  his  face,  and 
in  half  an  hour  fell  asleep  never  to  awake  again  in  this 
world.  As  a  statesman,  an  orator,  a  man  of  literature 
and  science,  a  man  of  purity  and  integrity  in  public 
and  private  life,  of  various  accomplishments  and  social 
qualities,  he  has  not  left  his  equal  behind  him. 

‘  Previous  to  the  operation  he  wrote  to  his  friend, 
Ur.  Fisher,  and  told  him  what  he  was  about  to  undergo ; 
that  he  iinderstood  there  was  much  hazard  in  his  case 
either  way,  and  he  very  earnestly  wshed  to  receive  the 
Sacrament,  which  was  accordingly  administered  to  him. 
and  he  expressed  much  satisfaction  in  having  performed 


238 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1810 


this  duty,  as  if  he  expected  that  this  might  be  his  last 
opportunity. 

‘  By  an  observation  in  his  diaiy,  the  day  you  took 
leave  of  him,  he  seems  to  have  had  a  presentiment  that 
you  would  never  meet  again. 

‘  Though  he  reached  the  age  of  sixty,  I  wonder  how 
he  could  accomplish  half  the  manuscripts  he  has  left 
behind  him.  1st,  a  complete  translation  of  De  Thou’s 
history  ;  2nd,  an  immense  body  of  mathematics  ;  and 
lastly,  an  uninterrupted  journal  from  January  1782  to 
within  four  days  of  the  operation  that  proved  fatal 
to  him.  Nothing,  however,  is  likely  to  prove  fit  for 
publication  except  the  mathematical  works,  which  he 
desired,  only  two  days  previous  to  his  death,  to  be 
submitted  to  the  inspection  of  Dr.  King,  Bishop  of 
Eochester.’ 


^T.  59] 


FOREIGN  POLICY. 


239 


CHAPTER  XI. 

The  most  brilliant  chapter  in  Lord  Minto’s  Indian 
government  is  that  of  his  foreign  policy.  When  Mr. 
Canning  declared  that  he  would  call  the  new  world  into 
existence  to  redress  the  balance  of  the  old,  he  expressed 
in  an  effective  phrase  the  spirit  of  the  policy  carried 
out  by  Lord  Minto  in  the  East.  The  conquests  of 
England  in  one  hemisphere  redressed  the  balance  of 
power  in  the  other.  Every  fresh  gain  by  France  in 
Europe  was  followed  by  a  corresponding  loss  in  Asia. 
It  was  the  glory  of  Lord  iMinto’s  administration  that, 
whereas  at  its  commencement  dread  of  a  French  in¬ 
vasion  of  India  haunted  the  imagination  of  statesmen, 
at  its  close  France  had  lost  all  her  acquisitions  eastward 
of  the  Cape.  The  isles  of  Bourbon  and  of  France,  the 
Moluccas,  and  Java,  had  been  added  to  the  colonial 
possessions  of  Great  Britain,  the  fleets  of  France  were 
swept  from  the  Indian  seas,  and  England  was  without  a 
rival  in  the  Eastern  hemisphere. 