

'  John  Clerk  of  Eldin,  ‘  inventor  of  the  modern  system  of  naval 
tactics.' 

^  Hon.  A.  M.  Elliot  to  her  father. 


Mi.  59] 


THE  BROWN  TOAST  CLUB. 


235 


tiful,  the  finest  eyes  I  ever  saw ;  and  her  manner  so  gay 
and  natural  as  well  as  graceful  that  I  rejoiced  I  was 
not  a  man  to  become  her  slave.  The  evil-minded  accuse 
her  and  her  family  of  being  spies  employed  by  Bona¬ 
parte:  certain  it  is  that  the  husband’s  sister  is  established 
here  as  a  person  of  very  considerable  fortune,  and  says 
Bonaparte  gave  her  permission  to  come  to  England  for 
no  given  time ;  but  I  do  not  see  what  they  can  spy,  for 
in  England  nothing  is  a  secret,  or  ever  will  be.  They 
may  tell  him  all  the  Ministers  are  at  variance,  and  the 
country  with  the  Ministers ;  but,  as  to  anything  they 
intend  to  do,  I  suspect  it  is  more  than  they  know  them¬ 
selves.’ 

To  these  cheerful  letters  I^ord  Minto  I’eplied  : 

‘  You  were  Bro^vn  Toasts  at  the  date  of  your  last 
letter  from  Edinburgh,  and  I  think  this  must  be  aliout 
the  pleasantest  part  of  your  lives ;  inasmuch  as  wit, 
and  learning,  and  good  sense,  and  good  humour,  and 
good  character  withal,  which  are  the  portion,  I  believe, 
of  every  member  of  your  Chdi,  make  excellent  four 
hours.  I  shall  be  delighted  to  be  admitted  to  your 
The,  though  not  legally  qualified ;  but  the  black  kettle 
and  brown  toast  would  make  my  outlawed  mouth  water 
if  it  were  only  for  the  base  corporeal  gluttony  of  the 
thing.  So,  Molly,  put  the  kettle  on,  and  I’ll  be  with 
you  in  a  trice.  You  will  find  me  an  old  carle ;  I  really 
am  tired — I  mean  weary ;  and  it  is  fidl  time  I  was  out  of 
harness,  and  without  my  shoes  in  one  of  your  mother’s 
best  improved  grass-parks.  It  would  be  a  vain  attempt 
to  tell  you  how  I  long  for  the  goal  of  my  seven  years’ 


236 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1810 


race.  I  have  been  at  full  speed  the  whole  way,  and  a 
round  or  two  more  would  break  me  down,  I  do  believe.’ 

The  last  fleet  of  1810  brought  to  India  the  dis¬ 
tressing  news  of  the  death  of  Mr.  Windham.  To  Lord 
Minto  it  was  an  irreparable  loss,  for  their  friendship 
had  begun  in  early  life  and  been  faithful  through  long 
years.  No  important  step  had  been  taken  by  the  one 
without  previous  consultation  with  the  other ;  and,  with 
considerable  difference  of  character,  there  had  been  sin¬ 
gular  harmony  in  their  sentiments. 

‘  Windham  expired  at  between  eleven  and  twelve 
o’clock  on  Monday,’ wrote  Lady  Malmesbury  on  June  6. 
‘  He  had  taken  the  opinion  of  eleven  medical  persons 
before  he  consented  to  the  operation,  and  only  one  was 
against  it.  He  is  universally  regretted  by  all  parties 
and  persons.  He  was  of  that  valuable  description  of 
men,  whom  Burke  so  finely  described,  that  become  daily 
more  valuable  as  the  race  becomes  extinct,  for  such  it 
will  be  soon — the  high-minded,  honourable,  true-born 
gentleman ;  and  yet  he  was  an  illegitimate  son,  and  his 
mother  of  the  lowest  description.  As  Fitzharris  said 
to  me,  he  was  one  under  whom,  if  bad  times  came, 
one  might  have  fought  without  fear  of  disgrace.  My 
Dominie  never  left  his  bedside  nor  rested  the  three 
last  nights.’  Another  correspondent  wrote :  ‘  I  am 
assured  by  the  physicians  that  the  solicitude  and 
enquiries  have  been  double  what  were  expressed  for  Mr. 
Pitt  and  Mr.  Fox.’ 