

‘  The  letter  ends  with  some  practical  suggestions  for  improving 
the  condition  of  the  higher  ranks  of  the  army. 

’  To  Lady  Minto. 


226 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809' 


that  undertaking  cannot  be  left  to  Sir  George  and 
General  Gowdie. 

‘  One  is  hated,  indeed  execrated,  though  unjustly, 
yet  heartily.  The  other  does  not  inspire  much  awe. 
I  propose,  therefore,  to  invite  General  Hewitt  here 
immediately.  He  has  all  the  qualities  that  suit  the 
occasion.  His  authority,  which  is  the  highest  military 
authority  in  India,  will  be  respected.  He  has  excel¬ 
lent  military  principles,  abhors  a  departure  from  the 
soundest  military  character,  is  firm,  temperate,  and 
judicious.  We  are  on  a  most  cordial  footing,  and  I 
shall  wait  for  him  here,  and  leave  him  in  charge  with¬ 
out  anxiety  when  we  have  thoroughly  compared  our 
ideas.  Coventry  is  the  order  of  the  day.  Indeed  there 
is  no  other  deviation  from  discipline,  or  none  to  speak 
of.  This  is  closely  connected  -with  the  recent  violence, 
and  if  no  new  exciting  cause,  as  Wilson  calls  it,  be 
created,  the  old  impressions  will  gradually  wear  them¬ 
selves  out,  and  the  effect  will  disappear  with  the  cause.’ 

The  disappearance  could  not  be  counted  upon  so 
long  as  the  courts  martial  continued  in  session,  nor 
until,  by  the  arrival  of  the  Commander-in-chief,  a  mili¬ 
tary  authority  should  have  been  established  superior 
to  that  of  the  very  well-intentioned,  but  not  able  officer 
who  commanded  the  coast  army  in  the  meantime ; 
and  thus  Lord  Minto  remained  at  Madras  for  fourteen 
months. 

The  sentences  in  several  instances  were  not  ap¬ 
proved  by  the  Government,  and  were  suspended  during 
re-consideration ;  and  in  England,  as  in  India,  a  violent 


^T.  59] 


FAMILY  LETTERS. 


227 


controversy  arose  upon  the  general  policy  which  had 
been  observed  towards  the  rebellious  army.  Some 
blamed  it  as  too  severe,  some  as  having  unduly  slack¬ 
ened  the  reins  of  authority.  It  was  no  doubt  due  to 
the  dissensions  on  the  subject  in  the  Court  of  Directors 
that  Lord  Minto  was  left  without  any  official  statement 
of  their  opinions  on  these  weighty  matters  for  more 
than  hoo  years  after  they  took  place. 


228 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


CHAPTER  X. 

Lord  Minto’s  pre-occupations  at  Madras  were  not 
wholly  of  an  unpleasant  kind ;  for,  during  his  residence 
there,  a  marriage  took  place  between  his  youngest  son, 
John,  and  Ameha  Casamaijor,*  a  young  lady  whose  family 
had  long  been  in  friendly  relations  with  that  of  Lord 
Minto.  He  told  his  correspondents  at  home  in  a  very 
amusing  style  of  the  series  of  emotions  which  possessed 
his  whole  being,  and  dispossessed  each  other  during 
the  space  of  one  quarter  of  an  hour ;  from  the  incredu¬ 
lous  horror  with  which  he  had  learnt  that  ‘  the  boy  ’ 
contemplated  matrimony,  through  various  phases  of 
fury  and  amusement,  till  all  culminated  in  a  sudden  but 
profound  conviction,  that  it  was  the  very  best  thing 
that  could  have  happened ;  and  he  found  himself  blessing 
and  kissing  everybody  all  round,  thinking  in  his  heart 
all  the  time  that  it  would  have  been  more  natural  to 
fall  in  love  with  her  mother,  a  very  handsome  woman, 
than  with  a  chit  of  eighteen.  The  marriage  took  place 
at  Madras,  in  December  1809,  and,  besides  being  a 
very  happy  arrangement  for  the  principals,  greatly  con- 