

'  The  residence  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Brydone. 


59] 


PKIVATE  LETTERS. 


231 


soft,  which,  besides  depriving  the  cause  of  discipline 
of  salutary  examples,  has  laid  Government  under  the 
necessity  of  doing  ungracious  things  and  incurring 
odium  which  ought  not  to  have  been  thrown  upon  it, 
by  censuring  and  refusing  to  confirm  sentences  of  too 
much  lenity.  The  courts  martial  have  found  all  those 
who  have  been  tried,  guilty,  except  one  who  is  honour¬ 
ably  acquitted,  directly  contrary  to  evidence  ;  and  those 
who  have  been  convicted  have  only  been  cashiered  for 
the  most  flagrant  and  dangerous  mutiny.  But  I  can¬ 
not  afford  to  write  another  despatch  on  this  subject.’ 

Soon  after  Lord  Minto’s  return  from  Madras  to 
Calcutta,  his  second  son,  George  Elliot,'  following  the 
example  of  his  younger  brother,  married  a  young  lady  of 
great  personal  attractions,  who  was  much  admired  in  the 
society  of  Calcutta.  Like  her  sister-in-law  she  was  im¬ 
mediately  installed  in  apartments  at  the  Government 
House,  which  ‘  was  much  improved  thereby  in  cheerful¬ 
ness  and  comfort.’  ‘  My  reigning  theme  is  my  daughters- 
in-law.  I  cannot  repeat  too  often  that  E.  is  really 
lovely  in  face,  person,  and  character.  There  never  was 
a  more  sweet  and  gentle  disposition ;  and  A.  is  my 
grand  favourite,  with  mirth,  good  temper,  good  sense, 
and  good  character.  I  have  occasion  for  all  the  comforts 
I  can  snatch  ;  for  my  work  is  hard  and  fatigues  both 
body  and  spirit,  not  by  bodily  exercise  but  by  the  effect 
of  mental  labour  on  a  body  entirely  at  rest.  I  am  as 
entirely  done  up  by  ten  o’clock  as  if  I  had  been  all  day 

'  Captain  George  Elliot,  afterwards  Admiral  and  K.C.B.,  married 
in  1810  Eliza,  daughter  of  James  Ness,  Esq. 


232 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[181(> 


on  the  moors,  and  I  am  in  general  too  much  over¬ 
worked  to  be  frosty-mornish.  However,  I  have  a  good 
quiet  sort  of  contentedness,  and  spectator-like  enjoy¬ 
ment  of  all  the  happiness  about  me,  which  serves  my 
turn.  A  few  gulps  of  caller  air  down  our  strath  will 
make  me  too  young  and  oppressive  for  the  best  nerves 
among  you.’ 

A  present  from  his  eldest  daughter  of  Scott’s  last 
poem,  ‘  The  Lady  of  the  Lake,’  gave  him  great  delight. 
‘  I  wish,’  she  wrote  to  him  from  Edinburgh,  where  the 
family  were  spending  the  winter  of  1809-10, — ‘  I  wish 
that  the  Edinburgh  Review  was  to  be  out  before  the 
ships  go,  but  it  will  not.  Mr.  Jelfrey  will  certainly 
review  it  himself,  and  I  cannot  help  thinking  he  will  be 
a  little  puzzled ;  for  he  does  not  like  to  be  scolded  by 
Mrs.  Scott  or  to  hurt  Walter,  though  he  pretends  not 
to  care ;  and  yet  he  is  very  likely  to  bully  himself  into 
being  more  severe  than  he  would  naturally  be,  to  prove 
to  himself  he  really  does  not  care.  It  is  impossible 
for  anybody  that  does  not  know  this  odd  little  man  to 
enter  into  the  merits  of  his  character ;  but  it  is  the 
most  amusing  thing  to  watch  when  you  do  understand 
it,  and  to  observe  all  the  odd  contradictions,  or  seeming 
contradictions,  produced  by  the  same  causes.  It  seems 
a  paradox  to  say  that  he  is  not  in  the  least  ill-natured ; 
and  yet  I  never  knew  an  acquaintance  of  his  that  did 
not  say  the  same  thing,  and  though  he  wonders  how 
anybody  can  be  so  silly  as  to  mind  the  tone  of  ridicule 
he  assumes  and  the  severe  things  he  says  in  his  Reviews, 
he  really  is  sorry  when  they  do.  He  is  very  proud  of 