

‘  Calcutta ;  September  19,  1810. 

‘  I  have  been  forced  to  suspend,  much  longer  than 
I  like,  my  quotidian  plan  of  correspondence  by  two 
reasons,  hard  work  and  constant  attendance,  required 
principally  by  the  expedition  to  the  Isle  of  France, 
which  has  been  pushed  forward  through  many  difficul¬ 
ties,  sometimes  by  absolute  determination  rather  than 
by  visible  means.  I  have  been  pretty  nearly  alone  at 
times  in  thinking  it  practicable  to  make  the  attempt 


^T,  69]  EXPEDITION  TO  THE  FRENCH  ISLANDS.  245 


before  next  April,  a  delay  which  might  probably  have 
been  fatal  to  the  ultimate  success.  If  the  troops  do 
not  rendezvous  off  the  island  in  time  to  attack  by  the 
middle  of  November,  it  is  not  entirely  prudent  to  at¬ 
tempt  it  later,  for  the  violent  hurricanes  which  seem 
to  live  in  those  islands  and  to  come  out,  like  swallows, 
at  certain  seasons,  sometimes  are  experienced  in  the 
course  of  November,  though  seldom  before  the  middle 
of  December;  and,  indeed,  they  will  be  ([uiet  in  their 
caves  sometimes  the  whole  year,  without  taking  the 
trouble  of  coming  abroad  at  all.  Although  it  woidd  be 
hazardous  to  keep  a  large  fleet  of  transports  exposed 
to  these  birds  of  prey,  or  to  land  troops  at  a  time  when 
their  ships  and  stores  may  be  blown  off  or  worse  ;  yet 
single  ships  or  more  which  have  a  port  to  come  to, 
may  run  in  and  bring  succours  during  the  tempestuous 
season,  without  greater  hazard  than  the  object  deserved. 
The  French  accordingly  employ  the  hurricane  months, 
when  the  blockading  squadron  is  obliged  to  cpiit  the 
ground,  to  throw  in  supplies,  and  we  are  informed 
that,  in  consequence  of  the  ap])rehensions  excited  by 
our  late  measures,  the  most  positive  assurances  have 
been  given  to  the  Governor  of  the  Isle  of  France  that 
troops,  military  stores,  and  all  other  means  of  defence 
shall  be  dispatched  from  Europe  this  very  season.  It 
is  of  great  consequence  therefore,  that  we  should  be  at 
Port  Louis  to  receive  such  supjdies  from  France,  rather 
than  IMonsienr  I)e  (^aen.  This  is  one  of  several  reasons 
and  certainly  the  strongest,  which  has  made  me  dam- 
natus  ohstinoAvs  midier  (vide  Cowslip’s  translation), 


246 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1810 


and  determined  me  to  push  off  the  expedition  now, 
whether  it  was  possible  or  not.  The  weight  of  opinions 
Avas  strong  against  me  in  all  quarters,  but  Avhen  once 
the  point  Avas  decided,  all  hands  concurred  lustily  in 
the  execution,  and  lo  and  behold !  everything  is  actu¬ 
ally  afloat.  Three  divisions  of  troops  from  three  Presi¬ 
dencies  are  noAv  on  their  passage,  with  a  very  perfect 
equipment,  having  six  Aveeks  to  perform  a  voyage 
which  may  be  done  in  one  month ;  flve  Aveeks  is  a  fair 
allowance,  so  as  to  arrive  at  Rodriguez  before  Novem¬ 
ber  1.  And  this  reminds  me  of  a  Piedmontese  gentle¬ 
man,  Avho  said  that  he  had  watched  the  quarrels  of 
mides  Avith  men  for  several  years,  but  had  never  in  any 
instance  found  the  mules  in  the  wrong.  Our  fleets 
may  still  be  dispersed  by  bad  weather  on  the  passage ; 
or  some  accident,  not  to  be  foreseen,  may  occasion 
delay ;  but  we  have  done  our  part,  and  there  is  the 
most  reasonable  prospect  of  success.  The  force  is  quite 
equal  to  the  service,  according  to  the  most  prudent 
and  scientific  opinions ;  and  all  the  information  we 
possess,  down  to  a  very  late  date,  avouIcI  make  the  diffi¬ 
culties  less  than  Ave  are  prepared  to  surmount . 