

‘  Even  close  to  [Malacca  the  country  seems  a  forest  of 


^3iT.  60] 


MALACCA. 


263 


lofty  timber.  But  the  timber  has  been  long  since  re¬ 
moved,  and  all  that  are  now  seen  are  fruit-trees,  some 
of  which  are  rather  of  the  forest  than  of  garden  dimen¬ 
sions,  and  under  their  close,  thick  shade  the  Malay  and 
Chinese  peasants  cultivate  their  grounds  with  industry 
and  not  without  skill.  There  are  many  green  drives 
from  three  to  five  and  six  miles  round  in  these  woods, 
and  they  pass  through  a  great  deal  of  beautifid  forest 
scenery.  The  conveyance  here,  as  at  Penang,  is  in  low 
buggies  and  phaetons  drawn  by  Acheen  ponies,  which 
l)ustle  on  with  great  activity  and  at  a  good  rate. 

‘  Mr.  George  has  made  a  number  of  sketclies  which 
will  help  to  fill  up  my  blanks. 

‘  There  are  about  15,000  souls  in  the  town  and 
adjoining  district.  About  two-thirds  of  these  are 
IMalays — that  is  to  say,  natives ;  the  remainder  are  prin¬ 
cipally  Chinese  who  have  been  long  settled,  and  have 
colonised  here  contrary  to  their  usiial  custom,  which  is 
to  ret\irn  to  China  when  they  have  made  a  little  inde¬ 
pendence  to  live  on  at  home.  The  Chinese  emigrants 
never  bring  women  with  them,  but  foregather  with 
Malay  females — mostly  slaves — and  leave  them  behind 
when  they  go  home.  At  iNIalacca  they  have  married 
the  daughters  of  these  Malay  mothers,  and  these,  inter¬ 
marrying,  have  in  a  number  of  generations  converted  the 
Malay  coarse  clay  into  fine  China;  so  that  the  colony  is 
now  whole  blood  on  both  sides  of  the  house,  and  maybe 
accounted  curious  in  that  respect  as  well  as  in  that  of 
the  men  not  b(*ing  emigrants  from  China,  but  descended 
from  emigrant  ancestors  and  born  for  several  generations 


264 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


at  Malacca.  There  are  also  some  remains  of  the  old 
Portuguese  stock.  These  are  very  degenerate,  and  little 
trace  of  European  origin  is  left,  except  their  professing 
the  Catholic  religion.  There  are  people,  both  IMussul- 
man  and  Hindoo,  from  different  parts  of  India  ;  but  the 
most  thriving  class,  though  not  the  most  numerous,  is 
Dutch,  pure,  and  mixed  with  Malay  blood.  The  better 
kind  of  Dutch  are  the  only  substantial  part  of  the  com¬ 
munity.  They  continue,  under  our  Grovernment,  to  fill 
the  principal  offices,  particularly  the  judicial,  Dutch 
law  being  established  by  the  capitulation.  Some  are 
'merchants,  several  of  them  are  well-informed,  respect¬ 
able  people,  and  one  or  two  are  polite,  accomplished 
men.  Of  the  ladies,  the  elder  matrons  preserve  a  smack 
of  the  primitive  Dutch  colonial  fashion  in  dress  and 
manners.  The  daughters  dress,  dance,  and  flirt  very 
much  as  well-educated  young  women  do  in  Europe,  with 
the  advantage  of  being  intensely  and  beautifully  brown. 
You  are  lily-fair  compared  with  the  fairest  of  the 
Batavo-lMalaya  fail’  sex.  My  fidelity,  you  see,  is  put 
to  the  test.  Of  English  there  is  but  a  commandant 
with  one  or  two  officers  and  medical  men  attached  to 
the  small  garrison,  which  consists  of  two  companies  of 
Sepoys  from  Bengal.  Malacca  is  a  dependency  of  the 
Penang  Grovernment. 