


^T.  60] 


PENANG. 


259 


ground  is  magnificent.  I  am  afraid  though,  this  side  the 
Cape  and  far  ayont,  to  say  what  they  measure,  but  thirty 
feet  in  the  girth  is  common.  When  you  see  them  down, 
theyare  stupendous  sticks.  Being  straight,  they  do  not 
furnish  the  most  essential  timbers  for  ship-building  ; 
but  they  are  excellent  masts,  yards,  spars  of  all  sorts. 
The  luxuriance  and  vigour  of  all  the  Eastern  vegetation 
is  scarcely  to  be  conceived  on  your  side  of  the  Cape. 
The  freshness  and  verdure  are  well  maintained  here  by 
showers  like  the  Flood  every  night  in  the  year,  or  the7'eby, 
I  have  found  the  climate,  so  far,  much  more  temperate 
and  even  pleasant  than  1  expected  ;  and  I  reckon  that 
I  shall  skip  a  summer  by  this  trip,  for  in  Bengal  it  is 
at  this  time  the  height  of  the  hot  winds,  which  are  no 
joke.  Here  we  have  gratefid  and  refreshing  winds 
during  the  greatest  part  of  the  twenty-four  hours,  and 
rain  and  pui'gative  thunder,  and  the  sting  is  taken  out 
of  the  tropical  sun. 

‘  Mr.  Seton  was  put  in  possession  of  his  government 
the  day  we  landed,  and  I  took  my  seat  at  the  same 
time  as  Governor  General  in  Council,  converting  this 
small  presidency  into  the  supreme  Government  of  India, 
and  acting  myself  the  part  of  the  great  lady  in  the  httle 
parlour.  There  were  some  few  points  of  business  to 
transact,  and  Penang  will  have  upon  its  consultations 
some  proceedings  of  the  Governor  General  in  Council, 
which  is  an  odd  accident  in  the  history  of  both  Govern¬ 
ments.  We  landed  here  on  the  9th,  and  are  getting 
under  weigh  for  Malacca  on  the  12th — a  short  space  for 
so  long  a  chronicle.’ 


260 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


‘Malacca;  May  31,  1811. 

‘  We  embarked  at  Penang  on  May  12,  and  arrived  at 
Malacca  on  the  18th.  Nothing  remarkable  happened 
on  the  passage.  The  weather  was  a  succession  of  calms 
or  light  winds  and  squall  s,  with  heavy  rain  and  thunder. 
This  is  the  case  pretty  generally  through  the  year 
in  the  Straits  of  Malacca.  .  .  .  The  passage  through 
these  straits  is  made  pretty  and  interesting  by  the  va¬ 
riety  of  islands,  and  by  the  high  coast  of  the  Malay 
peninsula,  which  is  always  in  view,  and  often  at  a  very 
discernible  distance.  Both  the  islands  and  the  main 
are  much  in  the  same  character  as  Penang — moun¬ 
tainous,  and  covered  with  timber,  of  which  there  must 
be  inexhaustible  treasures  in  these  regions.  We  some¬ 
times  had  the  Malay  coast  and  the  mountains  of 
Sumatra  in  sight  at  the  same  time,  to  our  right  and 
left.  At  iNIalacca  we  found  all  the  Bengal  troops 
arrived  .  .  .  the  troops  form  two  camps,  in  dry,  healthy 
situations,  on  the  sea-shore,  close  to  the  water.  One 
is  at  two  miles,  the  other  and  most  considerable  at  six, 
from  the  town,  which  helps  to  defend  them  against  the 
incursions  of  barrack-fever  and  dysentery.  The  camps 
very  much  adorn  and  enliven  the  scenery  of  this  pretty 
bay.  Malacca  stands  on  the  banks  of  a  small  stream, 
about  the  breadth  of  the  Rule  at  Spittal,  but  resem¬ 
bling  it  in  no  other  respect.  The  town  is  built  along 
the  right  bank  of  the  river,  one  side  of  the  houses  pro¬ 
jecting  a  few  feet  over  the  stream,  supported  on  piles, 
which  elevate  them  seven  or  eight  feet  above  the  surface 