


‘Fort  William  :  January  26,  1811. 

‘  I  have  this  morning  received,  by  despatches  from 
Mr.  Farquhar,  the  happy  accounts  of  the  surrender  of 
the  Mauritius.  I  will  not  postpone  my  cordial  congra¬ 
tulations  on  the  fortunate  accomplishment — with  loss 
so  much  less  considerable  than  might  have  been  ex¬ 
pected — of  a  service,  the  most  important  as  it  is  univer¬ 
sally  considered  here,  and  as  in  truth  I  believe  it  to  be, 
that  could  be  rendered  to  the  East  India  Company 
and  the  nation  in  the  East.’ 


60) 


JAVA. 


249 


CHAPTER  XI  r. 

In  a  letter  to  Lady  IMinto,  written  before  the  armament 
destined  to  capture  the  French  islands  had  sailed,  I.iord 
Minto  wrote: — ‘I  have  still,  one  object  more,  in  the 
event  of  a  prosperous  issue  to  the  present  enterprise, 
which  will  fill  up  the  whole  scheme  of  my  warlike  pur¬ 
poses,  and  which  will  purge  the  Eastern  side  of  the 
globe  of  every  hostile  or  rival  European  establish¬ 
ment.’ 

The  first  letter  of  1811  opens  thus: — ‘  We  are  now 
in  the  agony  of  preparation  for  Java  ;  and  I  will  whis¬ 
per  in  your  ear  that  I  am  going  there  myself,  not  to 
command  the  army,  but  to  s(h^  all  the  political  work 
done  to  my  mind. 

‘  “  Modeste  ”  is  to  be  my  state  coach.’ 

‘  Calcutta  ;  February  25,  1811. 

‘  I  am  to  emltark  in  a  few  days  for  IMadras.  I 
shall  then,  I  hope,  proceed  to  Malacca  on  board  the 
“  Modeste.”  '  .  .  .  My  going  in  ptu'son  upon  this  service 
is  not  a  very  usual  measure,  and  my  motives  not  being 
generally  understood,  many  ingenious  conjectures  are, 

'  The  ‘  Modeste,'  commanded  by  Captain  the  Hon.  George  Elliot, 
was  expected  at  Madra.s  from  China  on  JIarch  15. 


250 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA 


[1811 


as  usual,  in  circulation.  The  first  notion  Avas  that  I 
was  going  home,  and  that  my  touching  at  Madras  Avas 
only  a  cover  for  my  retreat;  others  reported  that  I 
was  going  to  the  Mauritius,  and  from  thence  to  visit 
Bencoolen  and  all  the  other  outlying  settlements.  A 
third  conjecture  Avas  that  some  great  fault  had  been 
committed  at  Madras,  and  that  I  was  going  to  set 
things  right  there.  IMy  OAvn  reasons  are  that  there  are 
many  important  points,  regarding  our  future  relations 
Avitli  the  Dutch,  and  Avith  the  native  States  in  Java, 
which  ought  to  be  adjusted  at  the  moment  of  the 
attack ;  that  it  is  impossible  to  obtain  at  this  dis¬ 
tance  the  information  and  materials  on  which  a  satis¬ 
factory  judgment  can  be  formed,  and  which  should 
enable  me  to  issue  instructions  sufficiently  distinct  or 
well-founded  to  meet  all  the  possible  exigencies ;  that 
if  the  general  system  could  be  settled  here,  events 
might  require  modifications  not  to  be  foreseen  or  pro¬ 
vided  for ;  and  lastly,  that,  as  Admiral  Drury  acts  under 
a  distinct  authority  and  is  fond  of  acting  for  himself, 
I  have  no  security  for  the  execution  of  any  plan  I 
might  adopt,  or  any  instructions  which  might  be  given 
by  this  Giovernment.  Upon  the  Avhole,  I  am  of  opinion 
that  I  should  not  perfectly  discharge  my  duty  if  I  did 
not  attend  the  Avhole  affair  in  person ;  and  although  it 
is  not  necessary  that  the  public  should  be  in  possession 
■of  my  motives,  I  have  the  satisfaction  of  knoAving  that 
they  are  entirely  approved  by  my  colleagues  and  other 
men  of  experience  and  judgment  Avith  Avhom  I  have 
communicated  on  the  STibject.  I  have  had  Mr.  Eaffles, 