


60] 


PENANG. 


257 


the  name  found  in  it,  and  felt  comfort  from  the  view 
and  neighbourhood  of  miniature  Kelso. 

‘  The  island  is  about  ten  miles  long,  and,  like  most 
high  islands,  has  a  space  between  the  sea  and  the  moun¬ 
tain  flat  enoiigh  for  cultivation.  The  interior  is  all 
mountain.  In  Penang,  however,  the  plain  is  narrow 
every^vhere,  and  in  a  great  part  of  the  circumference 
the  mountain  comes  down  steep  to  the  very  water,  so 
that  of  this  small  territory  a  very  small  proportion  can 
be  cultivated  or  even  inhabited.  The  principal  plain 
was  made  the  seat  of  the  settlement  ;  and,  considering 
that  it  was  desert  twenty-five  years  ago  when  it  came 
into  our  possession,  great  progress  has  been  made  both 
in  useful  and  ornamental  improvements.  The  popula¬ 
tion  is  called  in  round  mimbers  30,000  souls — of  which 
two-thirds  are  Chinese,  the  rest  Malays,  people  from 
the  coast  of  Coromandel  and  other  parts  of  India,  con¬ 
victs  from  Bengal — a  garrison  of  Bengal  Sepoys  of  about 
1,000  men,  and  about  100  English  gentlemen  and  sea¬ 
faring  2)eople.  The  whole  of  this  community  may  be 
considered  as  industrious,  for  without  industry  they 
could  not  live  ;  but  tlie  Chinese  are  superior  to  all  other 
Easterns  in  industry  and  ingenuity.  Agriculture  and 
most  of  the  handicraft  and  mechanic  trades  are  in  the 
hands  of  the  Chinese.  Georgetown  is  well  and  regu¬ 
larly  Imilt — the  fort  is  little  more  than  nominal.  1 
presume  you  know  that  Pulo  Penang  is  the  native 
name  of  Prince  of  Wales’  Island. 

‘  Upon  the  cession  of  the  island  the  English  colours 
happened  to  be  hoisted  on  August  12,  the  Prince’s 

s 


258 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


birthday,  and  hence  this  new  part  of  Her  Majesty’s 
dominions  received  his  name. 

‘One  of  the  favourite  sights  is  a  flour-mill  and  bak¬ 
ing  establishment  invented  and  executed  by  a  Chinese. 
There  is  nothing  very  ciurions  or  difficult  in  the  ma¬ 
chinery;  but  the  estabhshment  is  on  a  great  scale,  and 
owes  its  success  not  only  to  the  ingenuity,  but  to  the 
capital  and  to  the  very  liberal  spirit  of  enterprise  of  the 
owner ;  —  to  crown  all,  the  bread  is  preferred  by  the  navy 
to  anything  they  had  even  in  England.  There  is  a  good, 
regularly  built  road  from  Gleorgetown  to  the  furthest 
extremity  of  the  island,  and  there  are  extremely  pretty 
green  lanes,  smooth  and  safe  for  buggies  or  little  phae¬ 
tons.  The  horses  are  universally  little  Acheen  ponies, 
an  excellent  and  handsome  breed  of  the  smallest  fairy¬ 
like  horses  you  ever  saw,  from  the  great  island  of 
Sumatra,  and  particularly  from  Acheen,  one  of  its  king¬ 
doms.  What  struck  my  Scotch  mind  most  forcibly  at 
Penang  is  the  timber  which  covers  every  inch  of  the 
surface  not  under  cidtivation.  I  am  certain  that  your 
poor,  diminutive  European  imagination  never  conceived 
such  trees  and  such  innumerable  multitudes  of  them. 
They  stand  as  close  to  each  other  over  the  whole  moun¬ 
tain  as  a  larch  plantation  that  never  was  thinned.  The 
height  of  the  bole  before  it  loses  the  character  of  timber 
may  be  called,  one  with  another,  150  feet.  They  are 
thick  enough  at  this  height  for  the  mainmast  to  a  large 
ship.  They  are  in  general  perfectly  straight  and  withoiit 
branch  for  seventy  feet  high.  The  thickness  near  the 