


JEt.  60]  PEEPARATIONS  FOE  DEPAETUEE.  251 

secretary  to  the  Government  of  Prince  of  Wales’ 
Island,  a  very  clever,  able,  active  and  judicious  man, 
perfectly  versed  in  the  IMalay  language  and  manners, 
and  conversant  with  the  interests  and  affairs  of  the 
Eastern  States,  in  advance  for  some  months  past,  to 
collect  recent  intelligence,  to  open  communications 
with  the  Javanese  chiefs,  and  to  prepare  the  way  for 
our  operations.  I  carry  with  me  good  assistance  of 
every  sort,  though  few  in  number.  Among  these  are 
jMr.  Hope,  brother  of  Sir  John  Hope,  a  tolerable 
Dutchman,  with  excellent  talents  and  habits  of  busi¬ 
ness  ;  Dr.  Leyden,  a  perfect  Malay ;  Mr.  Seton,  now 
resident  at  Delhi,  who  is  to  be  Governor  of  Prince  of 
Wales’  Island  (in  the  room  of  poor  Mr.  Bruce,  Lord 
Elgin’s  brother,  lately  dead),  but  who  will  go  on  with 
me  to  Java.  Nothing  can  exceed  his  talents  except  the 
enthusiasm  of  benevolence  which  marks  his  character. 
I  have  John,  and  Taylor;*  Captain  Kobinson,  who 
married  a  Dutch  beauty  at  the  Cape,  and  mastered  his 
wife’s  tongue  ;  and  Lieutenant  George,  who  is  an  excel¬ 
lent  draughtsman.  .  .  .  The  object  we  have  in  view  is 
of  the  greatest  national  importance,  and  it  is  of  infi¬ 
nite  consequence  that  the  first  political  arrangement 
should  be  made  on  right  principles.  For  this  I  should 
have  been  equally  responsible  if  I  had  remained  at 
Calcutta,  but  I  could  not  have  made  an  adequate  pro¬ 
vision  for  it  by  any  other  course  than  that  I  am  now 
pursuing.  It  is  not  matter  of  taste  or  choice,  but  of 
duty,  or  rather  of  necessity,  that  I  am  going  to  friskify 
'  Captain  Taylor,  military  secretary. 


252 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


in  this  manner,  although  I  confess,  since  it  is  right, 
that  I  never  engaged  in  any  affair  with  greater  interest 
or  with  more  pleasure ;  and  you  will  easily  conceive 
what  a  gratifying  break  this  kind  of  adventure  must 
make  in  the  monotony  of  my  not  less  laborious  life  at 
Fort  William. 

‘  I  expect  to  be  absent  from  Bengal  seven  or  eight 
months  ;  and  of  that  period  I  shall  probably  not  pass 
above  six  weeks  or  two  months  on  land,  so  that,  as  for 
sailing,  I  might  as  well  go  to  England  at  once.’ 

The  next  passages  from  his  journal  are  dated 
‘  “  Morleste"  at  sea :  ’ — ‘  I  have  been  reading  “  Ossian,” 
and  Crabbe’s  “  Borough,”  &c.  I  have  also  with  me 
“  The  Lady  of  the  Lake,’’  and  the  six  volumes  of  Scott’s 
works,  besides  Mr.  Dugald  Stewart’s  new  volume.  His 
matter  is  always  attractive  to  me,  and  his  style  most 
captivating.  Mr.  Fox’s  History,  the  whole  corpus  of 
Latin  poets,  and  Cicero’s  works,  not  to  mention  Dry- 
den’s,  edited  by  Scott.  These  Avith  many  manuscript 
volumes  to  read,  and  some,  alas !  to  write,  will  serve 
me  for  pastime  for  this  trip. 