

‘  March  21. — We  have  thirty  soldiers  of  the  Com¬ 
pany’s  Bengal  European  regiment  sent  on  board  as 
marines.  They  are  all  recruits  just  come  out,  and  all 
boys  of  about  sixteen  or  seventeen  years  of  age, — fine- 
looking  lads,  but  never  having  seen  a  firelock,  without 
clothing,  without  an  officer,  commissioned  or  non-com¬ 
missioned,  or  so  much  as  a  corporal — in  short  the  raw 
raaterial  perfectly  unsophisticated.  John  has  under¬ 
taken  to  manufactulre  the  article,  and  has  accordingly 


^T.  60j 


JOUENAL  AT  SEA. 


253 


been  teaching  them  the  manoeuvres  on  deck  in  great 
style.  .  .  .  We  caught  a  shark  yesterday,  and  a  most 
butchering  business  it  was.  The  shark  would  not  have 
treated  one  of  us  half  so  inhumanly,  but  would  have 
put  us  out  of  our  pain  in  half  the  time. 

‘  April  2. — C - told  me  at  iMadras  that  his  plan 

is  to  consume  what  remains  of  life,  whatever  it  may  be, 
in  the  pursuit  of  fortune  for  his  family,  and  to  be  over¬ 
taken  by  the  gentleman  who  is  coming  up  behind  us 
all,  before  he  has  accomplished  his  object.  My  plan  is 
somewhat  like  his — with  this  difference,  that  I  have 
fixed  a  period,  and  that  I  propose  to  twaddle  a  space 
(I  have  not  settled  how  long)  amongst  you  all.  I 
allow  that  the  gentleman  behind  may  put  out  a  little, 
and  win  the  race  before  1  intend  it ;  but  this  is  no  part 
of  my  plan,  and  I  really  hope  he  will  not  be  so  uncivil 
nor  such  a  marplot.  After  all,  if  the  fellow  should  be 
a  brute,  I  hardly  know  how  I  should  have  the  face  to 
complain,  seeing  that  on  March  23  I  turned  the  corner 
of  three  score,  after  a  happy  and  prosperous  journey  so 
far,  and  seeing  that  much  of  my  plan,  by  far  the  best 
and  most  interesting  part  of  it,  I  mean  what  secures 
comfort  to  those  who  seem  now  to  make  me  live  be¬ 
yond  my  life  and  survive  myself,  will  have  been 
accomplished,  before  the  trouble-fete  could  come  up  to 
spoil  sport.’ 

‘  “  Modeste,”  at  sea,  May  1811. 

‘  Dr.  Leyden’s  learning  is  stupendous,  and  he  is  also 
a  very  universal  scholar.  His  knowledge,  extensive  and 
minute  as  it  is,  is  always  in  his  pocket,  at  his  fingers’ 


254 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


ends,  and  on  the  tip  of  his  tongne.  He  has  made  it 
completely  his  own,  and  it  is  all  ready  money.  All  his 
talent  and  labonr  indeed,  which  are  both  excessive,  could 
not,  however,  have  accnmulated  such  stores  without  his 
extraordinary  memory.  I  begin,  I  fear,  to  look  at  that 
faculty  with  increasing  wonder ;  I  hope  without  envy, 
but  something  like  one’s  admiration  of  young  eyes.  It 
must  be  confessed  that  Leyden  has  occasion  for  all  the 
stores  which  application  and  memory  can  furnish,  to  sup¬ 
ply  his  t-ongne,  which  would  dissipate  a  common  stock 
in  a  week.  I  do  not  believe  that  so  great  a  reader  was 
ever  so  great  a  talker  before.  Yon  may  be  conceited 
about  yourselves,  my  beautiful  wife  and  daughters, 
but  with  all  my  partiality  I  must  give  it  against  yon. 
Yon  would  appear  absolutely  silent  in  his  company,  as 
a  ship  under  weigh  seems  at  anchor  when  it  is  passed 
by  a  swifter  sailer.  Another  feature  of  his  conversation 
is  a  shrill,  piercing,  and  at  the  same  time  grating  voice. 
A  frigate  is  not  near  large  enough  to  place  the  ear  at 
the  proper  point  of  hearing.  If  he  had  been  at  Babel 
he  woidd  infallibly  have  learned  all  the  languages  there, 
but  in  the  end  they  must  all  have  merged  in  the 
Tividale  How,^  for  not  a  creature  would  have  got 
spoken  but  himself.  I  must  say  to  his  honour  that  he 
has  as  intimate  and  profound  a  knowledge  of  the  geo¬ 
graphy,  history,  mutual  relations,  religion,  character, 
and  manners  of  every  tribe  in  Asia  as  he  has  of  their 
language.  On  the  present  occasion  there  is  not  an 
island  or  petty  state  in  the  multitude  of  islands  and 