

‘  This  account  of  Malacca  is  for  ordinary  times.  At 
present  we  have  a  great  fleet  and  army  officered  by 
English  gentlemen ;  we  have  also  my  establishment, 
including  Mr.  Raffles,  who  has  a  pretty  numerous  family, 
Mrs.  Raffles  is  the  great  lady,  with  dark  eyes,  lively 


Mt.  60] 


MALACCA. 


265 


manner,  accomplished  and  clever.  She  had  a  former 
husband  in  India  ;  and  I  have  heard,  but  am  not  sure  of 
the  fact,  that  she  was  one  of  the  beauties  to  whom 
Anacreontic  INloore  addressed  many  of  his  amatory 
elegies.  .  .  . 

‘  I  have  mustered  the  whole  female  community  of 
Malacca  art  a  ball,  for  I  am  now  writing  on  June  7.  I 
celebrated  the  King’s  birthday  by  a  levee  in  the  fore¬ 
noon,  a  great  dinner  to  all  mankind,  and  a  ball  in  the 
evening  to  all  womankind.  I  escaped  during  the  first 
dance,  having  had  enough  of  the  day  by  the  earlier 
festivities ;  and  I  slept  that  night  up  in  George’s  bun¬ 
galow  to  be  oiit  of  earshot  of  the  fiddlers.  One  of  the 
pleasantest  j^arts  of  the  celebration  took  place  privately 
after  the  levee.  T  released  all  the  Government  slaves  at 
IMalacca,  presenting  to  each  with  my  own  hand  a  cer¬ 
tificate  of  their  freedom,  and  four  dollars  to  provide  for 
their  immediate  sulisistence  till  they  can  get  into  some 
way  of  life.  Tliey  ha\e  also  the  option  of  resuming 
their  former  state  if  they  find  a  difficulty  in  maintaining 
themselves.  They  are  only  nineteen  in  number,  male 
and  female,  of  all  ages,  from  infants  in  arms  to  old, 
helpless  people.  INIost  of  them  were  born  slaves  to  the 
Dutch  Company,  some  to  the  English,  and  all  their 
children  would  have  continued  slaves.  Slavery  is  esta¬ 
blished  in  all  these  couuti'ies  to  a  shocking  extent.  An 
insolvent  debtor,  however  small  his  debt,  is  condemned 
to  be  the  slave  of  the  creditor.  Some  have  been  slaves 
for  life  for  100  or  200  dollars,  and  if  the  sum  is  consider¬ 
able  the  whole  family  shares  the  same  fate.  IMen  may 


266 


LORI)  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


gamble  their  children,  their  wives,  and  lastly  them¬ 
selves  into  slavery,  in  satisfaction  of  bets  upon  fighting 
cocks,  or  any  other  gambling  debt ;  and  nothing  is  more 
common.  If  a  criminal  is  condemned  to  slavery,  his 
Avhole  family  goes  with  him  ;  or,  if  he  is  put  to  death, 
the  wife  and  children,  young  and  old,  after  mtnessing 
the  execution,  are  sold  into  slavery — the  mother  to  one 
master,  the  children  to  others.  I  speak  now,  not  of 
INIalacca,  but  of  other  Malay  countries,  including  Java. 
I  hope  something  may  be  done — -partly  by  authority, 
partly  by  influence — to  mitigate  these  horrors  ;  in  the 
meanwhile  the  people  of  IMalacca  have  been  told  and 
have  seen  that  the  English  think  no  man  should  be 
deprived  of  his  liberty  except  criminals.  Another 
proof  has  been  given  to  them  that  we  dislike  cruelty. 
Finding  some  instruments  of  torture  still  preserved, 
although  they  have  been  long  disused,  I  had  the  cross 
upon  which  criminals  were  broken,  and  another  wooden 
instrument  that  had  served  as  a  sort  of  rack,  burnt 
under  the  windows  of  a  room  from  which  executions  are 
seen  by  the  magistrates,  where  I  and  the  magistrates 
Avere  assembled  for  the  purpose ;  and  at  the  same  time 
various  iron  articles  for  screwing  thumbs,  wrists,  and 
ankles,  and  other  contrivances  of  that  diabolical  sort, 
Avere  carried  out  in  a  boat  by  the  executioner  into  the 
roads,  and  sunk  in  deep  Avater,  never  to  rise  or  screw 
poor  people’s  bones  and  joints  again. 