

None  of  the  officers  who  have  served  against  Bourbon 
consider  the  event  as  in  any  degree  doubtful.  .  .  .  We 
ought  not  therefore  to  fail,  although  War  is  a  fine 
lady  and  too  capricious  to  be  entirely  depended  upon.’ 

A  month  after  the  expedition  had  sailed  from 
India,  instructions '  were  received  from  home,  re- 

'  From  the  Right  Hon.  R.  Dundas,  dated  June  13,  1810. 


JEt.  69]  EXPEDITION  TO  THE  FEENCH  ISLANDS.  247 

commending'  the  measure  which — wrote  Lord  Minto — 
‘  a  strong  sense  of  duty  to  the  public  had  induced  him 
to  adopt  under  a  heavy  responsibility.’  ‘  About  the  time 
your  letter  reached  Fort  William,’  he  wrote  to  Mr. 
Dundas,*  ‘you  had  probably  received  in  London  ac¬ 
counts  of  the  surrender  of  the  Island  of  Bourbon  ;  and 
the  expedition  against  the  Mauritius  had  been  des¬ 
patched  from  the  three  Presidencies  a  month  before 
I  had  the  honour  to  receive  your  commands. 

‘  The  change  which  has  taken  place  in  the  finances 
of  the  Company  in  India  since  1807  has  removed  all 
the  difficulties  which  then  existed  in  the  supply  from 
hence  of  pecuniary  funds  for  the  expedition.  The 
remarkable  improvement  which  has  happened  in  that 
branch  of  our  affairs,  and  the  present  flourishing  state 
of  our  finances,  I  believe  unexampled,  afford  no  motive 
for  undertaking  chargeable  and  unnecessary  operations ; 
but  these  circumstances  do  certainly  remove  from 
measures  which  are  expedient  and  important,  the  ob¬ 
stacles  of  pecuniary  embarrassment ;  especially  when 
the  Company  is  only  required'  to  make  the  advances, 
without  being  ultimately  charged  with  the  burden,  as 
in  the  present  instance. 

‘  Let  me  here  indulge  the  flattering  hope  that, 
while  the  amount  of  this  armament  must  give  a  satis- 
facfory  proof  of  the  Company’s  resources  in  India,  .  .  . 
the  perfect  tranquillity  which  has  been  maintained  in 
the  absence  of  so  large  a  body  of  troops,  principally 
His  Majesty’s  regiments,  may  afford  views  not  less 

*  To  the  Right  Hon.  R.  Dundas,  Jan.  1,  1811. 


248 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


favourable,  first,  of  oiir  political  state  without,  and 
next  of  that  more  important  point  of  our  security, 
which  depends  upon  the  entire  suppression  of  recent 
troubles  within.  The  expedition  against  Bourbon, 
composed  entirely  of  troops  from  the  establishment  of 
Fort  St.  Greorge,  sailed  from  Madras  roads  the  day  on 
which  I  myself  took  leave  of  the  coast.  I  certainly 
could  not  have  ventured  such  a  measure,  if  notwith¬ 
standing  some  vexations  and  disgusts  down  to  the  latest 
period,  which  might  be  regarded  as  the  dregs  of  former 
disorder,  1  had  not  confidently  relied  on  the  stability  of 
those  considerations,  stated  at  the  time  to  the  Secret 
Committee,  on  which  my  conviction  rested  of  the  effec¬ 
tual  suppression  of  insubordination  and  disloyalty  in 
the  Madras  army.  It  cannot  but  be  matter  of  public 
gratification  that  these  sentiments  have  been  con¬ 
firmed  by  every  subsequent  event. 