


'  How,  twang. 


^T.  60] 


LEYDEN. 


255 


nations  amongst  which  we  are  going,  of  which  he  has 
not  a  tolerably  minute  and  correct  knowledge. 

‘  His  conversation  is  rather  excursive ;  because,  on 
his  way  to  the  point  of  enquiry,  he  strikes  aside  to  some 
collateral  topic,  and  from  thence  diverges  still  wider 
from  the  original  object.  I  have  often  tried  without 
success  to  fix  him  to  the  point  in  hand,  and  the  only 
way  has  been  a  more  peremptory  call  than  I  like  to  use, 
especially  to  one  whom  I  like  and  esteem  so  highly. 
But  nothing  can  differ  more  widely  from  his  conversa¬ 
tion  in  this  respect  than  his  writing.  His  pen  is  sober, 
steady,  concise,  lucid,  and  well  fed  with  useful  as  well 
as  curious  matter.  His  reasoning  is  just,  his  judgment 
extremely  sound,  and  his  principles  always  admirable. 
His  mind  is  upright  and  independent,  his  character 
spirited  and  generoiis  with  a  strong  leaning  to  the 
chivalrous ;  and  in  my  own  experience  I  have  never 
found  any  trace  either  of  Avrong  head,  or  of  an  imprac¬ 
ticable  or  unpleasant  temper.  The  only  little  blemish 
I  have  sometimes  regretted  to  see  in  him  is  a  disposi¬ 
tion  to  egotism  ;  not  selfishness — but  a  propensity  to 
bring  the  conversation  from  whatever  quarter  it  starts 
round  to  himself,  and  to  exalt  his  own  actions,  sufferings, 
or  adventures  in  a  manner  a  little  approaching  the 
marvellous.  I  have  indulged  myself  in  this  portrait 
because  I  feel  an  interest  which  I  know  you  all  share  in 
so  distinguished  a  worthy  of  Teviotside.’  * 

*  Dr.  Leyden  was  born  of  humble  parentage  in  the  village  of 
Denholm,  Roxburghshire.  In  his  native  districthe  is  best  remembered 
as  the  author  of  Scenes  of  Infancy  and  other  poems.  A  graceful 
monument  was  erected  to  his  memory  at  Denholm  a  few  years  ago. 


256 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


‘  Penang,  Prince  of  Wales’  Island  :  May  12,  1811. 

‘  Mr.  Bruce,  Tjord  Elgin’s  brother,  was  the  last 
Governor  of  Prince  of  Wales’  Island  ;  and  his  death, 
which  is  much  and  justly  lamented,  placed  the  senior 
member  of  Council,  Mr.  Phillips,  provisionally  in  the 
chair.  We  were  received  therefore  by  him,  and  carried 
immediately  to  liis  house  about  two  miles  from  George 
Town,  the  only  place  to  be  called  a  town  in  the  island. 
Mr.  Phillips  is  magnificently  lodged  ;  and  his  house, 
which  he  built  himself,  is  one  of  the  handsomest  I  have 
seen  in  India.  .  .  .  This  mansion  is  not  quite  propor¬ 
tioned  to  the  island,  and  looks  like  the  great  lady  in 
the  little  parlour.  The  situation  is  beautiful — on  the 
bank  of  a  running  stream  fresh  from  mountain  springs. 
Beyond  the  stream  the  plain  extends  perhaps  a  quarter 
of  a  mile  to  the  foot  of  a  sublime  mountain,  and  not 
more  sublime  than  beautiful,  steep,  craggy,  broken  into 
smaller  hills,  and  the  whole  covered  with  the  most 
magnificent  wood,  interspersed  with  underwood,  and 
here  and  there  vacant  spaces  which  are  green  and 
flourishing.  On  the  otlier  side  of  the  stream  stands 
Kelso — a  bungalow  or  cottage  built  by  Scott  of  Raeburn’s 
eldest  son,  who  gave  his  house  and  ground  that  name, 
because  the  little  stream  divides  itself  into  two  branches 
and  forms  a  sort  of  microscopic  Tweed  and  Teviot, 
principally  I  presume  from  love  and  affection  for  home, 
which  is  brought  to  mind  by  slight  affinities.  I  ex¬ 
perienced  something  of  the  pleasure  which  the  giver  of 
the  name  found  in  it,  and  felt  comfort  from  the  view 