


JEt.  60j 


MALACCA. 


261 


of  the  water.  This  gives  the  place  in  that  quarter 
rather  an  amphibious  appearance.  The  town  runs 
down  to  the  edge  of  the  sea,  and  runs  back  in  the 
direction  of  the  beach,  sometimes  advancing  into  the 
tide  upon  piles,  sometimes  leaving  a  handsome  terrace 
between  the  houses  and  the  water. 

‘  (3n  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river,  close  also  to  the 
sea,  the  Portuguese  built  a  small  fort,  on  their  acqui¬ 
sition  of  the  place  in  the  sixteenth  century.  The  Dutch 
dispossessed  them  in  the  following  century,  and  main¬ 
tained  everything  as  it  was.  We  came  next,  about 
sixteen  years  ago,  and  by  orders  from  home  have  pulled 
down  the  fort.  This  work  of  destruction  has  been  very 
recently  accomplished,  at  considerable  expense — a  most 
useless  piece  of  gratuitous  mischief,  as  far  as  I  can 
understand  the  subject.  The  ruins  of  the  Avails  remain, 
and  Avill  long  transmit  a  memorial  of  the  narroAv,  and 
Avhat  is  felt  by  the  people  here  to  be  the  malevolent, 
policy  displayed  by  England  to  this  new  portion  of  her 
dominions.  The  (TOA^ernment  House,  hoAve\'er,  built 
by  the  Portuguese,  and  a  church  erected  by  the  Dutch 
Avithin  the  limits  of  the  fort,  are  still  on  foot,  together 
Avith  a  feAv  other  buildings,  public  and  priA'ate.  I 
iidiabit  the  Government  House,  Avhich  is  not  magni¬ 
ficent,  but  ansAvers  my  purposes  perfectly  in  most 
respects.  Puit  it  staiids  at  the  foot  of  a  steep  hill, 
Avhich  covers  the  Avhole  tenement  from  the  sea.  Noav 
as  the  sea-breeze  is  in  these  climates  the  true  vitcd  air, 
and  as  delicious  as  the  gas  of  Paradise,  suffocation  is 
our  portion  at  the  GoA’ernment  House.  As  I  see  you 


262 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


gasping  at  this  account,  and  opening  all  the  windows  in 
spite  of  Elliot  of  Wells,  it  will  give  your  ladyship  great 
satisfaction  to  find  that  the  hill  makes  amends  for  the 
harm  it  does  below,  by  supporting  up  in  the  air  very  near 
the  top  a  small  bungalow,  composed  of  one  room  and 
an  open  verandah,  fronting  the  sea.  Greorge  is  the  real 
owner ;  but  the  dutiful  boy  permits  me  to  sit  in  the 
verandah  from  breakfast  to  dinner,  and  has  thereby, 
beyond  a  doubt,  prolonged  my  life  almost  a  fortnight 
already.  It  is  in  this  verandah  that  he  and  I  are  at 
present,  writing  love-letters  to  our  absent  wives.  We 
swallow  the  breeze  fresh  from  the  sea,  and  the  climate 
is  entirely  disarmed.  The  prospect,  too,  is  a  re¬ 
freshing  one  to  the  eye,  and  possesses  beauty  on  shore 
and  on  sea.  We  have  the  roads  with  all  the  ship¬ 
ping  and  a  string  of  small  islands  in  front;  to  the 
right  we  have  a  bird’s-eye  view  of  the  little  river  and 
town  beyond  ;  the  coast,  wooded  down  to  the  water, 
runs  curving  and  waving,  and  throwing  out  pretty  pro¬ 
jecting  points,  made  interesting  by  the  camps  at  different 
distances ;  the  whole  backed  inward  from  the  sea  by  an 
uneven  plain,  springing  first  into  elevations,  then  hills, 
and  at  length  high  mountains  in  the  distance ;  all 
clothed  near  the  eye  with  the  richest  vegetation  and 
verdure,  and,  far  as  well  as  near,  with  one  universal  wood. 
Of  the  distant  mountains  the  most  important  is  Mount 
Ophir,  which  has  pretensions,  of  which  I  will  not  pretend 
to  judge,  to  be  the  true  Mount  Ophir.  Certain  it  is 
that  gold  is  collected  there  at  this  day. 