

‘  From  Malacca  the  “  Modeste  ”  was  accompanied  by 
the  schooner  “  hlinto,”  a  vessel  attached  to  me,  and  con¬ 
taining  Dr.  Leyden  Avith  a  number  of  Malay  moonshees 
or  interpreters  and  writers  of  that  learned  language.  She 
is  commanded  by  Captain  Glreig,  a  remarkably  intelH- 
gent  country  ship-master,  who  is  perfectly  at  home  in 
the  eastern  seas.  He  has  already  been  of  the  greatest 
use,  both  by  missions  to  some  islands  adjacent  to  Java; 
and  more  particularly  by  having  pointed  out  the  passage 
which  Ave  are  now  making  to  .Java,  and  ascertained  its 


Mt.  60] 


PANAMBANGAN. 


279 


practicability  by  actual  survey  himself.  While  thus 
engaged  he  was  attacked  by  a  very  strong  Pirate  Prow, 
whom  he  beat  off  with  difficulty  and  with  the  loss  of 
several  killed  and  a  greater  number  wounded.  .  .  . 
Greig  is  a  plain,  modest,  unassuming  Fife-man,  with 
excellent  natural  parts  and  character,  such  as  “  Caly- 
donia,  altrix  terra  exuberaiitium  virum,’  so  often  sends 
from  her  lower  ranks  to  all  the  quarters  of  the  globe. 
Greig  is  ennobled,  however,  by  another  exuberant  member 
of  his  family,  who  sent  home  honour  and  reputation  to 
his  stock  from  Russia  and  the  Archipelago, — Admiral 
Greig  himself,  who  was  a  near  relation  of  our  Greig  of 
the  “  IMinto  ”  schooner.  .  .  . 

‘ .  .  .  I  return  to  Panambangan,  where  our  gay  fleet 
encampments  on  shore,  and  all  the  occupations  which 
this  halt  afforded,  would  make  a  mighty  good  engraGng 
to  illustrate  this  chapter  of  my  journal  when  it  is 
published,  as  it  will  be  by  my  executors,  in  quarto, 
price  ten  guineas. 

‘  You  must  know,  fresh  fish  is  a  great  treat  at  sea, 
and  with  this  luxury  we  solaced  ourselves  and  the  crew. 
There  were  oysters  also,  but  none  fell  to  my  share  ;  but 
do  not  imagine  our  pleasures  were  confined  to  the 
table ;  for  we  gratified  our  higher  tastes  and  improved 
our  minds  and  morals  at  the  Theatre.  A  play  has 
been  performed  every  Saturday  evening  by  His  Majesty’s 
servants  on  board  His  Majesty’s  Ship  “  Modeste,”  and 
when  the  fleet  was  collected  at  Panambangan  the 
house  was  crowded  with  rank  and  fashion.  I  omit 
beauty,  because  the  manager  admits  no  female  either 


•280 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


before  or  behind  the  curtain ;  so  that  we  enjoy  the 
moral  entertainment  of  stage  plays  in  all  its  purity. 
T  was  never  near  so  well  amused  at  any  other  perform¬ 
ance  of  amateurs.  It  is  really  surprising  to  observe 
the  propriety  with  which  these  rough,  uninstructed, 
unassisted  sailors  represent  all  the  varieties  of  character 
which  are  found  in  comedy,  and,  amongst  the  rest, 
young,  accomplished,  and  generally  sentimental  ladies 
of  quality;  rendering  vdth  perfect  justness  all  that 
concerns  nature,  failing  only  in  what  is  artificial  and 
arbitrary,  as  in  the  extraordinary  work  they  make  of 
what  appears  to  us  very  ordinary  words  of  the  English 
language.  We  now  hear  exqtiisitive  for  exquisite, 
etiquity  for  etiquette,  and  axe  for  ask,  with  as  little 
prejudice  to  the  play  or  the  performer  as  a  Scotch 
vowel  or  phrase  is  heard  in  the  House  of  Commons  from 
an  eloquent  member  for  Scotland.  .  .  . 