


JEt.  60] 


MALACCA. 


273 


appearance  of  pomposity  or  lofty-lieadedness ;  but  tliere 
was  real  modesty  and  kindly  expression.  .  .  .  Xow  as 
long  as  Lord  Minto  remained  in  ^Malacca  he  took  a 
round  in  his  carriage  every  evening,  one  day  visiting 
the  mosque,  another  the  t'hinese  Joss-house,  another 
the  Dutch  and  Portuguese  ('hurches ;  and  wherever  he 
was  met  by  rich,  poor,  or  low,  they  stopped  to  make 
their  bow,  which  he  returned  with  good-humour  and 
courtesy,  without  the  slightest  shadow  of  pomposity.’ 

Lord  Minto’s  visit  to  the  debtors’  prison  is  related 
with  much  sympathy  and  great  amplifications.  One 
fact  told  by  Al)dulla,  which  we  do  not  find  in  the  cor¬ 
respondence,  is  worthy  of  mention  ;  namely,  that  when 
the  cells  of  the  filthy  dungeon  were  destroyed,  a  new 
gaol  was  built  in  its  place  which  was  ‘  a  residence  free 
of  all  annoyances  but  one,  that  you  could  not  get  out 
of  it.’ 

We  learn  from  the  editor  of  Abdulla’s  autobiography 
that,  ‘as  a  memento  of  the  deliverance  of  the  prisoners, 
and  of  other  high-minded  acts  at  Malacca,  Lord  Minto’s 
portrait  was  procured  and  hung  up  in  the  resident 
magistrate’s  office,  where  he  is  represented  as  breaking 
the  shackles  of  cruelty.  When  I  saw  it  in  1848  1 
viewed  it  with  great  curiosity.  The  climate  had  so 
destroyed  the  colours  that  it  might  have  served  for  a 
black  Madonna.’ 

‘  H.M.S.  “  Modeste,”  off  Java  :  ended  August  3,  181 1. 

‘  The  fleet  having  at  length  assembled  at  ^Malacca 
it  was  despatched  towards  its  destination  in  a  number 

T 


274 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


of  small  divisions,  which  sailed  successively,  each  under 
charge  of  a  frigate,  and  attended  also  by  sloops  of  war  or 
Company’s  cruizers.  The  “Modeste  ”  was  not  attached 
to  any  division,  and,  being  sure  of  overtaking  the 
earliest  and  swiftest,  we  remained  at  anchor  till  the 
whole  had  departed.  The  fleet  consisted  of  81  sail 
of  all  descriptions,  and  it  was  despatched  in  many 
divisions  because  we  had  several  narrow  straits  and 
difficult  passes  before  us,  which  must  have  occasioned 
confusion,  and  probably  accident  and  loss,  if  so  large  a 
body  of  shipping  had  kept  together.  This  voyage  is 
made  interesting  by  the  very  positive  opinions  which 
Admiral  Drury  had  given  himself,  and  had  managed 
to  obtain  a  countenance  to  from  several  quarters  of 
authority  on  such  questions,  that  it  was  absolutely 
impracticable  to  make  a  passage  to  Java  with  a  fleet  of 
transports,  if  it  should  sail  from  Madras  later  than 
March  1 .  It  was  with  this  opinion  that  I  had  to  con¬ 
tend,  pushing  forward  the  expedition  in  the  present 
season,  although  it  could  not  take  its  departure  so  soon 
as  the  day  fixed  by  the  Admiral,  by  six  weeks  accord¬ 
ing  to  my  expectations,  and,  as  it  has  proved  on  trial, 
by  two  months.  The  result  has  furnished  another 
testimony  in  favour  of  the  virtue  called  obstinacy, 
which  is  entitled  by  success  to  the  more  polite  name 
of  firmness.  The  difficulty  was  this.  As  soon  as  what 
is  called  the  south-east  monsoon  in  the  eastern  seas 
sets  in,  the  wind  blows  hard  and  pretty  steadily  from 
the  east  along  the  channel  between  the  north  of  Java 
and  the  south  of  Borneo ;  it  blows  to  the  north-west 