


Mr.  60] 


‘  IIAKAYIT  ABDULLA.’ 


269 


face  are  identically  the  same,  for  iNIalays  are  all  exactly 
like  each  other.  Some  people  think  very  seriously 
that  the  oran-ontang  was  the  original  patriarch  and 
progenitor  of  the  whole  Malay  race,  and  there  is  cer¬ 
tainly  a  good  deal  to  he  said  on  both  sides.  It  is 
true  the  oran-ontang  has  one  manifest  advantage  over 
his  degenerate  posterity,  having  fonr  hands  instead  of 
two,  and  this  is  the  principal  difference.  My  Avild  man 
is  but  a  boy — indeed,  a  baby ;  but  he  is  much  larger 
than  any  monkey  I  ever  saw.  He  is  also  too  much 
civilised  to  deserve  the  name  of  wild.  I  saw  him  yes¬ 
terday  sitting  on  a  stool,  and  eating  his  rice  on  a  table 
like  a  Christian  gentleman.’ 

While  Lord  .'Minto  was  watching  the  gay  and 
moving  scene  from  the  Iningalow  on  the  hill,  it  was 
attracting  the  curious  gaze  of  the  natives  of  ^Malacca, 
who  had  never  before  assisted  at  pareille  fete,  and 
he  himself  was  more  closely  scanned  by  an  observant 
eye  than  he  was  at-  all  aware  of. 

A  most  entertaining  narrative  of  the  arrival  at 
Malacca  of  the  expedition,  consisting  of  ninety  sail, 
carrying  6,000  Kuropean  and  6,000  native  troops, 
forms  a  chapter  in  the  autobiography  of  a  IMalay, 
Abchdla  by  name,  Avhich  was  translated  by  the  well- 
known  vuiter  Mr.  .1.  T.  Thomson,  b  .K.fr.S.,  and 
published  about  six  years  ago.*  From  it  we  shall  ven¬ 
ture  to  (piote  a  few  passages  to  complete  the  narrative- 
contained  in  the  letters. 

'  Under  the  title  of  ‘  Hakayit  Abdulla.’ 


270 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


Abdulla  was  only  fourteen  years  of  age  at  tire  time  ; 
yet,  in  his  description  of  their  camps,  he  is  said  to  have 
painted  the  Sepoys  to  the  life ;  and  in  the  few  lively 
touches  with  Avhich  he  puts  before  us  the  English 
officers,  and  the  Grovenior  Gleneral  himself,  we  are  able 
to  recognise  the  photographic  fidelity  of  his  sketches. 

‘  They  erected  their  tents  from  Lambongan  as  far 
as  Tanjong  Kling,  this  without  break,  each  with  their 
entrances.  And  amongst  these  were  various  races  of 
Hindoos  and  Mussulmans ;  and  I  saw  some  who  ate 
like  dogs,  to  wit,  they  licked  their  food  with  their 
tongues;  while  there  were  others  who,  on  being  seen 
eating,  would  throAV  the  food  away,  and  chase  you  as  if 
they  would  kill  you,  they  were  so  angry.  There  were 
some  who  only  half-heated  the  food,  and  ate  it  then,, 
covered  with  perspiration  as  if  bathing  in  it.  And 
when  they  had  eaten,  they  buried  the  rice  and  curry 
that  was  over  in  the  sand.  And  there  were  others  who 
tied  three  strands  of  thread  round  their  body  before 
they  ate,  nor  did  they  stop  eating  till  the  thread  had 
broken.  There  were  others  who  took  white  and  red 
earth  and  smeared  it  on  their  breasts,  with  three  stripes 
on  their  arms  and  brow ;  then  they  bowed  themselves 
in  front,  then  to  the  right  and  to  the  left,  then  to  the 
back,  then  off  they  ran  into  the  sea,  and  worshipped 
the  sun  for  some  time,  turning  their  faces  to  the  right 
and  left.  Then  they  came  ashore,  and  went  to  eat 
within  white  cloth  screens,  so  that  no  one  could  see 
them  at  their  meals.  But  if  persons  should  happen  to 
see  them,  they  would  cast  out  their  food,  and  break  the 