

In  less  than  forty-eight  hours  from  Eendezvous  Island 
we  were  near  enough  Java  to  have  seen  the  land  if  it 
had  been  daylight.  On  the  next  morning,  July  25,  we 
got  a  sight  of  the  Land  of  Promise.’ 

That  afternoon  Lord  INIinto  received  from  Captain 
Sayer  of  the  ‘  Leda,’  the  intelligence  that  Rear-Admiral 
Stopford,  on  learning  the  death  of  Admiral  Drury,  had  s 
determined  to  jjroceed  at  once  to  Java,  and  was  actu-  j 

ally  within  a  feAV  days’  sail  of  Java.'  ‘  The  little  Com-  ] 

modore’s  brief  hour  of  authority  came  to  an  end  to  the  j 
great  relief  of  all  in  the  fleet  and  army.  There  coidd 

*  Another  piece  of  intelligence  derived  from  Caijtain  Sayer  is 
recorded  thus  :  ‘  He  hrougiit  the  news  of  the  Enipresst  liariiui  an  heir. 

The  Empress  Maria  Louisa,  daughter  of  the  Emperor  of  Austria, 
granddaughter  of  Maria  Theresa,  niece  of  tlie  Queen  of  Naples,  wife 
of  Bonaparte  !  !  !  ’  It  was  no  doubt  strange  news  to  tJie  late  Envoy 
Extraordinary  to  the  Court  of  Vienna,  and  it  was  scarcely  less 
strange  that  it  should  have  reached  him  in  a  remote  island  in  the 
Java  Sea,  on  his  way  to  wrest  an  important  conquest  from  the  grasp 
of  Bonaparte.  ‘It  seems  to  me,’ wrote  Lndy  Malmesbury,  ‘that 
while  you  have  taken  to  make  conquests,  Bonaparte  is  becoming 
quite  a  family  man.’ 


Mt.  60] 


OFF  JAVA. 


283 


not  be  a  man  less  fit  for  the  important  situation  into 
which  chance  had  brought  him. 

‘  Wliat  information  we  have  is  all  favourable  to  our 
views,  and  I  do  flatter  myself  that  my  last  military 
labour  will  terminate  as  successfully  as  the  former  have 
done. 

‘  Having  met  a  prize  vessel,  very  lately  from  Grrissy 
in  the  east  of  Java,  we  have  learnt  that  the  new 
Governor  General  Janssens,  (formerly  Governor  of  the 
Cape)  arrived  in  one  of  the  French  frigates,  and  that 
Marshal  D’Aendels,  whom  he  has  superseded,  has  since 
departed  in  the  same  frigate.  The  other  two  frigates 
are  blocked  up  iu  Sourabaya.  We  have  been  long  ex¬ 
pected  in  .Java,  and  the  disposition  of  all  tribes  and 
nations,  inchiding  the  Dutch,  is  entirely  favourable  to 
the  establishment  of  our  Government. 

‘  Having  now  brought  these  annals  do^vn  to  the 
present  hour,  dinner-time,  July  27,  cruising  till  our 
expedition  comes  on,  I  shall  conclude  with  the  event 
whenever  it  happens,  and  ojien  a  new  number  for  our 
exploits  on  shore. 

‘  AuguM  3. — We  cruised  to  the  eastward,  and 
George  sent  his  boats  in  the  night  to  a  small  place, 
called  Taggul,  to  cut  out  some  Prows  of  which  he  had 
intelligence,  lading  rice  for  Hatavia  by  the  order  of  the 
Dutch  Government.  Instead  of  that  sort  of  (juiet 
craft,  the  boats  fell  in  with  four  strong  gun-boats,  each 
carrying  thirty-two  pounders  and  full  of  men.  Xot 
being  equipjieil  for  that  sort  of  contest  our  boats  re¬ 
turned  without  attacking.  We  returned  to  the  Rendcz- 