

‘  Talking  of  slaves,  I  must  tell  you  that  I  am  myself 
the  master  of  several.  A  Eajah  of  Balli,  an  island 
adjoining  the  east  end  of  Java,  has  sent  me,  amongst 


Mt.  60] 


A  PEESENT  OF  SLAVES. 


267 


other  presents,  five  boys  and  two  girls,  all  slaves,  at  rny 
service.  They  have  been  some  time  kept  at  ]Mr. 
Eaffles’s  house,  who  has  agreed  to  take  one  or  two. 
They  are  all  emancipated,  of  course,  but  remain  an 
orphan  charge  upon  ns.  The  boys  are  from  about 
eight  to  thirteen  years  old,  and  are  all  fine,  spunky- 
looking  boys.  The  girls  are  four  or  five  years  old. 
Now  to  give  you  a  notion  of  the  manners  and  scenes 
they  are  accustomed  to  :  they  were  all  dressed  in  their 
bettermost  upon  the  occasion  of  their  being  first  showm 
to  me.  They  perceived  that  there  was  a  sort  of  so¬ 
lemnity,  which  seemed  to  give  them  some  uneasiness. 
While  they  were  paraded  in  this  manner,  and  they  were 
all  gazing  round  them,  two  Malay  spears  unfortunately 
caught  Taylor’s  eye,  in  the  corner  of  the  room,  and  of 
necessity  he  began  tossing  and  brandishing  them  about, 
and  at  length  the  scabbards  were  pnlled  otf  the  bright 
blades  at  the  ends  of  the  weapons.  The  moment  this 
happened  the  poor  boys  all  huddled  together,  and  the 
youngest  left  the  rest  and  came  with  his  little  hands 
joined  together,  in  the  7nost  supplicating  manner,  and 
with  the  most  imploring  fiice,  walking  from  one  of  us 
to  the  other,  and  evidently  begging  for  his  life,  though 
he  did  not  utter  a  word,  nor  even  cried  ;  but  he  appeared 
terrified.  It  was  like  one  who  had  little  hope  of  obtain¬ 
ing  his  request,  and  who  had  been  accustomed  to  con¬ 
sider  the  thing  he  feared  as  a  sort  of  natural  doom 
that  was  to  be  expected.  It  was  with  some  difficulty, 
even  after  the  spears  w,ere  removed,  that  the  children 
were  reassured.  They  certainly  thought  that  they  had 


268  LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA.  [i8Il 

been  dressed  out  to  be  sacrificed  or  put  to  death  for 
some  cause  or  other,  and  when  they  saw  the  naked 
points  of  the  spears  they  thought  their  time  was  come. 
This  is  the  less  surprising,  as  there  is  every  reason  to 
believe  that  each  of  them  had  seen  his  father  put  to 
death  by  a  number  of  spears,  which  is  a  common  mode 
of  execution.  Next  day  they  were  all  very  merry  and 
happy.  Greorge  has  taken  one  of  the  boys  to  serve 
him  on  board  of  ship,  and  that  boy  has  fallen  on  his 
legs.  ]Mr.  Eaffles  will  take  care  of  one  or  two,  and  the 
rest  liave  fallen  to  my  lot.  They  will  probably  grow 
into  very  good  servants.  The  girls  will  puzzle  me 
most.  I  have  some  thought  of  baking  them  in  a  pie 
against  the  (bieen’s  birthday,  unless  I  shoidd  strike  out 
some  other  idea  in  the  meanwhile.  Upon  the  whole, 
this  present  from  the  Eajah  of  Balli  is  providential  for 
the  poor  children.  The  Eajah  has  sent  two  Vakeels,  or 
Ambassadors,  to  meet  me  here,  and  I  gave  their  Excel¬ 
lencies  audience  on  June  4.  They  are  young,  well¬ 
looking  men.  I  do  not  remember  having  seen  the 
same  costume  at  St.  James’s.  They  Avere  naked  doAvn 
to  the  middle ;  biit  the  garments,  Avheu  they  once  began, 
were  rich  enough.  I  have  one  slave  more  who  was 
given  me  in  a  present  from  the  Sidtan  of  Pontiana,  a 
great  chief  in  the  island  of  Borneo,  whom  I  am  likely 
enough  to  thank  in  person  on  my  way  to  Java.  This 
gentleman  is  Lord  Monboddo’s  geniiine  oran-outang, 
which  in  the  iNIalay  language  signifies  literally  wild 
man.  He  is  really  too  like  a.man — that  is  to  say,  a 
Malay  man.  His  features  and  the  Avhole  cast  of  his 