

‘  From  Panambangan  anchorage  we  were  to  pass 
lietween  that  island  and  an  adjacent  one  to  the  east¬ 
ward  in  order  to  make  the  west  coast  of  Borneo.  But 
no  part  of  this  track  had  been  examined.  Gleorge  ac¬ 
cordingly  sent  Captain  Glreig  with  the  “Minto”  schooner 
to  perform  that  service,  and  he  made  a  perfectly  satis¬ 
factory  report  before  Commodore  Broughton  had  arrived 
at  Panambangan  with  the  bulk  of  the  fleet. 

‘  Commodore  Broughton,’  who  is  the  most  cautious 
navigator  that  ever  wore  a  blue  coat,  was  not  satisfied 

*  Commodore  Broughton  had  taken  the  command  of  the  naval 
force  on  the  death  of  Admiral  Drury,  which  occurred  before  the 
expedition  left  Madras. 


JEt,  60] 


OFF  FORNEO. 


281 


to  abide  by  (ireig's  report,  but  ordered  the  “Modeste’^ 
to  go  ahead  and  reconnoitre  the  whole  passage  to  the 
Kendezvons,  thinking  very  properly  that  I  had  better 
be  drowned  than  he.  As  I  was  entirely  of  the  same 
opinion  I  accepted  the  service  very  thankfidly.  In 
reality  I  knew  that  George  was  much  fitter  to  perform 
this  duty  than  any  other  officer  in  the  fleet,  and  I 
thought  it  would  be  amusing  to  myself. 

‘ .  .  .  We  made  the  coast  of  Borneo  as  far  to  the 
north  as  we  coidd,  and  then  zigzagged  our  way  along 
the  shore  in  five  or  six  fathoms  of  water  to  the  point 
proposed. 

‘ .  .  .  The  C'omniodore  had  also  ordered  George  to 
survey  the  neighbourhood  of  I’ulo  Mancap,  which  is 
situated  beyond  the  rendezvous,  and  is  surrounded  with 
shoals.  This  duty  we  also  performed,  returning  to  the 
Eendezvous  before  the  Commodore  and  fleet  reached 
it. 

‘  We  had  fallen  in  with  a  fleet  of  nine  Bnggese  Brows ' 
when  we  went  out  towards  Bulo  IMancap,  and  from 
them  George  was  informed  of  a  shoal  which  lay  some¬ 
what  in  the  course  to  Java.  George,  in  commnnicating 
the  rest  of  his  information  to  the  Commodore,  men¬ 
tioned  this  shoal.  Ilpon  this  he  ordered  the  “  INIodeste  ” 
to  explore  it,  whereupon  we  sailed  again,  but  returned 
the  second  day  without  having  found  it.  Immediately 
after,  accounts  were  received  that  three  French  frigates, 
with  1,000  troops,  had  got  into  .Java,  and  again  the 

‘  Another  letter  says,  ‘  l’>u"gese,  jn’opeiiy  Bouginese,  I’rows, 
belonging  to  the  Rajah  of  Bontiana.' 


282 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


Commodore  stood  my  frieud  imd  gave  me  the  post  of 
honour,  which  I  accepted  with  I’eal  pleasure.  He 
ordered  the  “  Modeste”  immediately  to  Java.  We. sailed 
that  night  and  fell  in  with  the  very  shoal,  which  we 
had  missed  by  one  mile  of  longitude  a  couple  of  days 
before.  But  as  the  Commodore  would  not  allow  us 
any  small  vessel  to  send  back  with  intelligence,  if  we 
should  meet  with  any,  we  could  not  convey  notice  to  the 
fleet  of  this  danger.  However,  there  is  little  risk,  for  it 
lies  further  to  windward  than  they  can  well  keep  up  to. 