


JiT.  CO] 


STRAITS  OF  MALACCA. 


275 


along  the  east  coast  of  Sumatra,  and  lietween  that 
coast  and  the  Malay  Peninsula ;  it  blows  to  the  north 
between  the  west  coast  of  Romeo  and  the  straits  of 
Malacca.  So  that,  starting  from  Malacca,  the  wind  was 
directly  contrary  in  every  part  of  the  course  to  the 
northern  coast  of  Java.  Besides  this  difficulty  there  is 
a  current  in  the  same  direction  as  the  wind  through¬ 
out.  To  carry  a  great  fleet  of  transports,  not  famous 
in  general  for  working  to  windward,  a  long  voyage 
directly  against  wind  and  current,  did  not  appear  pro¬ 
mising.  It  was  known,  however,  that  with  a  little 
patience  a  fleet  can  at  that  season  make  a  passage 
down  the  Straits  of  iNIalacca  by  any  one  of  the  several 
passages  which  lead  to  the  eastward.  This  is  done  by 
the  help  of  scpialls  which  generally  blow  from  the 
northward  ;  by  occasional  shifts  of  wind  ;  and  by  altera¬ 
tions  of  tide  or  current  which  afford  a  favourable  start 
to  the  eastward.  It  was  ascertained  by  investigation, 
eiupiiry,  and  actual  sm:vey  and  trial  recently  made  for 
the  present  occasion,  that  after  making  the  west  coast 
of  Romeo,  land  winds  at  night,  and  the  sea  breeze 
during  part  of  the  day,  together  with  a  slackening  of 
the  current,  and  even  a  fa\ourable  current  during 
particular  periods  of  the  tide,  will  enable  ships  to  make 
a  passage  along  the  coast  to  the  southward  without 
much  delay ;  and  from  the  south-west  point  of  Romeo, 
having  the  wind  at  east,  you  may  stand  at  least  as  high 
as  south  to  Java,  and  make  that  island  as  far  to  the 
east  as  Samarang — which  is  more  than  we  desire.  The 
plan  was  therefore  settled  upon  this  foundation.  The 


276  LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA.  [l811 

fil'st  object  was  to  make  the  west  coast  of  Borneo  as 
much  to  the  southward  as  Ave  could.  ItAvas  determined 
to  go  through  the  Straits  of  Singapore  in  pi'eference 
to  any  of  the  more  southerly  issues  from  the  Straits 
of  Malacca,  partly  because  the  A¥ind  Avas  rather  more 
faA'ourable,  and  partly  because  it  is  the  common  way 
to  China  and  better  known  to  the  masters  of  ships 
under  couA^oy.  The  “  Modeste  ”  sailed  from  Malacca 
on  June  18.  We  soon  passed  a  great  part  of  the  fleet, 
and  left  them  in  the  Straits  of  Singapore,  Avhen  Ave  got 
into  the  open  channel  between  those  Straits  and  Borneo. 
The  navigation  so  far  is  beautiful  in  the  highest  degree. 
We  were  always  very  near  the  Malay  coast,  Avhich  is  richly 
furnished  Avith  islands  of  many  patterns,  and  were  often 
sailing  in  archipelagos  of  them,  so  close  and  thick  round 
us  that  Ave  could  not  ahvays  see  the  Avay  out,  and  at 
such  moderate  distances  from  the  opposite  shores  as 
to  alloAv  us  the  full  benefit  of  Avood,  mountain,  and  all 
the  shifting  lines  of  land  and  water  Avhich  make  that 
sort  of  scenery  interesting  and  picturesque  to  those 
passing  quickly  through  it.  We  cleared  the  Straits  on 
June  20,  at  sunset,  leaving  a  great  part  of  the  fleet 
at  anchor  behind  us,  and  stood  across  toAvards  Borneo. 
We  made  that  island  off  Sambas,  a  little  to  the  north 
of  Pontiana.  Here  Ave  came  up  Avith  a  division  under 
the  command  of  Captain  Cole,  Avhich  had  sailed  from 
Malacca  some  time  before  us,  and  which  was  preceded 
by  another  under  Captain  Edgell  not  yet  in  sight. 
We  soon,  hoAvever,  came  up  Avith  it,  and  had  then  the 
lead  of  all.  On  the  29th  anchored  close  to  the  island 