


^T.  60] 


‘HAKAYIT  ABDULLA,’ 


271 


earthen  vessels  in  pieces,  haying  others  for  the 
next  time.  Others  there  were  who  could  eat  before 
people,  but  they  could  not  speak.  ...  I  saw  many 
foolish  customs.  .  .  .  How  many  forms  of  people  did 
I  then  not  see,  and  kinds  of  dresses  that  I  had  never 
in  my  life  seen  before !  And  it  was  to  be  perceived 
that  the  English  had  provided  their  leaders  with 
different  dresses:  some  had  tigers’  skins  for  coats, 
others  had  hats  covered  with  fowls’  feathers,  dyed  red, 
white,  or  black,  while  others  had  beasts’  skins  for  trou¬ 
sers  ;  there  were  others  who  had  clothes  spotted  like 
leopards.’ 

To  their  young  co-religionist — for  Abdulla  was  a 
IMussulman — the  ^Mahometan  Sepoys  from  Delhi  and 
Oude  wore  a  far  more  dignified  aspect  than  the  Hindoos 
with  their  strange  and  ‘foolish’  customs.  ‘These 
Sepoys  were  well  acquainted  with  the  Koran ;  amongst 
them  were  many  descendants  of  the  Arabs  of  the  race 
of  Syeds.  They  were  gracious,  manly,  and  courteous.’ 
‘  They  were  under  the  command  of  English  officers,  who 
drilled  f  hem  every  day.’  Here  follows  a  frait  as  charac- 
ferisfic  of  the  Englishmen  as  any  of  those  attributed 
to  the  men  under  their  command.  ‘And  when  they 
had  done  drilling  and  were  returning,  the  officers  did 
not  take  their  horses  through  the  gates,  but  leaped 
over  the  fence,  which  was  seven  cubits  high.*  The 
Malacca  people  came  in  hundreds  every  day  to  see 
this  feat,  and  the  officers  leaping  the  fence ;  loud  were 

'  The  Editor  informs  us  tliat  this  must  be  taken  as  Oriental 
hy^ierbole,  since  seven  cubits  would  be  ten  and  a  Italf  feet. 


272 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[181 


they  in  their  cries  of  astonishment  at  seeing  the  skill 
of  the  horses — equal  as  it  was  to  that  of  mankind— in 
understanding  the  sound  of  the  trumpet.  Says  one, 
^‘This  is  not  men’s  bntywi’.s  work.’” 

When  at  last  came  the  ship  with  Lord  Minto  on 
hoard,  ‘  there  went  out  an  order  for  everyone  to  clean 
their  frontages  in  all  the  streets.  Then  thousands  of 
all  races  collected  at  the  sea-shore  to  have  a  sight  of 
him  and  his  dress,  his  name  being  so  great.  After  this 
a  great  noise  was  heard  of  the  regiments  coming  in 
full  force,  with  the  music  of  drums,  fifes,  and  other 
instruments.  .  .  .  And  the  multitude  in  Malacca  in¬ 
creased  so  greatly  that  there  was  no  kno\ving  who  they 
were,  but  that  they  were  of  the  human  race.  .  .  . 
At  the  time  of  his  lea\'ing  his  ship  the  cannon 
roared  like  thunder — the  sea  became  dark  with  smoke. 
And  when  I  had  seen  the  appearance  and  circumstance 
of  Lord  Minto,  I  was  much  moved ;  for  I  guessed  in 
my  mind  as  to  his  appearance,  position,  and  height, 
that  these  would  be  great,  and  his  dress  gorgeous.  .  .  . 
But  his  appearance  was  of  one  which  was  middle-aged, 
thin  in  body,  of  soft  manners  and  sweet  countenance, 
and  I  felt  that  he  could  not  carry  tiventy  cutties  (about 
thirty  pounds),  so  slow  were  his  motions.  His  coat  was 
black  cloth,  trousers  the  same,  nor  was  there  anything 
peculiar.  And  when  the  leading  men  desired  to  pay 
their  respects  they  remained  at  a  distance,  none  daring 
to  grasp  his  hand ;  but  they  took  off  their  hats  and 
bent  their  bodies.  .  .  .  When  he  landed  he  bowed  to 
the  right  and  to  the  left.  How  he  had  not  the  remotest 