


284 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


vous,  and  the  fleet  not  having  yet  arrived,  we  stretched 
out  again  to  the  eastward,  and  the  boats  of  the 
“Modeste”and  “  Leda”  went  in  again  to  Taggul  prepared 
to  carry  the  gun-boats.  But  this  time  these  warriors 
had  retired  and  sailed  towards  Batavia ;  so  that  onr  boats 
only  brought  off  a  small  brig  and  two  Prows  laden  with 
rice  for  Batavia. 

‘  On  returning  to  the  Rendezvous,  we  found  yester¬ 
day  morning,  at  daybreak,  a  ship  looking  out  for  us  to 
say  the  expedition  had  arrived  on  July  30,  and  had 
sailed  towards  Batavia  early  that  morning.  We  soon 
came  up  mth  them,  and  are  now  approaching  the  place 
of  disembarkation  which  will  take  place  this  morning 
or  at  daybreak  to-morrow. — God  bless  you.’ 

The  expedition  arrived  on  July  30,  and  on  August 
4  the  disembarkation  was  effected  at  a  small  town 
called  Chillinching  in  Batavia  Bay. 

‘  Chillinching,  Java:  August  6,  1811. 

‘  The  disembarkation  took  place  without  any  kind 
of  opposition.  All  the  troops,  a  few  field-pieces,  and 
part  of  the  stores  were  landed  that  evening  and  in 
the  course  of  the  night.  The  horses,  ordnance,  and 
additional  stores  were  put  on  shore  next  day.  .  .  . 
This  village  is  principally  Chinese.  They  made  us 
welcome,  and  brought  their  articles  out  for  sale  with 
very  flattering  confidence.  This  was  justified  by  the 
exemplary  behaviour  of  the  troops,  who  paid  their  way 
and  did  not  even  kiss  an  old  woman  without  her  con¬ 
sent.  There  has  been  but  one  drunken  man  in  two 
days. 


Mt.  60] 


JAVA. 


285 


‘  Aiigust  7.  As  everytliing  has  been  quiet,  and 
the  army  remains  at  Ghillinching,  where  the  Gieneral  ‘ 
occupies  the  only  gentleman’s  house,  I  have  continued 
on  the  “  Modeste,”  and  go  on  shore  when  I  like.  Yester¬ 
day  I  took  a  ride  with  the  General  to  the  advanced  post, 
about  four  miles,  and  then  returned  to  the  “  Modeste.” 
The  country  is  like  Chinese  paper  on  a  wall.  Canals, 
tanks,  and  narrow  ways  between  ;  here  and  there  a  little 
dry  ground,  and  these  spaces  are  in  a  state  of  high  cul¬ 
tivation.  Every  now  and  then  we  found  a  gentleman’s 
house  Avith  no  appearance  of  splendour,  but  always 
marked  by  the  characteristic  neatness  of  the  Dutch. 
Our  road  ran  westward  parallel  to  the  sea ;  the  right 
of  the  line  of  the  troops  on  the  sea,  the  left  inland. 
I  had  an  opportunity  of  observing  Avhat  may  be  deemed, 
I  believe,  a  pretty  nearly  unexampled  degree  of  disci¬ 
pline  in  the  troops.  They  do  not  use  tents,  and  have 
as  yet  had  only  their  salt  provisions.  They  are  posted 
in  gardens  and  orchards  with  cottages  and  houses  of  a 
better  description,  surrounded  Avith  poultry,  fruit,  and 
vegetables.  Xo  fresh  beef  or  pork  Avas  to  be  procured, 
the  cattle  and  pigs  having  been  very  generally  removed 
by  order  of  Government.  In  these  circumstances  Ave 
saAv  the  peasants  living  as  quietly  in  tlieir  OAvn  houses, 
and  carrying  on  their  usual  occupations  Avith  as  little 
annoyance,  apprehension,  or  OA^en  notice  of  an  invading 
army  in  the  midst  of  them,  as  if  Ave  Avere  all  their  nc'ar 
relations  on  a  visit.  You  see  the  trees  laden  Avitli 
cocoa-nuts  and  plantains,  acres  of  onions,  cabbage,  and 
'  Sir  Samuel  Auchmuty. 