


jEt.  go] 


PANAMBANGAN. 


277 


of  Panambangan,  which  was  the  first  rendezvous  from 
Malacca. 

‘  The  different  divisions  of  the  fleet  came  up  gradu¬ 
ally  and  slowly,  but  we  saw  them  arrive  with  great 
satisfaction,  as  the  possibility  of  working  to  the  south¬ 
ward  was  thereby  completely  established,  and  our  pas¬ 
sage  to  Java  appeared  to  be  secured.  The  “IModeste” 
remained  at  this  anchorage  from  June  29  to  July  6,  and 
it  was  the  more  fortunate  that  the  situation  was  un¬ 
commonly  pretty.  The  island  is  five  or  six  miles  long 
and  somewhat  less  across.  It  rises  into  three  or  four 
hills  of  different  shapes,  and  of  considerable  height, 
covered  as  usual  with  wood  of  various  sorts  and  dimen¬ 
sions.  There  are  several  snug  bays,  with  two  of  which 
we  wei’e  principally  concerned.  In  each  of  these  there 
is  a  waving  beach  of  Avhite  sand,  about  fifty  or  sixty 
paces  wide  from  the  sea  to  the  wood,  and  a  nice  stream 
of  fresh  water  running  into  the  sea.  The  scenery  all 
round  is  beautiful,  and  while  we  were  there  ani¬ 
mated  by  tents  and  watering  parties,  boats  and  their 
crews,  carpenters  and  their  gangs  felling  trees  for  spars 
and  planks,  washermen,  smith’s  forges.  Sepoys  bathing 
and  cooking — in  short,  a  most  gay  and  picturesque 
scene.  The  island  is  uninhabited  by  man,  and  nothing 
more  formidable  was  seen  of  the  brute  population  than 
wild  boars  ;  there  are  deer,  however,  and  some  of  the 
small  kind  called  mouse  deer,  really  not  so  large  as  a 
hare. 

‘  I  went  on  shore  once,  to  see  (ieorge  and  Captain 


278 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


Edgell’s  works.  They  constructed  dams  across  the 
stream  of  fresh  water,  to  raise  the  surface  higher  than 
the  tide  at  high  water.  The  pond  head  was  carried 
down  every  shower  that  fell,  which  were  not  a  few,  but 
they  renewed  the  work  next  morning  indefatigably, 
having  plenty  of  hands ;  and  in  fact  their  labours 
answered  the  purpose,  and  a  fidl  stock  of  excellent  water 
was  obtained.  The  Sepoys  are  particidarly  happy  on 
these  short  visits  to  the  land.  Their  religion  makes  it 
difficult  to  supply  them  with  food  at  all  on  board,  and 
it  is  always  attended  with  inconvenience  and  privations 
of  various  sorts,  the  whole  heightened  by  uneasy  scruples 
by  way  of  spice.  When  they  get  on  shore,  each  man 
cooks  his  own  meal  according  to  his  taste  and  pre¬ 
judices,  and  they  bathe  comfortably  both  to  their  sldns 
and  consciences.  The  Avhole  scene  of  black  and  white 
men,  of  trades  and  occupations,  with  the  sort  of  spirit, 
energy,  and  cheerfulness  which  belongs  to  British  sea¬ 
men,  made  this  Panambangan  beach  a  most  lively  and 
agreeable  spot. 