

such  a  rout. 

‘  The  General  immediately  despatched  Captain 
Eohison  with  a  second  summons  to  be  delivered  verbally. 
It  was  again  refused.  But  the  affair  is  not  the  less 
decided.  Janssens  has  not  600  men,  out  of  7,000  or 
8,000  whonr  he  commanded  in  the  morning,  and  his 
government  is  at  an  end.  Troops  will  advance  to- 


292 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


morrow  morning  to  Buitenzorg,  and  on  their  arrival,  two 
days  hence,  he  must  either  capitulate,  or  fly  alone  to  the 
eastern  part  of  the  island,  where  he  may  alfect  to  hold 
out  till  he  is  pursued.  ...  I  do  really  believe  that 
August  26  is  a  glorious  day  to  Sir  Samuel  Auchmuty 
and  the  army . The  seamen  have  afforded  enter¬ 

tainment  as  well  as  acquired  honour  by  their  eccen¬ 
tricities  and  courage.  They  fell  in  with  a  galloper  of 
the  enemy’s,  of  which  they  took  possession,  when  they 
mounted  the  four  horses,  and  drove  the  gun  on  in  the 
character  of  horse  artillery.  They  were  very  soon  all 
mounted  at  the  expense  of  the  French  officers  and 
troopers,  and  have  obtained  the  title  of  His  Majesty’s 
Marine  Light  Dragoons.  In  short,  Johnny  has  main¬ 
tained  a  consistency  of  character  with  no  feature  of 
which  I  hope  he  will  ever  part. 

‘  I  knew  the  night  before  that  the  storm  was  to  take 
place,  and  you  may  imagine  the  anxiety  with  which  I 
heard  the  cannon  and  the  musketry  rather  before  day¬ 
light.  By  its  long  continuance  and  violence  I  per¬ 
ceived  that  the  enemy  had  not  instantly  fled  in  a  panic ; 
and  if  they  stood,  with  such  an  advantage  as  their 
works  gave  them,  I  dreaded  the  loss  which  must  be 
sustained  even  with  success.  Taylor  and  Robert  were 
constantly  in  my  mind.  On  the  event  of  this  enterprise 
depended  also  the  issue  of  this  grand  undertaking. 
George  slept  in  my  room.  He  soon  got  on  horseback, 
and  I  into  my  buggy  with  Mr.  Hope  as  expeditiously 
as  I  could.  We  drove  on  briskly  to  the  field  ;  the 
action  still  lasting ;  but  at  a  mile  distance  I  met  a 


JEt.  60] 


STOEMING  OF  COENELIS. 


293 


wounded  officer  and  soldier  walking  tq  the  hospital,  a 
mile  back.  I  therefore  sent  Mr.  Hope  to  drive  them 
to  the  hospital,  and  walking  on  myself  soon  came  to 
the  field,  where  the  victory  was  by  this  time  decisive, 
and  the  enemy  in  fidl  flight.  The  General  hearing  I 
was  there  rode  to  meet  me,  and  reported  his  triumph 
with  a  most  radiant  countenance.  I  then  inquired 
after  Taylor  and  my  particidar  friends,  and  most  hap¬ 
pily  found  all  unhurt. 

‘  Next  morning  I  went,  before  daylight,  to  visit  all 
the  works — our  o^vn  as  well  as  the  enemy’s.  A  field  of 
battle  seen  in  cold  blood  the  day  after  is  a  horrid 
spectacle,  but  is  too  horrid  for  description.  The 
number  of  the  dead  and  the  shocking  variety  of 
deaths  had  better  not  be  imagined.  In  this  instance, 
besides  the  objects  scattered  along  the  road  and  over  a 
Avide  plain,  there  was  a  crowded,  accumulated  scene  of 
slaughter  and  destruction,  in  all  their  worst  shapes, 
collected  together  in  a  small  space  Avithin  each  of  the 
many  redoubts  that  had  been  taken  from  the  enemy. 
In  one  of  them  the  dead,  more  mangled  than  can  be 
described,  were  the  conquerors  themseh’es.  They  Avere 
the  Grenadiers  of  Iaax)  English  regiments,  and  of  course 
the  finest  men  in  the  army.  After  forcing  their  way 
into  the  Avorks,  and  having  given  three  cheers  for  their 
success,  the  explosion  of  a  magazine  in  the  centre  bleAv 
them  into  the  air. 