

‘ .  .  .  .  The  loss  of  the  enemy  Avas  great,  ours  in¬ 
considerable.  Taylor,  who  is  attached  to  Gillesine,  dis¬ 
tinguished  himself  on  this  maiden  occasion  bv  the 
greatest  activity,  courage,  coolness,  and  judgment. 

‘  August  15.  I  continued  on  I)oard  the  “  Modeste  ” 
till  the  14th,  when  I  landed  privately,  and  settled,  Avith 
all  my  friends,  in  a  good  spacious  house  near  the  can¬ 
tonments  of  Weltevreeden.  Cornells  is  found  too  strong 
to  be  carried  without  heavy  artillery.  The  battering 
train  is  therefore  landing  from  the  transports,  and 
nothing  material  has  happened  since  the  10th.  The 
humanity  of  the  men  to  their  Avounded  ])risoners  on 
that  day  Avas  admirable.  No  distinction  of  colour  on 
that  occasion.  Our  soldiers  picked  uj)  English,  Dutch, 
and  Malay,  Avithout  distinction,  in  the  jungle  and  carri(‘d 
them  with  great  labour  to  the  hospital.  The  INlalays 

IT 


290 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


and  other  native  troops  are  all  in  amazement,  having 
been  made  to  believe  that  we  are  savages,  and  should 
treat  them  with  all  sorts  of  barbarities  if  they  fell  into 
our  hands. 

Batavia  shines  in  the  national  neatness  of  the  Dutch. 
The  streets  wide,  not  paved,  hut  the  roads  formed  of 
very  fine  gravel,  and  excellent.  From  the  town  the 
roads  run  along  canals,  or  streams  of  water,  in  some 
places  quick  and  almost  lively,  mostly,  however,  slow, 
dull,  and  always  yellow.  On  the  other  side  of  the  road 
there  is  a  succession  of  garden  houses  ;  the  garden  gate 
and  rail  close  to  the  road ;  the  houses  more  or  less 
retired,  and  standing  each  in  an  open  space  of  its  own. 
They  are  not  remarkable  for  show  and  cheerfulness,  and 
the  architecture  is  not  Vitruvian  ;  but  they  indicate  the 
neighbourhood  of  a  great  capital,  and  they  convey  a 
strong  idea  of  opulence  and  luxury.  The  houses, 
indeed,  are  to  be  admired  for  space,  loftiness  of  rooms, 
and  fitness  for  a  warm  climate.  In  the  house  that  I 
inhabit  there  is  a  high  open  gallery  of  100  feet  by  32. 
My  bedroom  is  immediately  over  it,  and  of  the  same 
dimensions.  A  great  hall  crosses  from  the  gallery  to 
the  front,  so  that  the  winds  blow  in  and  through  from 
four  quarters. 

‘  August  23.  The  batteries  have  been  very  tedious, 
and  there  does  appear  to  have  been  a  good  portion  of 
fiddle-de-dee  twaddlification  in  the  departments  con¬ 
nected  with  our  works. 

‘  August  28.  Nevertheless,  the  enemy’s  impregnable 


Mt.  60] 


JAVA. 


291 


works  were  stormed  at  daybreak  on  August  26 — a  new 
day  in  our  military  calendar.  The  place  was  most 
formidable  in  strength,  and  it  really  seems  miraculous 
that  mortal  men  could  live  in  such  a  fire  of  round,  grape, 
shells,  and  musketry  long  enough  to  pass  deep  trenches 
defended  by  pointed  palissades  inclining  from  the  inner 
edge  of  the  ditch  outwards,  force  their  way  into  redoubt 
after  redoubt,  till  they  were  in  possession  of  all  the 
numerous  works,  which  extend  at  least  a  mile.  .  .  . 
The  slaughter  was  dreadful,  both  during  the  attack 
and  in  the  pursuit,  when  the  total  destruction  of  the 
enemy’s  army  was  prevented  only  by  their  surrender¬ 
ing  prisoners,  or  dispersing  and  finally  deserting  the 
French.  We  have  upwards  of  5,000  prisoners,  including 
all  the  Europeans  left  alive.  General  Janssens  escaped 
captiure  most  narrowly,  by  the  most  precipitate  flight, 
leaving  all  his  official  papers  behind  him.  General 
Jumelle,  a  Frenchman  sent  out  to  watch  and  succeed 
Janssens,  was  glad  to  get  into  a  bog  up  to  his  chin  till 
the  heat  of  the  pursuit  was  over,  and  then  crept  out 
in  a  dirty  plight  to  a  hospital,  where  he  remained  till 
dark,  and  then  made  off  as  hard  as  he  could  gallop  to 
Buitenzorg,  to  join  Janssens.  There  never  was 