

‘  I  sent  a  letter  yesterday  morning  to  General 
Janssens,  the  Governor  General,  containing  a  summons, 
and  distributed  at  the  same  time  a  sort  of  manifesto 
to  the  Dutch  inhabitants  to  remo\  e  their  apprehensions 
and  invite  their  co-operation.  The  summons  was  re¬ 
fused,  and  I  received  the  answer  that  night. 

‘  August  12.  I  went  on  shore  on  the  9th  about 
noon  to  speak  to  the  General.  Admiral  Stopford  had 
joined  the  fleet  that  morning,  and  landed  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  visiting  the  General  and  myself. 


*288 


LORI)  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


‘  Captain  Eohison,  my  aide-de-camp,  who  carried  my 
summons  to  Greneral  Janssens  found  him  at  Cornelis,  a 
strong  post  about  six  miles  from  Batavia.  He  went  to 
Weltevreeden,  halfway,  Avithout  molestation  ;  but  Avas 
blinded  the  rest  of  the  road.  As  far  as  Weltevreeden 
he  saw  that  there  Avas  no  obstacle  to  the  advance  of 
troops ;  from  thence  to  Cornelis  he  perceived  by  the 
motion  of  the  carriage  that  the  road  Avas  smooth  and 
the  bridges,  if  any,  Avere  standing.  Upon  this  rejiort, 
confirmed  by  their  information,  the  Greneral  determined 
to  push  on  and  take  post  at  Weltevreeden.  Welte¬ 
vreeden  is  an  immense  and  magnificent  military  can¬ 
tonment,  but  not  fortified.  Cornelis  is  a  military  post 
of  great  strength,  on  Avhich  all  the  art  of  French 
engineering  has  been  long  bestoAved.  It  is  considered 
as  the  citadel  of  Java,  in  Avhich  the  colony  itself  is  to 
be  defended.  The  advance  of  the  army  moved  foi’Avard 
accordingly  on  August  10,  and  Avere  followed  by  other 
troops. 

‘  They  met  no  opposition  till  they  had  passed  through 
the  cantonments  of  Weltevreeden,  but  immediately 
afterAvards  a,  very  slrarp  action  commenced.  It  lay 
principally  betAveen  the  riflemen  and  the  light  troops 
in  the  jungle  on  each  side  of  the  road,  and  in  this  con¬ 
test  the  superiority  of  our  men  was  immediately  decisive, 
driving  the  enemy  from  the  woods  Avith  great  loss. 
Another  principal  feature  of  the  day  Avas  the  capture, 
sword  in  hand,  of  four  of  the  enemy’s  field-pieces,  Avhich 
had  been  planted  in  the  road  behind  an  abbatis.  They 
Avere  deserted  by  the  men,  but  Avell  defended  by  an 


jEt.  60] 


JAVA. 


289 


officer  or  two  and  a  non-comnaissioned  officer  who  were 
cut  down  at  fheirgun.s.  Our  troops  suffered  principally 
on  this  road  from  grape  and  musketry  under  cover  of 
the  ahbatis;  but  they  drove  the  enemy  in  such  confu¬ 
sion  before  them  that  tVdonel  Gillespie  was  prevented 
only  by  repeated  orders  from  the  General,  from  dashing 
at  once  into  the  place  along  with  them.  Our  troops 
halted,  and  took  post  under  the  guns  of  Cornells.  This 
was  a  most  important  and  most  honourable  success. 
It  gave  us  every  imaginable  accommodation  for  the  army 
in  the  barracks  and  cantonments  of  Weltevreeden,  great 
stores  and  magazines,  some  hundred  pieces  of  artillery, 
mostly  brass,  of  all  calibres,  horses,  labourers,  and  an 
easy  conveyance  of  every  article  by  water. 