

‘When  Hope  and  I  visited  this  place,  there  Avas  a 


•294 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[18JI 


corner  or  bastion  still  burning  violently.  We  looked 
into  the  fire,  standing  close  to  its  edge,  and  going 
afterwards  a  few  paces  towards  another  corner,  we  were 
surprised  by  a  loud  explosion  from  the  place  we  had 
just  left.  This  proved  to  be  a  blind  shell  which  had 
become  red  hot,  and  went  off  close  to  us,  so  that  we 
might  have  paid  for  our  peeping.  Many  officers  were 
killed  and  wounded  by  the  explosion  of  this  magazine, 
which,  I  am  disposed  to  think,  happened  by  accident.’ 

In  a  despatch  addressed  by  Sir  Samuel  Auch- 
muty  to  the  Grovernor  Gleneral,  after  the  captm'e  of 
Cornells  and  the  subsequent  dispersion  of  the  enemy’s 
forces,  he  stated  that,  in  the  action  of  the  26th, 
near  5,000  prisoners  had  been  taken.  Among  them 
three  Gleneral  officers,  thirty-four  field  officers, 
seventy  captains,  and  one  hundred  and  fifty  subaltern 
officers.  Gleneral  Janssens  made  his  escape  mth  diffi¬ 
culty  during  the  action,  and  reached  Buitenzorg,  a 
distance  of  thirty  miles,  with  a  feAv  cavahry,  the  sole 
remains  of  an  army  of  ten  thousand  men.  This  place 
he  subsequently  evacuated,  and  fied  to  the  eastward. 

‘  August  29. — Janssens  is  gone  Avith  a  fragment  of 
his  force,  under  two  thousand  of  all  sorts,  towards 
Samarang.  Two  frigates  haAn  already  sailed  Avith  a 
small  force,  and  will  be  folloAved  by  more,  to  inter¬ 
cept  him.  The  game  is  ours.  .  .  .  The  Gleneral  con¬ 
siders  the  affair  as  so  entirely  decided  that  he  proposes 
returning  to  Madras  after  visiting  Samarang.  I  have, 
on  my  part,  published  a  proclamation  declaring  the 
French  Glovernment  to  be  dissolved  and  the  English 


^T.  60] 


STOKMING  OF  CORNELIS. 


2 'Jo 


estilblished.  Such  is  the  state  of  our  affairs  at  this 
date. 

‘  I  have  now  a  melaucholy  account  to  send  you  of 
the  heavy  loss  we  hav^e  sustained  in  my  poor  friend  Dr. 
Leyden.  He  was  seized  with  fever  a  few  days  after  1 
landed  at  Batavia,  and  struggled  hard  with  it  till 
yesterday  morning,  when  he  expired,  and  I  assisted 
at  paying  him  the  last  honours  in  the  evening  of 
the  same  day.  He  had  been  subject  to  bihous 
attacks  from  the  time  of  leaving  Calcutta,  and  indeed 
long  before ;  but  he  was  frequently  ailing  on  the 
voyage,  and  always  making  great  efforts  of  mental  and 
sometimes  of  bodily  labour.  In  Java  he  pushed  his 
exertions  of  every  kind  far  beyond  his  strength,  and 
was  totally  regardless  of  the  precautions  against  the 
sun,  which  are  indispensable  in  these  climates.  He 
was  seized,  after  great  fatigue  in  the  examination  of 
a  public  library  which  I  had  committed  to  his 
charge  ;  and  having  gone  heated  from  the  library  into 
another  room,  which  had  not  been  opened  for  a  long 
while,  he  was  suddenly  struck  with  a  chill.  He  ran 
ont  of  the  place  saying  it  was  enough  to  give  any 
man  a  fever ;  but,  in  truth,  his  habit  was  predis¬ 
posed,  and  he  never  surmounted  the  first  attack, 
though  he  struggled  against  it  longer  than  is  usual,  tor 
fevers  are  rapid  here.  This  must  be  accounted  the 
illness  of  a  hot  climate,  but  not  of  Batavia  in  par¬ 
ticular.  The  climate,  indeed,  in  this  place,  a  little 
above  Batavia,  seems  to  us  milder  and  more  favourable 
to  health  than  Bengal,  and  this  is  not  reckoned  a 