

‘  Bonaparte  certainly  did  one  good  action  in  sending 
a  character  so  respectable  to  supersede  D’Aendels  at 
twenty-four  hours’  notice ;  for  he  was  peremptorily 
ordered  to  resign  the  government  in  that  time,  and  to 
embark  immediately  for  Europe.  As  soon  as  the  ship 
was  under  weigh,  it  is  vmderstood  here  that  the  cap¬ 
tain  produced  an  order  to  carry  him  to  France  as  a 
prisoner.  The  attachment  of  all  ranks  of  men  to 
Janssens  is  remarkable ;  and  he  certainly  deprived  ns  of 
the  support  which,  if  we  had  found  D’Aendels  in  the 
government,  the  Dutch  part  of  the  colony  would  have 
given  us.  So  pray  he  civil  to  my  virtuous  predecessor 
in  Java,  if  you  have  an  opportunity. 

‘  Cteorge  sent  yon  the  history  of  my  orgies  at  a 
dinner  given  bv  me  to  Sir  Samuel  Auchmuty  and  the 
army.  The  army  has  since  given  a  ball  and  supper  to 
Sir  Saimiel  and  me  jointly  ;  and  we  entered  hand  in 
hand,  like  the  two  kings  of  Brenttord  smelling  at  one 
nosegay.  This  festival  was  at  the  residence  of  the 
former  (lovernors  General,  and  the  decorations  had  been 


304 


LORO  .MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


all  or  nearly  so  in  a  state  of  preparation  for  the  cele¬ 
bration  of  Napoleon’s  birthday,  which  we  disturbed 
like  trouble-fetes  as  we  were,  by  landing  and  getting 
possession  of  Batavia,  (iovernment  Honse,  decorations 
and  all,  a  few  days  before  the  grand  occasion.  ...  It  is 
impossible  to  give  yon  anything  like  an  adequate 
notion  of  the  total  absence  of  beauty  in  so  crowded 
a  hall.  There  never  is  a  dozen  of  women  assembled 
in  Europe  without  a.  few  attractions  amongst  them. 
Here  there  was  no  difference,  except  in  some  few  varie¬ 
ties  of  ugliness  and  ordinariness  of  dress  and  manners. 
The  Dutch  rlid  not  encourage,  nor  indeed  allow  freely, 
European  women  to  go  out  to  their  colonies  in  India. 
The  consequence  has  been,  that  the  men  lived  with 
native  women,  whose  daughters,  gradually  borrowing 
something  from  the  father’s  side,  and  becoming  a  mixed 
breed,  are  now  the  Avives  and  ladies  of  rank  and 
fashion  in  Java.  The  young  ladies  have  learnt  the 
European  fashions  of  dress,  and  their  carriage  and 
manners  are  something  like  onr  own  of  an  ordinary 
class.  Their  education  is  almost  wholly  neglected ;  or 
rather  no  means  exist  here  to  provide  for  it.  They 
are  attended  from  their  cradles  by  numerous  slaves, 
by  whom  they  are  trained  in  helplessness  and  laziness ; 
and  from  such  companions  and  governesses,  you  may 
conceive  how  much  accomplishment  or  refinement  in 
manners  or  opinions  they  are  likely  to  acquire. 

In  dancing,  the  young  beauties  seemed  lame 
in  English  country  dances,  (jf  which  they  kneAv 
neither  the  steps  nor  the  figures  ;  but  in  their  own 