

Oh,  treasure  in  thy  filial  breast. 

My  parting  counsel,  last  and  best. 

Re  Virtue  for  herself  caress’d  ; 

Her  heavenly  love 

Such  transport  yields  as  Spirits  blest 
Enjoy  above. 

‘  I  shall  fjosltivehj  sail  by  tlie  2()th  lust.  (October)  ; 
I  hope  sooner ;  and  shall  be  most  h.ippy  to  turn  my 

‘  A  poem  written  by  himself  in  India  and  dedicated  to  his  family. 
“  Concluditur  prefect o,  et  virtutes  omnes,  et  honestum  illud,  quod 
e.v  his  virtutibus  exoritur,  et  in  his  h.eret,  esse se  expetendum. 
— Cic.  Dc  Finihux,  v.  215,  et  passim. 


302 


LORD  IMINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


head  towards  one  of  my  homes,  till  the  grand  departure 
of  all  arrives.  That  will  happen  at  latest  in  twenty- 
seven  months  from  October  1.  I  reckon  to  January 
1,  1814.’ 

‘  Java,  October  13,  1811. 

‘  Nothing  has  happened  since  my  last  at  all  memor¬ 
able  .  .  .  This  letter  goes  by  a  transport,  the  “  Countess 
d’Harconrt,”  which  carries  General  Janssens  and  his 
suite  to  England  as  prisoners  of  war.  If  you  should 
by  any  chance  come  in  his  way.  Palm,  he  civil ' — for  he 
is  one  of  the  very  best  and  most  estimable  men  I  ever 
knew.  He  has  suffered  a  great  and  severe  reverse, 
which  he  has  felt  so  deeply  as  to  affect  his  health. 
His  predecessor  was  a  -wretch  in  every  imaginable  way, 
one  of  the  monsters  which  the  worst  times  of  the 
hh'ench  Eevolution  engendered,  or  rather  lifted  from  the 
mud  at  the  bottom,  to  flounce  and  figure  away  their 
hour  upon  the  surface.  He  was  greedy,  corrupt,  and 
rascally  in  amassing  money  for  himself,  and  equally 
unjust  and  oppressive  in  procuring  public  supplies. 
He  was  cruel,  and  regardless  of  men’s  lives  beyond  most 
of  the  revolutionary  tyrants  in  the  Eeign  of  Terror,  He 
forced  the  Javanese  to  cut  a  road  through  a  morass  at 
the  expense  of  6,000  lives  for  that  short  space.  He 
ordered  two  Javanese  Princes,  confined  by  him  as  state 
prisoners,  to  be  pri\'ately  murdered,  and  became  savage 
from  the  delay  which  arose  from  the  scruples  of  the 
officer  in  Avhose  custody  they  were ;  a  providential 
delay;  for  Janssens  arrived  in  the  interval,  and  passing 
‘  A  phiase  frequently  addressed  by  Lady  Palmerston  to  her  lord. 


JEt.  60] 


JAVA. 


303 


throiigh  the  place,  on  his  way  to  Batavia,  saved  the 
victims.  D’Aendels  was  as  great  a  brute  as  tyrant  in 
his  pleasures — -no  man’s  family  was  safe.  ...  In  short, 
none  of  the  worst  of  the  Koman  pro-consuls  ever  vexed 
and  scourged  their  provinces,  too  distant  for  control, 
with  more  extortion  and  cruelty  than  this  villain.  His 
successor  is  his  opposite  in  every  point — a  virtuous,  just, 
and  humane  man  ;  a  brave  and  good  officer ;  and,  I  think 
from  his  conversation,  a  wise  and  even  enlightened 
statesman. 