

‘  I  have  seen  English  papers  down  to  the  middle  of 


■298 


LOEU  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


March,  and  I  certainly  cannot  perceive  that  any  mortal 
has  suspected  my  having  any  concern  mth  the  French 
islands,  beyond  the  execution  of  an  order  sent  out  by 
CTOvernment.  That  order  was  not  received  by  me  till 
the  army  sent  by  me  was  landing  in  the  Isle  of  France. 
That  order  was  for  an  expedition  in  April  1811  :  The 
Isle  of  France  surrendered  on  December  3,  1810,  to 
the  army  I  had  sent.  If  I  had  not  pushed  the  thing 
forward,  through  a  thousand  difticidties,  and  at  an 
immense  personal  hazard,  just  at  the  moment  when  I 
did,  the  expedition  ordered  by  the  Grovernment  could 
not  have  been  sent,  or  if  sent  could  not  have  been 
successful ;  for  the  island  would  have  been  reinforced 
— the  certainty  of  which  has  been  demonstrated  by 
the  arrival  of  French  squadron  after  squadron  since  the 
capture — and  would  have  been  impregnable  in  April  to 
any  force  it  was  possible  for  India  to  furnish.  If  I 
had  failed  in  my  own  expetlition,  from  whatever  chance, 
and  without  auy  fault  of  mine,  I  shmdd  have  been  torn 
to  pieces  by  the  very  same  iMinisters,  who  woidd  have 
told  the  world  very  distinctly,  and  without  any  equivo¬ 
cation,  whether  the  calamitous  expechtion  had  been 
.sent  by  me  or  by  themselves.  .  .  . 

‘  With  regard  to  Java,  I  acquainted  Government 
Avith  my  intention  to  folloAv  up  the  reduction  of  the 
French  islands  Avith  an  expedition  against  Java.  This 
Avas  done  in  my  first  communications  concerning  the 
fi'rench  islands ;  and  I  ])ressed  hard  for  instvactions  on 
the  latter  undertaking,  saying  that  I  should  Avait  as 
long  as  I  cmdd  for  their  ansAver  Avithout  hazarding  the 


Mt.  60] 


JAVA. 


299 


success  of  the  plan,  and  if  I  should  receive  no  orders, 
when  there  had  been  time  sufficient  to  send  them,  I 
shoidd  conchide  my  design  was  not  disapproved,  and 
should  proceed  to  the  execution  of  it.  In  the  mean¬ 
while,  everything  was  concerted  for  the  return  of  troops 
and  transports  from  the  Isle  of  France  to  India,  for 
the  purpose  of  serving  against  Java.  This  was  exe- 
■cuted  accordingly,  and  these  resources  arrived  in  time. 
Arrangements  were  made  at  all  the  Presidencies  of 
India,  and  every  preparation  was  put  in  motion  the 
moment  the  news  arrived  of  our  success  in  the  Isle  of 
France.  Everything  was  in  forwardness  when  I  re¬ 
ceived  the  orders  of  the  Secret  Committee  to  attack 
Java ;  and  I  shoidd  have  gone  on  that  expedition  when 
I  did  if  no  orders  had  come.  Java,  therefore,  so  far  as 
credit  is  concerned,  is  as  much  my  own  as  the  French 
islands  ;  for  the  plan  was  formed,  and  the  resolul  ion 
taken,  and  the  prejiarations  made,  and  the  service 
would  have  been  performed  precisely  as  it  has,  on  my 
own  judgment  and  at  my  own  risk.  I  do  not  think 
Government  has  neglected  anything  either.  They 
could  not  have  sent  their  orders  sooner.  But  cir¬ 
cumstances  were  such  that  if  I  had  not  taken  the 
whole  thing  upon  myself,  and  despatched  it  in  the 
shortest  imaginable  time,  the  orders  from  England 
would  have  been  too  late  in  both  cases.  This  is,  I 
think,  enough  on  the  first  pronoun  personal. 