


296 


LOEl)  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


healthy  month  by  the  inhabitants.  September  and 
October  are  among  the  best  in  the  year.  I  am  myself 
perfectly  well. 

‘  Septe'tnher  4. — The  despatches  for  England  are  to 
be  sent  on  board  this  day,  and  I  must  close  here.  Sir 
Samuel  has  embarked  for  the  eastern  expedition,  with 
3,000  men,  which  far  exceeds  the  force  required,  but  they 
\vill  garrison  that  end  of  the  island.  The  “  Modeste  ’’ 
carries  the  Greneral  to  the  easOvard,  and,  when  she  has 
landed  him,  will  retinn  to  be  ready  for  me.  I  still 
think  October  15  the  likely  time  for  my  departure. 
This  country  is  annexed,  like  the  East  India  Company’s 
territories.  I  leave  Mr.  Kafiles  with  the  title  of  Lieu¬ 
tenant  Giovernor,  and  this  Grovernment  is  sidiordinate 
to  the  Giovernor  Gieneral  in  Council  in  Bengal.  All 
these  arrangements,  however,  are  hitherto  made  provi¬ 
sional  by  me,  subject  therefore  to  confirmation  or 
alteration  at  home,  for  I  have  been  obliged  to  deviate 
materially  from  my  instructions.  The  country  is  great, 
fertile,  and  flourishing  beyond  my  expectations,  and, 
with  all  that  depends  upon  and  is  connected  with  it, 
will,  I  hope,  prove  an  acquisition  of  great  value  and 
importance. 

‘  Colonel  Gillespie  will  be  left  in  command  of  the 
troops  on  the  island.  He  has  been  the  great  hero,  and 
the  chief  means  of  our  success.  He  was  very  ill  of  a 
fever  the  day  he  led  the  storm  of  Cornells,  but  is  better ; 
and  T  think  this  appointment,  which  I  sent  Taylor  to 
communicate  to  him  yesterday,  will  prove  a  good  medi¬ 
cine.’ 


^T.  60] 


JAVA. 


297 


‘  Jina,  October  3,  1811. 

‘  This  letter  accompanies  the  final  surrender  of 
Java  by  capitnhition,  tincl  the  successful  temiination 
of  my  hist  m:irti;il  labour.  I  am  certainly  relieved 
from  many  cares  which  have  been  my  companions  from 
the  moment  of  losing  the  grand  care  of  the  IMadras 
mutiny ;  and  these  comrades  ha^■e  made  room  for  a 
most  comfortable  quiet  consciousness  of  having  done 
well,  and  employed  the  powers  that  have  been  placed 
in  my  hands  profitably  to  England,  from  which  I  held 
them.  Gilbert  tells  me  I  musf  not  expect  any  great 
rewards.  This  was  last  Eebruar}-,  on  the  occasion  of  the 
compiest  of  the  Mauritius.  I  do  not  expect  them  now, 
and  I  feel  little  concern  in  that  affair.  1  have  certainly 
deserved  some  public  acknowledgment  or  other  by 
a  very  unusual  train  of  successful  and  of  unusually 
important  services. 

‘  The  withholding  the  usual  recompense  of  seiAuce 
is  one  thing,  but  to  conceal  or  equivocate  about  the 
nature  of  a  ser\ice  is  another.  1  should  certainly 
not  become  a  suitor  for  reward,  which  loses  its  very 
substance  if  given  to  importunity  or  favour;  but  I 
would,  on  the  other  hand,  assert  my  right  simply  to  the 
pablic  k}iowle(l(je  of  what  I  ha\e  done.  I  cannot  help 
suspecting  that  an  attempt  has  been  made  by  ^Ministers 
to  cloke  themselves  in  my  feathers,  and  if  they  have 
done  so,  it  must  have  been  by  nothing  more  noble  than 
a  juggle. 