

‘This  country  far  surpasses  all  the  expectations  any 
stranger  had  ever  formed  of  its  fertility  and  the  richness 
of  its  produce,  its  population  and  civilimtlon,  a  praise 


300 


LOED  MIETO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


which  you  probably  did  not  look  for.  I  have  pleasure 
in  seeing  also  that  the  worst  system  of  government  and 
of  laws  imaginable  present  a  wide  field  for  active  im¬ 
provements,  which  better  principles  of  policy  and  a 
purer  administration  cannot  fail  of  producing.  If  I 
am  happy  enoirgh  to  see  some  progress  made  in  these 
^fiews,  and  to  Avitness  a  substantial  amelioration  in  the 
condition  of  the  five  millions  who  inhabit  this  beautiful 
country,  or  even  a  tendency  to  that  result,  from  the 
foundations  I  shall  have  laid,  I  shall  bear  the  want 
of  reAvards  Avith  the  greatest  equanimity  and  indiffer¬ 
ence. 

‘  I  am  a  great  philosopher  of  late,  having  studied 
hard  in  all  the  leisure  moments  of  this  expedition,  by 
sea  and  land,  under  the  best  precepts  and  the  worst 
practice  that  Avere  ever  united  in  the  same  master, 
Cicero  himself.  I  am  near  the  end  of  his  twenty  volumes, 
and  have  had  great  delight  in  almost  every  page.  Let 
Gilbert  read  you  the  “  Somnium  Scipionis,”  one  of  the 
finest  Avorks  of  antiquity ;  or  at  least  this  passage,  which 
is  near  the  end,  and  the  parting  advice  of  the  elder 
Scipio  to  his  son,  before  the  close  of  the  vision,  when 
he  returns  to  the  regions  of  light  and  immortality. 

‘  Igitur  alte  si  spectare  voles,  atque  hanc  sedem, 
et  aeternam  domum  contueri :  neque  te  sermonibus 
A’ulgi  dederis,  nec  in  premiis  humanis  spem  posueris 
rerum  tuarum :  suis  te  opportet  illecebris  ipsa  virtus 
trahat  ad  verum  decus.’  ‘  Verum  decus  ’  is  Latin  for 
nobility  Avithout  a  patent ;  and  the  last  passage,  begin¬ 
ning  ‘  suis  te  opportet  ’  and  ending  ‘  verum  decus,’  is 


^T.  60] 


JAVA. 


301 


most  beautiful.  I  have  chosen  it  for  the  family  motto, 
if  not  on  our  seals  and  panels,  on  our  lives.  In  the 
meantime  I  have  put  this  discourse  of  Scipio’s  appari¬ 
tion  to  his  son,  in  the  mouth  of  our  family  genius  in 
“  the  IMinto  vision.”  * 

Lot  Reason’s  torch  on  zeal  attend  ! 

Her  calm  undazzling  light  to  lend  : 

With  patriot  ardour  wisdom  blend. 

Be  these  your  guides  ! 

Your  country’s  good  the  noble  end, 

And  nought  besides. 

Heed  not  the  bellowing  crowd’s  acclaim, 

And  fleeting  roar  of  vulgar  fame. 

Powerless  to  giace  an  lionest  name, 

Or  to  defile ; 

The  drunken  praise  or  ruffian  Idame 
Of  clamoiu’  vile. 

Guerdons  that  prompt  the  worldly  race 
Thy  generous  toil  siiall  ne’er  debase  ; 

Won  by  fair  Virtue's  inborn  grace. 

Her  smiles  alone 
Sliall  woo  tliee  to  tlie  lofty  place 
Of  true  renown. 