


28G 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


many  tempting  things,  not  one  taken,  nor  the  slightest 
ofience  given  to  a  single  inhabitant.  Not  a  chick  or  a 
hen  made  free  with,  money  offered  and  given  in  every 
instance  for  what  the  people  are  willing  to  spare.  .  .  . 
The  gentlemen’s  houses  and  other  habitations  of  a 
middling  land  being  deserted,  with  some  old  slave  or 
servant  left  behind  to  look  after  them,  the  officers  have 
astonished  these  guai’dians  by  refusing  to  occupy  the 
houses  with  clean  beds  and  neat  furniture,  and  sleeping 
sometimes  in  the  verandah,  sometimes  in  a  separate 
pavilion,  and  never  in  the  house ;  and  the  cocks  are 
seen  fighting,  the  hens  and  chickens  pecking  about,  and 
the  ducks  gobbling  and  dabbling,  just  as  if  they  were 
our  own  fellow-subjects.  I  observed  yesterday  to  the 
General,  as  we  were  passing  the  house  of  the  Dutch 
Paymaster  General,  that  a  battle  which  we  saw  between 
two  of  his  cocks  was  the  only  thing  like  war  that  I 
could  perceive  in  our  invasion. 

‘  August  9.  The  advance  of  the  army  having 
moied  forward  to  a  place  about  three  miles  from 
Batavia,  the  General  sent  a  summons  to  the  city  which 
was  immediately  answered  by  a  surrender  at  discretion. 
The  enemy,  in  order  to  concentrate  their  force  at  a  place 
called  Cornelis,  had  withdrawn  their  troops  on  the  6th, 
and  set  fire  to  some  public  stores  and  to  the  citadel ;  the 
town  was  therefore  glad  of  our  protection  against  a 
disposition  to  plunder  and  disorder  manifested  by  the 
slaves  and  lower  class  of  Malays.  We  were  thus  in 
possession  of  the  metropolis  of  the  Dutch  East  Indian 


JEt.  60J 


BATAVIA. 


287 


Empire  the  fourth  day  after  our  landing.  Not  a  gentle¬ 
man,  not  a  person  of  any  note  was  left  in  the  city.  The 
Dutch,  that  is,  the  French  Governor,  had  required  them 
under  pain  of  death  to  quit  their  houses  and  repair  to 
the  head-quarters  of  the  army,  where  they  are  narrowly 
watched.  They  have  left  their  houses,  however,  richly 
furnished,  their  wives,  children,  and  slaves  to  the  safe¬ 
guard  of  the  invaders’  generosity  ;  and  we  are  all  Scipios. 
The  deserted  women  were  in  terror,  not  of  us  but  of  their 
own  slaves,  who  have  a  slavish  trick  of  using  the  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  public  disorder  to  gratify  their  private  pas¬ 
sions  by  rising  on  the  defenceless  whites  and  murdering 
those  they  rob.  .  .  .  Everything  p(.)rtable  of  public 
property  had  been  removed  from  the  town,  but  much 
valuable  public  property  was  consumed,  and  much 
plundered.  In  some  streets  people  walked  during  the 
first  days  of  our  occupation  over  the  shoes  in  sugar, 
coffee,  spices,  and  rice.  Ihit  much  has  been  preserved. 
In  that  great  city  were  fonnd  only  six  horses  (ponies) 
and  not  one  head  of  cattle. 