

‘  I  have  presented  no  exaggerated  view  of  this  sub¬ 
ject,  but  am  more  than  ever  confirmed  in  the  truth  and 
justice  of  the  picture  that  has  been  set  l^efore  you,*  by 


'  Id  an  earlier  and  fuller  despalcli. 


^T.  60] 


JAVA. 


309 


what  I  have  witnessed  of  terror  created  in  this  populous 
and  flourishing  quarter  of  Java  by  the  absence  of 
military  protection  for  the  short  interval  of  two  days 
only,  which  passed  between  the  departure  of  the  French 
and  the  arrival  of  our  troops ;  as  well  as  by  the  actual 
massacre  and  pillage  which  in  the  circiut  of  a  few 
miles  have  followed  the  dispersion  of  Janssen’s  army, 
before  a  detachment  of  our  own  could  be  advanced  to 
Buitenzorg. 

‘  It  would  have  been  an  abuse  therefore  of  the  word 
obedience,  and  offensive  above  all  to  the  authority  from 
which  the  order  had  been  issued  under  a  defect  of  local 
information,  to  have  carried  into  effect  a  command  of 
which  the  consequences  described  were  manifest  on  the 
spot  to  those  who  were  charged  with  the  execution. 

‘  Tlie  only  modification  of  which  the  measure  was 
susceptible,  would  have  been  to  provide  the  means  of 
retreat  and  of  future  security  and  maintenance  to  the 
imdtitudes  whose  lives  and  property  were  concerned. 
Tliis  would  have  entailed  an  immense  burden  on  the 
British  Government,  and  would  have  required  pecuniary 
sacrifices  and  arrangements  which  could  have  been 
hazarded  by  no  sid)ordiuate  authority  abroad. 

‘  The  three  courses  which  ai’e  open  to  your  choice 
are — to  withdraw  the  whole  European  population  and 
to  make  a  provision  for  their  support ;  to  restore  the 
colony  unweakened  to  the  Dutch  ;  ttr  to  retain  it  under 
the  British  protection  and  Government. 


310 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


‘I  have  found  here  the  favourable  disposition  which 
I  expected  from  the  Dutch  inhabitants.  They  are 
generally  repugnant  to  the  French  usurpation  both  of 
the  mother  country  and  of  the  colonies.  .  .  .  But  the 
French  Government  had  established  so  strong  a  power 
by  a  system  of  severity  and  terror,  and  there  still  exist 
so  many  collateral  means  of  influence  by  connections 
both  of  family  and  fortune  in  Europe,  that  we  have 
experienced  only  silent  and  inefficient  favour,  and 
derived  no  active  aid  whatever  from  the  friendly  dispo¬ 
sition  of  the  people.  Our  difficulties  have  been  con¬ 
siderably  increased  by  this  neutral  spirit ;  but,  had  the 
Dutch  been  apprised  that,  in  the  e\’ent  of  success,  it  was 
our  design  to  deliver  them  up  disarmed  to  the  Javanese, 
we  should  have  had  to  contend  with  all  the  energies  of 
despair,  and  I  am  quite  persuaded  that  we  should  have 
found  our  force  inadequate  to  the  enterprise. 