

‘  On  this  subject  it  may  be  satisfactory  to  your 
Committee  to  observe  that  I  have  abolished  the  duties 
and  suppressed  the  farms  on  gaming  and  cock-fighting, 
lea\dng  Grovernment  free  by  that  sacrifice  to  employ 
such  prohibitory  means  as  can  be  devised  to  check  this 
prevailing  and  destructive  vice  of  the  native  population. 

‘  The  state  of  slavery  has  attracted  my  serious  and 
anxious  attention.  That  monstrous  system  prevails  to 
a  calamitous  extent  throughout  these  Eastern  regions 
of  India,  and  produces,  as  it  cannot  fail  of  doing,  most 
of  the  miseries  incident  to  that  mode  of  procuring  the 
service  of  men.  But  it  is  too  general  to  be  suddenly 
suppressed  by  any  one  Power  in  so  many  separate  and 
independent  countries.  In  Java  it  is  fortunately  not 
grievous  to  the  slave ;  ser\’itude  being  almost  Avholly 
domestic  or  menial.  I  hope  something  may  be  done 
immediately  for  modifying  this  e\"il,  and  I  propose  that 
Grovernment  should  set  the  example  in  this  reform  by 
abstaining  entirely  from  the  future  purchase  of  slaves. 
A  return  is  preparing  of  the  public  slaves  of  Grovernment 
now  existing,  and  if  the  number  shoidd  prove  incon- 


^T.  60] 


JAVA. 


315 


siderable,  as  1  hope  it  will,  I  have  it  in  contemplation 
to  hazard  an  anticipation  of  yonr  approbation,  which  I 
shall  surely  receive,  by  emancipating  all  those  to  whom 
that  change  would  be  advisable.  The  importation  of 
slaves  may  also  be  checked,  although  it  cannot  yet  be 
abolished.’ 

‘  tVeltevreedeii.  Java  :  October  6,  1811.' 

‘  I  consider  the  main  point  as  ascertained,  and  that 
Java  will  supply  resources  at  the  least  for  its  own 
expenses.  I  need  not  say  to  you  how  great  a  benefit, 
not  reducible  to  the  columns  of  an  estimate  in  dollars, 
will  in  that  case  accrue  to  the  Company  and  the  nation. 
AVe  now  know  from  proof  that  it  was  the  policy  of  the 
Dutch  to  conceal  the  value  and  to  exaggerate  the 
defects  of  their  possessions,  especially  of  Java.  This 
will  account  for  the  inadequate  opinion  entertained,  at 
least  I  imagine  so,  at  home  of  this  island.  It  is  now 
most  nourishing ;  but  the  field  for  improvement  is  in¬ 
exhaustible.  All  that  I  fear  is  the  general  peace. 
This  ought  not  surely  to  prevent  us  from  beginning  to 
perform  the  first  duty  of  Crovenunents  in  improving  the 
condition  of  a  people  that  has  become  tributary  to  our 
authority  and  tributary  to  our  prosperity.  All  we  are 
justified  in  avoiding  is  the  prosecution  in  this  interval 
of  expensive  works.  The  exclusion  of  European  masters 
from  Java  is  impt)ssible  in  the  present  state  of  things. 
To  make  them  richer,  happier,  and  to  give  the  people 
itself  a  feeling  of  independence,  which  they  are  now 