

In  the  instructions  sent  from  the  Court  of  Directors 
to  Lord  Minto  respecting  an  expedition  to  Java,  no 
provision  was  made  for  any  permanent  occupation  of 
the  island  :  no  such  measure  had  been  in  contemplation 


^T.  60] 


JAVA. 


307 


previous  to  Lord  Minto’s  arrival  in  Java,  and  to  the 
personal  acquaintance  he  thereupon  attained  with  the 
condition  of  the  popnlation.  The  Court  of  Directors 
had  simply  intended  an  expedition  to  expel  the  Dutch 
Power,  to  destroy  the  fortitications,  and  to  distribute 
the  arms  and  stores  among  the  natives.  These  in¬ 
structions  Lord  Mintotook  it  on  his  own  responsibility 
to  disobey,  preferring  to  give  time  for  reconsideration  of 
orders  issued  in  ignorance  of  the  hicts,  to  their  execu¬ 
tion  at  the  cost  of  bloodshed  and  anarchy,  if  not  of 
certain  destruction  to  the  colonists. 

It  would  be  mere  waste  of  time  at  the  present  day 
to  enter  into  any  detailed  account  of  the  measures  in¬ 
augurated  by  Lord  Minto  for  the  administration  of 
Java,  thus  incorporated  into  the  British  Empire. 

A  few  extracts  from  his  despatches  will  siifhce  to 
show  the  condition  in  which  he  found  the  island  and 
the  nature  of  the  amelioration  he  proposed  to  effect. 
The  ‘History  of  Java,’  by  Sir  S.  Baffles,  and  other 
works  demonstrate  that  the  brief  period  during  which 
the  connection  of  Glreat  Britain  and  Java  existed,  was 
one  to  the  island  of  prosperity  and  traiKpiillity. 

In  a  despatch  to  the  Secret  Committee  dated 
September  3,  1811,  Lord  Minto  stated  that  he  had 
taken  possession  of  the  Island  of  Java  in  the  Company’s 
name. 

‘  I  am  aware,’  he  said,  ‘  that  all  conquests  of  terri¬ 
tory  from  European  Powers  accrue  by  the  constitution 
of  the  Empire  to  the  Crown  ;  and,  if  I  had  been  under 
the  necessity  of  prosecuting  this  enterprise  on  my  own 


308 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


responsibility  and  witbont  orders,  Java  must  have  been 
simply  annexed  to  His  Majesty’s  dominions  subject  to 
any  arrangement  which  might  afterwards  be  adopted 
by  His  Ma,iesty  with  the  Company.  But  since  the 
-establishment  of  the  Board  of  Control,  every  order  that 
issues  from  the  Honourable  Court,  or  your  Honourable 
Committee,  bears  with  it  the  sanction  of  His  Majesty’s 
Government,  and  I  am  therefore  to  consider  the  com¬ 
mands  with  which  I  was  honoured  respecting  Java,  as 
importing  a  transfer  of  His  Majesty’s  rights  of  conquest 
in  this  instance  to  the  Honourable  Company. 

‘  I  shall  appear  on  first  sight  to  have  departed  from 
the  tenor  of  your  Honourable  Committee’s  instructions, 
by  keeping  possession  instead  of  dismantling  and  evacu¬ 
ating  the  island. 

‘  This  is  a  much  greater  country  than  I  believe  is 
generally  conceived,  and  the  destructive  field  of  massacre 
and  ruin,  to  which  the  disarming  of  the  colony  and 
arming  the  natives  must  have  led.  is  too  extensive,  and 
the  scene  would  have  been  too  shocking  to  every 
virtuous  and  natural  feeling,  to  remain  for  a  moment 
in  the  contemplation  of  minds  to  which  the  object 
should  have  been  presented  in  its  true  colours.  In 
deviating  from  this  part  of  the  plan  I  have,  therefore, 
most  assuredly  been  long  since  approved. 