

‘  It  has  been  made  manifest  that  if  the  PTench 
islands  had  not  been  reduced  before  the  last  hurricane 
month,  that  conquest  would  never  have  been  accom¬ 
plished  by  any  scale  of  force  or  measures  which  have 
hitherto  been  in  contemplation.  .  .  .  Three  thousand, 
or  four  thousand,  indeed  a  smaller  number  of  PTench 
troops  of  the  line — and  that  succour,  we  have  now 
reason  to  know,  would  have  been  actually  thrown  in— 


320 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


would,  in  all  the  opinions  I  have  heard,  have  rendered 
the  Mauritius  impregnable  to  any  expedition  from 
India. 

‘  Again,  if  the  Mauritius  had  not  fallen  in  December, 
it  would  have  been  totally  impossible  to  prosecute  the 
views  against  Java,  always  combined  with  the  former, 
before  the  rainy  monsoons  in  the  Eastern  seas.  And  if 
we  had  waited  for  the  succeeding  favourable  season,  we 
have  now  seen  that  Java  would  also  have  been  re¬ 
inforced  beyond  any  means  we  could  have  employed 
for  the  conquest.  In  a  course  of  measures,  therefore, 
necessarily  to  follow  each  other,  depending  all  through 
upon  a  chain  of  success  without  a  broken  link,  and  each 
limited  to  the  narrowest  period  of  time,  and  treading 
upon  the  heels  of  the  other,  I  had, — first,  to  be  reasonably 
satisfied  that  by  great  exertion  success  was  possible 
and  probable, — and  next,  to  push  on  without  delay. 
“  Nos  quidem  hoc  sentimus  ” — this  is  the  sentiment  of 
Cicero  to  Lentulus  when  he  advises  him  ft)  undertake 
the  conquest  of  Egypt — “  si  exploratum  tibi  sit,  posse 
te  illius  regni  potiri,  non  esse  cunctandum ;  si  dubium 
non  esse  conandum.’’ 

‘  .  .  .  and  in  the  progress  of  these  successive 
anxious  events  I  have  been  more  than  once  reminded 
of  what  Lentulus  is  told  in  the  same  epistle  from  his 
friend:  ‘Totius  facti  tui  judicium,  non  tarn  ex  con- 
silio  tuo,  quam  ex  eventu,  homines  esse  factnros. 

‘  I  have  been  most  fortunate  in  Sir  S.  Auchmuty,  not 
only  as  a  Glen  era!  but  as  a  gentleman.  Collision  has 


^T.  60] 


CALCUTTA. 


321 


been  entirely  excluded  from  this  joint  service,  and  the 
most  cordial  harmony  has  prevailed  between  ns. 
Indeed,  I  have  taken  care  there  should  be  no  collision 
by  effacing  myself  entirely  till  the  conquest  was  made, 
and  the  moment  came  for  assuming  the  govern¬ 
ment  ;  taking  care  that  one  sun  should  be  in  eclipse 
while  the  other  was  shining  in  the  same  hemisphere. 
.  .  .  You  cannot  well  imagine  the  discomfort  I  feel  in 
writing  a  line  that  expresses  even  a  shade  of  discontent, 
and  especially  in  addressing  it  to  yourself,  whose  whole 
conduct  towards  me  has  been  calculated  to  inspire  sen¬ 
timents  of  the  very  opposite  kind ;  but  in  truth  I  have 
had  occasion  to  perceive  for  a  certain  time  back  a 
change  in  the  comfortable  footing  on  which  I  stood  at 
home  when  I  left  England.’  After  alluding  to  certain 
measures  which  in  his  judgment  appeared  to  claim  an 
acknowledgment  that  they  had  not  received.  Lord  Minto 
continued  :  ‘  At  the  head  of  these  I  place  all  that  relates 
to  the  IMadras  troubles,  on  which  I  am  anxious  to  say 
beforehand  that  I  join  issue  with  any  adversaries  I  may 
appear  to  have,  and  to  assert  for  myself  that  from  the 
first  origin  to  the  last  date  of  these  events  I  acted  the 
part  that  became  me,  considting  alike  the  duty  I  owed 
to  the  public,  and  the  justice  or  indulgence  which  it  was 
fitting  to  administer  to  individuals.  A  mutiny  of  officers 
and  gentlemen  was  subdued ;  the  distracted  army  was 
tranquillised  and  reconciled ;  the  same  army  has  since, 
and  did  indeed  instantly  evince,  not  merely  its  fidelity, 
but  its  courage  and  discipline  in  action  and  distin¬ 
guished  service.’ 