


^T.  60] 


JAVA. 


305 


dance,  which  was  to  a  very  slow  valse  tune,  the  figure 
inuch  the  same  as  ours,  with  a  valse  embrace  however, 
instead  of  an  allemande,  they  were  at  home,  and  not 
without  grace  ;  while  our  English  damsels  and  cavaliers 
were  all  abroad,  and  about  as  awkward  and  cri2:)pled 
as  their  Dutch  fellow-subjects  had  been  before.  Mrs. 
Bunbury,  the  wife  of  an  officer,  a  young  pretty  English¬ 
woman,  stood  up  in  the  dance ;  but  seeing,  when  the 
first  couple  reached  her,  the  Dutch  gentleman  take  his 
partner  fairly  in  his  arms  and  hug  her,  as  it  appeared 
to  her  as  a  bear  does  his  prey,  she  fairly  took  to  her 
heels,  and  could  not  be  brought  back  again  by  any 
means,  to  see  or  share  such  horror.  The  Dutch  valsers 
certainly  deal  in  very  strict  embraces,  but  our  English 
gentlemen,  to  their  shame  be  it  said,  appeared  so  en¬ 
tirely  unpractised  in  that  art,  that  their  Dutch  partners 
gave  the  point  uji  as  a  bad  job,  and  were  forced  to  con¬ 
tent  themselves  with  merely  taking  hands  and  swinging 
the  loobies  about.  The  chapcn-ons  and  older  Dutch 
ladies  are  a  class  not  yet  described  in  Europe.  The 
principal  mark  to  know  them  by  is  their  immense  size. 
Tlie  whole  colonial  sex  runs  naturally  to  fat,  jvartly 
from  over-feeding— jxirtly  from  total  want  of  exercise. 
The  morning  air  is  the  grand  pursuit  of  the  English 
Orientalists ;  the  Dutch  of  both  sexes  have  a  honw  for 
it,  and  prefer  their  beds.  In  the  re.st  of  the  day  nobody 
can  go  out;  and  in  the  evening  they  think  a  drive  in 
a  carriage  too  great  an  effort.  They  pass  their  time 
as  follows.  There  is  a  canal  opposite  to  every  door  on 
the  other  side  of  the  road.  Each  house  has  a  little 


X 


306 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


projecting  gallery  supported  by  posts  in  the  canal. 
The  lower  part  of  this,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  level  of 
the  road  down  into  the  water,  is  made  in  some  small 
degree  private,  by  upright  bars  at  a  little  distance 
from  each  other,  and  with  this  bath  the  road  communi¬ 
cates  by  wooden  steps.  Here  the  lady  of  the  house, 
her  relatives,  and  female  slaves,  lave  their  charms,  and 
here  you  may  behold  the  handmaids  of  Diana  sporting 
on  and  under  the  wave  in  sight  of  all  passing  Actaeons. 
Th  is  is  the  morning  scene.  In  the  evening,  as  I  was 
saying,  they  have  chairs  brought  out  in  the  gallery 
above,  and  sit  with  their  beaux  in  conversation  and 
repose.  Suppose  an  immense  woman  sitting  behind  a 
stall  mth  roasted  apples,  and  we  have  an  old  Dutch 
lady  of  the  highest  rank  and  fashion.  Her  upper 
garment  is  a  loose  coarse  white  cotton  jacket  fastened 
nowhere,  but  worn  with  the  graceful  neghgence  of  pins 
and  all  other  fastenings  or  constraints  of  a  Scotch  lass, 
an  equally  coarse  petticoat,  and  the  coarsest  stockings, 
terminating  in  wide  thick-soled  shoes  ;  but  by  standing 
behind  her  you  find  out  her  nobility,  for  at  the  back  of 
the  head  a  little  circle  of  hair  is  gathered  into  a  small 
crown,  and  on  this  are  deposited  diamonds,  rubies,  and 
precious  stones  often  of  very  great  value.  It  is  well 
■with  this  if  they  can  speak  even  Dutch,  many  knowing 
no  language  but  Malay.’ 