

‘  Fir.st,  I  strongly  recommend  that  the  arrangements 


316 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


now  established  may  not  be  superseded  for  the  purpose 
of  uniting  the  Government  in  the  same  person  with  the 
command  of  the  army. 

‘  Secondly,  that  this  island  and  all  its  affairs,  civil 
and  military,  may  be  left  under  the  superintendence  of 
the  Governor  of  Bengal,  and  not  transferred  to  any 
other  authority  in  India. 

‘  I  am  happy  to  confirm  the  opinion  I  have  already 
submitted  to  your  honourable  Committee  that  the 
resources  of  the  island  will  assuredly  cover  all  charges, 
civil  and  military.’ 

Before  quitting  Batavia  Lord  Minto  remarked  to 
one  of  its  chief  residents,  that  it  was  not  certain  whether 
England  would  retain  permanent  possession  of  Java, — 
‘  but,’  he  added,  in  words  which  were  long  remembered, 
‘  while  we  are  here  let  us  do  as  much  good  as  we  can,’ 
To  the  close  of  his  administration  of  the  government 
of  India  he  watched  over  the  welfare  of  Java  with  un¬ 
failing  solicitude — a  fact  recognised  in  feeling  language 
by  Sir  Stamford  Baffles  when,  addressing  the  Batavian 
Society  subsequently  to  Lord  Minto’s  death,  he  said  : 

‘  A  tender  and  parental  care  for  the  island  of  Java  was. 
publicly  avowed  on  different  occasions ;  the  proofs  of  it 
were  received ;  the  European  community  was  saved  and 
preserved  by  his  humanity,  and  on  his  responsibility ; 
for  the  native  administration  principles  were  laid  down 
on  which  the  whole  of  the  present  structure  has  been 
raised ;  and  in  every  instance  a  wish  was  evinced  of 


^T,  ',60] 


JAVA. 


317 


improving  the  successes  of  war,  as  much  in  favour  of 
the  conquered  as  of  the  conqueror. 

‘  It  would  not  be  proper  on  this  occasion  to  enter 
into  particulars,  but  who  does  not  gratefully  recollect 
the  general  tenor  of  his  conduct  and  demeanour  Avhile 
in  Java  ?  administering  aid  and  assistance  with  his  own 
hands  to  the  maimed  and  wounded  of  his  enemies ; 
setting,  in  the  midst  of  his  successes,  an  example  of 
moderation  and  simplicity  of  manner  even  to  the  van¬ 
quished  ;  proceeding  often  in  public  without  any  other 
signs  of  greatness  and  distinction  than  what  the  whole 
community  singly  and  jointly  were  eager  to  show  him  ; 
never  missing  an  opportunity  of  doing  even  a  temporary 
good ;  and  conciliating  by  these  means  the  minds  of 
the  public  to  such  a  degree,  that  enemies  were  rendered 
friends,  and  that  the  names  of  conqueror  and  subduer 
were  lost  in  those  of  protector  and  liberator.’ 

The  energy  and  devotion  which  Lord  iMinto  brought 
to  bear  on  the  affairs  of  Java  were  all  the  more  praise¬ 
worthy,  because  of  the  acute  grief  he  endured  during 
the  months  passed  by  him  in  the  island.  There  he 
learnt  the  death  of  his  youngest  son,  William,  who  had 
been  left  at  hladras,  having  already  shown  symptoms 
of  the  illness  which  was  the  cause  of  his  death — an 
attack  of  congestion  of  the  lungs. 