

Y 


322 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


And  to  the  Chairman  of  the  Court  of  Directors  *  he 
Avrote  in  the  same  strain ; — 

‘  If  I  had  acted  on  any  feeble  and  false  principle — if 
I  had  Aveakened  my  support  to  the  Company’s  govern¬ 
ment  by  any  refined  or  capricious  modification — if  I 
had  but  Avavered  and  suffered  a  shade  of  doubt  to  exist 
concerning  me,  Sir  Gleorge  himself  has  often  acknoAV- 
ledged,  since  the  event  has  been  closed,  that  all  Avas  lost. 
After  the  submission  of  the  guilty  I  claim  to  have  done 
all  that  Avas  necessary  for  discipline  and  future  security ; 
and  it  is  my  boast,  and  abvays  Avill  be,  that  I  did  no 
more ;  that  I  stopped  the  torrent  of  individual  calamity 
at  the  point  Avhere  it  ceased  to  be  indispensable  for  the 
public  interest  and  safety.  I  claim  to  have  tranquil- 
lised  the  army  as  quickly  after  the  tempest  as  the  SAvell 
that  survives  tempests  alloAved ;  and  from  a  condition 
dangerous  to  the  existence  of  our  nation,  I  sent  out 
that  army  instantly,  entitled  to  our  confidence  Avhen  it 
Avent,  and  to  our  thanks  and  applause  when  the  service 
was  performed. 

‘  In  the  last  days  of  1811  I  have  still  to  say  that  I 
do  not  know  by  a  single  official  word  that  my  residence 
at  Madras  during  eight  months  of  the  years  1809 
and  1810  has  ever  reached  the  ears  of  the  Court  of 
Directors.  I  hazarded  from  thence  several  important 
suggestions  for  the  public  good,  but  they  have  lain 
Avithout  notice  until  the  present  time.’ 

Again,  as  in  his  differences  with  the  missionaries, 


'  Dec.  12,  1811. 


^T.  60] 


LETTERS  FROM  HOME. 


,32.3 


the  Court  of  Directors  was  a  house  divided  against 
itself.  Sir  (xeorge  Barlow’s  friends  were  offended  liy 
the  leniency  shown  to  the  officers;  his  opponents 
resented  the  approbation  bestowed  by  Lord  Minto  on 
Sir  George  Barlow  for  the  energetic  measures  by  which 
he  had  stemmed  the  tide  of  mutiny. 

The  Governor  General  had  strcjiigly  recommended 
Sir  George,  ‘  and  other  faithful  servants  of  the  Madras 
mutiny,’  for  some  mark  of  public  approbation.  ‘  If 
this  is  not  done,  I  must  say  that  Government  will  be 
deficient  in  a  just  estimate  of  the  evil  that  has  been 
averted,  and  of  the  service  that  has  been  rendered  to 
the  empire,’  But  though  the  despatches,  when  at  last 
they  arrived  in  India,  contained  a  cordial  approbation 
of  the  part  taken  by  the  Governor  General,  the  con¬ 
duct  of  Sir  George  Barlow  was  commented  upon  in 
terms  which  foreshadowed  his  recall  in  the  following 
year. 

Some  passages  fixan  a  letter  written  by  Lord 
]\Iinto’s  eldest  daughter,  give  an  amusing  and  pro¬ 
bably  an  accurate  view  of  certain  circumstances  which 
deprived  her  father’s  services  at  this  period  of  their  just 
meed  of  approbation. 