

‘  The  multitude  of  arrangements,  especially  for  the 
public  security  and  tranquillity  which  the  sudden  as¬ 
sumption  of  the  government  demand,  do  not  in  the 
present  moment  leave  me  at  liberty  to  prosecute  in¬ 
quiries  and  pursrre  deliberations  concerning  your  more 
general  interests  in  this  quarter. 

‘  I  propose  to  vest  the  chief  authority  in  Mr. 
Raffles,  under  the  title  of  Lieutenant  Governor ;  .  .  .  . 
that  the  Government  of  Java  should  be  subordinate  to 
the  supreme  Government  of  Bengal ;  that  a  regular 
report  of  all  proceedings  should  be  made  there  ;  and  that 


JEt.  60] 


JAVA. 


311 


the  orders  of  the  Governor  General  in  Council  should 
be  binding  in  Java,  sidiject  to  the  higher  authority  of 
the  Honourable  Court  of  Directors.’ 

‘  I  can  say'  with  certainty  that  the  value  of  the  island 
and  the  face  of  prosperity  which  every  part  of  the  island 
wears,  even  weighed  down  as  it  has  been  by  a  most 
oppressive  system,  and  after  a  most  iniquitous  and 
grinding  administration  of  government,  very  far  exceeds 
any  other  which  had  ever  been  conceived  by  strangers, 
and  is  a  constant  and  general  subject  of  observation 
amongst  ourselves.  Yet  every  acknowledged  principle 
of  good  government  is  unknown  in  Java,  and  all  the 
mischievous,  deteriorating,  and  grievous  maxims  of  a 
narrow,  monopolising,  and  harsh  policy  are  in  full  force 
and  vigour  in  every  department  of  affairs.  No  man’s 
interest  in  land  exceeds  the  term  of  one  year.  This 
admits  of  a  small  number  of  partial  exceptions,  but  is 
generally  true.  The  whole  surface  is  the  property  of 
Government,  and  very  extensive  territories  are  cultivated 
and  managed  on  the  account  of  Government  under  the 
direction  of  pidilic  affairs.  Government  exacts  a  pre¬ 
emption  at  an  arbitrary  price  in  the  produce  of  many 
other  lands. 

‘  In  a  word  the  whole  system  of  property  is  vicious 
and  adverse  to  the  interests  of  Government  and  people. 

‘  The  revenues,  &c.,  have  long  been  all  in  farm :  the 
farmers  are  universally  Chinese,  who  have  no  competi¬ 
tors.  Hence  arises  necessary  loss  to  Government  and 

'  To  Uie  Secret  Committee  of  tlie  Court  of  Directors,  October  5, 
1811. 


312 


LOED  MIXTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


oppressive  extortion  on  the  subject.  I  have  neverthe¬ 
less  been  obliged  to  renew  the  farms  for  the  remaining 
months  of  the  present  year.  A  change  in  the  system 
of  collecting  will  require  considerable  preparation  both 
in  regulation  and  in  providing  instruments,  who  ai’e  now 
entirely  Avanting.  The  duties  of  export  and  import  in 
the  harbour  of  Bata\ia  haA'e,  hoAvever,  been  placed  under 
a  custom-house,  collection  being  immediately  under  the 
A'igilance  of  Grovernment. 