


To  the  night  Hon.  Ih  Hnndas. 


314 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


totally  mtliout,  would  be  the  best  receipt  for  making 
their  country  less  accessible  to  European  invaders.  But 
in  our  orvn  times  this  cannot  be  looked  to,  and  the 
Giovernment  we  have  established  must  instantly  be  re¬ 
placed  by  the  French  whenever  it  is  withdrawn.  The 
more  flourishing  the  country  may  be  at  the  time  of 
such  a  revolution,  the  better,  I  think,  for  the  nations 
without,  although  it  may  also  be  advantageous  to  the 
ruling  European  power  mthin.  But  I  feel  assiured  that 
you  agree  with  me  in  thinking  our  policy  should  lead 
to  the  improvement  of  the  country,  and,  if  not  our 
policy,  the  eternal  and  fundamental  law  by  which  Gro- 
vemments  and  subjects  are  united.  I  think  we  ought 
to  make  it  an  English  colony  as  soon  as  we  can,  by  the 
introduction  of  English  colonists,  English  capital,  and, 
therefore,  an  English  interest.  This  does  not  require 
the  exclusion  of  the  old  Dutch,  who  will  not  bear  a 
great  proportion  to  the  whole,  and  who  will  become 
English  the  more  readily  as  they  are  now  -without  a 
country.’ 

‘  I  shall  embark  to-morrow  evening,  and  hope  to 
make  the  passage  in  about  thirty  days.'  Local  business, 
and  the  extreme  pressTire  of  such  affairs  as  concern 
either  bodies  of  men  or  individuals,  have,  as  is  usual, 
accumulated  irpon  me  to  such  a  degree  for  some  time 
past  in  the  expectation  of  my  approaching  departure, 
that  it  would  have  been  entirely  impossible  for  me  to 
throw  the  information  I  possess,  or  the  resolutions  and 

'  Extract  from  a  despatch  of  Lord  Miiitoto  the  Secret  Committee 
October  18,  1811. 


JEt.  60] 


JAVA. 


315 


opinions  I  have  been  able  to  form,  on  the  affjiirs  of  this 
new  Government,  into  a  shape  fit  for  inspection.  .  .  . 
The  leisure  of  my  voyage  to  Bengal  will  enable  me  to 
digest  the  material  I  take  with  me,  and  to  present  to 
your  Honourable  Committee  by  the  first  ship  from 
Bengal  after  my  arrival  there,  a  full,  and  I  would  anx¬ 
iously — fondly  hope,  a  satisfactory  report  of  my  pro¬ 
ceedings  in  this  country. 

‘  In  the  meanwhile,  conscious  that  in  the  share 
which  has  fallen  to  my  lot  in  the  arduous  but  successful 
measures  which  have  placed  this  important  territory  at 
your  disposal,  I  have  looked  only  to  the  general  interests 
of  the  nation  and  the  East  India  Company,  and  that  in 
every  point  of  the  arrangements  which  I  have  pro\rsion- 
ally  adopted  since  the  acquisition  was  made,  the 
advantage  of  the  Company  and  the  improvement  of 
the  country  have  been  the  united  but  exclusive  ob¬ 
jects  of  contemplation,  I  cannot  help  entertaining  an 
earnest  wish,  which  I  should  be  happy  indeed  if  all 
circumstances  authorised  me  to  call  a  hope,  that  suffi¬ 
cient  confidence  might  be  felt  in  the  judgments  which 
I  have  formed,  with  much  incpdry  and  reflection  on 
the  spot,  to  make  at  least  a  trial  of  the  system  and 
arrangements  I  now  presume  to  recommend.  ...  I  will 
therefore  specify  two  points  at  least  of  the  present 
system  in  Java,  which  in  my  faithfid  and  deliberate 
judgment  it  would  be  prejudicial  to  every  interest  of 
the  Conjpany  or  the  public  in  this  country  to  alter  or 
reverse  in  the  present  period  of  our  connection. 