

Of  this  sad  event  Lord  Minto  said  to  tliose  who 
were  near  him  when  he  learnt  it,  that  ‘  it  was  the  first 
and  only  grievance  which  either  this  son  or  any  of  his 
children  had  ever  inflicted  on  their  parents.’ 


318 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA 


[1811 


CHAPTEE  XIIT. 

Heavy  and  numerous  were  the  letter-bags  which  awaited 
at  Calcutta  Lord  Minto’s  return  from  Java.  It  was 
therefore  mth  no  small  share  of  surprise  that  he  found 
the  official  letters  addressed  to  him  absolutely  silent  on 
the  most  important  transactions  of  the  preceding  years, 
namely,  the  Madras  mutiny,  and  the  conquest  of  the 
French  islands. 

‘  It  does  not  appear,’  he  wrote  to  Lord  Melville,  in  a 
j:)rivate  and  confidential  letter  dated  December  10,  1811, 
‘  it  does  not  appear  from  anything  official  that  the 
Court  of  Directors  ever  heard  that  the  French  cruisers 
had  been  for  ever  excluded  from  the  port  of  Mauritius, 
and  that  the  French  islands  themselves  had  been  cap¬ 
tured  by  an  army  of  their  own  under  their  own  Grovem- 
ment.  This  seems  strange  to  ns,  to  whom  no  doubt 
those  events  have  appeared  of  greater  moment  than 
they  are,  owing,  perhaps,  to  their  having  so  long  occu¬ 
pied  our  whole  hearts  and  souls.  I  have  not  been  able 
sometimes  to  help  asking  myself  whether  the  same 
silence  would  have  prevailed  if  I  had  failed,  and  whether 
the  public  would  not  in  that  case  have  been  very  dis¬ 
tinctly  informed  whose  expedition  it  was.’ 


^T.  60] 


CALCUTTA. 


319 


In  another  letter  to  the  same  correspondent,  he 
wrote :  ‘  I  do  not  foresee  that  in  what  may  remain  of 
my  puldic  life  any  occasion  can  ever  occur  again  in  which 
the  interests  confided  to  me  shall  require  the  assumption 
at  my  own  hazard  of  unauthorised  powers.  I  am  firr 
from  thinking  that  measures  undertaken  on  respon¬ 
sibility  are  by  any  means  meritorious  on  that  account. 
On  the  contrary,  success  itself  should  in  my  judgment 
be  put  on  its  defence,  and  it  is  not  till  after  acquittal 
that  the  irregular  service,  however  important,  can  ob¬ 
tain  acknowledgment.  .  .  My  defence  is,  first,  I  knew 
in  an  authoritative  way  (I  include  the  French  islands 
in  this  argument)  that  the  objects  proposed  by  the 
measures  I  hazarded  were  deemed  desirable  by  Govern¬ 
ment.  I  knew,  secondly,  that  they  could  not  be  ob¬ 
tained  in  any  other  way.  Thirdly,  I  had  good  grounds, 
since  established  by  success  in  each  instance,  to  believe 
that  they  might  then  be  accomplished.  Fourthly  (and 
this  is  the  strong  point  of  my  defence,  without  which  all 
the  rest  would  be  invalid),  1  was  intimately  convinced, 
and  I  am  now  sanctioned  by  the  events,  that  the  service 
woidd  have  become  impracticable  by  delay. 