


Mt.  61] 


L JOTTERS  FROM  INDIA. 


335 


were  waiting  for  my  gracious  acceptance,  and  you  have 
also  heard  of  their  arrival  at  Calcutta  in  my  last.  I 
had  sjiven  the  simiames  of  Man  and  Fi’iend  to  the  two 
eldest  boys,  who  continue  to  he  my  owi  hlan  and 
Friend.  I  forget  whether  I  have  given  you  an  account 
of  these  sentimental  appellations  ;  hut,  to  save  you  from 
the  chance  of  a  second  seccatore,  I  shall  now  refer  you 
briefly  to  an  amiable  passage  in  Seneca,  Epistle  47, 
where,  preaching  humanity  and  kindness  towards  slaves, 
he  says :  “  Servi  sunt,  imo  homines ;  servi  sunt,  imo 
contubernales ;  servi  sunt,  imo  humiles  amici  (this  I 
think  beautiful),  servi  sunt,  imo  conservi,”  &c.  I  gave 
them  the  Christian  names,  therefore,  of  Homo  and 
Amicus,  that  I  may  always  be  put  in  mind  to  treat 
my  humble  property  like  men  and  friends  instead  of 
cattle.  Indeed,  they  deserve  it ;  for  better,  gentler  boys 
were  never  born  in  Christendom.  However,  they  were 
to  have  Christian  names  in  the  usual  sense  of  that  word 
at  their  baptism,  and  one  of  them  is  fhancis  ]Man,  and 
the  other  Edmund  Friend  ;  but  I  do  not  mean  to  jiart 
with  the  names  given  them  by  their  godfather  Seneca, 

and  they  will  continue  to  be  Man  and  Friend . 

‘  I  have  read  seven  volumesof  “  Madame  du  Deffand” ' 


‘  ‘There is  a booJc published,  called  Cm-roijmii dance  de  Madame  de 
Deffand,  which  contains  an  account  of  tlie  court  of  Madame  de 
Maine,  "reatly  roseuilding  what  is  to  be  seen  at  Kensington.  Tlie 
mixture  of  kindness  and  torment  exercised  towards  her  ladies,  tlur 
violent  walks  and  agitations  of  l)ody  to  malve  uj)  for  tlie  want  of 
events,  the  jealousy  about  her  friends,  and  her  caju'iee,  the  shortness 
of  her  emotions,  the  extreme  gaiety  and  extreme  dulness  of  her 
house,  are  exactly  like  tlie  ways  of  Kensington.' — Anna  Jlaria  Elliot 
to  her  fa'her,  Lord  Minto,  February  26,  1810. 


336 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1812 


most  faithfully,  which  I  confess  is  a  great  waste  of  life, 
especially  as  both  her  topics  and  her  thoughts  are 
identically  the  same  in  every  letter.  But  I  felt  so 
much  interest  both  in  herself  and  in  many  of  the 
persons  who  belonged  to  her  society  and  are  found  in 
her  correspondence  either  as  parties  or  subjects,  that  I 
did  not  like  to  skip.  Her  style  also  is  so  good  that  I 
was  afraid  of  losing  a  pleasure,  such  as  good  writing 
bestows,  if  I  missed  a  sentence.  I  did  really  feel  for¬ 
merly  a  sort  of  affectionate  veneration  for  her ;  but  I 
knew  nothing  more  of  her  real  character  and  value  than 
what  she  chose  to  show  in  the  best  part  of  her  day, — 
that  is  to  say,  in  her  evening  circle,  which  had  in  truth 
all  the  freshness  of  other  people’s  mornings,  as  she  was 
just  out  of  bed.  But  now  that  I  have  seen  the  rest 
of  her  four-and-twenty  hours,  and  am  in  all  the  secrets 
of  her  insomnies  by  night  and  her  ennui  by  day,  I 
confess  that  my  veneration  has  much  abated ;  and  if  a 
kind  feeling  still  remains  it  is  the  glimmering  of  an 
old  flame  which  a  knowledge  of  her  life,  character,  and 
opinions  has  not  served  to  feed  or  brighten.  There 
certainly  never  was  anybody  with  talents  and  a  good 
understanding  whose  philosophy  had  taught  them  less 
d(i  finilms,  and  who  had  lived  eighty  years  in  greater 
or  more  childish  error  concerning  the  ends  of  life  and 
the  means  of  happiness.  The  only  virtue  she  professed 
was  sincerity,  of  which  she  has  left  an  illustration  in  her 
correspondence  mth  Voltaire ;  and  her  only  passion 
friendship  ;  witness  her  teasing  quarrelsome  connection 
with  the  President  H4nault.  As  for  Mr.  Walpole,  his 