


^T.  61 J 


MADAME  DU  DEFFAND. 


337 


brutality  seems  to  have  been  a  judgment  upon  her  sins 
to  others.  He  was  a  prim,  precise,  pretending,  con¬ 
ceited  savage,  but  a  most  uri-E utflisli  one.  It  is  not 
odd  that  she  should  have  thought  a  little  incorrectly 
of  the  English  character,  having  formed  her  notion  of 
it  principally  from  iMr.  Walpole,  Fish  Crawfurd,  and 
George  ISelwyn.  I  have  taken  of  late  a  good  course  of 
epistolary  reading,  just  before  Madame  du  Detfand, 
having  gone  through  the  whole  of  Cicero’s  correspond¬ 
ence  with  his  contemporaries,  Atticus  included. 

‘  Pray  never  pubhsh  mine,  for  it  is  a  sort  of  post¬ 
humous  work  that  I  think  seldom  does  much  for  the 
fame  of  the  writer.  But  Cicero  repays  the  reader  by  the 
history,  or  rather  memoirs,  of  a  period  more  interesting 
than  that  of  Louis  XV.,  and  by  the  charm  of  his  style, 
which  is  always  admirable.  I  am  now  reading  Middle¬ 
ton’s  “  Life  of  Cicero  ”  for  the  third  time.  It  has  always 
entertained  and  interested,  but  not  editied  me,  as  to  the 
character  of  the  times,  of  the  Koman  people,  of  Cicero 
the  hero  of  the  book,  or  of  any  one  of  the  able  but 
universally  profligate  and  generally  detestable  actors  in 
that  turbulent  and  calamitous  though  splendid  scene.’ 

‘  Calcutta:  March  10  1812. 

‘  1  am  in  perfect  health,  but  have  been  less  robust 
since  my  Java  excursion  than  before.  .  .  .  My  onl} 
concern  is  about  the  use  of  my  legs.  They  have  been 
so  entirely  confined  to  purposes  of  ornament,  having 
touched  nothing  harder  than  a  carpet  or  a  mat,  and 
carried  their  master  no  further  than  the  length  of  a 

z 


338 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[181-2 


verandah,  for  so  many  years,  that  I  have  often  serious 
donhts  and  anxieties  ahont  the  craigs.  If  I  cannot 
enjoy  them,  wherefore  should  I  live  ?  and  at  Prince  of 
Wales’  Island,  scrambling  np  to  the  waterfall,  my 
gentlemen  gave  themselves  such  fine  airs  that  I  have 
been  rather  nneasy  on  the  subject  ever  since.  How¬ 
ever,  I  shall  hopQ  both  in  the  climate  and  the  exercise 
of  the  craigs,  for  the  recovery  of  at  least  some  share  of 
what  I  have  been  losing  all  this  time.  I  have  long 
been  content  to  ^valk  through  the  remainder  of  life, 
and  to  leave  the  old  leaping  and  skipping  paces  to  my 
betters  ;  but  if  I  cannot  follow  my  own  kilted  lady  to 
Topwood  or  Fatlips  I  shall  stand  in  need  of  more 
philosophy  than  any  of  my  books  have  yet  tanght 
me.  .  .  . 

‘  Jan  nary  1,  1814,  is  the  day  at  which  my  reckonings 
end.  It  cannot  probably  be  that  identical  day,  but 
it  will  be  as  few  over  or  under  as  we  can  contrive. 

By  the  deep  nine,  and  then  a  quarter  less  five,” 
will  be  sung  out  at  last,  and  reward  our  long  voyage 
with  home  and  perfect  happiness.  So  man  proposes ; 
the  out-tirrn  is  not  our  affair ;  and  we  have  a  right 
to  enjoy  hope  till  the  event  comes,  whatever  it 
may  be. 