


‘April  22,  1812. 

‘  You  will  see  by  the  papers  that  the  whole  country 
is  up  in  arms  at  the  immoderate  price  of  everything. 
Bread  is  double  what  it  was  last  year,  and  four  times 
its  original  price,  and  all  other  necessaries  equally  high. 
As  to  luxuries,  they  are  beyond  imagination ;  but  you 
may  guess  that  of  necessaries  when  I  tell  you  I  am 
obliged  to  give  the  maid-servants  shillings  a  day,* 
which  with  difficulty  will  suffice.  Riots  have  taken 
place  in  most  of  the  great  manufacturing  towns,  of  a 
most  formidable  character ;  they  are  increasing  rather 
than  diminishing,  and  there  is  a  most  general  dread  of 
what  will  be  the  result  of  the  present  state  of  things. 


'  For  their  Board. 


328 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1812 


Koyalty  seems  to  court  its  downfall,  and  has  already 
forfeited  even  artificial  respect.  He  seems  determined 
to  leave  the  nation  to  its  fate,  and  mil  not  even  go 
through  the  labour  of  signing  his  name  to  one  paper 
in  twenty  that  awaits  his  signature.  He  gets  up  at 
three;  has  jewellers,  tailors,  and  all  sorts  of  tradesmen 
as  soon  as  he  is  up,  whom  he  receives  before  he  dresses  ; 
and  metamorphoses  the  dress  of  the  army  and  navy, 
and  fiddle-faddles  away  an  hour  or  two,  dresses  and 
goes  to  Hertford  House,  drinks  the  hottest  and  strong¬ 
est  mixtures  of  spirits  and  strong  wines,  and  forgets 
the  pleasures  and  the  cares  of  life.’ 

‘  May  21,  1812. 

‘  I  have  long  been  holding  forth  on  the  badness  of 
the  times,  but  the  horrible  and  atrocious  murder  of  the 
Prime  IMinister  ^  last  week  has  really  made  everybody’s 
hair  stand  on  end.  I  need  not  describe  it,  as  every 
circumstance  is  most  truly  detailed  in  all  the  news¬ 
papers.  It  does  not  appear  that  the  assassin  was  con¬ 
nected  with  any  of  the  great  variety  of  discontented 
or  riotous  mobs  which  exist  in  different  parts  of  the 
kingdom ;  at  the  same  time  his  conduct  has  been  ap¬ 
plauded  and  commended,  as  you  will  see  at  Nottingham, 
by  huzzas  and  ringing  of  bells. 

‘  In  London,  I  am  very  sorry  to  say,  the  lower  and 
even  the  middle  classes  rejoice  in  the  event,  and  make 
no  scruple  of  saying  openly,  “  It  is  all  the  better ;  more 
should  go  the  same  way.”  There  have  been,  and  still 

'  Mr.  Perceval  was  shot  by  Bellingham  on  May  11,  1812. 


JEt.  61] 


LONDON  IN  1812. 


329 


are,  numberless  anonymous  letters  sent  to  xarious 
persons  in  high  situations  of  the  most  threatening  de¬ 
scription.  Infamous  handbills  are  dropped  in  the  streets 
and  areas ;  and  one  yesterday  was,  “  Mr.  Perceval’s 
ribs  as  a  gridiron  for  the  Prince  Kegeut ;  “  another, 
“  10,000h  for  the  Prince  Regent’s  head.” 