

‘  The  price  of  bread  and  the  want  of  work  have 
caused  the  riots  in  the  manufactm-ing  districts,  and,  as 
far  as  one  can  see,  must  continue  to  cause  them.  In 
addition  to  these  evils  the  season  has  been  wonderfully 
backward,  and  is  so  still ;  no  vegetation  has  taken  place, 
and  the  accounts  from  Scotland  are  dreadful.’ 

Nor  were  Lady  iMinto’s  opinions  of  the  society  of 
London  much  more  favourable  than  those  she  held  on 
the  state  of  the  nation.  After  five  years  of  absence, 
she  found  it  more  insipid  than  of  old ;  the  hours  had 
grown  so  late,  that  dinners  might  properly  be  called 
suppers.  ‘  Seven  is  the  hour,  and  ten  as  early  as 
even  ladies  can  get  away.’  The  heat  of  the  rooms 
seemed  to  have  increased  with  the  multitude  of 
Argand  lamps,  and  the  only  engagement  which  did 
not  deprive  her  of  a  night’s  rest  was  a  dinner.  In 
general  she  found  a  total  want  of  animation  where  all 
came  to  be  amused,  and  ‘  the  horrid  phrase  tvell-'imin- 
nered  means  silent,  dull,  and  no-carey.'’ '  ‘  It  is  melan¬ 
choly  to  see  the  total  want  of  character  and  capacity 
in  the  upper  ranks ;  the  excessive  expense  bestowed 

'  A  favourite  expression  of  the  sisters  Ladies  Minto  and  Malmes¬ 
bury  when  describing  tlie  nil  admirari  disposition  which  was  so 
antagonistic  to  their  own. 


330 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1812 


on  education,  and  by  men — nothing  attained.  A  young 
man  passes  through  the  common  routine  of  a  public 
school  and  Oxford,  and  escapes  acquiring  any  informa¬ 
tion  from  either  ;  having,  I  fancy,  only  got  into  a  variety 
of  scrapes  of  every  kind,  and  appearing  to  be  completely 
a  sheet  of  white  liaper.’ 

The  severity  of  these  remarks  is  occasionally  tem¬ 
pered  by  the  pleasure  she  received  from  the  society 
lirought  together  by  the  hosts  of  Holland  House  and 
1  iansdowne  House. 

Lansdowne  House  was  pleasant  enough  to  compen¬ 
sate  for  much  didness  elsewhere.  ‘  There  is  nothing 
in  this  town  half  so  comhjrtable  as  that  house  and  its 
inhabitants.’  Again:  ‘I  have  been  living  a  great  deal  of 
late  with  the  most  agreeable  people  I  have  met  with  :  the 
►Smiths,  who  are  delightful;  Sir  J.  Mackintosh,  who  is 
not  less  so.  I  wish  I  could  board  ;md  lodge  with  them. 

‘  All  London  is  now  agog  about  Lord  Byron,  a 
person  who  three  months  ago  was  not  known  or  thought 
of.  The  truth  is,  he  is  crazy  — as  all  his  forbears  have 
1  )een- — not  to  say  mad  and  bad  ;  b;it  he  lately  published 
a  poem  called  “  Childe  Harold,”  which  all  London  has 
fallen  in  love  with,  and  which  in  good  honest  truth  has 
a  good  deal  of  genius  in  it,  with  a  certain  portion  of  bad 
taste  and  bad  writing ;  but  certaiidy  very  striking  from 
a  man  of  five-and-twenty ;  and  so  he  is  all  at  once  the 
thing  to  see  and  to  meet.  Linfortunately,  he  has  been 
flattered  into  trying  his  hand  at  oratory,  and  made  a 
ridiculous  appearance.  To-morrow  we  dine  at  Lord 
Glenbervie’s  to  meet  him.’ 