

‘  I  have  received  yonr  letter  of  April  8  ;  and  the  few 
words  it  contains  concerning  the  Farms,  the  House,  and 
other  subjects  of  that  sort,  gave  me  the  assurance  that 
you  had  resumed  your  ordinary  occupations,  and  that 
by  the  providential  and  merciful  arrangements  of 


J&T.  61 J 


FAMILY  LETTERS. 


.3.39 


nature,  surviving  cares  and  duties  and  the  daily  offices 
of  life  would,  with  the  healing  influences  of  time, 
soften  the  sharpness  of  recent  affliction  and  leave  only 
those  tender  impressions  which  are  not  inconsistent 
with  the  calm  enjoyment  of  our  remaining  blessings, 
and  with  what  may  be  considered  the  happiness  of  our 
period  of  life,  in  which,  without  losing  our  sensibilities 
either  to  good  or  evil,  the  edge  at  least  of  the  latter 
may  be  less  acute  than  when  life  and  all  its  events  are 
new.  ...  I  do  what  I  can  to  check  the  pains  of  im¬ 
patience;  and  in  that  difficult  attempt  I  am  much 
assisted  by  the  total  occupation  of  my  hours  and  even 
moments  in  this  laborious  office.  But  I  make  no 
endeavour  to  weaken  my  notions  of  the  happiness 
which  I  trust  awaits  us  all,  and  give  full  scope  to 
memory  and  imagination  in  painting  the  joys  of  home. 
1  am  sure  they  cannot  be  exaggerated,  because  I  am 
sure  of  your  love,  and  of  my  own,  and  of  the  love  of 
every  mother’s  son  and  daughter.  I  may  be  vexed  a 
little  by  the  injustice  of  the  world;  but  I  have  made  a 
true  estimate  of  all  that  can  happen  from  without,  and 
the  treasure  of  all  I  possess  within  sinks  the  rest  to 
cowries,  which  is  infinitely  less  than  brass  farthings. 
The  one  is  all  sterling,  and  the  other  all  Birmingham, 
and  not  worth  a  thought,  much  less  a  care. 

On  June  10,  1812,  the  following  sentence  begins  a 
letter  to  his  wife  :  ‘  I  have  received  from  Lord  TJver- 
pool  a  full  and  handsome  acknowledgment  of  my 
services  with  regard  to  all  the  conquests  in  which  1 


340 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1813 


have  had  a  share,  as  well  as  of  the  general  merit  of  my 
administration  in  India.’ 


‘  Calcutta ;  February  4  and  9,  1813. 

‘  The  whole  family  is  in  perfect  health. 

‘  If  we  can  but  take  care  and  keep  out  of  mischief 
this  last  year,  and  then  find  you  all  as  perfect  as  our¬ 
selves,  my  vows  and  hopes  will  be  fulfilled.  A  space 
more  for  you  and  me  to  witness  and  partake  in  the 
happiness  around  us,  and  to  make  up  for  the  spoils  of 
time  by  blessings  which  we  can  bestow  and  receive, 
whatever  the  young  may  think,  to  and  from  each  other 
as  long  as  we  live,  but  to  and  from  no  mortal  besides, 
will  be  a  welcome  winding  up  of  Fortune’s  beautiful 
gifts.  However  she  has  been  a  good  dame,  and  will 
be  out  of  debt  to  us  whenever  our  books  may  close.* 
My  thought  and  fancy,  having  a  free  choice,  dwell 
only,  and  that  perpetually,  on  the  bright  side  of  the 
prospect. 