


‘  By  our  latest  news.  Parliament  was  prorogued, 
and  no  change  of  Ministry.  I  am  sorry  for  the  interests, 
and  indeed  honour  of  the  country  ;  and  one  cannot  see 
without  some  apprehension  the  inefficacy  of  a  vote  of 

‘  To  this  passage  Lady  Minto  replied  :  ‘  I  agree  with  you  tliat 
Dame  Fortune  has  not  dealt  unkindly  by  iis.  The  grand  favom"  of  all 
she  has  shown  us,  is  in  our  family ;  though  I  do  not  feel  insensible 
of  her  other  gifts  ;  but  without  the  first  the  rest  would  have  failed 
in  securing  the  happiness  we  can  now  enjoy  round  us.  Honours  have 
been  the  result  of  your  labours,  ability,  and  character;  but  the  dis¬ 
positions  of  a  family  do  not  always  go  with  inheritance.’ 


JiT.  62] 


FAJVIILY  LETTERS. 


.‘^41 


Parliament.  Parliament  stands  between  anarchy  and 
order,  and  when  that  defence  is  removed,  either  the 
Crown  or  the  people  must  be  vanquished.  The  Crown 
must  probably  fall  in  that  contest,  and  after  an  interval 
of  blood  and  misery,  either  a  foreign  or  domestic  des¬ 
potism  will  be  the  fruit  of  the  popular  triumph.  These 
may  seem  visionary  notions,  and  I  hope  and  pretty  well 
believe  they  are.  (_)uly  one  has  seen  in  our  own  time 
these  very  events  run  their  course,  and  many  a  time  in 
history.  Why  should  we  be  privileged  against  the 
common  laws  of  cause  and  effect  ?  The  times  require 
a  decent,  at  least  not  a  depraved  and  discredited. 
Court ;  an  able,  tirm,  and  well-supported  (xovernment, 
not  a  broken,  selffsh,  and  disjointed  gentry,  leaving 
mediocrity  in  possession  of  feeble  and  precarious 
power. 

‘I  have  read  “Portugal,”  by  Lord  Nugent,  and 
admire  both  the  versification  and  the  poetry.  ...  Yet 
in  one  point  I  could  have  wished  that  a  sentiment 
generally  good,  but  not  suited  to  the  times,  and  there¬ 
fore  not  a  virtue  of  the  day — I  mean,  a  longing  for 
peace — had  been  withheld  or  expressed  with  less  ear¬ 
nestness.  I  perceive  with  great  concern,  and  sometimes 
with  a  little  dismay,  a  tone  of  whimpering  after  peace, 
arising  gradually  iu  England,  and  growing  too  much 
into  a  fashion.  A  desire  for  peace,  because  we  are  tired 
of  war,  not  because  its  object  is  attained — which  in  the 
present  war  is  mere  security  against  subjugation — is 
little  better  than  to  call  craven,  and  submit  to  all  the 
consequences  of  defeat.  What  those  are  we  have  only 


342 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[181S 


to  look  rovind  upon  the  craven-callers  of  Europe  to 
understand.’ ' 

Lord  hlinto  alludes  in  this  letter  to  a  vote  of  the 
House  of  Commons  on  a  motion  for  an  Address  to  the 
Prince  Kegent  praying  him  to  take  measures  for  form¬ 
ing  a  strong  and  efficient  Administration  which  was 
unexpectedly  carried  by  a  majority  of  174  to  170. 
The  prayer  was  not  granted,  and  on  June  8  Lord 
Liverpool  assumed  the  first  place  in  a  Grovernment, 
which  was  neither  strong  nor  efficient,  though  it  proved 
tough  and  lasting.  Parliament  was  dissolved  in  the 
autumn,  when  a  good  harvest  and  the  glorious  victory  of 
Salamanca  had  done  much,  in  spite  of  exorbitant  prices 
and  scarcity  of  grain,  to  counteract  the  depression  de¬ 
scribed  in  Lady  Minto’s  letters  in  the  early  part  of  1812. 