

After  his  return  from  Java  a  perceptible  change 
came  over  the  tone  of  his  letters.  Passages  in  the 
minor  key  preponderate.  The  expressions  of  love  and 
longing  for  home,  frequent  enough  before,  become  almost 
painful  in  their  repetition  and  intensity — the  more  so 


JEt.  61] 


CALCUTTA. 


333 


when  a  certain  anxiety  is  discoverable  shadowing  the 
exuberance  of  hope. 

For  this  there  were  many  causes.  The  last  two  years 
had  brought  griefs  such  as  do  not  leave  a  man  without 
taking  away  great  part  of  himself.  The  death  of  his 
young  son,  the  Benjamin  of  the  family,  who  by  a  com¬ 
bination  of  modesty  and  spirit  had  wound  himself  closely 
round  his  father’s  heart  during  the  companionship  of 
the  long  sea  voyage,  and  the  lad’s  subsequent  adventures 
in  his  naval  career,  and  the  death  of  his  earliest  and, 
beyond  the  circle  of  his  family,  best  loved  friend,  Mr. 
Windham,  were  events  that  not  only  enshrouded  the 
present  in  gloom-,  but  cast  their  shadow  over  the  past 
and  the  future.  He  was  wont  to  say  that  no  grief 
shoidd  be  indidged  at  the  cost  of  duties  to  the  living, 
or  to  the  exclusion  of  a  thankful  acknowledgment  of 
past  happiness  and  of  blessings  untouched ;  and  he  did 
his  best  to  act  up  to  his  professions ;  Imt,  as  he  wrote 
to  his  wife,  ‘  though  their  names  may  be  seldom  on  my 
lips,  their  memory  will  be  ever  present  to  me ;  ’  and  again 
of  his  long  intimacy  with  Windham  ;  ‘  The  earliest  fruit 
of  friendship’s  tree  is  the  sweetest,  and  the  latest  in 
rotting ;  but  of  it  there  is  no  second  crop.’ 

By  the  side  of  these  weightier  griefs  he  himself 
would  have  given  no  place  for  such  disappointments  as 
arose  from  the  neglect  of  his  public  services  by  ministers 
and  directors.  Yet,  if  they  were  not  causes  of  depression, 
tliey  can  hardly  have  raised  the  tone  of  his  spirits  ;  and 
the  climate  of  India  and  hard  and  anxious  labour  had 
begun  to  tell  on  the  vigour  of  his  bodily  frauie. 


334 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1812 


Arriving  as  his  letters  did  at  long  intervals,  it  is 
possible  that  they  may  not  have  impressed  those  who 
received  them,  as  they  do  ourselves,  with  a  conviction 
that  he  had  already  recognised  the  first  tones  of  a  voice, 
‘‘  no  other  heard,  that  summoned  him  away.’ 

‘  Calcutta  :  begun  middle  of  January,  ended  February  7,  1812. 

‘  I  never  was  such  a  slave  since  I  came  to  India  as  I 
have  been  since  my  return  from  Java.  A  great  deal  of 
additional  work  has  fallen  upon  me  from  that  quarter  ; 
and  the  necessity  of  looldng  back  to  proceedings  here 
during  my  absence  has  also  increased  the  demands — 
always  greater  than  I  can  answer — upon  my  time. 
However,  there  is  nothing  saved  to  me  by  fatiguing  you 
all  with  my  fatigues.  .  .  .  This  Barrackpore  is  a  most 
happy  change  of  scene  from  Batavia,  and  is  indeed  to 
me  a  kind  of  little  Minto,  having  a  faint  smack  of  some 
virtue  in  it.  I  have  kept  January  3  in  a  grand  style 
this  year ;  giving  a  ball  and  supper  on  my  wedding  day, 
as  appearing  to  myself  more  worthy  of  celebration  than 
any  other  feast  in  the  calendar,  especially  as  it  is  also 
the  birthday  of  Cicero,  a  gentleman  who  attended  ns 
faithfully  through  the  whole  campaign.  Seven  hundred 
sat  down  to  supper,  and  you  see  how  I  must  oppress  the 
provinces  to  support  such  extravagance.  We  have  had 
a  christening  of  seven  souls  at  once.  .  .  .  Five  of  them 
were  presents  from  various  Jlalay  kings  and  potentates, 
“  rich  in  slaves,  but  low  in  cash,”  like  the  King  of  Cappo- 
docia — “  Mancipiis  locuples,  egit  seris  Cappadocum  rex.” 
You  have  heard  of  them  before  from  Malacca,  where  they 