


‘  Minto,  May  1,  ISl  1. 

‘  T  think  it  has  been  the  way  all  along  for  the 
Foxite  Whigs  to  take  part  tvith  the  officers  at  Madras; 
and  I  Avas  convinced,  from  the  time  Cecil  Smith  came 
home,  that  not  only  the  ‘  Edinburgh  Review  ’  Avould  take 
that  side,  but  that  Sidney  Smith  Avould  be  the  oracle 


324 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1812 


upon  the  subject  at  Holland  House,  &c. ;  and  so  I 
verily  believe  it  is. 

‘  There  is  such  a  complication  of  plots  and  wheels  in 
the  political  world  that  it  is  not  very  easy  to  say  at  any 
time  what  will  be  thought  or  done  by  those  who  call 
themselves  your  friends.  I  believe  that  if  the  present 
fxovernment  brought  forward  any  proposal  of  rewarding 
you,  or  Sir  George  either,  for  the  Madras  business,  or 
had  even  voted  thanks  for  the  Isle  of  France,  Opposi¬ 
tion  would,  as  in  duty  bound,  have  opposed  the  mea¬ 
sure  ;  and  the  Directors,  amidst  the  variances  in  their 
Court  on  all  the  late  Indian  business,  may  think  like 
Mrs.  Beaumont,  in  “Manoeuvring,”*  that  m  general 
it  is  safest  not  to  mention  things.  As  for  the  Isle  of 
France,  they  wish  it  had  been  taken  for  them,  instead 
of  the  Crown.  The  Croivn,  or  at  least  the  Ministers, 
seem  detei’mined  not  to  approve  too  hastily  of  any¬ 
thing  you  do ;  and  therefore  General  Abercrombie  goes 
■without  his  thanks,  all  Melvillite  though  he  be.  Lord 
Grenville,  &c.,  think,  I  suppose,  that  it  might  have 
been  done  during  their  Administration  (as  Lord 
Wellesley  knows  he  might  have  done  it).  Lord  Grey 
is,  they  say,  chspleased  that  his  brother  did  not  com¬ 
mand  the  Expedition ;  and  while  in  their  eyes  your 
measures  are  those  of  the  present  iMinistry,  and  your 
honour  and  glory  theirs,  consequently  not  to  be  pro¬ 
moted — in  the  eyes  of  said  Ministers  you  are  an 
Oppositionist,  and  equally  an  unfit  person  to  be  exalted 


One  of  Miss  Edgeworth’s  Tales  of  Fashionable  Life. 


.Et.  61] 


LETTEES  FROM  HOME. 


325 


by  their  approbation.  The  great  men  of  the  age  are 
certainly  not  governed  by  great  motives.  So  much 
the  worse  for  them.  .  .  .  Certainly  if  it  were  possible 
to  unravel  such  mysteries,  one  would  think  that  one 
had  the  key  to  the  hearts  of  the  Directors,  when  one 

praised  Sir  G.  Barlow  ;  yet  G - always  seems  to  think 

his  friends  in  the  Direction  are  least  friendly  to  you. 
The  thing  I  dislike  is  the  apparent  indifference  of  the 
AMiigs ;  but  mamma  says  she  is  used  to  that,  and  that 
it  is  the  way  of  the  world  and  of  politicians ;  and  we 
certainly  don’t  worry  ourselves  about  any  part  of  it. 
We  never  can  be  sufficiently  thankful  that  the  Isle  of 
France  business  succeeded.  If  we  had  received  your 
letter  and  the  account  of  a  failure  at  the  same  time, 
and  in  these  times,  we  should  really  have  been  in  de¬ 
spair.  I  am  not  much  apt  to  think  about  politics;  but 
lately  they  have  come  in  everybody’s  way  to  observe, 
and  I  am  like  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  look  and 
wonder  how  it  will  all  end. 