


^T.  61] 


CALCUTTA, 


331 


One  more  quotation  we  may  allow  ourselves  from 
Latly  Minto’s  letters  from  London;  because  it  is  always 
interesting  to  see  the  effect  produced  on  contemporaries, 
before  fame  has  been  attained,  by  one  destiired  to  fill 
a  large  space  in  public  estimation.  ‘  Harry  ’  (Lord 
Palmerston),  she  wrote,  ‘  is  doing  very  well — with  a  clear 
head  and  a  good  understanding.  He  will  never  be  a  great 
man  because  he  has  no  great  views ;  but  he  is  pains¬ 
taking  and  gentlemanlike  to  the  highest  degree,  and 
will  always  swim  where  greater  talents  might  sink. 
Nothing  can  be  more  amiable,  and  I  have  always 
regretted  that  he  should  have  set  out  in  life  on  the 
shahhif  side,  which  he  must  now  stick  to.’ 

Lord  Minto  returned  to  Calcutta  towards  the  end 
of  1811.  During  the  two  years  which  ensued  before 
he  resigned  his  high  office  into  the  hands  of  Lord  Moira, 
many  considerable  questions  fell  under  the  consideration 
of  his  Government,  and  led  to  measures  of  importance. 
Some  of  these  referred  to  the  relations  of  the  Company’s 
Government  with  that  of  the  native  States — of  Gude, 
of  Nagpore,  and  of  Hyderabad — and  to  the  irruptions 
of  the  Pindarees  on  the  British  frontier ;  others  to  the 
internal  administration  of  British  India,  to  the  revenue 
system,  and  to  the  settlement  of  the  ceded  and  con¬ 
quered  provinces  of  Bengal.  But  with  none  of  these 
shall  we  attempt  to  deal.  They  find  no  place  in  Lord 
IMinto’s  unofficial  correspondence,  and  they  occupy 
their  proper  one  in  the  valuable  histories  of  IMessrs. 
Wilson  and  IMarshman.  The  silence  maintained  in 
the  private  letters  with  regard  to  many  of  the  subjects 


332 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1812 


which  at  this  period  absorbed  Lord  Minto’s  most  care¬ 
ful  thoughts  and  laborious  hours  is  explained  by 
himself. 

‘  I  feel  anxious  to  tell  you  why,  with  the  same  good 
intentions,  I  have  fallen  lately  so  far  short  of  my  former 
voluminous  virtues  in  correspondence.  One  grand 
reason  is  that  I  have  too  much  to  do  by  several  hours’ 
work  every  day.  Our  conquests,  among  other  causes, 
have  increased  our  labours  greatly.  But  since  you  will 
know  my  infirmities,  the  honest  truth  is  that  I  am 
older  every  birthday,  which  is  very  common  in  the  East; 
and  I  find,  first  and  foremost,  that  writing  in  windy 
weather  by  candlelight  is  a  thought  more  kittle  than  it 
was  last  century ;  secondly,  and  lastly,  I  used  to  write 
to  Minto  between  the  evening’s  drive  and  supper  Avhich 
is  now  called  tea ;  but  now-a-days  getting  up  to  open 
my  shop  at  five  or  half-past,  and  slaving  like  a  maid-of- 
all-work  the  whole  day,  I  am  ashamed  to  own  that  be¬ 
tween  7  and  8  p.m.  I  am  so  thoroughly  done  up,  that 
I  coup  o'’er  like  a  leaden  statue,  on  a  sofa  ready  set 
in  the  breezy  verandah,  and  doze,  and  dream  of  Minto ; 
but  am  fairly  unable  to  sit  up  and  write,  fighting  TOth 
the  flare  and  with  the  darkness  and  the  mosquitoes,  as 
I  was  wont  in  my  youth,  a  year  or  two  ago.  This  is  the 
melancholy  truth.’ 