

‘The  King  seems  regaining  his  bodily  health;  but, 
as  no  one  seems  to  expect  his  mind  really  to  recover,  I 
cannot  see  any  reason,  public  or  private,  for  wishing  his 
recovery ;  excepting  that  in  that  case  Lord  Eldon  has 
almost  promised  to  depart  in  peace,  which  certainly 
woidd  be  a  pleasing  circumstance.  I  think  there 
would  be  some  pleasure  (enough  to  make  up  for 
many  disadvantages)  in  laying  one’s  hand  upon  his 
lordship’s  head,  and,  like  the  old  Abbot  in  “  Marmion  ” 
dismissing  him  with — “  Sinful  Brother,  part  in 
peace.'’  ’ 


326 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1812 


As  ill  1811,  so  in  1812,  the  state  of  affairs  at  home 
absorbed  all  the  interest  which  in  more  fortunate  times 
might  have  been  extended  to  the  empire  at  large. 
After  the  death  of  Percexal  and  the  various  abortive 
attempts  at  the  formation  of  a  new  ministry  which 
followed  on  that  tragical  event.  Lord  Holland  wrote  to 
Lord  IMinto  that  ‘  whatever  indifference  may  have 
been  shown  to  events  in  India,  has  been  extended  also 
to  the  war  in  Spain,  the  concerns  of  the  North  of 
Europe,  the  Catholics  in  Ireland,  the  ( )rders  in  Council 
at  home,  and  the  events  in  America;  for  while  the 
various  negotiations  for  forming  a  ministry  Avere  pend¬ 
ing,  it  is  true  that  they  so  entirely  engrossed  all  the 
attention  of  the  public,  that  Auctories  and  defeats, 
peaces  and  Avars,  insurrections  and  scarcities  were 
OA^erlooked  as  matters  of  inferior  importance ;  and  a 
ueAvspaper  which  contained  nothing  but  extraordinary 
gazettes,  and  no  minute  of  a  conversation  between 
priA^ate  gentlemen  on  their  vieAVs  of  policy  or  party 
connections,  Avas  a  dull,  insipid,  and  uninteresting  pro¬ 
duction.  I  do  not  knoAv  Avhether  Ave  are  quite  come 
to  our  senses  yet — there  are  strong  suspicions  that 
Lord  Liverpool  has  said  something  to  Mr.  Canning,  and 
]\lr.  Canning  answered  something  to  Lord  Liverpool, 
Avith  Avhich  the  public  is  unacquainted ;  and,  in  the 
language  of  the  neAvspajAers,  the  Avorld  has  much  reason 
to  complain  of  this  suppression  of  intelligence.” 

At  the  present  time  neAvs  from  our  distant  depend¬ 
ency  comes  to  us  Avith  the  rapidity  of  the  lightning’s 
'  Lord  Holland  to  Lord  Minto,  September  1812. 


jEt.  61] 


LONDON  IN  1812. 


327 


flash,  and  not  seldom  with  something  of  its  dread 
effects.  In  the  time  of  Lord  Minto  it  travelled  like 
light  from  a  distant  star — paled  by  distance  ere  it 
reached  our  shores.  Besides  this  unavoidable  disad¬ 
vantage  attending  on  the  imperfection  of  communica¬ 
tion  between  England  and  India,  the  brilliant  residts 
of  the  expedition  to  Java  were  made  known  in  England 
at  a  moment,  not  only  of  political  anxiety,  but  of  great 
national  depression.  The  prolongation  of  the  war,  the 
consequent  rise  of  prices,  the  prevailing  disaffection  in 
the  country  towards  the  person  of  the  Regent,  had 
created  a  general  sentiment  of  uneasiness  among  the 
best-informed  portion  of  the  public.  Lady  Minto’s 
letters  from  London  in  1812  give  a  vivid  impression  of 
the  troubled  condition  of  the  times. 