

‘  A  solid  and  substantial  accession  of  resources  to 


358 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[Ch.  XIV. 


(fovernment  will  arise,  coiiplerl  with  material  improve¬ 
ment  in  the  comfort  and  condition  of  the  people.  In 
effect  the  present  state  of  our  finances  is  so  much  more 
favourable  than  was  expected  by  the  most  sanguine 
Avhen  I  left  England,  that  we  may  wait  without  im¬ 
patience  for  the  benefit  which  rests  on  the  fair  fomida- 
tion  of  general  and  permanent  principles.  Instead  of 
annual  deficits  of  three  millions,  which  naturally  alarmed 
Government  when  the  Commission  was  proposed  as  a 
strong  expedient  in  an  ixrgent  case,  we  have  in  this 
very  year  of  account  to  show  a  surplus  of  one  million.* 
Therefore  I  say  with  the  best  physicians,  “Hands  off! 
let  Nature  work.” 

‘I  cannot  close  this  subject  without  saying  that  I 
have  never  conceived  the  Commission  to  have  been  pro¬ 
posed  in  any  quarter  in  an  unfriendly  spirit  to  me. 
The  apparent  distress  in  the  Company’s  affairs,  and 
the  necessity  of  going  to  Parliament  for  relief,  might 
naturally  suggest  some  extraordinary  measure  to  meet 
the  exigency;  and  I  am  satisfied  that  it  was  not  a 
diminution  of  the  authority  of  the  Indian  Government, 
but  a  relief  from  responsibility  and  an  accession  of 
strength,  that  was  truly  and  sincerely  proposed.’ 

The  close  connection  between  the  temper  of  the 
ruling  class,  and  the  character  of  their  rule,  is  briefly 

'  ‘  During-  the  three  concluding  years  of  Lord  Minto’s  adminis¬ 
tration  the  supplies  remitted  from  India  exceeded  the  value  of  the 
Company’s  investments  to  the  extent  of  nearly  10  millions  sterling. 
Of  the  amount  so  remitted  nearly  2  millions  were  in  bullion,  which 
was  unprecedented  in  the  history  of  the  commerce  of  India.’ — 
Wilson’s  History  of  British  India,  vol.  vii. 


€h.  XIV.] 


OFFICIAL  COERESPONDENCE. 


359 


touched  upon  in  this  letter :  it  finds  place,  however,  in 
many  others.  Writing  to  Lord  Grrenville  on  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  the  Company’s  affairs,  he  said : — ‘  I  subscribe 
heartily  to  the  advantage  of  a  general  and  comprehen¬ 
sive  view  of  that  subject  in  preference  to  partial  and 
individual  reforms. 

‘  To  keep  iip  establishments,  or  to  pay  them  on  a 
scale  for  which  onr  funds  are  insufficient,  is  impossible 
on  a  permanent  system.  On  the  other  hand,  I  doubt 
whether  reductions  of  emolnments  can  ever  furnish  a 
very  considerable  result ;  for  if  pushed  too  far  it  extin¬ 
guishes  exertion  and  energy  and  creates  general  dis¬ 
content  and  inaction.  Tt  produces  also  the  danger  of 
abusive  and  irregular  profits,  which  is  the  greatest  evil 
of  all.’ 

And  again  to  the  same  correspondent,  writing  with 
reference  to  the  salary  of  a  high  legal  functionary,  the 
Recorder  of  Prince  of  Wales’  Island,  he  says : — ‘  It  is 
of  great  moment  to  send  a  capable  and  respectable  man 
to  administer  civil  and  criminal  jixstice  where  he  will 
be  the  only  lawyer  in  the  country  ;  and  such  a  man  is 
entitled  to  live  without  penury  and  anxiety.  He  is 
not  placed  there  as  a  step  in  his  career ;  but  must 
limit  his  views  to  the  enjoyment  of  his  office  in  a  dis¬ 
tant  and  secluded  country  while  he  holds  it,  and  to  a 
very  moderate  retreat  at  the  close  of  his  labours  and 
exile.’ 