

'  To  Mr.  Elliot  of  Wcll.s. 


A  A 


1 


354  LORD  IVUNTO  IN  INDIA.  [Ch.  xiv. 

hand  by  the  local  Government  imder  the  administration 
of  Sir  G.  Barlow.  It  is  evident  to  me  that  retrench¬ 
ments  can  no  longer  be  classed  amongst  the  material 
resources  of  the  Company.  The  establishments  will  in 
reality  not  afford  it.  I  do  not  mean  that  you  may  not 
lay  your  finger  upon  some  isolated  case  of  a  civil 
office  that  may  bear  a  reduction  of  salary,  or  some 
military  staff  appointment,  or  allowance  to  a  military 
office,  that  might  be  reformed  without  injury  to  the 
efficiency  of  the  service. 

‘  I  have  myself  constituted,  and  carried  through,  a 
formal  inquiry  of  this  nature  with  regard  to  the  civil 
departments  :  it  has  terminated  in  some  few,  but  in  no 
degree  considerable,  reductions  of  charge;  amongst  which 
I  may,  indeed,  reckon  the  diminution  of  my  own  salary 
as  the  principal.  The  investigation  has  nevertheless 
led  to  some  alterations  which,  both  in  point  of  economy 
and  regulation  may,  I  hope,  conduce  to  improvement  in 
the  prosperity  both  of  the  Company  and  the  provinces. 
But  it  is  demonstrated  by  the  same  proceeding  that 
retrenchment  of  civil  establishments,  though  not  to  be 
neglected,  can  afford  no  supply  adequate  to  the  great 
object  of  meeting  the  general  exigency  of  the  Company’s 
financial  situation.  It  is  an  unwelcome  truth,  I  know, 
at  home;  but  I  am  much  inclined  to  believe  that 
the  general  scale  of  legitimate  emolument  is  perhaps 
already  lower  than  is  entirely  consistent  with  justice 
to  the  Company’s  servants,  and  with  sound  policy,  even 
financial,  but  especially  with  those  general  principles  of 
Government  on  which  the  security  and  prosperity  of 


Ch.  XIV.]  SCHEMES  OF  EETEENCHMENT. 


355 


iStates  are  founded.  The  loose  principles  which  formerly 
prevailed  amongst  the  Company’s  servants,  and  the 
fashion,  if  I  may  so  term  it,  of  corruption  which  now 
forms  the  reproach  of  what  is  called  the  old  school, 
deserved,  however,  a  little  more  indulgence  perhaps 
than,  as  one  of  its  sworn  enemies  and  persecutors,  I  was 
disposed  to  show  it,  Pecidation  and  abuse  were  not 
merely  tolerated ;  they  were  in  a  manner  established 
and  authorised  by  the  parsimony  of  the  Company  in  tlie 
regular  remuneration  of  its  servants.  The  Company, 
perhaps,  in  those  older  times  pursued  that  impolitic 
policy  upon  a  principle  which  would  deserve  less  in¬ 
dulgence  than  the  practice  of  its  servants ;  I  mean  that 
of  'participation,  or  something  like  pjomidage,  in 
abuse  and  even  oppression ;  for  the  charge  of  adequate 
salaries  is  saved  by  the  toleration  of  irregular  emolument. 
If  these  supplementary  profits  had  continued  to  be 
furnished  oidy  from  the  extortions  and  oppressions 
practised  on  the  Princes  and  people  of  India,  and 
had  not  at  length — through  the  disorder  of  provinces 
become  our  own — touched  the  direct  interests  of  the 
Company  herself,  we  are  not  positively  entitled  to  say 
that  the  abuses  of  the  old  Indian  administration  would 
have  roused  the  vigilance  of  Parliament  so  effectually 
or  so  early,  and  that  the  only  radical,  as  it  is  the  only 
rational,  remedy  for  abuse  would  have  been  applied. 
The  provision  of  legal  and  authorised  emoluments,  cor¬ 
responding  with  the  just  and  fair  expectations  of  the 
Company’s  servants,  completely  changed  tlie  fashion ; 
and  at  this  day  I  have  great  satisfaction  in  saying  that 