


'  The  old  ash  tree  which  .stands  on  the  grass  oijposite  to  the 
entrance  of  the  house  at  Minto. 

-  Mr.  George  Wilson,  an  English  barrister,  who  resided  in 
Edinburgh,  and  enjoyed  the  friendship  of  some  of  tlie  most  eminent 
men  of  his  day. 


348 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1813 


Yolir  peaceful  administration  of  India,  affording  fewer 
materials  for  history,  as  happy  times  always  do,  Avill 
probably  remain  unknowi  except  to  a  few  old  clerks  at 
the  India  House.  All  this  you  must  bear — with  this 
consolation  only,  that  it  has  been  the  lot  of  the  best 
and  wisest  men  in  all  ages,  and  will  continue  to  be  the 
lot  of  all  those  who  go  somewhat  beyond  the  reach  of 
the  times  they  live  in.  There  are  at  Minto  a  great 
quantity  of  letters  and  papers,  all  ready  in  portfolios,  for 
you  to  work  upon  ;  and  it  is  not  impossible  that,  fifty 
or  a  hundred  years  hence,  posterity  may  understand  a 
little  of  these  matters,  and  begin  to  do  you  justice. 
You  are  not  of  those  who  will  say  posthumous  fame  is 
of  no  value.  But  independent  of  that,  the  sons  or 
grandsons  of  the  present  little  Giilbert  may  feel  the 
effect  of  it,  and  people  mil  say,  “  He  comes  of  a  good 
stock.’'  ’ 

When  the  Grovernor  Gieneral’s  recall  was  made 
known  in  Calcutta,  surprise  and  indignation  were 
loudly  expressed.  As  the  moment  of  his  departure 
drew  near,  the  manifestations  of  regard,  of  respect, 
and  of  regret,  were  general  and  cordial.  Addresses 
poured  in  from  all  classes  of  the  community,  couched 
in  the  most  gratifying  terms.  Not  only  were  his  bril¬ 
liant  ser^dces  duly  acknowledged,  but  also  the  fact, 
patent  to  all,  that  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of 
his  administration  he  had  laboured  unremittingly  for 
the  public  good,  and  that  he  and  his  family  had  given 
an  example  of  domestic  life,  not  only  irreproachable  in 


^T.  62] 


FEELING  IN  CALCUTTA. 


349 


its  purity,  but  attractive  by  its  social  charm.  No  other 
circle  in  Calcutta  contained  prettier  women  or  abler 
men.  Youth,  wit,  and  high  spirits  defied  the  languid 
atmosphere  of  India ;  and  wherever  the  Governor 
General  was  the  centre  of  the  society  it  could  not  be 
otherwise  than  distinguished  for  simplicity  of  manners 
and  cidtivated  tastes.'  Lord  IMinto  was  at  his  best  in 
the  ease  of  private  society.  In  London  and  at  Vienna 
some  of  the  most  brilliant  men  and  women  of  their 
time  had  shared  his  friendship  and  had  met  in  familiar 
intercom'se  under  liis  roof.  The  volumes  of  corre¬ 
spondence  preserved  at  Minto  testify  to  the  regard  in 
which  he  was  held  by  friends  whose  signatures  would 
rejoice  the  heart  of  a  collector  of  autographs ;  and 
who  wrote  to  him  with  the  sort  of  easy  confidence  that 
can  only  co-exist  \vith  perfect  social  equality.  At  Cal¬ 
cutta  he  was  a  big  man — bigger  by  head  and  shoulders 
than  any  one  near  him — yet  nobody  could  be  more  un- 
feignedly  grateful  than  he  when  some  amiable  person 
ignored  the  circumstance — nor  more  happy  than  when, 
under  the  shadow  of  the  banians  of  Barrackpore,  he 
gathered  round  him  those  to  whom  his  public  capacity 
was  the  least  of  his  merits. 