

‘  ...  It  is  comical  enough  that  my  resignation 


346 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1813 


should  have  arrived  just  at  the  moment  they  were 
turning  me  out  without  leave.  My  answers  to  the 
thanks  of  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament  were  received 
by  the  Chancellor  and  the  Speaker  at  the  same  critical 
time  when  the  movers  of  the  thanks  were  treating  me 
like  a  criminal. 

‘  We  have  got  through  the  hottest  hot  season  that 
anybody  ever  remembers  in  India.  It  has  lasted  longer 
than  usual,  and  the  rains  have  come  so  late  that  there 
has  been  a  pretty  serious  scarcity  in  the  provinces  ;  and 
some  apprehension  of  it  even  in  this  fertile  quarter ; 
for  Bengal  is  the  proper  granary  of  India.  The 
tanks  were  almost  entirely  dry,  and  the  little  water  that 
remained  was  of  course  putrid  and  corrupted.  This  is 
a  serious  evil  and  always  occasions  sickness  and  mor¬ 
tality,  as  well  as  distress  to  those  who  escape  disease 
or  death. 

‘  As  the  time  advances,  I  am  sorry  to  say  it  seems 
more  tedious  instead  of  more  rapid,  as  I  expected  it 
would.  I  have  opened  a  new  account  for  November 
instead  of  January,  and  am  at  my  old  work  of  counting 
days,  weeks,  and  decades,  with  painful  earnestness.  I 
dare  hardly  let  my  thoughts  loose  upon  the  end  of  our 
wanderings  and  separation,  because  it  makes  me  down¬ 
right  giddy  ;  and  yet  I  seldom  miss  a  night  dreaming 
of  being  at  home.  I  had  been  talking  of  the  discom¬ 
fort  of  waking  out  of  such  dreams,  and  the  next  night, 
three  or  four  nights  ago,  I  had  a  most  lively  and 
insidious  dream  of  Minto.  I  thought  we  were  aU 
walking  on  the  haugh  ;  John  was  one  of  the  party,  and 


Mr.  62] 


LETTEKS  FROM  HOME. 


347  ■ 


I  said  to  him  in  perfect  confidence  of  the  reality,  and 
by  way  of  triumph  in  that  certainty,  “  Now,  John,  if  I 
should  awake  this  moment  to  find  myself  in  India  ! 
That  would  be  a  proper  job,  would  it  not?”  1  said 
this  with  a  sort  of  grin  t)f  satisfaction  at  my  positive 
knowledge  that  I  was  in  the  midst  of  you  on  the  haugh 
at  jMinto.  I  had  hardly  spoken  the  words  when  1  did 
awake  at  Barrackpore.  However,  I  shall  be  revenged 
one  of  these  days  by  dreaming  myself  in  India  and 
waking  at  Minto. 

‘  I  should  certainly  wish  to  make  the  ash  ‘  that  has 
the  North  Pole  over  it  our  trystiug  tree  in  preference 
to  any  elm  in  Carlton  (xardens ;  and  I  know  you  will 
only  adopt  the  latter  plan  in  case  of  necessity.’ 

A  letter  from  a  friend  ^  he  highly  valued,  written 
when  the  decision  to  supersede  him  became  knowiiy 
finds  a  fit  place  here. 


‘  Edinburgh:  October  11,  1812. 

‘  Your  Indian  administration  has  been  thrown  away 
uj)on  an  administration  at  home  incapable  of  apprecia¬ 
ting  it,  and  perhaps  with  a  selfish  motive  of  keeping  it 
back  from  the  jinblic.  Either  IManritius  or  Batavia 
should  have  made  the  fortune  of  a  Governor  General; 
and  this  great  success  without  any  mixture  of  bad  for¬ 
tune,  should  at  least  afford  a  presumption  of  merit. 