

The  first  fleet  of  1813  brought  to  India  the  account 
of  the  general  election,  when  Lord  Minto’s  eldest  son 
came  into  Parliament  for  Eoxburghshire.  In  the  en¬ 
suing  session  (1813)  he  had  the  pleasnre  of  recording 
his  vote  in  support  of  the  very  measure  which  had 
turned  out  Lord  Glrenville’s  ministry  in  1806  ;  a  Bill 
to  allow  Roman  Catholics  to  hold  commissions  as  field 
officers.  ‘  This,’  wrote  Lady  Minto,  ‘  we  must  devoutly 
hope  will  prove  a  first  step  in  a  policy  of  liberality  and 
justice  towards  our  injured  fellow-subjects.’’^ 

'  ‘  La  paix  u’est  rien,’  said  Napoleon  I.  ‘  Ce  sont  les  conditions 
de  la  paix  qui  font  tout.’ 

^  In  one  of  her  letters  of  this  summer  Lady  Minto  gives  a  glimpse 
of  Teviotdale  which  seems  worth  preserving  : 

‘  Gilbert  is  at  Jedburgh  with  his  troop  ;  640  new  recruits  out  of 


Mt.  62] 


EECALL  OF  LOED  JVIINTO. 


343 


Lord  Miiito  had  intimated  to  the  Directors  his  wish 
to  be  relieved  from  the  government  early  in  1814.  The 
day  he  had  named  as  that  of  his  departure  from  India 
was  indeed  January  1.  In  the  summer  of  1813  he 
learned  that,  six  months  before,  it  had  been  decided  to 
supersede  him  in  the  government  of  India,  and  that 
the  appointment  had  been  bestowed  on  the  Earl  of 
IMoira,  to  whom  the  Prince  Eegent  conceived  himself 
peculiarly  indebted  for  the  assistance  rendered  by 
him  while  a  new  ministry  was  in  process  of  formation 
after  Mr.  Perceval’s  death.  It  was  stated  at  the  same 
time  that  Lord  INIoira  would  reacli  India  in  October 
1813.  The  Court  of  Directors  reluctantly  submitted 
to  the  pressure  put  upon  them  by  the  Board  of  Control 
and  accompanied  their  resolution  of  recall  with  another 
warmly  acknowledging  Lord  Miuto’s  euuuent  services. 
Nothing  coiild  be  more  undeserved,  more  ungracious, 
or  more  discreditable  to  the  parties  concerned,  than 
the  recall  of  an  able  and  uniforndy  successful  (xovernor 
General  to  make  room  for  a  personal  friend  of  the 
Kegent’s.  The  calmness  with  which  Lord  Minto  received 

his  800  men.  This  is  the  day  of  in.spection.  We  expect  our  cousin. 
Sir  John  Dalrymple,  here,  who  is  the  inspecting  General.  To  the 
lionour  of  the  race  of  Teviotdale,  Gilbert  says  he  never  saw  so  tine- 
looking  a  l)ody  of  men,  a  very  great  proportion,  five  feet  ten — fine 
hand.some  fellows.  The  breed  of  men  is  as  much  clianged  for  the 
better  of  late  years  as  that  of  other  stock,  and  we  have  often  observed 
among  our  hosts  of  masons,  carpenters,  and  labourers  in  the  last 
three  years  the  extreme  good  looks  of  the  population.  The  men  have 
got  before  tlie  women,  and  are  a  sharp,  cleanly  set,  though  1  am 
happy  to  see  the  younger  women  with  cleaner,  tidier  houses  than 
their  grandmothers,  and  all  are  anxious  to  adorn  their  walls  with 
roses  and  honeysuckles.’ — August  26,  1813. 