


356 


LOED  MINTO  IE  INDIA. 


[Ch.  XIV. 


a  more  pure  and  highly  honourable  administration  does 
not  exist  than  that  of  the  E.  I.  Company  in  India  ;  by 
administration,  I  mean  the  service  at  large. 

‘  Now  I  speak  from  a  firm  conviction,  founded  on 
personal  observation  and  knowledge,  when  I  say  that 
any  scheme  of  general  retrenchment,  which  should 
reduce  the  scale  of  authorised  and  avowed  emolument 
materially  below  its  present  standard,  would  have  the 
effect  of  countenancing  abusive  profits. 

‘  There  is  another  consideration,  which  recent  events 
have  rendered  too  prominent  to  be  overlooked — I  mean 
the  effect  on  the  pubhc  temper  in  India  — that  is  to  say, 
on  the  temper  of  the  British  public  in  India,  likely  to 
be  produced  by  frequent  and  teasing  renewals  of  odious 
and  alarming  investigations  which  seem  to  leave  no 
man  a  year’s  security  in  the  most  moderate  reward  of 
labour.  The  diminution  of  salary  is  not  in  this  countrv 
a  mere  loss  of  money,  but  it  retards  the  accompHshment 
of  that  wish  which  is  at  the  bottom  of  every  heart,  a 
return  to  England ;  and  in  many  cases  it  extinguishes 
even  hope  upon  that  subject.  .  .  .  Anything  like  de¬ 
spondency  or  loss  of  energy  in  the  temper  of  the  ser\dce 
would  cause  an  abatement  of  public  zeal  and  public 
usefulness,  which  would  seriously  damage  the  interests 
of  the  Company,  if  no  worse  evils  were  to  ensue. 

‘  With  regard  to  military  retrenchments,  anything 
short  of  reduction  of  the  establishment  itself  will  pro¬ 
duce  no  essential  relief  to  the  finances  of  the  Company ; 
and  the  excited,  well-nigh  disaffected,  state  of  feehng 
existing  in  large  portions  of  the  army  tend  to  make  the 


Ch.  XIV.] 


FINANCIAL  SITUATION. 


357 


operation  of  such  a  Commission  as  that  proposed  of  very 
doubtful  residt. 

‘  Great  injustice  woidd  be  done  to  me  if  it  were 
supposed  that  backwardness  to  incur  personal  odium  in 
the  performance  of  a  duty  has  any  influence  whatever 
on  my  opinions.  It  is  not  the  disaffection  of  the 
provdnces  over  which  I  preside  to  my  ‘person  that  would 
deter  or  for  a  moment  obstruct  me  in  carrying  through 
a  wise  and  beneficial  reform ;  it  is  disafiection  to  the 
Company  and  to  the  Government  itself  t  hat  I  apprehend, 
and  it  is  that  apprehension  that  appears  to  me  strongly 
to  dissuade  from  the  undertaking.  These  sentiments  are 
not  in  any  degree  inconsistent  with  a  vigilant  superin¬ 
tendence  of  the  public  expenditure,  with  the  suppression 
of  all  abuse  and  embezzlement,  or  even  mth  partial  and 
occasional  reductions  of  charge  in  which  the  interests 
aird  feelings  of  individuals  shall  not  be  too  harshly 
neglected.  In  this  course  I  am  proceeding,  not  without 
sensible  benefit  to  the  country,  and  without  any  sen¬ 
sible  opposition  from  the  public  or  individuals.  But 
my  views  have  always  been  more  directed,  because 
directed  with  better  hope,  to  an  improvement  of  the 
resources  of  the  country  and  an  augmentation  of  the 
Company’s  revenue  ;  and  I  do  flatter  myself  that,  by  the 
aid  and  advice  of  the  ablest  men  I  have  ever  met  mth, 
intimately  acquainted  with  all  the  affairs  of  this  country 
and  well  versed  in  political  science,  much  has  been 
effected,  and  more,  which  requires  a  little  time  to  mature 
its  fruits,  is  in  prospect. 