


352 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[Ch.  XIV. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

We  have  endeavoured  in  the  preceding  chapters  to  re¬ 
produce  from  Lord  Minto’s  correspondence  the  most 
eventful  transactions  of  his  government  of  India.  Yet 
that  which  he  would  himself  have  regarded  as  the  most 
important  branch  of  his  administration,  namely,  its 
internal  policy,  has  been  altogether  omitted.  To  enter 
into  any  details  of  the  financial,  judicial,  and  legislative 
measures  which  were  either  executed  or  prepared  while 
he  held  the  direction  of  public  affairs  in  India,  is  beyond 
the  competency  of  his  present  editor ;  but  to  show  from 
his  correspondence  the  general  principles  which  approved 
themselves  to  his  mind  in  connection  'with  the  subjects 
idDove  named  is  within  the  province  of  this  work.  It 
will  be  remembered  that  when  Lord  Minto  went  to 
■India  the  financial  affairs  of  the  Company  were  in  a 
[highly  embarrassed  condition.  Fresh  obligations  had 
been  recently  incurred  iDy  the  extension  of  their  territo¬ 
ries  ;  an  empty  exchequer  and  high  interest  threatened 
a,  financial  crisis  ;  and  the  necessary  retrenchments  of 
expenditure  consequent  on  the  deficiency  of  revenue 
had  gone  far  to  provoke  a  political  and  social  catastrophe. 


Ch.  XIV.]  SCHEMES  OF  RETRENCHMENT. 


.353 


During  the  interval  between  the  recall  of  Lord  Wellesley 
and  the  appointment  of  Lord  INIinto,  anarchy  had  spread 
unchecked  in  the  newly  ceded  proxdnces,  and  a  spirit  of 
dissatisfaction  had  crept  over  the  services  whose  emolu¬ 
ments  had  been  subjected  to  the  pruning  knife  with 
more  vigour  than  tact  by  Sir  (feorge  Barlow.  Lord 
Minto,  when  assuming  the  reins  of  gov^emment,  was 
strictly  charged  to  abstain  from  all  political  measures 
having  a  tendency  to  increase  the  expenditure  of  the 
Company,  and  to  reduce  all  expenses  capable  of  dimi- 
nution.  How,  under  these  instructions,  he  dealt  wth 
the  vexed  questions  which  he  found  seething  in  the  evei- 
boiling  cauldron  of  Indian  politics  has  been  already 
told.  His  views  concerning  the  advantages  to  be 
derived  from  further  reductions  in  the  general  ex¬ 
penditure  of  the  Company,  especially  in  regard  to  the 
emoluments  of  their  servants,  may  be  seen  in  the 
following  letter  to  IMr.  Elliot  of  Wells,  who  had  in¬ 
formed  him  of  the  probability  that  a  Commission,  com¬ 
posed  of  members  of  both  Houses,  woidd  be  sent  out  to 
India  for  the  purpose  of  inquiring  into  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  Company’s  finances  and  of  suggesting 
retrenchments. 

‘  September  4,  1809.' 

‘  With  regard  to  the  Commission,  the  two  services, 
civil  and  military,  have  scarcely  had  a  breathing  time 
from  an  operation  jirecisely  similar  in  its  object,  which 
was  executed  with  a  very  steady  and  a  very  efficient 