

In  the  diary  kept  by  General  iNlalcolm  for  the 
benefit  of  his  wife  during  his  visit  to  Calcutta  in  1808, 

'  Luring  the  last  yeai's  of  Lord  Minto's  residence  at  Oalcutta, 
Government  House  was  thc'home,  not  only  of  the  f.amily  circle,  but 
of  Colonel  Taylor,  n  ilitary  secretary,  who  in  I80i»  married  Miss 
Petrie,  a  lady  remarkable  for  iiersonal  and  other  gifts,  and  of  the 
sisters  of  Mrs.  John  Elliot,  whose  popularity  and  agreeable  qualities 
had  made  their  father’s  house  at  Madras  a  centre  of  pleasant  society. 


350 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1813 


we  find  the  following  entry:  ‘Mrs.  W -  happened 

not  to  have  been  introduced  to  Lord  Minto  when  he 
dined  here,  and,  mistaking  him  for  another,  she  said : 
“  Do  you  know  the  cause  of  Greneral  Malcolm’s  return 
to  Calcutta ?  ”  “I  believe  I  can  guess,”  was  the  Lord’s 
reply.  “  Pray  then  tell  me,”  said  the  lady.  Lord  Minto 
hesitated  till  after  we  were  at  table,  and  then  said : 
“  We  had  better  give  the  Greneral  plenty  of  wine,  and 
we  shall  get  this  secret  out  of  him.”  The  lady,  who 
had  now  discovered  his  rank,  began  to  make  apologies. 
“  I  assure  you,  my  Lord,”  she  said,  “  I  did  not  know  you.” 
“  I  am  delighted  at  that  compliment,”  he  replied ;  “  not 
to  be  known  as  Grovernor  Greneral  in  private  society  is 
my  ambition.  I  suppose  you  thought  I  looked  too 
young,  and  too  much  of  a  puppy  for  that  grave  old 
fellow,  Lord  JNIinto,  whom  you  had  heard  people  talking 
about.”  I  mention  this  anecdote  as  very  characteristic 
of  that  playful  pleasantry  which  makes  Lord  Minto’s 
society  so  agreeable  to  those  he  associates  with.’ 

In  another  passage  Malcolm  says  that  it  had  been 
‘  an  equal  subject  of  astonishment  and  delight  to  him  to 
find  a  man  whose  fife  had  been  passed  in  all  the  bustle 
of  public  affairs,  cherishing  local  attachments  with  all 
the  enthusiasm  of  a  country  gentleman,  and  resting 
his  happiness  upon  the  best  and  truest  basis,  natural 
ties,  and  consequently  finding  in  the  constantly  in¬ 
creasing  affection  of  his  family  that  which  gives  success 
its  highest  zest,  and  brings  comfort  under  every  reverse 
of  fortune.’  ‘ 


Kaye’s  Life  of  Malcolm, 


^T.  62] 


FEELING  IN  CALCUTTA. 


351 


The  sympathy  which  his  strong  love  of  home 
excited  among  his  brother  exiles  of  Calcutta  was 
gracefully  displayed  when,  at  the  close  of  1812,  the 
bachelors  of  Calcutta  gave  the  Glovernor  General  a 
ball.  As  he  entered  the  door,  the  opposite  end  of 
the  room  disclosed  a  \dew  of  Minto  House,  ‘  the  burn, 
the  green  hills  all  to  the  life,  and  on  so  large  a  scale  as 
to  reach  from  side  to  side  of  an  immense  room.’  Mer¬ 
cifully,  no  prophetic  instinct  warned  him  that  in  the 
vision  created  by  friendly  regard  he  was  alone  to  see 
the  scene  he  loved  so  well. 