


344 


T.OED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


f  i8i;^ 

the  first  intelligence  of  the  slight  ahont  to  be  put  upon 
him  may  be  seen  in  the  following  letter  to  Lady  Minto. 

‘June  26,  181:?. 

‘  Your  last  letter,  dated  Minto,  November  7,  brought 
me  the  first  notice  of  Lord  Moira,  or  of  any  intention 
to  supersede  me  earlier  than  the  time  I  had  myself 
fixed.  By  the  same  fleet  I  had  half  a  page  from  Lord 
Buckinghamshire  with  the  dry  fact  of  Lord  Moira’s 
appointment,  and  of  his  having  himself  proposed  an 
earldom  to  Lord  Liverpool,  who  had  concurred  very 
readily,  and  in  a  friendly  manner.  By  the  second  line 
from  Lord  Buckinghamshire  in  December  I  am  informed 
of  the  Prince’s  assent. 

‘  I  shall  not  launch  into  the  question  of  Lord 
Moira’s  appointment  to  this  office  before  I  had  re¬ 
signed  it.  The  feelings  and  opinions  of  us  all  upon 
this  occasion  must  be  very  much  alike.  .  .  .  Some  cir¬ 
cumstances,  however,  soften  the  matter  so  far  as  I  am 
personally  concerned.  First,  the  offer  of  the  earldom,* 
as  well  as  what  everyone  knows  of  the  motive,  origin, 
and  progress  of  the  measure,  proves  that  my  removal 
from  this  office  has  no  relation  whatever  to  my  con¬ 
duct  ;  and  the  measure  is  defended  by  its  authors 
and  instruments  by  arguments  entirely  foreign  to  the 
usual  merits  of  such  questions, — that  is  to  say,  upon 
the  several  grounds  of  excessive  favoiur  to  another  man, 

'  Lord  Minto  was  created  Viscount  Melgund  and  Earl  of  Minto 
on  February  24,  1813. 


^T.  62]  RECALL  OF  LORD  MINTO  R45 

of  political  arrangements  of  office,  and  of  commands 
which  must  be  obeyed  without  hesitation  or  remon¬ 
strance.  Part  of  this  is  new  in  England,  and  the 
remainder  entirely  new  regarding  the  (fovernment  of 
India,  but  it  does  not  touch  me  personally.  The  other 
softening  is  a  vigorous  protest  against  the  measure, 
both  on  the  personal  and  public  ground,  by  some  of  the 
ablest  and  most  respectable  members  of  the  Court  of 
Directors.  I  might  perhaps  have  felt  mortihed  (though 
the  feeling  would  have  been  false,  since  I  have  done 
nothing  amiss)  if  such  an  affront  had  been  passed  on 
me  through  such  a  body  without  dissent.  As  it  is,  1 
have  been  well  and  handsomely  defended,  and  the 
mere  obedience  of  the  servum  pecus  to  a  master  ought 
not  to  humiliate  me  or  any  other  man.  Whether  it  is 
pleasant  to  their  own  feelings  or  not  is  their  affair. 
It  may  be  from  this  view  of  the  subject  that  I  cannot 
perhaps  get  myself  to  be  quite  angry  enough. 

‘  The  consequence  of  the  arrangement  might  to 
many  people  he  uncomfortable.  1  must  remain  at 
Calcutta  some  months  after  my  successor  wn'll  have 
assumed  the  government,  but  I  confess  this  circum¬ 
stance  appears  to  me  perfectly  indifferent.  Lord  iNIoira 
is  naturally  disposed  to  act  handsomely  on  all  occasions, 
and  I  shall  have  no  disposition  to  give  him  umbrage ; 
so  that  I  think  the  rising  and  setting  suns  may  drive 
their  chariots  very  peaceably  and  amicably  round  the 
Calcutta  Course. 