

The  peculiar  conditions  in  which  the  British  rule 
in  India  exists  were  ever  present  to  his  mind  when  the 
interests  of  the  iState  or  of  individuals  were  under  con- 


360 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[Cn.  xiY. 


sicleration.  A  few  thousands  of  men  were  called  upon 
to  govern  millions ;  between  the  few  and  the  many 
there  were  no  sympathies  of  race  or  of  religion,  no 
similarity  in  civilisation,  none  of  the  links  which  bind 
men  together.  Exiles  from  their  native  country,  often 
from  their  families,  when  time  and  distance  were 
e\  ils  of  a  magnitude  ^vhich  we  can  hardly  appreciate, 
the  dearest  hope  of  Anglo-Indians  was  the  achieve¬ 
ment  of  such  an  independence  as  would  permit  them  to 
escape  from  the  land  where  the  best  years  of  their  man¬ 
hood  had  to  be  spent ;  yet  the  fate  of  India  depended 
on  the  faithfidness  of  such  men  to  the  functions  of 
go\"ernment.  To  their  energy  and  integrity  England 
looked  for  safety,  and  India  for  justice.  ‘  Destroy  or 
even  retard  their  hopes,  and  you  sap  their  energy,  and 
tempt  their  probity,  and  by  so  doing  you  weaken  the 
governing  power  of  your  empire.’ 

In  the  same  spirit  he  wrote  on  the  general  ques¬ 
tion  of  the  suitability  of  a  Commission  to  elfect  mea¬ 
sures  of  retrenchment. 

‘  All  schemes  of  sound  economy  must  be  combined 
with  other  points  of  public  policy.  If  simple  retrench¬ 
ment  is  ordered,  without  regard  to  other  principles  of 
government,  either  the  economical  result  will  itself 
lie  fallacious,  and  the  worst  as  well  as  greatest  of 
all  prodigalities  Avill  be  the  real  consequence,  by  the 
substitution  of  abuse  in  the  room  of  avowed  remunera¬ 
tion  for  service ;  or,  if  the  economy  should  prove  real, 
the  State  itself,  for  the  benefit  of  which  that  economy 
is  sought,  will  suffer  more  essentially,  perhaps  vitally, 


Cm.  XIV.] 


OFFICIAL  coerp:spondence. 


361 


iu  its  higher  interests,  liy  the  inefficiency  of  all  the 
branches  of  the  public  service.  .  .  .  Ketrenchment  is 
the  specific  object  of  the  appointment  of  a  Commission. 
It  is  in  that  branch  that  the  pnblic  looks  for  the  proofs 
of  their  exertion ;  and  the  accomplishment  of  those 
expectations  is  to  be  their  title  to  pnblic  notice  and 
approbation  on  their  return  to  Europe.  They  are  not 
sent  out  to  govern  India.  The  permanent  interests 
of  that  country  are  not  committed  to  them,  although 
these  objects  may  be  recommended  to  their  collateral 
regard.  In  this  respect,  therefore,  I  cannot  help  think¬ 
ing  a  Commission  of  retrenchment  is,  by  its  very  con¬ 
stitution,  subject  to  the  objection  of  separating  those 
objects  of  pnblic  policy  which  ought  to  be  combined, 
and  of  throwing  an  extraordinary  share  of  the  public 
authority  and  energy  into  a  single  branch  of  the  pub¬ 
lic  concerns,  in  a  manner  which  is  distinct,  from,  and  is 
on  that  account  prejudicial  to,  the  general  interests  of 
the  State.  It  is  in  this  view  that  I  still  consider  the 
established  government  of  India  as  the  most  convenient 
—  I  might  say,  as  the  only  convenient — instrument  of 
such  economical  reforms  as  the  present  conjuncture  of 
the  Company’s  concerns  may  require. 