

A  discussion  having  arisen,  in  connection  with  this 


Ch.  XIV.] 


lUL.VNrE  OF  POWER. 


365 


question,  between  the  Court  of  Directors  and  the 
Indian  Giovemment,  regarding  the  policy  of  endeav¬ 
ouring  to  restore  the  balance  of  power  among  the 
States  of  India,  which  it  Avas  assumed  had  been  de¬ 
stroyed  by  the  territorial  acquisitions  of  the  Company, 
Lord  Minto  observed  in  a  secret  despatch,  that,  ‘  as  an 
abstract  proposition,  all  opinions  will  agree  that  a 
balance  of  the  power  of  States,  united  in  political  or 
commercial  intercourse,  affords  the  best,  if  not  the 
only  security  which  human  ingenuity  can  devise 
against  the  projects  of  ambition  or  the  ruinous  effects 
of  reciprocal  enmity.  But  a  balance  of  power,  to  be 
efficient,  must  be  formed  on  principles  of  convention 
such  as  those  under  which  it  subsisted  on  the  Conti¬ 
nent  of  Europe  before  the  French  Bevolution. 

‘  It  must  arise  out  of  a  consentaneous  submission  to 
a  system  of  public  Lvav,  and  a  recognition  of  reciprocal 
rights  as  they  respect  the  several  States  individually, 
and  of  reciprocal  duties  as  they  relate  to  the  imposition 
of  restraints  on  their  own  ambition,  or  on  the  ambition 
of  their  neighbours.  It  must  be  foundcvl  at  least  on  a 
declared  renunciation  of  vieAvs  of  corupiest,  as  a  ])rin- 
ciple  of  government ;  and  it  must  operate  by  the  ajjpn*- 
hended,  and,  as  the  occasion  may  require,  the  actual 
association  of  several  States  to  resist  the  endeavours 
Avhich  any  one  State  may  employ  to  aggrandise  its 
power  at  the  expense  f)f  another.  At  no  period  of  the 
history  of  India  do  we  recognise  the  existence  of  any 
such  system  of  federation  or  balance  of  the  power  of 
States;  nor  indeed  is  it  compatible  with  the  character. 


366 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[Ch.  XIV. 


principles,  or  constitution  of  the  States  which  have 
been  established  on  the  Continent  of  India.  With 
them,  war,  rapine,  and  conquest  constitute  an  avowed 
and  legitimate  pursuit,  and  the  chief  source  of  public 
glory,  sanctioned  and  even  recommended  by  the  ordi¬ 
nances  of  religion,  and  prosecuted  without  the  sem¬ 
blance  or  pretext  of  justice,  Avith  a  savage  disregard  of 
every  obligation  of  humanity  and  public  faith,  and 
restrained  alone  by  the  poAver  of  resistance.  Under 
the  successful  impulse  of  these  principles  the  vast 
empire  of  the  hlahommedans  Avas  established  over  more 
than  the  Continent  of  India. 

‘  On  its  ruins  arose  the  poAver  of  the  INIahratta  States, 
Avhich  subsequently  branched  out  into  a  confederation 
of  chiefs,  professedly  directed  to  objects  of  conquest 
and  universal  exaction,  the  fruits  of  AAUich,  by  regular 
convention,  Avere  to  be  divided  in  specific  proportions. 
The  same  vieAvs  and  principles  animated  and  extended 
the  usurpations  of  Hyder  Ali  and  his  successor.  The 
checks  which  the  Mahrattas  and  the  rulers  of  Mysore 
occasionally  received  from  the  poAver  of  the  Nizam,  and 
from  different  combinations  among  these  three  States, 
Avere  the  result,  not  of  a  predetermined  federation  and 
))alance  of  poAver,  but  of  the  prevalence  of  a  system  of 
concpiest,  violence,  and  usurpation.  The  efforts  of  the 
contending  parties  Avere  directed,  not  to  the  just  limita¬ 
tion,  but  to  the  subversion  of  each  other’s  poAver,  and 
the  aggrandisement  of  their  OAvn  ;  and  it  is  unnecessary 
to  refer  to  the  testimony  of  specific  facts,  Avith  a  view 
to  demonstrate  the  self-evident  proposition,  that  the 