


crowned  with  eminent  siiccess.  ‘  The  junior  members 
of  the  service  were  animated  to  hoirourable  exertions, 
which  formed  the  foundation  of  their  future  distinction ; 
their  seniors  were  induced  to  apply  their  knowledge 
and  acquirements  to  the  instruction  of  their  younger 
brethren ;  and  a  number  of  natives  of  talent,  exercising 
over  their  countrymen  the  combined  influence  of  learn¬ 
ing  and  religion,  who  were  engaged  in  the  servuce  of 
the  College,  derived  from  their  employment  some  com¬ 
pensation  for  that  neglect  to  which  the  decay  and  ex¬ 
tinction  of  native  patrons  of  rank  had  subjected  them, 
and  learned  to  identify  their  interests  with  those  of  a 
foreign  and  intrusive  race.  To  them  and  to  their 
European  associates  were  due  a  variety  of  useful  works, 
tending  to  make  the  Oriental  student  familiar  with 
the  laws  and  institutions,  the  religion  and  character  of 
the  people.  Every  attempt  so  directed  was  encouraged 
and  aided  by  Lord  Minto.’ 

Some  years’  experience  of  the  beneflcial  results 
already  attained  from  the  prosecution  of  Oriental  studies 
at  the  College  of  F ort  William,  and  through  the  medium 
of  the  learned  works  produced  by  the  Serampore  Press, 
induced  Lord  Minto  to  consider  the  propriety  of  in¬ 
stituting  colleges  for  the  two  great  races — the  Hindoo 
and  Mahommedan — forming  the  immense  majority  of 
the  population  over  which  we  were  called  to  rule.  Both 
were  races  boasting  histories  of  great  renown ;  \'isible 
monuments  of  their  public  spirit  were  scattered  over 
the  land — monuments  of  exquisite  art  and  refined  taste. 
In  Sanscrit  literature  lie  imbedded  some  of  the  earliest 


Ch.  XIV.] 


nativp:  colleges. 


375 


and  some  of  the  highest  theological  conceptions  to  which 
the  uninspired  mind  has  attained ;  and  with  Hindoo 
and  Mussulman — as  with  all  men — ‘  the  natural  law  of 
which  St.  Paul  speaks,  was  capable  of  development  under 
moral  cidture,  whatever  the  figments  of  their  faith. 

Therefore  it  seemed  to  Lord  Minto  that  to  give  a 
higher  education  on  general  subjects  of  learning  through 
the  channels  by  which  alone  they  could  receive  it,  was 
an  object  worthy  of  the  State,  and  shortly  before  he 
went  to  Java  in  1811  he  wrote  a  minute  from  which 
the  following  passages  are  extracted. 

‘Fort  William:  March  6,  1811.' 

‘  It  is  a  common  remark  that  science  and  literature 
are  in  a  progressive  state  of  decay  among  the  natives 
of  India.  From  every  enquiry  which  I  have  been  en¬ 
abled  to  make  on  this  interesting  subject,  that  remark 
appears  to  me  but  too  well  founded.  The  number  of 
the  learned  is  not  only  diminished,  but  the  circle  of 
learning,  even  among  those  who  still  devote  themselves 
to  it,  appears  to  be  considerably  contracted.  The 
abstract  sciences  are  abandoned,  polite  literature  neg¬ 
lected,  and  no  branch  of  learning  cultivated  but  what 
is  connected  with  the  peculiar  religious  doctrines  of  the 
people.  The  immediate  consequence  of  this  state  of 
things  is  the  disuse,  and  even  actual  loss,  of  many 
valuable  books ;  and  it  is  to  be  apprehended  that,  un¬ 
less  Government  interposes  Avith  a  fostering  hand,  the 