

‘  I  hope  that  a  remedy  for  the  disorder  in  our 
finances  may  be  sought,  in  part  at  least,  from  an  aug¬ 
mentation  of  resources  as  well  as  from  diminution  of 
charges.  I  am  persuaded  much  may  be  done  by  an 
economical  administration,  by  avoiding  unnecessary 
expenses,  and  by  combating  abuse,  fraud,  and  extrava¬ 
gance  in  the  pidilic  expenditure.’ 


362 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[Ch.  xiy. 


One  source  to  which  Lord  Minto  looked  for  an 
augmentation  of  resources,’  was  the  gradual  extension 
of  free  trade,  in  the  place  of  the  existing  system  of 
exclusion  and  monopoly. 

In  a  private  letter  to  the  Hon.  E.  Dundas,  Decem¬ 
ber  1808,  he  wrote:  ‘  The  great  question  between  the 
Company’s  monopoly  and  the  private  trade  is  too  exten¬ 
sive  and  complicated  for  a  letter.  I  shall  only  say  that 
the  circumstances  on  which  the  necessity  for  monopoly 
for  the  trade  of  India  was  originally  founded,  have 
passed  away  ;  and  a  state  of  the  -world,  as  well  as  a 
change  in  the  condition  of  the  Eastern  world  itself, 
has  arrived  which,  so  far  from  requiring  monopoly,  will 
I  suspect,  be  found  no  longer  compatible  with  that 
system.  Sudden  and  radical  changes  in  great  institu¬ 
tions  are  however,  seldom,  perhaps  never,  free  from 
danger  and  evil.  'My  mind  certainly  leans  to  the 
system  which  appears  to.be  in  agitation — namely,  that 
of  relaxation  in  the  present  monopoly,  rather  than  to 
its  total  or  immediate  abolition. 

‘  Of  this  I  Avill  venture  to  assure  you,  looking  to 
the  Indian  side  of  the  question  only,  that  every  exten¬ 
sion  that  can  be  given  to  the  freedom  of  trade  Avill 
operate  most  powerfully  and  sensibly  to  the  instant 
improvement  of  the  wealth  and  prosperity  of  India.  I 
am  strongly  inclined  to  the  opinion  that  the  East  India 
Company  itself  will  find  more  advantage  in  the  pros¬ 
perity  of  its  territories  than  in  the  profits  of  its  exclu¬ 
sive  trade  ;  and  is  in  reality  more  interested  as  a  Stock 
Company  in  the  former  than  in  the  latter.  As  Sove- 


Ch.  XIV.] 


FKEEDOM  OF  TRADE. 


363 


reigns  of  an  Empire  the  question  Avill  admit  of  no 
doubt,  and  the  duties  arising  from  that  relation  may  be 
thought  entitled  to  their  share  in  its  decision.’'  ^ 

‘  I  should  conceive  that  if  the  import  and  exjiort. 
trade  is  thrown  open  to  the  extent  mentioned  in  the 
Articles  3rd,  4th,  and  7th,  of  your  letter,  a  liberty  to 
individual  traders  to  employ  European  factors,  of  their 
own  appointing,  in  the  interior  of  the  pimdnces  will 
become  necessary.  This  ^vill  increase  the  number  of 
Europeans  resident  in  the  provinces,  and  it  will  be  im¬ 
possible  to  protect  the  native  people  from  oppression 
if  Europeans  residing  in  the  provinces  continue  to  be 
amenable  only  to  the  Supreme  Court  in  Calcutta,  and 
exempt  from  the  local  control  of  the  Company’s  Courts. 
This  inconvenience  is  already  felt  most  sensibly.* 