

In  a  similar  spirit  Lord  Minto  addressed  himself  to 
the  students  of  the  College  of  Fort  William,  remind¬ 
ing  them  that  they  were  about  to  be  employed  in  the 
administration  of  a  great  country,  in  which  it  would 
not  be  much  beyond  the  truth  to  say  that  the  English 
iangnage  was  not  known ;  that  they  wonld  have  to 
deal  with  mnltitudes  who  could  only  communicate  with 


Ch.  XIV.]  COLLEGE  OF  FOKT  WILLIAM. 


371 


them  in  some  one  or  other  of  the  languages  taught  at 
the  College  of  Fort  William ;  that  ignorance  of  the 
languages  of  India  created  almost  unavoidable  and 
almost  unlimited  dependence  on  the  native  and  sub¬ 
ordinate  officers.  ‘  How  much  prejudice  to  the  inter¬ 
ests  of  the  Company,  how  much  vexation,  extortion,  and 
cruelty  towards  our  native  subjects,  how  much  indi¬ 
vidual  shame  and  ruin  have  resulted  from  this  cause,  a 
very  short  acquaintance  with  the  affairs  of  India  will 
too  clearly  show.’  He  could  not  therefore  declare  too 
explicitly  his  determination  to  give  the  preference  in 
the  selection  of  gentlemen  for  public  trust  and  employ¬ 
ment  to  those  who  should  have  established  a  reputation 
for  conduct,  diligence,  and  talents  during  their  studies 
at  the  College  of  Fort  William. 

The  College  of  Fort  William  was,  as  is  well  known, 
founded  by  Lord  Wellesley.  The  parsimony  of  the 
Directors  led  to  several  important  restrictions  of  its 
original  functions  before  Lord  Minto  went  to  India.  He, 
however,  lent  it  the  fidl  aid  of  his  support,  recognising 
in  it  the  twofold  object  of  promoting  knowledge  among 
the  Anglo-Indian  pidilic  servants  and  the  restoration 
of  (Oriental  literature  to  its  due  position  among  the 
scientific  studies.  A  number  of  important  and  learned 
works  on  the  science  of  language  and  of  jurisprudence 
were  published  by  the  College  in  the  years  1808,  1809, 
and  1810;  as  also  others  of  a  more  literary  character, 
reproducing  the  most  important  and  esteemed  produc¬ 
tions  of  Hindoo,  Persian,  and  Arabian  poets  and  writers. 
A  printing  press,  established  by  learned  Hindoos,  for 


JJ  B  2 


372 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA, 


[Ch.  XIV. 


the  printing  of  books  in  the  Sanscrit  language,  was 
munificently  aided  by  T./ord  Minto,  and  was  encouraged 
by  the  College  to  undertake  an  edition  of  the  best 
Sanscrit  dictionaries,  and  a  compilation  of  the  Sanscrit 
rides  of  grammar. 

His  first  address  in  the  character  of  Visitor  to  the 
College,  in  1808,  contains  a  passage  which,  emanating 
from  the  lips  of  the  man  ivho  was  shortly  to  open  nego¬ 
tiations  with  the  ruler  of  Afghanistan,  and  who  later 
on  enrolled  an  important  portion  of  the  Malayan  race 
among  the  subjects  of  the  Company,  possibly  contained 
more  meaning  than  met  the  ear. 