

‘  The  latter  offences  against  the  peace  and  happiness 
of  society  have  indeed,  for  the  present,  been  materially 
checked  by  the  vigilance  and  energy  of  the  police  ;  but 
it  is  probably  only  by  the  more  general  diflusion  of 


378 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[Oh.  XIV. 


knowledge  among  the  great  body  of  the  people  that  the 
seeds  of  these  evils  can  be  etfectually  destroyed. 

‘  Snfificient,  I  presume,  has  been  already  said  to 
show  the  fitness  of  incurring  some  additional  expense 
with  a  view  to  the  restoration  of  learning  in  the 
extensive  provinces  subject  to  the  immediate  govern¬ 
ment  of  this  Presidency.’ 

The  minute  indicates  certain  reforms  which  were 
required  to  adapt  the  existing  college  at  Benares  (for 
which  a  liberal  sum  was  allowed  by  Grovernment)  to 
the  prevailing  opinions  and  habits  of  the  natives,  and 
to  correct  the  abuses  which  had  crept  into  it ;  it  then 
proceeds  to  recommend  that  two  other  Hindoo  colleges 
at  Nuddea  and  at  Bhour  should  be  constituted ;  and 
ends  thus  : '  ‘It  will  be  observed  that  in  the  foregoing 
remarks  I  have  confined  myself  almost  exclusively  to 
the  plan  necessary  to  be  adopted  for  the  restoration  of 
Hindoo  science  and  literature.  .  .  .  With  the  difference 
only  in  the  population  of  Hindoos  and  Mahommedans, 
all  the  arguments  which  have  been  above  stated  in 
support  of  the  arrangements  proposed  to  be  adopted 
for  the  propagation  of  knowledge  among  the  former 
would  equally  apply  to  similar  institutions  for  the 
benefit  of  the  Mahommedans.  A  sentiment,  however, 
of  deference  for  the  Honourable  Court  of  Directors  re¬ 
strains  me  from  recommending  any  extension  of  the 
plan  until  their  orders  shall  have  been  received  on  the 
subject  generally  of  this  minute.  I  deem  it  therefore 
sufficient  to  add  on  the  present  occasion  that  Mahom- 
medan  colleges  might  be  beneficially  established  at 


Ch.  XIV.]  PUBLIC  ADDRESS  TO  LORD  MINTO. 


379 


Bhangiilpore,  Juanpore  (where  Persian  and  Arabic  litera¬ 
ture  formerly  flourished),  and  at  some  place  in  the  ceded 
and  conquered  provinces ;  and  that  it  might  be  advisable 
to  reform  the  iNIadrissa,  or  iMahommedan  collegiate  in¬ 
stitution,  at  ('alcntta,  on  the  principles  recommended 
with  respect  to  the  Hindoo  colleges.  The  attention  of 
the  Honourable  Court  will  be  of  course  drawn  to  this 
interesting  subject  in  the  next  despatch  from  the 
Revenue  Department.’  * 

We  cannot  terminate  this  chapter  more  effectively 
than  by  a  few  extracts  from  an  Address  presented  to 
Lord  Minto  on  his  departure  from  India  by  the  British 
residents  at  Calcutta. 

‘The  arduous  and  sacred  trust  of  administering  this 
great  government  devolved  upon  your  Lordship  soon 
after  the  termination  of  wars,  which  had  far  extended 
the  limits  of  the  Empire,  and  had  raised  to  the  highest 
pitch  the  reputation  of  the  British  councils,  together 
with  the  fame  of  the  British  arms ;  but  the  mighty 
efforts  necessary  to  ensure  those  splendid  results  coidd 
not  be  supported  without  proportionate  sacrifices.  To 
repair,  therefore,  the  evils  inseparable  from  the  most 