

*  The  discipline  of  the  Sepoys  was  shown  in  a  remarkable  degree 
during  a  great  riot  at  llonares  in  ISOlt. 


Ch.  XIV.] 


VAEIOUS  MEASURES. 


369 


Lord  Minto’s  expectations  as  to  the  development 
of  a  ‘  wholesome  and  convenient  system  of  law,’  from 
the  basis  of  the  scheme  instituted  by  liord  Cornwallis, 
do  not  appear  to  have  been  realised.  In  the  year 
following  that  in  which  this  letter  was  written,  he  had 
occasion,  as  we  have  seen,  to  deplore  the  lawless  con¬ 
dition  of  districts  at  no  considerable  distance  from 
Calcutta,  and  to  trace  them  in  part  to  the  ignorance 
of  European  magistrates,  and  the  corruption  of  the 
native  poUce. 

Various  measures  for  the  improvement  of  the 
administration  of  justice  were  under  consideration  at 
various  periods  of  his  tenure  of  office  ;  but  he  himself 
appears  to  have  rested  his  best  hopes  of  attaining  a 
more  efficient  system  upon  a  previous  amelioration  in 
the  relations  of  the  two  races,  and  upon  the  gradual 
instruction  of  the  native  population  in  those  elemen¬ 
tary  principles  of  truth  and  honesty  without  which 
there  can  be  neither  law  nor  justice. 

The  mutual  ignorance  of  eacli  other’s  motives,  in¬ 
tentions,  and  actions,  in  which  Europeans  and  natives 
seemed  content  to  live,  had  forcibly  struck  Lord  IMinto 
during  his  short  residence  at  IMadras  in  1807.  ‘  1  do 

not  believe  that  either  Lord  VVilliajn  (Bentinck)  or  Sir 
.John  Cradock  had  the  slightest  idea  of  the  aversion 
their  measures  woidd  excite.  I  fidly  believe  that  their 
intentions  were  totally  misapprehended  by  the  natives.’ 
His  subsequent  letters  show  his  conviction  that  the 
chief  impediment  to  the  improvement  of  the  native 
race,  and  the  chief  disadvantage  under  which  their 


B  B 


370 


LORD  MINTO  IN  IISDIA. 


[Ch.  XIV. 


European  rulers  laboured,  was  to  be  found  in  their 
reciprocal  ignorance  of  each  other’s  language  and 
modes  of  thonght.  One  of  the  first  objects  of 
Grovernment,  he  said,  should  be  to  assist  them  to 
understand  each  other. 

In  a  despatch  to  the  Home  Grovernment,  written 
soon  after  his  arrival  in  India,  the  following  passage 
occurs  : — ‘  Some  unnecessary  mortifications  experienced 
at  present  by  the  native  officer  might,  I  think,  be  re¬ 
moved  with  great  propriety  and  advantage ;  and  a  very 
material  and  essential  improvement  wonld  result  from 
every  encouragement  that  could  be  given  to  a  closer 
interconrse  between  European  officers  and  the  Sepoys 
they  command.  To  this  very  important  object  the 
attention  of  Grovernment  is  now  directed,  and  mnch 
benefit  may  be  expected  from  the  means  of  instruction 
in  the  native  language  which  are  now  furnished  to  the 
younger  branches  of  the  service.  It  must  be  the  care 
of  Grovernment  to  inculcate  throughout  the  army  that 
an  intimate  acquaintance  and  intercourse  with  the 
native  soldier  will  constitute  one  of  the  strongest  titles 
to  the  favour  of  their  superiors,  and  advancement  in 
their  profession.’ 