

‘Redress  is  in  reality  entirely  refused  if  it  must  be 
sought  by  poor  men  from  a  h^reign  court  at  a  great 
distance.  The  proper  remedy  will  in  my  apprehension 

*  Tlie  exclusive  monopoly  by  the  Company  of  the  India  trade 
was  abolished  on  the  renewal  of  the  Bast  India  Charter  in  1813. 
The  exclusive  trade  to  China  was  confirmed  to  them. 

*  The  system  of  judicature  referred  to  was  that  instituted  by 
Lord  Cornwallis,  of  which  the  chief  feature  was  the  establishment  of 
a  number  of  coiu'ts  throughout  the  British  territory — one  in  the 
chief  city  of  every  district — over  which  presided  a  judge  with  one 
or  two  assistants  chosen  from  the  Company’s  servants.  Eacli  court 
was  provided  with  a  native  to  expound  the  Hindoo  or  Mahommedan 
law.  All  descriptions  of  persons,  British  subjects  alone  excepted,  were 
amenable  to  these  tribunals.  From  their  decisions  there  were  two 
stages  of  appeal  ;  the  (irst  to  the  provincial  courts,  of  which  there 
were  four  ;  the  last  and  highest  Court  of  A])])eal  was  the  Sudder 
Dewanee  Adawlet,  composed  of  the  chief  members  of  Government, 
assisted  by  natives.  British  subjects  were  amenable  only  to  the 
Supreme  Court  at  Calcutta. 


364 


LOKD  MINTU  IN  INDIA. 


[Ch.  XIV. 


he  to  subject  Europeans  at  a  certain  distance  from 
Calcutta  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Company’s  Courts, 
with  such  limitations  as  may  be  thought  necessary. 
Ihit  I  must  take  the  liberty  of  cautioning  you 
auxiously  against  any  proposition  (and  such  will 
certainly  be  made)  for  extending  the  administration 
of  English  law  to  the  provinces ;  and  consequently 
sending  English  lawyers  and  attorneys  among  the 
people  of  India.  I  would  also  caution  you  against  any 
admixture  of  the  two  judicatures,  by  giving  appeals 
from  the  Company’s  courts  to  the  Supreme  Court,  or 
by  placing  a  judge  or  the  Chief  Justice  of  the  Supreme 
Court  ill  the  Sudder  Dewanee  Adawlet,  which  is  the 
Court  of  Appeal  from  all  the  Company’s  tribunals. 
Our  judicial  system  is  not  without  defects.  It  is  yet 
in  an  early  stage,  but  I  am  persuaded  it  will  mature 
itself  into  a  good,  rational,  and  for  this  country  whole¬ 
some  and  convenient  system  of  law,  with  a  pure 
and  efficient  administration  of  justice,  provided  it  be 
not  perplexed  by  an  alliance  with  a  foreign  code,  and 
borne  down  by  the  superior  authority  of  English  and 
professional  lawyers.’ 

The  great  burden  on  the  finances  of  the  Company 
was  the  size  of  their  army.  ‘  On  all  sides  I  am  assured,’ 
wrote  Lord  Aliuto,  ‘  that  this  great  expense  is  a  neces¬ 
sary  one.’  Surrounded  by  rival  ambitions,  by  popula¬ 
tions  indifferent  when  not  hostile,  the  ascendancy  of 
Great  Britain  could  only  be  maintained  by  indispu¬ 
table  military  supremacy. 