


Ch.  XIV.] 


MILITARY  DISCIPLINE. 


367 


permanent  existence  of  a  balance  of  power  is  incompa¬ 
tible  with  reciprocal  views  of  conquest  and  ambition. 

‘  We  shall  not  adduce,  in  proof  of  the  existence  of 
that  spirit  of  insatiable  coiKpiest  which  we  have 
ascribetl  to  the  native  States  without  distinction,  the 
various  etforts  which  they  have  employed  to  subvert 
the  British  broverunieut  in  India,  since  the  period  of 
its  establishment.  The  existence  of  it,  as  the  actua¬ 
ting  principle  of  every  Indian  Power,  requires  no  de¬ 
monstration ;  and  we  found  upon  it  this  undeinable 
conclusion — that  no  extent  of  concession  or  territorial 
restitution  on  our  part  would  have  the  effect  of  estab¬ 
lishing  any  real  or  effectual  balance  of  power  in  India, 
or  forbearance  on  the  part  of  other  States  when  the 
means  of  aggrandisement  should  be  placed  in  their 
hands.  Vour  Honourable  Committee  has  indeed  justly 
remarked,  in  your  letter  of  October  30,  1805,  “that  to 
recede  is  often  more  hazardous  than  to  advance  ;  ”  add¬ 
ing  “  that  this  observation  is  peculiarly  applicable  to 
India,  where  there  is  little  probability  that  concession 
woidd  be  attributed  by  the  native  Powers  to  any  other 
motives  than  weakness  and  fear.”  To  enter  more 
amply  into  this  discussion  would  require  a  laborious 
review  of  events  during  a  long  course  of  years  .  .  . 
the  necessity  of  which  is  superseded  by  the  conviction 
which  we  entertain,  that  no  argument  can  be  retpusite 
to  demonstrate  how  vain  would  be  the  expectation  of 
augmenting  our  security  by  dinuuishing  our  power  and 
political  ascendancy  on  the  Continent  of  Asia.' 

It  is  perha])s  scarcely  sufficiently  remembered  that. 


368 


LOED  JUNTO  IN  INDIA. 


[Ch.  XIV. 


in  countries  where  a  low  state  of  ci\dlisation  exists, 
military  discipline  is  generally  found  to  be  the  first 
and  most  efficient  school  to  teach  the  rudiments  of 
social  order. 

A  curious  instance  of  this  ffict  is  given  in  a  passage 
of  a  journal  -written  by  Colonel  Taylor,  aide-de-camp  to 
Lord  ]\Iinto,  while  accompanying  the  Commander-in- 
chief  on  a  visit  to  the  Upper  Provinces.  After  de¬ 
scribing  a  visit  to  the  ruins  of  iShah  Soojah’s  palace 
on  the  Ganges,  he  goes  on  to  describe  a  mosque  some 
miles  further  on.  ‘  We  found  it  surrounded  with 
jungles;  in  it  a  very  picturesque  and  savage-looking* 
group  had  taken  possession  of  the  ruins ;  about  twenty 
hill-men  were  just  taking  their  breakfast  of  venison 
steaks  on  plantain  leaves  ;  half  of  the  deer,  not  skinned, 
lay  among  them ;  some  were  repairing  their  arrows ; 
each  had  a  large  bamboo  bow  leaning  against  the  wall, 
and  quantities  of  arrows  of  different  kinds  were  by 
them.  The  next  day  we  inspected  the  hill  rangers,  a 
corps  of  about  300  men,  formed  entirely  from  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  the  hills.  It  is  curious  to  see  men  who 
were,  before  enlisting,  such  as  rve  saw  in  the  Jumna 
Mesjid,  or  mosque  near  Kajemahl,  with  their  clothes, 
arms,  and  accoutrements  in  high  order,  and  going 
through  their  manoeuvres  by  the  word  of  command  in 
English  -with  more  steadiness  than  is  always  to  be  met 
with  in  an  English  regiment ;  though  I  observe  the 
native  corps  are  generally  slower  in  their  movements.’ ' 