


Minute  by  the  Governor  General 


376 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[Ch.  XIV. 


revival  of  letters  may  become  hopeless,  from  a  want  of 
books,  or  of  persons  capable  of  explaining  them. 

‘  The  principal  cause  of  the  present  neglected  state 
of  literature  iu  India  is  to  be  traced  to  the  want  of  that 
encouragement  which  was  formerly  afforded  to  it  by 
princes,  chieftains,  and  opulent  individuals  under  the 
native  governments.  Such  encouragement  must  always 
operate  as  a  strong  incentive  to  study  and  literary 
exertions,  but  especially  in  India,  where  the  learned 
professions  have  little  if  any  other  support. 

‘  The  justness  of  these  observations  might  be  illus¬ 
trated  by  a  detailed  consideration  of  the  former  and 
present  state  of  science  and  literature  at  the  three 
principal  seats  of  Hindoo  learning,  viz.  Benares,  Tirhoot, 
and  Nuddea.  Such  a  review  would  bring  before  us  the 
liberal  patronage  which  was  formerly  bestowed,  not 
only  by  princes  and  others  in  power  and  authority,  but 
also  by  the  zemindars,  on  persons  who  had  distin¬ 
guished  themselves  by  the  successful  cultivation  of 
letters  at  those  places.  It  would  equally  bring  to  our 
view  the  present  neglected  state  of  learning  at  those 
once  celebrated  places  ;  and  we  should  have  to  remark 
with  regret,  that  the  cultivation  of  letters  was  now 
confined  to  the  few  surviving  persons  who  had  been 
patronised  by  the  native  princes  and  others,  under  the 
former  governments,  or  to  such  of  the  immediate  de¬ 
scendants  of  those  persons  as  had  imbibed  a  love  of 
science  from  their  parents. 

‘  It  is  seriously  to  be  lamented  that  a  nation  particu¬ 
larly  distinguished  for  its  love  and  successful  cultivation 


Ch.  XIV.]  MINUTE  I!Y  THE  GOVEliNOR  GENERAL.  377 


of  letters;  in  other  parts  of  the  empire,  should  have 
failed  to  extend  its  fostering  care  to  the  literature  of  the 
Hindoos,  and  to  aid  in  opening  to  the  learned  in  Europe 
the  repositories  of  that  hterature. 

‘  It  is  not,  however,  the  credit  alone  of  the  national 
character  which  is  affected  by  the  present  neglected 
state  of  learning  in  the  East.  The  ignorance  of  the 
natives  in  the  different  classes  of  society,  arising  from 
the  want  of  proper  education,  is  generally  acknowledged. 
This  defect  not  only  excludes  them  as  individuals  from 
the  enjoyment  of  all  those  comforts  and  benefits  which 
the  cultivation  of  letters  is  naturally  calculated  to  afford, 
but,  operating  as  it  does  throughout  almost  the  whole 
mass  of  the  population,  tends  materially  to  obstruct  the 
measures  adopted  for  their  better  government. 

‘  Little  doubt  can  be  entertained  that  the  prevalence 
of  the  crimes  of  perjury  and  forgery,  so  frequently 
noticed  in  the  official  reports,  is  in  a  great  measure 
ascribable  both  in  the  Mahommedans  and  flindoos,  to 
the  want  of  due  instruction  in  the  moral  anil  religious 
tenets  of  their  respective  faiths.  It  luis  even  been 
suggested,  and  apparently  not  without  foundation,  that 
to  this  uncultivated  state  of  mind  of  the  natives  is  in 
a  great  degree  to  be  ascribed  the  prevalence  of  those 
crimes  which  were  recently  so  great  a  scourge  to  the 
country. 