

There  were  two  languages  which,  though  included 
in  the  comprehensive  scheme  of  Oriental  study 
embraced  by  the  College  of  Fort  ’William  at  an  earlier 
period  of  the  institution,  were  not  provided  for  in  the 
modified  plan  of  instruction  to  which  the  College  was 
now  restricted — the  Alalay,  and  the  Afghan  or  Pushtoo. 

‘Yet,’ said  Lord  Minto,  ‘  I  cannot  think  either  of 
those  I  have  mentioned  entirely  devoid  of  interest ;  in 
the  first  place  as  branches  of  the  general  and  liberal 
pursuit  of  Eastern  learning  which  we  profess;  and  in 
the  next  place  as  bearing  either  a  present  and  imme¬ 
diate,  or  in  the  many  chances  of  human  vicissitude,  a 
prospective,  and  perhaps  not  remote,  affinity  to  our 
affairs.’  Some  steps  had  been  already  taken  in  the 
direction  indicated,  by  the  joint  labours  of  a  learned 
native  of  Peshawur  and  of  a  British  Orientalist,  of 
which  a  vocabulary,  dictionary,  and  essay  on  Afghan 
grammar  were  the  result. 


Ch.  XIV. J 


COLLEGE  OF  FORT  WILLIAM. 


373 


We  have  seen  it  stated,  with  what  trutli  we  know 
not,  that  at  the  present  time  fewer  of  onr  officers  are 
accjiiainted  with  the  Pushtoo  dialect  than  might  be 
desired,  and  ‘  enlightened  foreigners  ’  have  commented 
on  the  insufficient  knowledge  of  Oriental  tongues  ob¬ 
servable  among  British  agents  in  the  East. 

Not  one  of  his  public  duties,  said  Lord  INIinto  in  his 
last  annual  address  to  the  College  of  Fort  \\hlliam,  had 
excited  in  his  mind  a  more  cordial  concern  and  more 
lively  interest  than  those  appertaining  to  the  office  of 
A^isitor  of  the  College. 

And,  perhaps,  no  more  intellectual  treat  was  to  be 
olitained  at  Calcutta  than  was  offered  by  the  discourse 
of  Lord  INIinto  on  the  occasion  of  the  annual  chstribu- 
tion  of  honorary  degrees,  of  prizes,  and  medals  to  the 
successful  students  of  the  College.  Alauy  went  to 
hear  him  who  had  no  other  attraction  than  the  plea¬ 
sure  of  listening  to  a  thoughtfid  address,  expressed 
in  language  worthy  of  the  thought.  It  is  probable 
that  none  of  his  pnblic  appearances  were  so  well  adapted 
to  disclose  the  natural  bias  of  his  tastes  as  this;  in 
which  the  pursint  of  literature  in  all  its  branches  was 
his  theme,  while  the  almost  paternal  tenderness  with 
which  he  sympathised  in  the  hopes  and  eftorts  of  the 
young  gave  at  times  a  touching  as  well  as  impressive 
character  to  his  exhortations. 

It  is  pleasant  to  learn,  on  the  authority  of  the 
eminent  historian  of  British  India,  that  Lord  Alinto’s 
earnest  efforts  to  bring  into  fnll  operation  the  benefits 
intended  by  the  illnstrious  founder  of  the  College  were 


374 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA, 


[Ch.  XIV. 