

'  Lord  Russell.  -  To  Lady  Minto,  May  lil,  1814. 

’  ‘  He  must  fall,’  wrote  Benjamin  Constant  to  Sir  James  Mack¬ 
intosh  (March  1814)— ‘he  must  fall  before  we  can  think  of 
anything  else  ;  he  mu.st  fall  that  we  may  have  time  to  think  of  any¬ 
thing  else.’ 


384 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1814 


quiet  to  have  him  back  again.  By  the  bye  have  you 
heard  the  calembourg  ?  “  Les  Anglais  nous  ont  vendu 
un  cochon  de  dix-huit  Louis  qui  ne  vaut  pas  un 
Napoleon.”  His  works  in  roads,  buildings,  and  mili¬ 
tary  establishments  are  magnificent  beyond  all  idea, 
and  I  conld  not  help  being  indignant  at  the  pains  taken 
to  efface  all  remembrance  of  his  being  the  author  of 
them.’ ' 

Into  this  scene  of  splendour  and  triumph  arrived 
the  returning  Grovernor  General;  but  to  him  and  to 
those  who  waited  for  him  all  other  feelings  were  swal¬ 
lowed  up  in  the  joy  of  reunion — actnal,  or  at  hand. 
What  that  moment  was  to  them,  and  what  too  the  days 
that  followed  it,  their  own  letters  will  most  fitly  tell. 

Lord  Minto  to  Lady  Minto. 

‘  H.M.S.  Hussar  ”  at  sea  :  May  7,  1814. 

‘We  are  all  well — off  the  sonth  of  Ireland — hope 
to  land  in  four  days.  We  fell  in  with  an  English  frigate 
this  forenoon  with  which  we  conversed  by  telegraphic 
signals  and  received  the  most  happy  intelHgence. 
“  Peace  with  France — the  old  kingdom  restored,”  by 
which  we  understand  the  Bourbons  restored.  We 
now  hear  from  the  Irish  boat  that  the  Emperor  of 
the  West  is  sent  to  Elba — relegatus  ad  insulas.  We 
are  all  out  of  our  wits,  and  especially  myself,  at  the 
thoughts  of  meeting  you  all. 

'  Lord  Auckland  to  Miss  Emma  Elliot,  who  was  at  Madras  with 
her  father,  the  lit.  Hon.  Hugh  Elliot,  Governor  of  the  Presidency. 


^T.  63] 


ARRIVAL  IN  LONDON. 


385 


‘  London :  May  19. 

‘  I  arrived  yesterday,  and  was  in  a  complete  whirl  of 
delight  for  the  first  two  or  three  hours  ;  and  I  was 
caught  by  the  last  bell,  the  sound  and  meaning  of 
which  I  had  forgot.  I  am  excessively  glad  that  you 
did  not  come  to  town ;  and  the  delay  in  our  meeting 
will  be  fully  compensated  by  the  superior  happiness  of 
meeting  at  home.  You  may  reckon  on  this  day  fort¬ 
night  as  the  longest  period  of  my  stay  in  London.  I 
was  delighted,  as  you  may  imagine,  with  A.  ]\I. 
and  Gilbert.  Yesterday  was  indeed  one  of  the  very 
happiest  days  of  my  life ;  but  there  is  one  happier  still 
in  store,  when  I  shall  have  you  once  more  in  my  arms, 
with  the  certainty  of  having  no  more  of  those  sad 
absences  from  which  we  have  so  often  suffered,  and 
Cat  an  to  kiss  and  to  spoil,  and  Mary  and  her  four 
upon  my  knee.  It  is  in  short  to  me,  like  the  events  of 
this  annus  mirabilis  to  the  world,  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  a  new  era  of  happiness  and  repose.  You  will 
have  heard  from  other  quarters,  and  spare  my  blushes 
in  repeating,  all  the  compliments  that  are  paid  me,  by 
everybody  I  meet,  on  my  youth  and  beauty.  To  the 
latter  I  must  plead  guilty,  since  they  all  tell  the  ssime 
story ;  but  of  youth  there  is  little  left.  I  have  seen 
crowds  of  old  friends  to-day — Glenbervies — Aucklands 
— Chichesters — Temples — Fred  North — Henry  Gaily 
Knight — Harrises — Mrs.  Robinson — Elliot  of  Wells — 
John  Frere.  I  go  to  Park  Place  in  my  way  to  Scot¬ 
land. 