


392 


LOBD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1814 


His  longing  to  push  on  was,  however,  too  strong  to 
be  opposed.  Thejoumey  was  proceeded  with.  ‘He  has 
but  one  wish,  to  see  the  person  on  whom  his  thoughts 
are  ever  fixed ;  ’  one  anxiety — to  reach  home.  The  rest 
may  be  guessed.  From  the  first  horrid  misgiving, 
when  the  groimd  seems  to  fail  away  from  under 
one’s  feet,  to  the  full  con^iiction  that  there  is  no 
help,  no  hope,  no  escape  from  an  overwhelming  cala¬ 
mity,  most  of  us  know  the  course. 

By  short  stages,  Stevenage  on  the  northern  road 
was  reached ;  but  in  a  state  of  prostration  which  left 
no  room  for  hope  ;  and  there  he  quietly  sank  early  in 
the  night  on  June  21.  ‘Oh!  my  poor  mother — take 
care  of  her — I  know  you  will  do  all  you  can,’  was  the 
note  sent  home  by  his  son  that  night. 

How  fearful  the  shock,  how  profound  the  grief,  may 
be  imagined  by  any  reader  of  the  letters  now  pub¬ 
lished  ;  but  the  degree  and  the  faithfulness  of  the 
sorrow  with  which  he  was  mourned  may  best  be  told  in 
a  few  affecting  lines,  written  by  his  eldest  son  very 
many  years  after  the  event,  and  found  by  his  children 
at  his  death.  They  were  obviously  intended  to  find 
place  in  the  opening  chapter  of  a  biography  of  Lord 
Minto,  which  was,  however,  never  proceeded  with ;  for 
the  date  proves  that  the  writer’s  own  days  were  thence¬ 
forth  but  few. 

‘  During  the  period  of  an  absence  of  seven  years, 
engaged  in  laborious  and  absorbing  duties,  there  was  no 
one  day  in  which  the  evidence  does  not  exist  of  the 
fond  affection  with  which  his  mind  dwelt  on  the 


;Et.  63J 


DEATH  OF  LORD  MINTO. 


393 


domestic  circle  from  which  he  was  severed,  and  on  the 
distant  prospect  of  reunion  with  those  he  loved.  Nor 
on  our  side  was  there  a  single  day  in  which  he  was  not 
the  constant  object  of  our  thoughts,  or  in  which  we 
did  not  anxiously  count  the  days  of  our  separation. 
The  one  great  object  looked  to  on  either  side,  as  the 
greatest  happiness  that  could  await  us,  was  his  return 
to  England,  and  to  the  tranquil  enjoyment  of  honour¬ 
able  repose  in  the  home  he  loved.  In  order  to  under¬ 
stand  the  intense  anxiety  with  which  we  contemplated 
this  reunion,  it  would  be  necessary  to  have  known  the 
feelings  with  which  he  was  regarded  by  his  family — as 
the  friend,  the  companion,  the  playfellow,  the  guide 
and  example  for  all  ages — feelings  in  which  were 
combined  the  warmest  familiar  affection,  with  admira¬ 
tion,  respect,  and  veneration.’ 

Here  follows  an  account  of  his  gratifying  reception 
in  London;  the  splendid  success  of  his  government 
being  a  subject  of  general  congratulation ;  and  then, 
after  some  details  of  the  comrse  of  the  illness,  comes 
the  end :  ‘  Thus  at  once  were  dashed  those  hopes  in 
the  moment  of  their  accomplishment,  which  had  been 
the  solace  of  seven  years  of  painful  separation.  Any 
attempt  must  be  vain  to  describe  the  overwhelming 
weight  of  this  blow.  The  first  object  of  our  affection, 
of  our  reverence,  was  lost  in  the  first  days  of  its  resto¬ 
ration  ;  the  feehngs  and  the  mind  were  subdued  and 
prostrated  almost  to  a  condition  of  insensibihty  and 
indifference  to  all  the  interests  of  life.  Many,  many 
years  elapsed,  chequered  by  other  and  deep  affliction, 