


388 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1814 


three  cheers,  and  found  all  the  work-people  assembled. 
The  day  being  perfectly  divine,  I  thought  I  had  never 
seen  so  beautiful  and  interesting  a  scene,  the  air  ring¬ 
ing  with  joyful  sounds,  and  all  nature  gay  and  seeming 
to  partake  of  my  feelings. 

Friday. — I  have  not  slept  so  sound  for  years  as  I 
did  last  night. 

Saturday. —  You  really  are  in  London  —  only 
think  !  Comparatively  speaking,  I  feel  as  if  you  were 
at  Hawick  or  Jedburgh  ;  and  all  the  letters  to-day,  mad 
or  sober,  are  full  of  your  youthful  looks  and  beauty, 
and  declare  you  look  younger  and  fresher  than  when 
you  left  England.  I  begin  to  think  I  did  very  wrong 
to  stay  at  home ;  for  I  can’t  say  our  northern  blasts  have 
had  the  same  effect  on  me.’ 

Such  was  the  happiness  and  such  the  hopes  created 
by  Lord  Minto’s  return.  Every  day  brought  him  letters 
from  his  wife,  showing  that  she  lived  in  the  thought  of 
their  approaching  reunion,  while  with  the  unselfishness 
and  strong  sense  of  duty  which  distinguished  her,  she 
assured  him  she  would  not  be  miserable,  and  that  he 
must  not  hurry  away  from  London  till  all  claims  on 
his  attention  had  been  satisfied.  Nothing  interested 
her  but  the  preparations  for  the  moment  to  which  all 
were  looking  forward ;  nothing  calmed  her  but  an 
active  participation  in  them. 

‘  I  have  myself  been  arranging  the  rooms,  and 
dragging  about  the  furniture ;  Grilly,  who  certainly 
expects  to  find  you  the  youngest  thing  here,  has  a 
trap  and  ball  ready  for  you.’ 


r 


^T.  63] 


MINTO  AND  LONDON. 


389 


The  poor  little  Malay  boys  brought  home  from 
Malacca  were  welcomed  at  INIinto  as  the  first  detach¬ 
ment  of  the  home-coming  party.  Lady  Minto  shivered 
for  them  in  their  ship’s  clothing,  and  at  once  set  about 
clothing  them  in  flannel.  ‘Are  they  my  cousins?’ 
asked  the  little  son  of  the  house,  and  on  being  told 
not,  ‘  I  am  glad  of  that,  as  I  should  rather  not  have 
black  cousins,  but  they  are,  ver?/  nice.’  Then  black 
boys  and  white  went  off  to  the  hills  together,  which  the 
little  darkies  climbed  on  all  fours,  chattering  most 
excitedly  in  their  native  lingo. 


‘  Hay  20,  1814.' 

‘  I  breakfasted  this  morning  with  Mr.  Elphinstone, 
the  Chairman,  and  it  is  settled  that  I  am  to  dine  with 
the  Court  of  Directors  at  one  of  their  court  dinners, 
without  the  fussification  to  both  parties  of  an  immense 
public  dinner.  The  day  is  not  fixed,  but  it  will  be  very 
soon,  which  will  be  one  step  towards  Minto.  I  am  as 
perfectly  delighted  and  as  perfectly  happy  as  it  is  pos¬ 
sible  for  me  to  be  till  I  see  you.’ 

‘  May  24. — I  have  your  letters  of  Thursday  and 
Saturday,  and  I  am  thankful,  my  dearest  love,  that  your 
cares  are  heaved  overboard.  We  have  nothing  now  to 
do  but  to  be  thankful  and  happy.  The  period  to  come 
will,  I  trust,  be  unshadowed  by  absences,  or  that  they 
will  be  very  short,  and  that  we  shall  enjoy  the  tranquil 
comforts  of  content  and  of  mutual  love  for  the  rest  of 