

‘  We  cannot  forego  the  gratification  of  bearing  our 
testimony  to  the  wisdom  and  humanity  which  extended 
to  the  conquered  the  blessings  of  British  protection 
and  of  British  laws,  and  saved  an  ancient  and  popidous 
colony  from  that  devastation  to  which  a  less  generous 
policy  might  have  doomed  it.’ 


382 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1814 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Lord  jMinto  returned  to  England  as  he  had  left  it,  on 
board  a  frigate  commanded  by  his  son,  Captain  George 
Elliot ;  but  on  this  occasion  accompanied  by  his  younger 
son  John,  and  the  wives  and  infants  of  both  brothers. 
All  the  family  had  assembled  in  London  to  receive  him, 
with  the  exception  of  his  wife  and  yonngest  daughter 
and  daughter-in-law.  These  awaited  him  at  Alinto. 

If  the  letters  of  1812  gave  us  a  glimpse  of  the 
gloomiest  period  of  England’s  long  struggle  with  the 
despotism  that  had  enchained  the  Continent  of  Europe, 
those  of  1 8 1 4  mark  the  high  tide  of  her  triumph .  London 
overflowed  with  Emperors,  Kings,  and  field-marshals. 

These  were  the  heroes  of  the  Harvest-Home,  but 
the  sheaves  had  been  gathered  by  the  nations  in  arms 
-  -from  the  Tyrolese  Alps  to  the  ramparts  of  Saragossa  ; 

From  Moscow,  self-devoted  in  a  blaze 
Of  dreadful  slaughter, 

to  the  heights  where  German  armies  paused  in  their 
headlong  course  to  gaze  upon  and  hail  the  free  ‘  exult¬ 
ing  ’  Rhine. 

And  in  English  hearts  was  the  proud  consciousness, 


JEt.  63] 


AKRIVAL  IN  LONDON. 


383 


to  which  a  great  Whig  statesman  '  has  given  expression, 
that  ‘  the  constancy,  courage,  and  perseverance  of  the 
J^ritish  people,  animating  the  prostrate  nations  of  the 
Continent,  had  at  length  achieved  a  triumph  over  the 
most  formidable  combination  of  military  genius,  war¬ 
like  popidation,  conquering  armies,  and  political  talent, 
which  ever  threatened  the  independence  of  our  country.’ 

‘  Is  it  not  (piite  glorious  to  have  lived  to  see  this 
holiday — this  festival  for  all  the  nations  under  heaven  ?  ’ 
wrote  the  calm  Lord  Webb  tSeymour ;  ^  ‘  yet  it  is 
humiliating  to  think  that  the  bar  to  all  this  happi¬ 
ness — the  bar  we  have  removed — was  the  ascendancy 
of  one  baneful  mind.^  This  is  a  sad  check  to  those 
splendid  contemplations  which  Mr.  Stewart  and  other 
philosophers  would  encourage,  respecting  the  influence 
of  general  causes  upon  the  progressive  improvement  of 
the  human  race.  ]\Ir.  Playfair  mil  go  to  Paris  if  he 
finds  Lord  J.  Pussell,  the  Miss  Jlerry’s,  or  any  old 
intimates  ready  to  go  with  him.’ 

Another  correspondent — deorge  Eden,  afterwards 
Lord  Auckland — did  go  to  Paris,  and  with  all  the 
sympathies  of  Holland  House  about  him,  saw  nothing 
so  interesting  there  as  Josephine  and  Hortense. 
‘  Very  few  of  those  to  whom  we  talked  disguised  their 
ailiiiiratiou  for  Napoleon ;  but,  with  the  exception  of 
some  of  the  army,  very  few  would  risk  their  internal 