

'  This  minute  is  quoted  in  an  article  on  the  ‘  Early  or  exclusively 
Oriental  period  of  Government  Education  in  Bengal,’  in  the  Cdlcvtta 
jR(‘vic)v,  vol.  iii.  1845,  and  is  ushered  in  with  the  remark  that  ‘  The 
Earl  of  Minto,  having  succeeded  to  his  heart’s  content  in  crushing 
the  efforts  of  Christian  evangelists,  next  directed  his  attention  to  the 
heathenish  institutions  which  owed  their  origin  and  support  to 
■the  munificence  of  some  of  his  predecessors.  These  he  re.solved 
not  only  to  perpetuate  but  to  render  still  more  efficient.  And  not 
only  so,  but  his  purpose  was  consentaneously  formed  to  add  to  their 
number  at  the  expense  of  the  State.  .  .  .  This  document  of  great 
historical  importance  is  little  known.’ 


380 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[Ch.  XIV. 


fortunate  warfare,  to  recruit  and  husband  our  resources, 
to  consolidate  our  recent  conquests,  to  introduce  among 
our  new  subjects  the  inestimable  blessings  of  security, 
of  order,  and  of  justice,  were  among  the  first  objects 
which  called  forth  the  exercise  of  your  Lordship’s 
wisdom  and  talents. 

‘  The  consummate  prudence  and  complete  success 
of  the  measures  directed  to  the  accomplishment  of 
these  momentous  objects  are  attested  by  the  flourish¬ 
ing  condition  of  every  branch  of  the  public  revenue  ; 
by  the  state  of  tranquillity  in  which  these  Provinces 
have  been  maintained,  and  by  the  increasing  opulence 
and  prosperity  which,  notwithstanding  the  privation 
of  foreign  commerce,  they  unequivocally  manifest. 

‘  At  the  period  of  your  Lordship’s  arrival  in  India, 
the  undisguised  and  ambitious  projects  of  our  in¬ 
veterate  enemy  in  Persia,  in  Turkey,  and  in  every 
quarter  of  the  East  to  which  his  agents  and  emissaries 
found  means  of  access,  threatened  to  interrupt  the 
tranquillity  and  security  of  these  dominions.  .  .  .  The 
vigilant  exertions  and  comprehensive  arrangements  of 
that  period  of  your  Lordship’s  administration  were 
commensurate  with  the  exigency  of  the  times,  and 
were  eminently  calculated  to  secure  those  external  and 
internal  combinations  of  policy  and  power  which  in  the 
season  of  approaching  peril  constitute  the  most  efficient 
means  of  national  defence. 

‘  We  have  witnessed  the  successful  exertion  of 
promptitude,  energy,  and  foresight  in  restoring  tran- 
(|uillity  to  a  vast  portion  of  the  Empire  ;  in  repelling 


Ch.  XIV.]  PUBLIC  ADDRESS  TO  LORD  MINTO. 


381 


the  aggression  of  foreign  enemies  ;  in  maintaining  the 
efficiency  of  our  political  relations,  in  vindicating  the 
rights  and  dignity  of  the  British  Government,  and  in 
supporting  the  reputation  of  its  faith  and  the  vigour  of 
its  arms. 

‘  These  brilliant  results  of  foresight  and  of  energy 
formed  a  happy  presage  of  the  triumphant  expeditions 
in  which  the  zeal,  discipline,  and  valom-  of  our  armies, 
under  the  guidance  of  your  Lordship’s  councils,  ac¬ 
complished  the  subjugation  of  the  Islands  of  Bourbon 
and  Mauritius,  and  achieved  the  still  greater  compiest 
of  the  Dutch  possessions  in  the  East. 