


V  c 


386 


LOED  JVnNTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1814 


Lady  Melgund  to  a  Friend. 

‘  Minto  :  May  20,  1814. 

‘  The  “  Hussar  ”  has  arrived,  and  every  soul  on 
board  well.  They  landed  at  Plymouth  on  the  14th ; 
wonld  get  to  London  as  yesterday  or  to-day.  We  shall 
probably  see  them  in  about  ten  days.  We  got  this 
joyful  news  yesterday  morning,  and  we  spent  such  a 
day !  It  would  have  raised  the  spirit  of  a  Dutchman 
to  see  the  happiness  that  reigned  at  Minto.  The 
news  spread  through  the  house  like  wildfire,  every¬ 
body  was  running  here  and  there,  not  knowing  how  to 
show  their  joy.  When  I  told  them  to  go  to  the  top  of 
the  house  to  cheer,  in  ten  minutes  there  were  about 
seventy  people  assembled ;  I  gave  them  a  quantity  of 
guns,  and  we  had  volleys  and  cheering  from  that  time 
till  one  o’clock,  the  local  militia  colours  flying  on  the 
house  all  the  time.  After  the  children’s  dinner  we  had 
a  grand  procession  of  all  the  people,  with  fiddles  play¬ 
ing  and  colours  flying,  followed  by  Lady  Minto,  Gilbert, 
and  me  in  the  little  gig,  to  the  Eocks,  to  fire  the 
cannon,  which  was  done  four  times  with  great  effect. 
Then  we  had  cheering,  &c.  till  dinner-time,  when  the 
procession  returned,  and  we  had  a  song  from  one  of 
the  workmen,  made  on  the  occasion.  The  moment  he 
heard  the  news  he  ran  home  to  make  his  poem,  and  it 
was  all  ready  by  two  o’clock.  In  the  evening  we  had 
dancing,  and,  as  one  of  the  carpenters  observed,  “  the 
day  ended  with  the  utmost  hilarity."  Lady  Minto 
behaved  admiiably;  she  was  not  overcome  with  all 


jEt.  63] 


LETTERS  FROM  MINTO. 


387 


this  joy;  but  it  was  a  long  while  before  she  durst 
trust  herself  to  speak  to  me.’ 

Lady  Minto  to  Lord  Minto. 

‘  Thursday,  May  19. 

‘  Oh,  dear  me  !  I  can  hardly  breathe  or  speak  or 
think  or  run  about,  or  sit  still,  or  believe  that  all  my 
cares,  all  my  wishes,  and  all  my  anxieties  are  whisked 
away  in  a  moment  by  the  most  delightful  certainty 
that  here  you  are  in  our  own  little  island  safe  and 
sound ;  and  I  cannot  say  how  more  than  delighted  I 
am,  as  a  secondary  feeling,  to  find  that  my  having  re¬ 
mained  here  proves  the  decision  you  wished  for.  I  felt 
so  sure  of  this  that  I  have  been  as  obstinate  as  any 
mule,  and  positively  set  my  face  against  the  opinions 
and  advice  of  most  of  my  friends,  feeling  sure  I  knew 
better  than  they  could,  all  the  feelings  you  must  have 
respecting  Minto  itself,  not  to  mention  the  everlasting 
delight  in  future  years  of  the  sweet  recollections  that 
will  ever  attach  to  the  spot  of  our  reunion.  I  will 
not  say  that  I  would  not  at  this  moment  give  my  ears 
to  be  amongst  you ;  but  even  at  this  moment,  in  ail 
the  delirium  of  delight,  I  know  it  is  best  as  it  is.  I 
can  be  patient,  and  shall  be  in  a  more  composed  state 
than  is  possible  just  now,  when  all  is  flutter,  flutter, 
and  not  one  idea  is  settled  for  an  instant,  and  every 
possible  demonstration  of  joy  has  been  made  through¬ 
out  the  house.  I  was  called  away  here  by  the  sound 
of  firing  from  the  top  of  the  house,  and  ran  upstairs 
to  that  beautiful  terrace,  where  I  was  received  with 