


•  Lord  Slinto  to  Lady  Minto. 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


390 


[1814 


our  time  while  the  younger  generations  flourish  away 
in  the  more  lively  joys  of  their  period  of  life.’ 

‘May  27,  1814. 

‘  I  meet  a  very  cordial  reception  from  everybody  of 
all  descriptions ;  and  general  esteem,  sincere  as  it 
appears  to  be,  is  a  satisfactory  result  of  public  life. 
jNIy  w'ish  is  to  close  it  here.  Indeed,  young  and  beau¬ 
tiful  as  I  am,  I  feel  that  I  am  not  equal  to  the  fatigues, 
either  mental  or  bodily,  of  public  business  in  England. 
My  legs  improve  a  little,  and  I  hope  to  make  them 
younger  at  Minto ;  but  really  young  they  can  never  be, 
of  course ;  and  I  am  not  only  content  to  toddle  on 
with  you  through  the  rest  of  my  journey,  but  shall 
think  and  find  it  the  best  part  of  our  lives.  There 
certainly  never  were  happier  parents,  and  the  children 
who  make  us  so,  appear  to  be  rewarded  by  happiness 
themselves.’ 

June  3,  the  day  after  the  Drawing-room,  was  fixed 
for  Lord  hlinto’s  departure  from  London ;  but  on  May 
28  an  event  occurred  which  altered  his  plans,  and  was 
big  with  fate.  Lord  Auckland,  who  had  gone  to  rest 
in  perfect  health,  was  found  dead  in  his  bed  by  his 
daughters  when  they  went  to  summon  him  to  break¬ 
fast.  In  order  to  be  with  his  sister  in  her  over¬ 
whelming  grief,  and  to  follow  his  brother-in-law  to  the 
grave.  Lord  Minto  at  once  postponed  his  departure. 
Unhappily  the  funeral  was  arranged  to  take  place  at 
Beckenham — the  parish  in  which  Eden  Farm,  the 
happy  home  of  the  bereaved  family,  was  situated — 


JEt.  63] 


DEATH  OF  LORD  AUCKLAND. 


391 


and  at  night.  The  sad  procession  by  road  from  London 
to  Beckenham,  and  the  subsequent  funeral  service, 
occupied  five  hours — from  half-past  seven  till  half- 
past  twelve,  in  a  cold  drizzling  rain.  Four  days  later 
we  have  the  first  note  of  the  coming  tragedy.  A 
cold,  which  Lord  Minto  had  complained  of  before,  had 
been  greatly  increased  by  the  exposure  of  that  fatal 
night.  He  was  ordered  to  stay  indoors.  On  the  8th 
‘  he  broke  prison  to  visit  Lord  Melville,  and  obtain  a 
nephew's  well-earned  promotion.’  On  the  13th  he 
confessed  himself  so  low  in  strength  and  spirits  that 
he  could  not  attempt  a  letter.  In  proportion  to  his 
bodily  weakness  was  the  increase  of  his  passionate 
longing  to  reach  iSIinto ;  and  his  family,  having  no 
apprehension  of  any  impending  danger,  were  equally 
anxious  with  himself  to  get  him  out  of  town  and  in 
the  safe  keeping  of  his  home.  ‘  With  the  affectionate 
kindness  which  never  flagged  he  resolved  to  visit 
Lady  Malmesbury  at  Park  Place,  although  this  added 
at  least  another  day  to  the  length  of  his  journey.’ 
There  he  made  the  greatest  exertions  to  conceal  his 
weakness,  and  his  conversation  was  cheerful  and  gay ; 
but  by  this  time  his  eldest  son,  his  constant  companion 
and  now  tender  nurse,  was  greatly,  though  still  in¬ 
sufficiently,  alarmed.  A  medical  man  was  sent  for  to 
attend  them  on  their  journey ;  and  from  him  it  was  for 
the  first  time  ascertained  that  Lord  jMinto  was  suffer¬ 
ing  from  an  attack  of  a  most  alarming  disease,  which, 
under  the  treatment  of  those  days,  too  frequently 
proved  fatal. 