

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 31 Numerical force of the two first Russian Armies opposing the Grande Armée.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 32 Last mission entrusted to the Count of Lauriston (nice image of Italian troops).

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 33 Napoleon at Vilna; Confederation of Poland; from 21 June to 16 July 1812.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 34a Crossing of the Niemen

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 34b The following military operations and the new provisions of the Emperor Alexander

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 35a Napoleon at Vilna

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 35b End of Napoleon’s stay in Vilna

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 36 Military correspondence of the Cabinet of the Emperor, Bulletins of the Grande Armée

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 37 Napoleon’s stay at Vitebsk; Secondary operations of the Army Corps of the Prince of Schwarzenberg, and Marshals Oudinot and MacDonald, 17 July to 12 August 1812.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 38 Secondary military operations of the Army Corps of Marshals Davout, Oudinot, MacDonald and the Prince of Schwarzenberg

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 39 The Emperor Alexander at Moscow; Appendix to the Fourth Part; Bulletins of the Grande Armée, Proclamations of the Emperor of Russia

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 40 Napoleon at Smolensk; March on Moscow; The Great Battle; from 13 August to 14 September 1812

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 41 Napoleon stops at Smolensk; Retreat of Russian Armies; Battle of Polotsk.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 42a Interview with Emperor Alexander and the Crown Prince of Sweden, Bernadotte, at Abo.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 42b March of Napoleon on Moscow.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 43 What happened at the Russian camp.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 44 Battle of the Moskowa.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 45 Aftermath of the Battle of the Moskowa. Nice image of Prussian Royal Guard.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 46 What happened in Moscow. Setting fire to the city.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 47 Bulletins of the Grand Army; fights of Polotsk and Valutino; nice image of Prussia troops.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 48 Appendix: General, senior and other officers killed during 5 September 1812.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 49 Napoleon established in the Kremlin; very good description of Moscow; burning of the city; evacuation of Moscow by the French Army.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 50 Napoleon at Petrovsky Palace.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 51 Napoleon returned to Moscow; Works of the Emperor; Negotiation attempts. Nice image of Prussian troops.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 52a Movements of the Russian Army around Moscow.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 52b News from the most distant Russian and French Armies.