

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 53 The French Army evacuates Moscow. Nice image of Prussian troops.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 54 Military correspondence of the Emperor’s cabinet; Instructions from the Emperor Alexander; Treasure found in the Kremlin; Bulletins of the Grande Armée.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 55 Napoleon leaves Moscow; March of Napoleon on Kologa; Destruction of the Kremlin. Nice image of Austrian troops.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 56 Taking of Vereya; Battle of Maloyaroslavets.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 57 Retreat of the Army; Napoleon’s march on Smolensk.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 58 The Army passes the Protva twice; Borodino battlefield.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 59 Relaxation of discipline; Continuation of General Kutuzov’s operations. Nice image of Austrian troops.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 60a Appearances and alarms of Cossacks; Combat of Vyaz’ma.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 60b Incessant attacks by Cossacks; Passage of the Vop.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 61 Fights of Polotsk and Bononia; Disaster of Minsk. Nice image of Austrian cavalry.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 62 Fight of Smoliani; Napoleon abandons Smolensk and heads to Krasno.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 63 Occupation and fire of Dukhovshcina; Heroism of three hundred soldiers.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 64a Second battle of Krasnoi; Retreat on Orsha.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 64b Recovery of Borisov by Oudinot; Fight of Ousnask.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 66 Appendix to the seventh part; Bulletins of the Grande Armée.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 67 Passage of the Berezina; Departure of the Emperor for France; End of the Retreat from Russia. Nice image of Saxon troops.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 68 Preliminaries for the passage of the Berezina. Nice image Saxon Wurttemburg troops.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 69 Crossing of the Berezina; Simultaneous fights on both banks; breaking of the bridges.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 70 Chapter III continued; order of battle 28 November.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 71 Retreat of the Grande Armée; Battle at Studianka; Actions around the Berezina; French rear-guard actions; Pursuit by Russians; Analysis of Russian actions.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 72 Attack of the rearguard; Battles of Pleshchenitsy and Maladzyechna; Departure of Napoleon. Nice image of Bavarian troops.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 73a The 10th Army Corps; Taking of Baldone and Friedrichstadt; Vilna.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 73b Retreat to Kowno; Scenes of murder and vengeance; The hill of Pourany.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 74 Continuation of the retreat; Marshal Ney; Kowno. Nice image of Bavarian troops.

History of the Campaign of Russia Part 75 Evacuation of Kovno; Burning of the bridges of the Neman and the Vilija; Battle of Labiau.