2   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


constitution. Denmark-Norway, however, was isolated politically and
militarily, and necessity dictated peace at any price if the remainder of
the state were not to disappear into the maelstrom of the Napoleonic
Wars. The Treaty of Kiel was accordingly signed on 14 January 1814.
It involved surrendering an area of 385,252 km2, and meant that the
territorial losses of the Danish king were among the greatest during
the Napoleonic Wars. The treaty dissolved the 434-year union between
Denmark and Norway, a union that had bound the two countries
together not only in their constitutional law and fiscal policy but also
in their language, culture and family ties.
   But how had this situation come about? Why had Denmark-Norway
been dragged into the Napoleonic Wars? How had the wars influenced
society and the inhabitants of the two countries? And what did the sep-
aration come to mean for them? Historians outside of Scandinavia have
not found it easy to provide satisfactory answers to questions of this
kind, as little has been written in English about Scandinavia during the
period. The most recent general survey in English, covering the entire
duration of the wars, dates back to 1986 and does not include insights
gained from the extensive Scandinavian research conducted over the
last 25 years. Nor have other major works in English provided much
information, with the exception of a monograph on the bombardment
of Copenhagen and one on the Anglo–Swedish alliance of 1805–10. For
their part, Scandinavian historians in general have shown relatively lit-
tle interest in recent international research on the Revolutionary period
and its Napoleonic aftermath. It therefore comes as no surprise that
Scandinavia has largely been ignored in the surge in international stud-
ies of the period, and some scholars have voiced their frustration over
the lack of literature in English on Scandinavia.1
   The aim of this book is to help fill this lacuna in international research
on Europe in the Napoleonic era. Its contribution is twofold. First, it
provides a general overview of war, society and politics in Denmark and
Norway in the years 1807–15, and is the first monograph to do so from
a comparative perspective. Second, it provides an in-depth analysis of
three central subjects in recent international historiography in the con-
text of Scandinavia: the role of nationalism, patriotism and experiences
of the Napoleonic Wars.
   But in order to understand the turmoil created by the Napoleonic
Wars in Denmark and Norway, it is necessary to begin with the con-
ditions that prevailed at the time. This chapter introduces the reader
to the Danish-Norwegian state: its structure, geography, economy and
society, its domestic and foreign policy, its system of government, view
