                            Denmark-Norway and the Ideology of Patriotism   3


of foreign powers, ideological currents and collective identity on the
eve of war.


The Danish-Norwegian State

Denmark-Norway was a composite state or even an empire, as some
Danish and Norwegian historians have begun to call it. The term
‘empire’ should not be misunderstood as an instance of Danish megalo-
mania but, quite the contrary, as a conscious attempt to settle with the
methodical nationalism that has characterised the discipline and erro-
neously equated the Danish nation-state, which was created in 1864,
with the polity of the more distant past. It is more appropriate to com-
pare Denmark-Norway with the Habsburg Empire, which united sev-
eral nations in a community based on loyalty to the same royal house,
than with the British Empire. The kings of Oldenburg reigned over a
state that stretched from the North Cape in the north to the gates of
Hamburg in the south. It was a conglomerate that differed fundamen-
tally from the Danish and Norwegian nation-states of the present.
  In addition to the kingdoms of Denmark and Norway, the Danish-
Norwegian state comprised the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein, the
dependencies of Iceland, the Faroe Islands and Greenland, as well as
the overseas colonies in the West Indies (today the US Virgin Islands), the
East Indies (Trankebar, Serampore, the Nicobar Islands) and the Gold
Coast (today part of Ghana). According to the census of 1801, 929,000
people lived in Denmark and 883,000 in Norway. The Danish duchy of
Schleswig had 278,000 inhabitants, while Holstein, until 1806 part of
the Holy Roman Empire, had 328,000. In total, 2.5 million people lived
in the Danish-Norwegian state. This overextended coastal state with its
many islands and overseas provinces was difficult to defend – especially
in a naval war, and the navy, which was regarded as the pride of the two
kingdoms, was therefore vital for the Danish-Norwegian union.
  The capital, Copenhagen, with a population of more than 100,000,
was the only city of any size by international standards. Yet it had far
fewer inhabitants than the major European metropolises such as London
(958,000), Paris (547,000) and Naples (430,000). It was more comparable
to the populations of the larger German cities such as Berlin (170,000)
and Hamburg (130,000) and greater than the population of the biggest
city in the United States, New York (61,000), and Scandinavia’s second
capital, Stockholm (75,000). In spite of liberal reforms at the end of
the eighteenth century, the state was still centralist. A contemporary
observer noted that Copenhagen was like a giant’s head on a dwarf’s
