                            Denmark-Norway and the Ideology of Patriotism   5


to suggest that either ‘Dannora’ or ‘Dannorig’ should be the common
name for the Danish–Norwegian union, just as Great Britain was for
England, Scotland and Wales, in order to emphasise the ‘eternal’ merg-
ing of the kingdoms. The suggestion was probably never representative
of the views of the general public, but it did reflect a powerful sense of
the Nordic identity that could be found in some academic circles.
   After the war it was claimed that there had been a Danish plan to
replace the name of Norway with North Denmark in order to obliterate
it. While there is no proof of this improbable conspiracy theory, there
were actually some sarcastic statements made by Norwegians during the
period to the effect that they believed the Danes wanted to turn them
into ‘Northern Danes’, which could reflect the fear of some individuals
that there was a policy of ‘Danicisation’ in existence, based on what
actually happened in the duchies at the time. What was known as the
‘Danicisation process’ in Schleswig and Holstein had begun even before
the outbreak of war in a bid to modernise the state administration.2


Dissatisfaction and Identity in Denmark-Norway

In spite of the reform fervour at the end of the eighteenth century,
Denmark-Norway was far from perfect either as a union or as a state,
which meant that the patriotism of the period potentially became an
oppositional phenomenon. The potential firebrands among Danes and
Norwegians alike were young academics, and their base was Copenhagen.
Danish national patriotism, materialising out of a challenge from the
middle classes to the aristocracy and to pro-German sympathies, helped
to strengthen Norwegian national patriotism. National patriotism can
be understood as a form of patriotism that primarily involves a citizen’s
own nation within the framework of the state. Patriotism of this type
can easily be confused with nineteenth-century nationalism but, as the
Norwegian historian Odd Arvid Storsveen, for example, has pointed
out, it existed side by side with ordinary state patriotism, which had
its own political aims such as civic virtue, rationality and the common
good throughout the state.3 Thus, working for and serving the cause of
the Norwegian nation need not make a Norwegian national patriot an
opponent of the union with Denmark and of the king in Copenhagen,
as long as the union and the monarch served Norwegian interests.
   Norwegian middle-class identity developed, with a brief delay, along
the lines of the Danish process that had begun in the 1740s. From 1770 to
1773, when in principle there was full freedom of the press, many young
Norwegians expressed their dissatisfaction with the state of affairs. Their
