                            Denmark-Norway and the Ideology of Patriotism   9


of natural law, according to which people had a number of inviolable
rights. Society was a community of individuals who together ensured
each other’s freedom and independence. It not only protected citizens
against external enemies, it also supported and formed the individual.
All of which imposed a duty on citizens to be prepared to set aside
their own needs for the benefit of the interests of society and the state.
The idea being, in the final analysis, that by serving the common good
patriots also served themselves.
   In other words, patriotism was the dominant social morality that
emphasised ideas about civic virtue, the common good and self-
sacrifice, and focused on the active participation of the individual. The
rational construction of patriotism, however, did not exclude a strong
emotional commitment on the part of the citizen. On the contrary, the
period was rich in bombastic pronouncements and decided sentimen-
tality. Most people saw love of country as a natural urge that should be
raised to the status of a virtue with the help of upbringing.9
   The ideas of the Enlightenment had initially engendered a decidedly
cosmopolitan form of patriotism in which the fatherland was defined as
the place people lived and made themselves useful as citizens. However,
there was also an alternative view of the fatherland as that country
in which one was born. Europe in the eighteenth century was char-
acterised by enmity between a rising middle class and the traditional
aristocracy, which in Denmark became a national clash of interests. For
centuries German language and culture had had an influence on the
country, in part as a result of German immigration, which, as far as the
aristocracy was concerned, was further boosted by Frederick III’s coup
d’état and the introduction of absolutism in 1660. This was a develop-
ment that only peaked with Frederick V in the middle of the eighteenth
century.
   The growing middle class saw the aristocracy as its antithesis and as
an obstacle to social advancement, because it was to them that the top
jobs in the bureaucracy were reserved. They defined themselves, there-
fore, in contrast to the German-French culture and language of the
aristocracy and identified themselves with Danish language, history
and culture. In Denmark, the Norwegian-born historian and author
Ludvig Holberg had helped to awaken the interest of younger academ-
ics for Danish language, literature and history and, from the 1740s, they
demanded that Danish patriots should write in their native language.
The Danish middle class considered the lack of German assimilation
as a provocation and developed a stereotype of Germans as the antith-
esis of patriotic Danes, which came to expression in concepts such as
