4   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


body. The city was the kingdom’s principal fortress where the court,
the administration, the Academy of Fine Arts and the navy were based.
Copenhagen was not only the political, military and intellectual capital,
but also the financial heart and brain of the Danish-Norwegian state.
The banks and the only university in Denmark-Norway were located
here – though the duchies of Holstein and Schleswig were privileged
in having their own banks and a university – and the capital had a de
facto monopoly on colonial goods, which made the Danish provinces
and Norway dependent on Copenhagen.
   The other ‘larger’ Danish towns – Odense, Aalborg and Elsinore –
had only 5000–6000 inhabitants and, in the words of Danish histo-
rian Edvard Holm, were little more than pantiled villages with a licence
to distil spirits. Towns in the duchies such as Altona (23,000) and
Flensburg (13,000) were far more populous, while the biggest town in
Norway, Bergen, had 18,000 inhabitants. Trondheim had 8800, while
Christiania (today Oslo) had slightly more, with approximately 9000
inhabitants. Even though the town was only half as big as Bergen,
Christiania was the closest Norway could get to its own capital. In
peacetime, there were limits to Norwegians’ ability to determine their
own affairs independently of the administration in Copenhagen. The
duchies, on the other hand, had considerable influence on their own
affairs thanks to their old landed aristocracy and a separate chancellery
in Copenhagen.
   The Norwegian towns were generally bigger than those in Denmark,
but there were fewer of them. They held a total of about 20 per cent
of Norwegians, while the rest of the population lived in the country.
The figures for Denmark were roughly similar: 80 per cent lived in
the country, 10 per cent lived in provincial towns and 10 per cent in
Copenhagen, but the majority of the city’s inhabitants were not born
there. The number of Norwegians who lived in Copenhagen is not
known, but it was considerable. About 20 per cent of the inhabitants
were German speakers who chiefly had their roots in the duchies.
   At the time, Denmark-Norway was simply called Denmark, the Danish
state or, more poetically, the ‘twin kingdoms’. The last name was later
interpreted as a rhetorical instrument used by the state to create a false
impression of equality between the two countries. There is no doubt
that ‘twin kingdoms’ was part of the rhetoric of absolutism, but the fact
that many Danish-Norwegian citizens really did view the two peoples
as ‘brothers’ should not be underestimated. The ties between the two
nations, which had never been stronger than just before the outbreak
of war in 1807, led some Danish writers during the Napoleonic Wars
