                            Denmark-Norway and the Ideology of Patriotism   7


absolutist monarchy consciously combined a certain leniency with
regard to the Norwegians with unyielding centralism. At the same time,
it was evident that Norwegian national patriotism was limited to the
middle-class elites. Contemporary peasant risings and religious move-
ments targeted the local middle class, and their leaders viewed the king
as an ally rather than as an opponent in their struggle against the elite.5
   However, Norwegian identity was not solely political in nature but also
cultural, and this came to expression in works dealing with Norwegian
history and geography, which, together with poetry written in local
dialects, gave the Norwegians material that they could use in subse-
quent nation-building processes. Their political demands and cultural
identity strengthened the concept of being Norwegian, but they did not
necessarily conflict with loyalty and state patriotism.
   According to the Danish historian Ole Feldbæk, two elements that
were decisive for the development of a Danish national identity were
still lacking in the establishment of a Norwegian identity: their own
language and a distinctive contrast in national character. The language
of the people had not yet become a national ‘border guard’ and – accord-
ing to Feldbæk – Danes were not objects of hatred. As the Norwegian
civil servant class was self-recruiting, they had no need to create an
object of hatred in order to secure their social position – as was the case
with Danish civil servants. On the other hand the Norwegian historian
Ståle Dyrvik has claimed that there is a parallel between Danish anti-
German feeling and Norwegians’ sense of being unfairly treated by the
Danes. Given the closeness of Danish-Norwegian ties, this parallel is
exaggerated, but there is no doubt that the Dane – and the Swede – was
seen as a potential antithesis to the Norwegian.6
   Norwegian civil servants were ‘pseudo-Danes’ linguistically, cultur-
ally and with regard to their education, and they had ties to Denmark
through families and friends. The difference between Danish and
Norwegian was fluid; a father might be Danish and his son Norwegian
or vice versa, and many Norwegian civil servants were married to Danes.
This meant that some Danes considered Norwegians as half Danish and
Denmark and Norway as a common fatherland. For some Norwegians
who did not regard themselves as pseudo-Danes, this acted as a provoca-
tion, which they would demonstrate by flaunting their ‘Norwegianness’
whenever possible. This often happened at the expense of Danes, who
found it irritating. Norwegianness became associated with nature, his-
tory, allodial rights, and with a particular Norwegian character that
comprised stamina, honesty, freedom and loyalty, while Danes were con-
sidered softer by Norwegians. According to the later Bishop of Bergen,
