6   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


complaints were that Norway was not on an equal footing with Denmark,
that the central administration had no knowledge of their country and
treated it like a colony. They demanded the abolition of the Danish corn
monopoly in Norway (which took place in 1788), more Norwegians in the
central administration and separate Norwegian institutions. Merchants
wanted a bank in Norway and a Norwegian department of commerce,
while civil servants demanded a Norwegian university. These demands
can be traced back to the seventeenth century, but they increased in
vigour in the eighteenth century with the emergence of a self-recruited
class of Norwegian civil servants, who were often descendants of Danish,
German and British families. From the 1790s, the university cause
became a ‘national cause’ for the Norwegian elite. This was rejected in
Copenhagen on several occasions for fear that a Norwegian university
would militate against the unity of the state and strengthen Norwegian
separatism.
   The state attempted to make allowances for Norwegian national
patriotism without giving in to Norwegian wishes. The opposite held
true for the Danish middle classes, who demanded the primacy of the
Danish language, the sole right of citizens of the Danish-Norwegian
state to occupy government posts and recognition of their social and
cultural ambitions. During the last decades of the eighteenth century
all Danish demands were acceded to, in direct contrast to the response
to Norwegian demands. However, their demand for political influence
was rejected out of hand. The policy of absolutism was a balancing act,
where the necessary concessions were made in an attempt to tame, neu-
tralise and control burgeoning national and political tendencies to the
state’s own advantage.4
   The only Norwegian separatist idea we have any definite knowledge
of before 1807 was discussed at a meeting close to the border at Eda in
Sweden by four Norwegian merchants and a Swedish emissary in 1790.
There is controversy about the significance of this particular meeting,
but it is clear that the merchants were imbued with a separate Norwegian
identity that was in opposition to the royal power and that their political
aims were inspired by British parliamentarism and revolutionary France.
The excitement felt in Norwegian (and Danish) circles at the beginning
of the 1790s, however, turned to some extent into a conservative reac-
tion during the second half of the decade. In spite of a certain amount
of discontent, most Norwegians were generally satisfied with the state
of affairs, largely due to the long period of peace the state had enjoyed,
the rule of law, an economic upturn, traditional dynastic loyalty and
the taxation of peasants, which was among the lowest in Europe. The
