8   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


the difference between Norwegians and Danes was created by nature,
but the two peoples were citizens of the same state and shared common
privileges and duties, and for this reason, loyalty to the king extended
over an area from Vardø in Northern Norway to Kiel in Holstein. As far
as the bishop was concerned, the relationship between the two countries
was characterised by an honourable competition between brothers as to
who could best serve their father, the king.7
  The Norwegian peasantry’s ties with Denmark were naturally looser
than those of the civil servant class, but this did not mean that they
considered Denmark a foreign country. Peasants were aware of the
basic principles of the Danish–Norwegian union and of the fact that
Copenhagen was the centre of the state. Norwegian peasants were
familiar with and diligently made use of their right to send petitions
to the king in Copenhagen when they were dissatisfied with local or
regional conditions and, in a few cases, peasants’ sons could be found
among the students at the University of Copenhagen. There can, there-
fore, be little doubt that the Danish–Norwegian union had deep roots
in Norway. On the other hand, the Danish peasantry’s relations with
Norwegians were weaker. This was not only due to adscription, which
remained in force until 1788, but also because Danish peasants had
few dealings with Norwegians and therefore had little reason to take
Norway into consideration, even after adscription was abolished.
  The strength of the feeling of fellowship and the fluid borders between
what was Danish and Norwegian is demonstrated by the fact that Danes
and Norwegians could actually speak of a Danish-Norwegian people.
In Norway even the most uneducated peasant might think of himself
as a Norwegian, but as a Norwegian who lived in Denmark (e.g. the
Danish state). The distinction, or the gradation, between Norwegian
and Danish would often be connected with the idea of ‘Norwegian’ as
the people and ‘Danish’ as the state. In the same way as England and
English are sometimes used as synonyms for Britain and British, the
concepts of Denmark, Danish and Danishness were used in some con-
texts by both Danes and Norwegians. In other countries, Norwegians
were often referred to as Danes because they were citizens of the Danish
state. Thus, many Norwegians had no problem referring to themselves
as ‘Danish citizens’.8


Patriotism and Fatherland

Patriotism had long been the point around which contemporary
ideas about a community of citizens revolved. It was based on ideas
