12   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


Norway could survive as an independent state. The danger for the
Danish–Norwegian union was precisely that Danes and Norwegians
could be seen as antitheses. The threat to the Danish state arose as
soon as the concept of the fatherland became so narrow that the cos-
mopolitan and state patriotic identities became incompatible with the
national patriotic identity.


Society, Absolutism and Foreign Powers

In theory, the state was governed autocratically by Christian VII who,
according to the only absolutist European constitution (the Lex Regia
of 1665), was king by the grace of God. But everyone familiar with the
state of affairs was fully aware that the schizophrenic monarch did not
govern the state. Denmark-Norway’s real regent was his son, Crown
Prince Frederick (VI), who had taken over the reins of power in 1784 in
a bloodless palace revolution, which marked the beginning of a period
of reform, especially in the Danish part of the state. Elder statesmen
such as Foreign Minister Andreas Peter Bernstorff were the prime mov-
ers of the new reform policy, but they would never have been able to put
it into effect without the acceptance of the crown prince.
   The new government wanted to see a middle-class public that was
prepared to engage in public debate since Bernstorff believed that free-
dom of expression led to tranquillity and prosperity. In the final analy-
sis, any criticism of social conditions in an autocratic state would be
a criticism of the system, but the government was prepared to accept
criticism – as long as it was not direct criticism of the king, state insti-
tutions, of people of rank or public officials. The public could be used
by the government as a source of inspiration and support for neces-
sary reforms. Initially, the government’s hope was fully realised. Public
interest in the state and society flourished as never before or since, per-
haps, and new pamphlets and periodicals containing animated debates
about the common good, flooded the market.
   A free, informed public, however, proved to be a two-edged sword.
Citizens no longer believed in the idea of an absolute monarchy estab-
lished by the grace of God. A Danish lawyer actually called the idea
insane. In accordance with contemporary thinking derived from natu-
ral law, informed citizens believed that the state had arisen from man’s
natural social instinct and that it was based on a contract between a
prince and a people. The exercise of power by the former was only legit-
imate because power had been entrusted to him by the people – as the
citizens of Copenhagen had done on the introduction of absolutism
