                           Denmark-Norway and the Ideology of Patriotism   13


in 1660. But, as the people were the real sovereign power, problems
would increasingly arise if their will did not find expression through
the state. According to the Norwegian historian Jens Arup Seip, this led
to the creation of what he called the theory of opinion-guided absolutism
(1958), which came to expression in the 1780s and dominated the pub-
lic debate during the 1790s.
   The Danish professor of law Johan Frederick Wilhelm Schlegel, who
taught generations of Danish-Norwegian civil servants, made it clear in
his lectures that the monarch was there for the sake of the people and
that society was made up of free men and not minors. Schlegel and oth-
ers viewed society as a contract between citizens and the monarch, an
arrangement that meant that the king was not only obliged to ensure
civil liberty but also to reign in accordance with the will of the people.
Failure to honour this contract would mean that the king would be
accounted a despot. Based on the theory of absolutism governed by
public opinion, there was in fact already a kind of popular sovereignty
that was based either on the king’s interpretation of an abstract and
ideal view of the will of the people or on specific measures of public
opinion. These ideas were central to Schlegel’s theory of democratic
autocracy based on the will of the people.13
   The idea of absolutism governed by public opinion was not a pecu-
liarly Danish-Norwegian phenomenon. Similar ideas could be found
in Prussia but, just as in Denmark-Norway, the public authorities in
Berlin had a negative reaction to this liberal development, and freedom
of the press became press impudence in the eyes of the government.
Revolutionary impulses simply made the situation worse, according to
the public authorities of both states.14 Initially, the upheavals in France
had otherwise been well received by the Danish-Norwegian public. The
French government had been seen as reactionary, and the revolution
was therefore greeted with delight. There was a widespread opinion that
the French people had now simply gained the benefits that were already
being enjoyed in Denmark-Norway.
   Relations between Copenhagen and London had previously been
marked by the scandalous marriage between George III’s sister, Caroline
Matilda, and the mentally ill Christian VII. The young, British-born
queen had begun an affair with the king’s physician-in-ordinary, Johann
Friederich Struensee, who in fact governed the state in the king’s name
for 14 months. However, the German-born doctor was overthrown and
condemned to be broken on the wheel following a palace revolution
in 1772, while Caroline Matilda was exiled to her brother’s estate in
Hanover. The scandal marred relations between Denmark and Britain,
