                            Denmark-Norway and the Ideology of Patriotism   11


not Denmark, but all of the king’s countries and kingdoms. One of the
authors of the books, a Dane married to a Norwegian, criticised Norway’s
position in the state in a draft, for which Guldberg reprimanded him
with the words, ‘There are no Norwegians. We are all citizens of the
Danish state.’11 His attitude reflected the absolutist desire to create order,
uniformity and a feeling of fellowship in the state.
   But state patriotism involved more than just loyalty to the king. It was
also associated with common state institutions such as the navy and
the capital, Copenhagen. This can also be seen in appeals by the state
for people to do their best for ‘King and Fatherland’, even with regard
to the peasantry. State patriotism was based on the government’s policy
of neutrality, which safeguarded shipping, trade and prosperity, and on
a progressive domestic policy which, at the end of the eighteenth cen-
tury, came to include freedom of the press, citizenship, tariff reforms,
agrarian reforms and reforms in education and so forth. This calcu-
lated construction of a state identity can be compared to the creation
of the British identity in which the various nations within the state’s
territory were theoretically equal and governed from a common cen-
tre. In the language of art, this was depicted by the fact that Holstein,
which had previously been neglected, was now placed allegorically on
an equal footing with Danes and Norwegians as a child of a common
fatherland.12
   This meant that there were now three related, overall identities in
Denmark-Norway in the eighteenth century: a cosmopolitan iden-
tity, a state patriotic identity and a national patriotic identity, which
were attached to three different views of the fatherland, and were in
turn connected respectively with a universal concept, a civic concept
and an ethnic concept. These were ideal types that did not necessar-
ily exclude one another – yet. Norwegians in particular argued that in
a natural sense, Norway was their fatherland (patria naturae), while in
the civic context, both Denmark and Norway were their fatherland
(patria civitatis); similarly, Norwegians and Holsteiners could, as men-
tioned, refer to themselves as Danes and call Danes their fellow coun-
trymen. On the other hand, the fact that Norwegian dissatisfaction
was lurking beneath the surface should not be underestimated but, fear
of the state meant that it was rarely expressed publicly. One exception
was the book Outline of Sensible Norwegian Patriotism (1787), in which
it was stated that Norwegians had only one fatherland: Norway. The
king was considered just as Norwegian as Danish. Norwegians should
only consider the good of Norway, and the author made no attempt
to conceal that there were Norwegians who were discussing whether
