10 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


‘Germanness’ and ‘Germanity’. Germanness meant being boastful, super-
ior, condescending and lacking knowledge of Denmark, its institutions,
customs and posts. Germanity referred to German statesmen and civil
servants who overlooked Danes and Norwegians for the government
posts they gave to members of their families. Frequently no distinction
was made here between Holsteiners, who belonged under the state, and
other Germans. A radical author actually cast doubt on the loyalty of
the people of Holstein, describing them as subjects of the ‘Holy Roman
Empire’, which was correct as far as constitutional law went, but politi-
cally polemical.10
   The movement away from cosmopolitan patriotism began with the
assumption of power by Christian VII in 1766. A year later a Norwegian
civil servant published a text entitled Letters about Love of the Fatherland,
in which the fatherland was defined on the basis of birthplace rather
than the state. This development was stepped up by the Struensee inter-
mezzo during the years 1770–72 (see below), which increased national
patriotism and anti-German feeling. Danish became the language of
command in the army, ‘national’ tragedies were commissioned, and
Danish and history were given a more prominent place as grammar-
school subjects. The climax came with the introduction of the act of
citizenship (1776), which was a constitutional right that reserved all gov-
ernment offices for the state’s own citizens. The government had hit the
nail on the head with this measure, as was made clear by the delight
that news of the law aroused throughout Denmark, while enthusiasm
was more subdued in Norway and non-existent in the duchies. The
right of citizenship is in several ways reminiscent of what had hap-
pened in England 75 years previously. Prompted by the Dutch advisers
that William III had brought with him after the ‘Glorious Revolution’
of 1688, the English Parliament adopted The Act of Settlement in 1701,
which deprived both foreign and naturalised citizens of the right to
hold government office. Together with the Union with Scotland Act
of 1707, the provision was extended to include Scots. This provision
relating to British citizenship, whose status resembled that of a consti-
tutional right, may have been the inspiration for the Act of Citizenship
in Denmark-Norway.
   From 1772, the government was led by Ove Høegh-Guldberg. His love
of the Danish language and Danish history is indisputable, but the pat-
riotism Guldberg promoted had an instrumental character as citizenship
applied to Danes, Norwegians and Holsteiners. He wanted to create a
feeling of state patriotism, which was clearly shown by the books that
were commissioned for use in grammar schools. The fatherland was
