22   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


the British accepted the narrow definition during their confrontation
with the belligerent American colonists.
   Neutrality was not only exploited by the Danes and Norwegians in
the form of shipping supplies to the warring parties, but also by their
ships sailing under a Danish flag of convenience. The prime mover in
this connection was the Dutch-born merchant Frédéric de Coninck.
When the Netherlands were forced into the war, de Coninck and other
Danish merchants purchased a large number of Dutch ships on a pro
forma basis. With the help of his political contacts, de Coninck man-
aged matters so that many of these Dutch ships that were in foreign
ports were sent Danish papers and could provide a regular carrying
trade on the international routes without so much as even seeing the
coasts of Denmark or Norway. Other ships were purchased in the Dutch
colonies where goods were stockpiled and sailed to Copenhagen under
the cover of the Dannebrog. This was a pattern that was repeated during
the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars.
   The state not only attempted to help private individuals by exploiting
the boon. Members of the government also established quasi state-owned
trading companies, all of which had six directors, who were government
ministers, and merchant prince Niels Ryberg in common. The group of
shareholders was dominated by the royal family and the power elite,
which blurred the line between private advantage and the interests of
the state. However, other traders were generally given concessions similar
to those that members of the government reserved for their own specula-
tions, or were allowed to take part-ownership of the companies through
the issue of ‘small-denomination shares’. The companies thereby func-
tioned as the advance guard for the exploitation of neutrality.
   The question, however, was whether this was a responsible policy as
it increased the risk of a conflict with Great Britain. The gamble became
more dangerous over time with ministers smuggling colonial produce
from the Spanish colonies under the protection of the navy’s men-
of-war, whose captains had orders to prevent any British attempts to
search them. The government had refused to give this protection to
merchants as the use of warships involved the risk of a conflict that
could probably not be controlled. The members of the government were
hereby playing games of chance with the neutrality of the state for the
sake of their own gain.
   The economic downturn in the wake of the American War of Inde-
pendence was replaced by a new boon as the Revolutionary Wars once
again threw Europe into a state of conflict. These wars, however, were
of a new character as they were fought not only to gain power, territory
