14   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


until Crown Prince Frederick, Caroline Matilda’s son, assumed power
in the name of his sick father after a palace revolution in 1784. That
Denmark-Norway was now ruled by the British monarch’s nephew,
however, made no difference to the fact that the Danish-Norwegian
policy of neutrality continued to constitute a problem for relations
between the two states.
   This also had a certain influence on the general public’s view of
Great Britain, but it did nothing to change the long-standing percep-
tion that this was a pioneering nation, marked out by freedom, pro-
gress and sound business acumen. This was particularly the case in
Norway, which had closer ties with the British Isles, via its commer-
cial relations, than Denmark had. Norwegian exports of timber to the
British market had taken off in earnest after the Great Fire of London
in 1666, at which ‘the Norwegians warmed themselves well’. Several of
the great families of the Norwegian trading elite had emigrated from
Great Britain, and their sons were often sent across the North Sea to do
their apprenticeships. All Norwegian merchants could speak English,
and their homes were furnished in accordance with the latest English
fashion. English furniture could be found even in the homes of some
of the richest farmers in the eastern regions of Norway who, in the
service of the merchants, earned huge sums from the timber trade with
Great Britain. But the Norwegians were not only receptive to British
luxury items. They also imported British ideas and standards. So, for
example, the first Danish translation of Adam Smith’s The Wealth of
Nations, published in 1779, only three years after the original version,
was financed by Norwegian merchants. It therefore came as no surprise
that Norwegians were highly critical of the government’s mercantile
favouring of the capital of Copenhagen at their expense. A prominent
Norwegian poet sarcastically summed up his countrymen’s attitude to
England, taunting them for believing ‘that human beings can be found /
only in England and here [in Norway]’.15
   The role of the British during the American Revolution and the
Revolutionary Wars in Europe, however, had a more negative influence
on the attitude of progressive forces in Denmark. The most significant
issues for relations between the two countries were Danish-Norwegian
exploitation of neutrality and the dominance of the British navy and
British trade on the high seas. These factors helped to nurture the idea
of Great Britain as a greedy nation of shopkeepers.
   The attitude to France also changed during the 1790s when it became
clear that developments in revolutionary France and in the Danish-
Norwegian state were by no means identical. Robespierre’s reign of
