20   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


dreamt of a few years previously had descended on Denmark-Norway in
an absolutist form.
   This growing prosperity, however, had its foundations in the misfor-
tunes of others. The good times that had literally cannoned into exist-
ence with the American War of Independence in 1775 and lasted up
to the Bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807 have become known in
Danish and Norwegian historiography as ‘the palmy days’. This was
the golden epoch of big business, during which fortunes were made
from overseas trade, from the exploitation of neutrality and from
speculation. The economic boon was closely related to the wars and
destruction created by the rivalry of the great European powers. These
perpetual wars allowed Danish and Norwegian ships to win a market
share on international routes. The years of peace in Europe, on the other
hand, meant economic decline with ships laid up by the major business
houses in Copenhagen, where fortunes had been amassed by exploiting
the neutrality of the state to the absolute limit. But even though Danish-
Norwegian market share always fell at the end of a war, it would stabilise
at a higher level than before. In 1806, the year before Denmark-Norway
became involved in the Napoleonic Wars, the Danish-Norwegian mer-
chant fleet saw the number of its ships and their total tonnage reach its
peak. A total of 3500 merchant ships sailed under the Dannebrog (the
Danish flag) in 1806, making Denmark-Norway one of the world’s larg-
est shipping nations relative to its population.19
   The general expectation in the Danish-Norwegian state was that the
good times would continue to roll. The author of a series of articles in
a prominent Danish newspaper at the beginning of 1807 optimistically
envisaged how, over the next 30 years, the appearance of Copenhagen
would be enhanced with the addition of magnificent public buildings,
among them a new palace that would house a national museum. As
predictions go, this was not a bad one, since the museum was actually
opened in the newly built palace in 1832, but the vision of an interim
period of peace and happiness was, to put it mildly, misplaced. Before
the end of the year, large areas of the capital had been turned into
smouldering heaps of rubble.


The Exploitation of Neutrality

During the eighteenth century territories overseas took on increasing
importance for the European economy which, during times of war,
meant that many nations made use of neutral shipping to bring home
their precious cargos. This was a sine qua non for ‘the palmy days’ in
