16   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


to avoid loopholes, covert attacks in the form of allegories, satire, irony
and woodcuts were also forbidden. A person once convicted of a viola-
tion was subject to lifelong censorship, while works of less than 384
pages were subject to de facto censorship in advance as they had to be
forwarded to the chief constable prior to publication. A fledgling sector
of Danish-Norwegian public opinion that was free, young and imma-
ture was thereby crushed before it could spread its wings. Its two most
vociferously radical authors were exiled, both fleeing to France, where
they made careers for themselves under Napoleon.
   There was good reason for introducing such harsh measures against
incautious statements about conditions in foreign parts. During the
period up to 1807 the government had fought a hard battle to navigate
through the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. The diplomats of the
great powers kept a vigilant eye on the public and, with the help of
complaints and threats, attempted to exercise control over what was
written about their respective states. In spite of widespread media self-
censorship, the government found it necessary to tighten up legisla-
tion even further. The state decided who could publish newspapers and
periodicals and, to an increasing extent, what these publications could
contain. During the years 1799–1814, the Danish-Norwegian state was
turned from what had been, by contemporary standards, a very open
society into one that was muzzled.


Denmark-Norway and the Politics of ‘the Palmy Days’

The successive helmsmen of the Danish-Norwegian state had by and
large successfully steered the ship of state around the shoals of war aided
by a mixture of luck, skill and sheer opportunism. This was a rare thing
in a Europe where war was the order of the day. The background for this
favourable period in the history of Denmark-Norway can be found in
contemporary continental politics. Europe in the eighteenth century
was marked by a seemingly endless series of wars between the great
powers, which reflected the dominant theory of the balance of power.
What appeared to one country to be the right balance of power could
appear in the eyes of other states to be a fundamental breach of the frag-
ile status quo. The Danish statesman, Ove Høegh-Guldberg, correctly
observed that the system resulted in a new European war every seven or
eight years, one which lasted for a corresponding period. Peace treaties
rarely led to any real détente and were more in the nature of armistices.
   Since the end of the Great Northern War in 1720–21, the Danish-
Norwegian state had maintained neutrality in all European conflicts.
