                           Denmark-Norway and the Ideology of Patriotism   17


Neutrality, in the words of Foreign Minister Andreas Peter Bernstorff,
would ensure the state’s safety and prosperity. The traditional interpreta-
tion of this in Danish-Norwegian historiography has been that Denmark-
Norway had given up hope of territorial expansion and revenge on the
Swedes who, throughout the seventeenth century, had overrun many
Norwegian and Danish provinces. The general political goal was to
defend the state in its existing form against any external threat, which
in practice meant from Sweden, which still wished to take possession
of Norway. However, it must be added that Denmark-Norway entered
into a large number of alliances during the eighteenth century but ful-
filled its obligations only to a limited extent, which hardly improved
the diplomatic reputation of the state abroad. But in 1788, Denmark-
Norway was forced to fulfil its obligations under its alliance with Russia.
After the Swedish attack on Russia, Empress Catharine demanded that
Denmark-Norway should take action against Sweden, which resulted
in 10,000 Norwegian troops entering western Sweden – but doing so
officially as ‘Russians’ because, unlike Crown Prince Frederick, Foreign
Minister Andreas Peter Bernstorff was absolutely opposed to a war with
Sweden. The ‘war’ of 1788 could hardly be called a Scandinavian war, or
even a war in any real sense, even though it may have appeared as such.
   Relations between Denmark-Norway and Sweden improved consid-
erably after the murder of Gustav III in 1792. The autocratic Swedish
king, who had been notoriously anti-Danish, was replaced by a regency
representing the under-age Gustav IV. This paved the way for a rap-
prochement between the two Nordic arch-enemies who, at the end of
the 1790s, developed closer ties both politically and culturally. The for-
mer found expression in a collaboration on neutrality in which Danish
and Swedish warships jointly patrolled the North Sea to protect neutral
shipping. This had the desired effect when the British revoked instruc-
tions to privateers to seize Scandinavian ships carrying corn, which
they correctly assumed was bound for France. Political relations, how-
ever, became cooler when the Swedish navy failed to come to the relief
of Copenhagen when it was attacked by the British in 1801. Both states
had joined the Russian-led League of Armed Neutrality, and Sweden
was therefore obliged to come to the aid of Denmark-Norway in the
case of a British attack. Swedish good intentions were genuine enough,
but unfavourable winds prevented the Swedish fleet from leaving
Karlskrona. In such a critical situation, the failure of the fleet to arrive
stirred up rumours in Copenhagen and led to growing antipathy to
Sweden among the population and in the crown prince, who was scep-
tical about these Swedish excuses. On the other hand, the Swedish king
