                           Denmark-Norway and the Ideology of Patriotism   21


Denmark-Norway. However, it also gave the warring parties a greater
incentive to engage in economic war at sea, something that increas-
ingly affected Danish and Norwegian ships in the form of privateering,
searches and seizures.
   The concept of neutrality essentially involves the idea of occupying a
balanced mid-point without favouring any parties, even though it does
not exclude the possibility of being neutral and allied at one and the
same time. Reality, however, often looks quite different. Great Britain
was indisputably the strongest naval power, and neutral trade there-
fore always benefited Britain’s opponents. For this reason, the Danish
government adapted its policy to the current balance of power at sea.
During the American War of Independence, the Royal Navy was under
extreme pressure and this allowed Denmark to exploit the situation to
a greater degree than usual. The principles of the Danish-Norwegian
standpoint can be summed up in five points: (1) There must be no
restrictions to shipping in any port or along any coast. (2) A neutral
ship has unrestricted cargo (except contraband). (3) There should be
a narrow and equitable definition of what constitutes contraband.
(4) A blockade need only be respected when it is enforced. (5) These rules
had to be published and apply to all privateers and in all courts of law.
   The demand was that neutral ships, like the Danish-Norwegian ships,
should be able to sail the seas freely and without being searched to
determine whether they had contraband of war on board, or whether
their cargos really belonged to one of the warring parties. In reality
neither Danes nor Norwegians wanted these principles to be univer-
sally enforced as it would have benefited their competitors. The Danish-
Norwegian government was therefore anything but happy when the
state was forced to join the League of Armed Neutrality in 1780 by its
Russian ally, which officially demanded recognition of precisely the
five Danish-Norwegian principles.
   The de facto recognition of Danish and Norwegian activities by the
British was at stake and this goal was achieved during the American
War of Independence. There was also a victory in relation to the issue
of contraband of war with the Danish–British convention of 1780.
Contraband of war includes the materials used by a state to conduct
war and it was generally accepted that a country was entitled to prevent
its enemies from obtaining them. The question, however, was how the
concept should be defined. A narrow interpretation included products
that were of immediate use in a war, such as cannons. But a broad defi-
nition could include everything from iron and timber to agricultural
produce and fish. First in practice and later also in principle, however,
