                          Denmark-Norway and the Ideology of Patriotism   19


the Norwegian armies were each of about the same size that the British
army had been at the outbreak of war in 1793.
  Growing prosperity masked the fact that Denmark-Norway had
become weakened militarily in relation to the rest of Europe during the
long period of peace. The integrity of the state was thereby only allowed
to endure for as long as this was in the interests of the great powers.
Russia played a decisive role here as, since entering into the ‘eternal
alliance’ in 1773, the country had been the protector of a Denmark-
Norway which had, in effect, become a Russian client state. The alliance
was in opposition to Sweden, which nursed the desire to regain lost
areas of Finland from Russia and, above all, to conquer Norway. It might
not appear on the face of things that Sweden could have constituted a
threat to mighty Russia, but during this period the Russian army was
frequently engaged in wars with the Ottoman Empire or, after 1792, in
wars with France on the continent. In this situation, the Russian capital
was dangerously close to the border with Finland, which was part of the
Swedish state. Sweden could launch a surprise attack on St Petersburg
from Finland in order to regain its lost territories, something that
Gustav III had unsuccessfully attempted to do in 1788. Therefore, the
purpose of the Danish–Russian alliance was to keep Sweden in check
with the threat of a war on two fronts. Russian interest in the integrity
of Denmark-Norway, however, was conditional upon the danger of a
Swedish attack on St Petersburg. If Russia were to conquer Finland, it
would render the alliance superfluous and make the Swedish loss of the
country a Danish-Norwegian nightmare.
  In step with the growing ‘civilising’ effect of the Enlightenment,
a number of European philosophers, among them Immanuel Kant,
dreamt of a peaceful world where war did not exist. Even in military
circles, attempts were made to find laws of mathematical strategy
that would eliminate war once and for all. In Denmark-Norway such
thoughts were seen in the light of the long period of peace, which
prompted some authors to claim that the Danish-Norwegian state had
actually moved to a more elevated stage than the rest of the world. This
may appear exceptionally arrogant, but it must be viewed against the
fact that Europe had been in the throes of wars and revolution since
1792, while Danes and Norwegians had been enjoying the fruits of
peace for 80 years. The two peoples can hardly be blamed for viewing
the state as a ‘temple of peace’ in a chaotic world. In prose, poetry and
song Danes and Norwegians paid tribute to themselves, their king and
their government for the twin kingdoms’ wise and humane policy of
neutrality. It appeared to some people that the perpetual peace Kant had
