18 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


regarded the Danish armistice with Britain as treachery and even used
it as moral support when he attempted to persuade France and Prussia
to back a Swedish annexation of Norway in the summer of 1801. In the
wake of the First Battle of Copenhagen, the old mistrust between the
two hereditary enemies flared up once again at the political level.16
   At the cultural level, however, things were quite the reverse. Engendered
by what was known as the ‘Nordic Renaissance’ at the end of the
eighteenth century, intellectuals in the two countries began work-
ing towards closer literary and cultural ties. This led to the ‘rediscov-
ery’ of a common Old Norse history, which became part of Danish,
Norwegian and Swedish cultural identity. The languages of the Nordic
countries were very similar, there were clear cultural similarities, their
histories were connected and they had common myths concerning
their origins.
   This proto-Scandinavianism bore a cosmopolitan stamp and, dur-
ing the war of 1807–14, it was affected by dynastic thinking.17 The
Danish professor Jens Schielderup Sneedorff had launched the idea of
‘the union of the three Nordic kingdoms’ as early as 1792, while in
France the exiled Danish geographer Conrad Malte-Brun published his
pamphlet Projet d’association coloniale de la nouvelle Scandinavie (1804),
in which he suggested that Napoleon should unite the Nordic coun-
tries under Danish leadership. Malte-Brun even organised a committee
in Paris to further this aim, but it was suppressed by Napoleon, who
did not consider the idea politically opportune. News of the project
reached Copenhagen, however, where it was erroneously believed to
enjoy French support. As will become evident, several attempts were
made by Danes and Norwegians to realise a Scandinavian union during
the war years of 1807–14, but each time French support, which would
have been decisive, failed to materialise. This may appear paradoxical
since in 1801 the French had shown interest in the idea of a united
Scandinavia that could pose a threat to the influence of Great Britain
in the Baltic.18
   The Danish and Norwegian armies, which were separated for admin-
istrative reasons, each consisted of approximately 40,000 men, to which
must be added the militia (established in 1801) and the navy, which
comprised more than 20 ships of the line and a larger number of frig-
ates and smaller ships. At the beginning of the eighteenth century, the
‘twin kingdoms’, together with Sweden and Prussia, had been the most
militarised kingdoms in Europe. This was no longer the case on a conti-
nent where war and chaos had brought about a hitherto unseen mobili-
sation of power, resources and military might. However, the Danish and
