                           Denmark-Norway and the Ideology of Patriotism   15


terror and the execution of Louis XVI and his queen sent shockwaves
through Danish-Norwegian society, where the royal family and the
aristocracy in particular feared the establishment of a similar mob rule
in Copenhagen. However, the introduction of the Directory in 1795
meant that many people became more sympathetic to France. In gen-
eral, young people and academics had a positive attitude to the revo-
lution, while older people and especially senior civil servants were
appalled at the development. Most members of the public supported
state reforms, the struggle against the influence of the aristocracy and
the greatest possible freedom of the press, but they remained positive
in their attitude to absolutism as a system. There was no stomach for
major, drastic upheavals; what was wanted instead, as the periodical
Minerva put it, was governance by regents and ministers who acted like
philosophers, as in Plato’s Republic.
  The French Revolution prompted the crown prince to take an increas-
ingly reactionary stance. Two incidents, the first in 1794 when a fire
broke out at the royal residence at Christiansborg Palace, the second the
Copenhagen Fire of 1795, were interpreted by Frederick as the start of
revolution in Denmark. While he was mistaken on both counts, events
on the continent radicalised many members of the middle class and
some began to doubt the wisdom of the existing system. Criticism had
grown during the 1780s when radical authors in particular lambasted
the aristocracy and its privileges. But the contemporary critics of the
system still regarded the absolute monarchy as being, as it were, on
the same team. This changed during the 1790s, however, when radicals
increasingly began to challenge the legitimacy of absolutism. As early
as 1790, then, we can find proposals to introduce an Assembly of the
States of the Realm.
  As in Prussia, so in Denmark the authorities deemed it necessary to halt
such radical development. The theory of absolutism governed by public
opinion collided with stark political reality when the crown prince for-
cibly imposed an ordinance limiting freedom of the press in 1799. The
background for this ordinance can be found in Frederick’s opposition
to the French Revolution, his irritation over ‘the impertinence of the
press’ and external pressure from the state’s Russian ally that nursed an
exaggerated fear of radicalism in Copenhagen. A prohibition was intro-
duced against writing critically about the absolutist constitution, the
royal house, Lutheranism, matters of state and well-disposed foreign
powers, and against attacking private individuals and, not least, civil
servants in print. Punishments for violating the prohibition ranged
from the death penalty and exile to imprisonment and fines. In order
