                           Denmark-Norway and the Ideology of Patriotism   23


and glory, but also in the name of ideology. There was thus tremendous
pressure on the Danish-Norwegian state to join the war against revolu-
tionary France. But the government stood firm on its policy of neutral-
ity. After the execution of Louis XVI, while the state officially broke off
diplomatic relations with France, it retained a secretary of legation in
Paris and allowed a French emissary to live in Copenhagen.
   The Danish-Norwegian government demanded only two things from
its merchants during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars: first that
they respected an effective blockade and second that they did not ship
contraband of war to the French, the latter being something that the
Danish government was fully aware that the merchants were doing.
Huge quantities of muskets, gunpowder and bullets were thus shipped
to France under cover of the neutral Danish flag. But the greatest service
the Danes performed for the French was to transport corn and other
food to France. According to Denmark-Norway’s understanding with
the British, this should not have been a problem, but it was.
   The British thus broke the convention with Denmark from 1780 as
they had made it their official policy to starve the French into sub-
mission. Denmark was thereby from the very beginning of the
Revolutionary Wars on a collision course with Great Britain. Danish
and Norwegian ships were seized by the dozen and the strong Danish-
Norwegian protests were rejected on the grounds that France had no
legal government and in pursuing its policy had placed itself outside all
existing international law. With the support of the other great powers,
the British attempted to put the neutral states of Denmark-Norway and
Sweden in their place – but without success. Denmark-Norway invoked
the immutability of international law, but went so far as to refuse to
admit French privateers to the state’s ports.


The First Battle of Copenhagen, 1801

The Danish-Norwegian exploitation of neutrality often balanced on a
knife-edge, but was usually weighed up according to the situation. At
the end of the 1790s, however, Denmark-Norway made the fatal mis-
take of going from a ‘defensive’ to an ‘offensive’ policy of neutrality.
Ailing Foreign Minister Andreas Peter Bernstorff wisely rejected the
request for convoys from the merchants of Copenhagen as this could
bring the state on a collision course with Great Britain. However, his
son, Christian, who in fact, although initially not in name, took over
the office of foreign minister on his father’s death in 1797, did not pos-
sess the authority of his father. Crown Prince Frederick was a year older
