                                   The Bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807    31


   On 6 November 1806 French troops crossed the Danish border in
Holstein, hunting for fleeing Prussian soldiers. The Danes promptly
took up arms to protect the neutrality of the state and forced the French
units to withdraw. However, the battle did not appear to have harmed
Danish–French relations. On the other hand, Danish support of the
British mail route to the continent through the duchies was a thorn
in the side of both states. Napoleon demanded it be closed, which the
Danish-Norwegian government flatly refused.6
   But neither the Danish–French engagement nor the rejection of
Napoleon’s demand made any impression on Downing Street. The grow-
ing British distrust of the Danish-Norwegian government was height-
ened in the summer of 1807 by some alarming information. The fleet in
Copenhagen was a fleet in being, with the great majority of its ships lying
stripped at anchor in the harbour. As long as this was the case, it consti-
tuted only a potential threat. If the fleet were to be fitted out, on the other
hand, it would immediately be observed and interpreted as an expression
of an offensive attitude to Great Britain. In May 1807 Lord Pembroke,
who was the recently appointed British ambassador to Austria, was pass-
ing through Copenhagen on his way to his post when, so he said, he
observed the entire Danish-Norwegian fleet being fitted out. What Lord
Pembroke actually saw was and remains a mystery. The only ship that
had been fitted out was a ship of the line being prepared to take a Russian
princess to St Petersburg, and Foreign Secretary George Canning did not
react immediately to Pembroke’s letter. Matters changed, however, at the
beginning of July with the Peace of Tilsit, which fundamentally altered
the appearance of the threat. British fears were further exacerbated by
intelligence from France that Napoleon was planning to use the Danish-
Norwegian fleet to support an invasion of Ireland. The information later
proved to be a deliberate fabrication but it was taken at face value by the
British government and, together with Pembroke’s letter and the errone-
ous assessment of sentiments in Denmark-Norway, it contributed to the
decision to send a substantial British fleet to Danish waters to emphasise
the gravity of the ultimatum that would be presented to Crown Prince
Frederick. The actions of the British government may appear ruthless,
but as far as the British were concerned the aim was to deprive Napoleon
of the first fruits of the Peace of Tilsit.7
   A determined expedition against Copenhagen could be used to show
the British themselves and the world that the country had not been
beaten ‘and to stun Russia into her senses again’.8 While the attack on
Denmark did not on the face of it influence Russian policy, it was sig-
nificant for the choice made in Portugal, which was shortly afterwards
