                                 The Bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807   29


possibly be due to the fact that he knew that the British were preparing
an attack and therefore expected that Denmark-Norway would end up
in the French camp under any circumstances. In this case, a French
ultimatum could be used as a justification for an action by the British.1
   The British government also knew nothing of the supplementary
clause to the Peace of Tilsit but quite accurately guessed what it con-
tained and decided to steal a march on the French by sending a fleet
to Copenhagen. In an attempt to prevent the Danes and Norwegians
from learning about the impending expedition, a total prohibition was
imposed on sailing from British ports. This was only partially success-
ful. Members of the Danish Ministry of Trade as well as merchants in
the duchies were convinced that the British aims were hostile, but it
was assumed at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that the expedition was
bound for the Swedish town of Stralsund in northern Germany, where
British troops were already stationed. Joachim Bernstorff, the Foreign
Minister’s brother and permanent secretary, brushed aside a warning
from the Danish consul in Portsmouth in a similar manner.
   But why did the actions of Great Britain come as such a surprise to
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the foreign minister and the crown
prince? One explanation was that even though the Danish-Norwegian
government was not exactly enthusiastic about Great Britain, it did not
believe it had acted in such a way as to be considered hostile. But this
was precisely what the British did feel. The British had long feared that
the Danes would not be capable of preventing the French from taking
possession of the Danish-Norwegian fleet, but now they had begun to
doubt whether they were even willing so to do.
   On the face of it, it could be asked whether Denmark-Norway and
its fleet really could constitute a threat to the mighty Royal Navy, but
the British fleet was stretched almost to the limit on the seven seas. In
1805 Denmark-Norway’s fleet was the fifth largest in the world and
was manned by skilled seamen. In addition, it would easily be able to
collaborate with the state’s traditional protector – and Napoleon’s new
ally – Russia, whose Baltic fleet was the fourth largest in the world. They
were incapable of challenging British mastery of the seas either individ-
ually or collectively, but at home the Danes would be capable of cutting
off British trade in the Baltic, which was vital for the British economy,
for British corn imports and for the Royal Navy, whose supplies of naval
stores came from the Baltic. In addition, if the Danish-Norwegian fleet
fell into Napoleon’s hands, the French could employ it in an attempt to
challenge British naval dominance or to mount a landing in the British
Isles to provide support for an Irish rebellion.2
