30 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


   In contrast to the situation in 1800–01, this was not a question of
Denmark-Norway deliberately running a risk. Danish-Norwegian pro-
tests against violations of its neutrality had become more acrimonious
and had grown in number as the British countermeasures had made
life increasingly difficult for the neutral states, but they were hardly
intended as provocations. They were simply necessary in order to be
able to invoke the principles of neutrality at a later date. While the
Danish-Norwegian government was not enthusiastic about the British,
both Foreign Minister Christian Bernstorff and Crown Prince Frederick
were clearly more critical of Napoleon. Bernstorff consistently referred
to France as a tyrannical power that was keeping all of Europe in a state
of dishonour and slavery.3
   The size of the Danish army made it impossible to protect the state
against a French attack on the duchies and Jutland as well as a British
attack on Zealand and Copenhagen. What the Danish-Norwegian gov-
ernment chiefly feared and prepared for was an attack by the French,
as was clearly shown by the fact that, since 1803, the Danish army
had been guarding the border to the south, leaving the capital virtu-
ally unprotected. This policy had been reinforced in 1805 when the
crown prince and the Foreign Minister took up permanent residence in
Holstein. Fear of the French had only increased in 1806 when Napoleon
clearly demonstrated his lack of respect for neutrality by occupying the
free cities of Hamburg and Lübeck.
   If the French ultimatum had been anticipated by the British, the
chances were that the Danes and Norwegians would have thrown them-
selves into the arms of the British instead of Napoleon’s. In December
1806 the Danish-Norwegian government had openly declared that,
if the French demanded the closing of Danish ports to British ships,
it would regard Great Britain as its ‘natural ally’, but the declaration
appears to have gone unnoticed in Whitehall.4
   What had caught the eye of the British was the rejection by Crown
Prince Frederick of a Swedish proposal to set up a joint Scandinavian army
in Holstein which, together with Britain, would act as a bulwark against
further French expansion. This was only to be expected in the light of
Denmark-Norway’s declared policy of neutrality, but it provoked anger
in the British government.5 This could possibly be because it coincided
with the withdrawal of the Danish army from Holstein to Schleswig. This
move took place firstly because the Danish army in Holstein had been
surrounded by French troops on three sides. Second, there was a need
to avoid a clash erupting between Danish and French troops, which was
exactly what had happened before the withdrawal had begun.
