                                The Bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807   33


situation was clear to Jackson: Denmark must choose between an alli-
ance and war, but after a heated discussion with the foreign minister and
then the crown prince, it became evident that they refused to make this
choice. Foreign Minister Christian Bernstorff called the British offer the
‘most infernal’ ever conceived, as the pledge demanded for an alliance
was the entire Danish-Norwegian fleet. In his eyes this was not a ques-
tion of an alliance, but of Denmark-Norway’s ‘thraldom’.12 Denmark-
Norway stood firmly by its 80 years of neutrality. This meant that there
were never negotiations proper in Kiel in August 1807.
   Having learned what the British aims were, the crown prince rushed
from Kiel to the capital to prepare its defence where he summoned the
leading generals and chief civil servants. News of Frederick’s arrival
spread like wildfire through the city, where it created great delight.
Frederick had originally intended to take the lead in defending the capi-
tal as he envisioned an attack along the lines of that in 1801. It rapidly
became clear, however, that the size of the British force was of a com-
pletely different magnitude than it had been six years previously.13 He
therefore decided to return to Holstein immediately as he did not want
to be cut off from the army or from contact with his surroundings and,
after giving the necessary orders, Frederick left Copenhagen with his
mentally ill father, Christian VII.
   There was tremendous disappointment over Frederick’s ‘flight’ in the
hour of danger, and this was not lessened by the fact that, after the
siege had begun, other members of the royal family left the city carry-
ing British passports and accompanied by many members of the royal
household, as well as the crown jewels. Copenhageners felt they had
been betrayed, and in order to dampen the ill feeling, attempts were
made in newspaper articles and sermons to explain the necessity of the
royal conduct.
   Having arrived safely on shore, the crown prince continued his jour-
ney, first through Odense on Funen to Kolding in Jutland and then on
to the army’s headquarters in Kiel in Holstein. However active Frederick
had been during his 24 hours in the capital, he had forgotten what was
perhaps the most important matter: he had given no instructions as to
what should be done with the fleet if the city was forced to surrender. He
attempted to remedy this from Kiel with an order to General Peymann
in Copenhagen. If it became necessary to surrender Copenhagen, the
fleet must be burned. The courier, however, was captured by the British,
and the order never reached the capital. According to Danish historiog-
raphy, the courier destroyed the order, but British sources show that the
enemy got its hands on Frederick’s instructions.14
