                           Denmark-Norway and the Ideology of Patriotism   25


put it at risk, so a number of decommissioned defensive ships were sailed
to the King’s Deep outside Copenhagen Harbour. If the British gained
control of these waters, they would be able to bombard the city and the
fleet, and were well on their way to accomplishing this when, after a
battle lasting almost five hours, Vice Admiral Horatio Nelson offered
Denmark-Norway a truce. There was no reason to increase what were
already considerable British losses in equipment and lives when it was
simply a question of time before the battle was won. This offer should
be seen in the light of the fact that the British fleet, according to plan,
would subsequently have to be capable of challenging both the Russian
and the Swedish fleets. This inconclusive outcome created the myth that
Denmark and Norway had been closest to victory. There can be no doubt
that the Danes and Norwegians who fought and died on the ‘glorious’
2 April 1801, as the battle in Denmark-Norway was known at the time,
did so with a courage that helped to ignite the strong sense of patriotism
of the following period. But the First Battle of Copenhagen can only be
regarded as a British victory. The negotiations after the battle were on
the brink of breaking down when news came on 9 April that the tsar
had been assassinated just over a week before the battle. His successor,
Tsar Alexander I, was far less keen on a confrontation with Great Britain,
and Denmark-Norway could therefore meet the British demands by sus-
pending its membership of the League of Armed Neutrality. This made
it possible to avoid a total military defeat, which would almost certainly
have been the outcome if hostilities had continued.
   The First Battle of Copenhagen was compared in contemporary poems
to the battles of antiquity at Salamis and Marathon. Danes and
Norwegians poetically presented themselves as Greeks who were
defending the civilised principals of trade and international law against
the British, who acted barbarically like modern-day Persians under the
leadership of the new Xerxes, Lord Nelson. In spite of this blustering
rhetoric, the First Battle of Copenhagen did not result in a general, last-
ing hatred of the British. According to the memoirs of a civil servant,
relations with Great Britain at the time were relatively amicable. Trade
took an upswing again and many people took a positive view of the
British up to the Bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807.


The Last Years of Peace

Denmark-Norway returned to its less provocative policy of defensive
neutrality after the Battle of Copenhagen, and relations with Great
Britain remained good for the next few years. The danger at this period
