                            Denmark-Norway and the Ideology of Patriotism   27


redirected to towns in west Schleswig such as Husum and Tønning.
In 1804, the Danish monarchy imported what was technically 15 per
cent of total British cotton production – which should not be taken to
mean that Danish peasants stopped wearing woollen vests!23 But during
the years 1805–07, the political and military situation developed in a
way that was to prove catastrophic for Denmark-Norway. The victory at
Trafalgar in October 1805 definitively secured British naval superiority
while Napoleon ruled the European continent to the same degree as the
British dominated the seas. The victories at Austerlitz (1805) and at Jena/
Auerstädt (1806) removed the Austrians and Prussians from the picture
and it appeared to be only a matter of time before the Russians would
also have to give in. The French troops were now immediately south of
the state’s border in Holstein and there were rumours of a French inva-
sion of the two duchies.
   While it was true that it was a loss of prestige for the British to see the
coalition they had financed brushed aside, Napoleon’s victories on land
brought him no closer to a decisive victory over Great Britain. After
the Battle of Trafalgar, an invasion of the British Isles was not realistic
and it would hardly be possible to starve the British into submission.
Attempts to do so might also lead to reversals on the home front as
French farmers earned good money by exporting corn to the British.
Napoleon hoped instead to undermine the British economy by striking
at the country’s huge export income from its industrial and colonial
products by closing the continent to British shipping.
   In the autumn of 1806, Napoleon attempted to realise his plan by
introducing the ‘Continental Blockade’ with the intention of creating
an economic and social crisis in the British Isles and preventing Britain
using its wealth to finance its wars against France. London’s counter-
move in January 1807 was to forbid the ships of all other countries to
enter those ports that British ships were debarred from entering. This
was a bitter pill for neutral Denmark-Norway to swallow, but initially
it was only possible to partly enforce the draconic French and British
provisions. Where the Continental Blockade was concerned, while
Napoleon already controlled large areas of Europe through his allies
and vassal states, the system would only have the desired effect if the
hostile states of Russia and Sweden and neutral states such as Denmark
and Portugal joined in. In spite of the Danish-Norwegian government’s
genuine desire to maintain the state’s neutrality, its time was running
out and it would soon be necessary to choose between Great Britain and
France, a choice that lay between the devil and the deep blue sea for the
government in Copenhagen.
