24 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


than Christian Bernstorff and he now wished to reign ‘autocratically’.
Finance Minister Ernst Schimmelmann, who was deeply involved in
a host of business speculations, wasted no time in appealing to the
prince’s overdeveloped code of honour. By citing the increasing problem
of French privateers at the beginning of 1798, he succeeded in gaining
permission for ships to sail in convoys from the East Indies through the
English Channel in ‘exceptional’ cases. Once the barrier had been bro-
ken down, more and more convoys sailed during the following period
until the exception became the rule and thereby set Denmark-Norway
on a direct collision course with the world’s most powerful navy. This
was a signal error of judgement and rapidly turned into a number of
minor episodes that led to acrimonious diplomatic exchanges.
   The situation became acute in connection with what was called the
Freya Affair, a brief naval battle in the English Channel between a Danish-
Norwegian warship and three British men-of-war. The government in
Copenhagen subsequently appealed to its Russian ally to establish a new
League of Armed Neutrality, an idea that was received with enthusiasm in
St Petersburg, where Tsar Paul wanted to establish a new, more aggressive
policy in relation to Great Britain at precisely this point in time. The result
was a new league between Russia, Denmark, Sweden and Prussia with
the tsar high-handedly and ruthlessly determining the common course
of the league. The policy that had been chosen led the league in general
and Denmark-Norway in particular towards war with Great Britain as the
League of Armed Neutrality denied the right of the great powers to inspect
the cargos of neutral ships and made it clear that there would be no hesi-
tation in backing up the principle of neutrality with arms.
   The new Danish-Norwegian policy was based on an unrealistic assess-
ment of the state’s military power. The British seized all Danish and
Norwegian ships in their ports, occupied the Danish-Norwegian colo-
nies in the West Indies and sent a fleet to Copenhagen in March 1801
in order to convince Crown Prince Frederick that he should leave the
league. This created a dilemma for the Danish-Norwegian government.
Leaving the league would mean running the risk of reprisals from
Russia, where the anti-British Tsar Paul I was making energetic over-
tures to France. The existence of the state was now under real threat
as any concessions to Great Britain could be expected to result in a
Swedish invasion of Norway while, under pressure from Russia, Prussia
could occupy the Jutland peninsula.
   This was the reason why Denmark-Norway decided to take up the First
Battle of Copenhagen on 2 April 1801. As the Danish-Norwegian fleet
was the guarantor of the lucrative maritime trade, there was no desire to
