32 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


presented with both a French and a British ultimatum. Referring to the
fate of Copenhagen, the king decided to evacuate his capital with the
help of the Portuguese fleet and set up a government in exile in Brazil,
leaving Napoleon’s troops to occupy Portugal itself. A similar paral-
lel would have been Crown Prince Frederick seeking refuge with the
Danish-Norwegian fleet in Norway. But in the first place the British
had not burned Lisbon as a terrible warning of things to come, and in
the second it should be remembered that the British had offered the
Portuguese better terms than the Danish-Norwegian government.9


The British Fleet in Danish Waters

An imposing armada set sail from Britain at the end of July. The fleet,
comprising no fewer than 25 ships of the line with around 40 smaller
warships and several hundred transports, reached the Kattegat during
the first days of August. Traditionally, only Danes had been able to navi-
gate ships in the Great Belt in the waters between Zealand and Funen
as they were the only seamen who possessed the necessary charts, but
on their way home from the First Battle of Copenhagen, the British
had charted the straits. This meant that Rear Admiral Keats could be
sent to the Great Belt to cut off Zealand and the capital from the rest of
Denmark.
   Britain’s impressive military demonstration was designed to empha-
sise its intention to back up the demands it was making on the Danish-
Norwegian government with force. A decision had been made at a cabinet
meeting on 18 July demanding that Denmark-Norway either enter into
an alliance with Great Britain – whereby the entire Danish-Norwegian
fleet would come under British control – or surrender its fleet to Britain
for the duration of the war as a pledge that it would maintain its neu-
trality. It was impossible for Crown Prince Frederick to agree to either
of these demands. Cohesion between the various parts of the Danish-
Norwegian state depended on the fleet, and the protection offered by
the British would not make it possible to defend the Jutland peninsula.
The question here is whether the British demands were really addressed
to the Danish-Norwegian government or to the British opposition. An
attack on a neutral Denmark would in all probability give rise to harsh
criticism, but the ultimatum and the offer to the Danish-Norwegian
government could be used in defence of the policy the British were
pursuing.10
   The British negotiator, Sir Francis Jackson, presented the British demands
to the crown prince and the foreign minister in Kiel on 8 August.11 The
