26 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


came from another quarter. During the summer of 1801, Gustav IV
Adolph considered attacking both Zealand and Norway, and during
the winter of 1803, Swedish propaganda was spread in the Norwegian
border areas in order to pave the way for pro-Swedish sympathisers.
Even though Gustav IV Adolph had spent the years between 1803 and
1807 chiefly in Germany and had brought Sweden into the third coali-
tion against Napoleon in 1805, several of his most influential political
and military advisers had their eyes focused sharply on Norway. They
felt that Sweden should rather make war on Crown Prince Frederick in
Scandinavia than on Napoleon in Germany. Initially, Gustav IV Adolph
paid no attention to this, but when the Swedish army was thrown out
of Pomerania in September 1807 and Sweden, as the only remaining
British ally, was threatened by Napoleon and Russia, the pressure on the
Swedish king became even more intense.20
   The Treaty of Amiens in 1802 brought a temporary halt to the seem-
ingly perpetual hostilities between France and Great Britain, but the
respite was brief and the war broke out again in 1803. Many Danes
saw Great Britain, which had declared war, as the villain. According
to a prominent Danish philologist, seven of the eight members of the
Danish general staff in 1804 were convinced ‘Bonapartists’.21 In gen-
eral, however, sympathies were more divided and attitudes to France
and Britain were ambiguous.
   It comes as no surprise that Napoleon Bonaparte was central to Danes’
and Norwegians’ views of France. His person and conduct divided opin-
ions. After his coup d’état in November 1799, Napoleon reintroduced
censorship in France, which presumably prompted many Danish radi-
cals to renounce the new regime, while others continued to hold their
democratic views in the guise of ‘Bonapartism’. Many people thus
saw Napoleon as the man who could further and realise the revolu-
tion’s ideals. A prominent Danish periodical editor, who was critical
of Napoleon, grudgingly acknowledged that the ‘general view’ of the
First Consul of France was positive. However, this was not the crown
prince’s view. Frederick VI has often been accused of being an uncriti-
cal admirer of Napoleon, but this is due to a lack of knowledge of the
later king’s attitude. Crown Prince Frederick had become increasingly
conservative over the years and his personal view of Napoleon was that
while the man was a great general, he was also a dangerous usurper who
was a threat to the stability of Europe.22
   Just as expected, the resumption of the war between France and
Britain constituted major financial benefit for merchants in Denmark-
Norway. When the British blocked the Elbe, many exports had to be
