38   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


halberds, spears and swords in market towns and churches, weapons
that their forefathers had used ‘with honour against enemies and assail-
ants’. Uniforms were also in short supply, so most peasants simply wore
their everyday clothes and clogs.23
   The attempt to assemble the militia in Zealand succeeded to a surprising
extent, not least thanks to the tremendous efforts made by patriotic civil
servants. Every man capable of bearing arms – including beggars – were
assembled, armed and equipped. The peasants of Zealand, however,
summoned from their homes in the middle of the harvest, were not
fired by the same spark that had ignited the middle classes. When
the call to arms reached the village of Spjellerup, wives and chil-
dren bewailed the fact that their fathers and sons were going off to ‘a
real war’.24
   Things were far worse on Lolland-Falster. The peasants there were
fully aware that, according to the original decree on militias, they had
the sole responsibility for defending their own province. For that reason
they had no intention of abandoning ‘their country’, that is, Lolland-
Falster, not Denmark, in the midst of the harvest. The attempt of a gen-
eral of the militia to explain to the peasants that they belonged to the
Zealand regimental district and that their ‘province’ also included the
capital had just as little effect as his appeals to patriotism and his hur-
rahs for king and country. The mood was almost rebellious and the
local peasants threatened several times to shoot the general or the few
people who wanted to march off with him. But after a great deal of toil
and trouble, he finally succeeded in transporting the Lolland-Falster
militia to Zealand.
   They joined the Zealand militia at Køge, just south of Copenhagen,
where they collectively comprised a force of 7700 men. The British were
fully aware of the Danish activities on Zealand, thanks to their efficient
network of spies. The decision was made to send a corps of 6700 soldiers
led by Sir Arthur Wellesley against Køge where, early in the morning of
29 August, they took the unprepared militia by surprise. The battle was
brief and unequal. Some of the militiamen fought heroically against
the superior force while others simply succumbed to ‘cannon-fever’ at
the mere sight of the enemy. The militiamen threw away their muskets
and equipment in their panicked flight, the better to make their escape
in their peasants’ clothing. The reports from the field hospitals at Køge
and Roskilde showed that most of the militiamen had been shot in the
back. A total of approximately 150 Danes fell in the battle, 200 were
wounded and more than 1100 were taken prisoner. British losses were
considerably lower with 29 dead, 122 wounded and 21 missing.25
