                                 The Bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807   39


   The engagement was dubbed ‘The Battle of the Clogs’ in Copenhagen,
as many of the peasants had thrown away their clogs so that they
could run faster. Contemporary patriotic discourse emphasised time
and again that Danes were courageous and loved their fatherland by
definition. Middle-class opinion was, therefore, that, in acting as they
had, the peasant militia had betrayed the patriotic set of norms which,
in their eyes, was common to all Danes, and the Lolland-Falster mili-
tia was mocked as cowardly. But the militia had not been given either
the training, the equipment or the leadership to take on a professional
army of hardened veterans, and, if criticism should have been levelled
at anybody, its target should have been the crown prince for giving
those peasant conscripts such a self-evidently unreasonable task.
   Conditions in Denmark and Norway appeared to reflect tendencies
similar to those described in more recent research into popular resist-
ance in Europe during the Napoleonic Wars. Linda Colley has shown
that in 1798 there was the same unwillingness in Britain to fight out-
side the local area and that patriotism was weakest in rural districts. The
view that peasants lacked a sense of national identity is also supported
by a new study of letters from Danish soldiers during the First Schleswig
War (1848–51), where the peasants identified with their villages and
their regions and fought in the name of the king. National categories
were foreign to them. The same point can be made as regards Norway,
where the local peasant defence force was precisely that – local. The
motivating factor appears to have been the fear of depredation, violence
and rape, while national and patriotic themes were of only subsidiary
importance.26
   The fear of violence and looting on Zealand were, in fact, justified in
the wake of the ‘Battle of the Clogs’ at Køge, when the generally strict
discipline among the British broke down during the hunt for militia-
men through the town of Køge. In this case, it was not only the British
soldiers, but also their wives and sweethearts accompanying them, who
saw the occasion as an opportunity to fill their pockets and spread fear
among the town’s inhabitants.27


The Besieged City

Many people fled with their belongings into the city from the area
around Copenhagen for protection against the invasion. In spite of the
departure of the crown prince, a general enthusiasm reigned inside the
ramparts. The buoyant mood was due not least to the fact that the coun-
try’s ‘victory’ at the First Battle of Copenhagen lived on in memory.
