36 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


the civil servants’ authority and that they were in danger of commit-
ting treason by entering into the service of the enemy. This did not
trouble the patriotic collaborators, who continued working to protect
their countrymen.


Fortress Copenhagen

On 16 August, the same day as the landing at Vedbæk, Crown Prince
Frederick declared war on Great Britain. His hope was that he could
relieve the beleaguered city with the help of the army from the duch-
ies. The crown prince was counting on Copenhagen being able to hold
out for about three months, and the inhabitants of the capital expected
that the army would be able to see off the enemy as soon as the inland
waterways froze over.
   Nobody in the isolated capital knew what was happening outside its
ramparts, but in accordance with his orders, General Peymann refused
the British request to surrender. He wrote instead to the crown prince
that he would defend to the end a city that could only fall into enemy
hands if it were stormed. As a fortress, Copenhagen was not only inad-
equate and outdated but actually in a state of decay. The soldiers, too,
were poorly equipped, and their cannon and gunpowder were of infer-
ior quality to those of the British. The defences constructed in the sev-
enteenth and the beginning of the eighteenth centuries and fronted
with artificial lakes were, however, so extensive that the fortress in itself
was robust enough to withstand shelling and difficult to storm. On the
other hand, the artificial lakes made it difficult to conduct an active
defence using sorties.19
   The defensive works facing the sea, on the other hand, had been
strengthened since the First Battle of Copenhagen in 1801, so it was
now possible, using gunboats, to ward off British attempts to bombard
Copenhagen from the Sound. There were almost 14,000 men available
to defend the city. Of these, however, only slightly more than 5500 were
regular soldiers. The rest were made up of citizen corps, students, mili-
tia and gamekeepers. To these could be added between 3500 and 4000
seamen and marines, who were responsible for the seaward defences. At
the head of this force was the 72-year-old engineer general, Peymann,
seconded by the similarly ageing generals Bielefeldt and Gedde. All
three were conscientious patriots, but none of them had any real experi-
ence of war. The only person with any military competence among
those with the task of defending Copenhagen was the commander of
the seaward defence, Commodore Steen Bille.20
