34   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


Landing and Occupation

The morning of 16 August saw the start of the landing of a large number
of troops at Vedbæk, north of Copenhagen, and this was followed the
next day by landings at Skodsborg, also north of Copenhagen, and in
the northern part of Køge Bay, south of the city. The British army com-
prised about 30,000 men who could, if required, be supplemented by
5000 seamen from the fleet.15
   The British army advanced rapidly and had already surrounded
the capital and cut it off from the rest of the country by 17 August. A
proclamation to the effect that the British had not come as enemies
but as Denmark’s friends was distributed among the local inhabitants
throughout the occupied areas. According to the proclamation, the
British were acting purely in self-defence and their sole mission was
to defend the country against the continental tyrant, Napoleon. They
wanted nothing more than to reach an understanding with the Danish-
Norwegian government. Their fine words made very little impression
on the Zealanders – not least because they were not in Danish but in
English or German. And when the British had the text translated in
Sweden, it turned out to be a hotchpotch of Danish and Swedish, which
the Danes found highly entertaining. The only result of this English
propaganda was to encourage the gallows humour of the Danes, who
subsequently described the British attack on Copenhagen as ‘the friendly
English bombardment’.
   In Denmark, and across the rest of the European continent, the rav-
ages and depredations of the French army were notorious, and on
Zealand people hardly expected the British troops to behave much bet-
ter, as their reputation was marred by stories about their conduct in
India. The presence of the British fleet in the Sound alone prompted
people in many places to bury their silverware, and after the landing
the mere sight of foreign soldiers scared the locals half to death. Some
fled helter-skelter into the forests with their families and belongings,
while others loaded their wagons with beds, furniture and families
before fleeing with their livestock in tow. People were afraid of being
plundered, assaulted and raped, but this fear evaporated for many of
them as it gradually became clear that it was unfounded in most cases.16
   Although military operations took place primarily in and around
Copenhagen, British troops were spread over large areas of Zealand.
Officers usually lived on farms, while ordinary soldiers lived in the for-
ests or in barns and stables. In some cases, this led to damage, theft
and assaults on civilians. At Frederiksberg, just north of Copenhagen,
