                                 The Bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807   41


to return to the narrow path of virtue, but the sermons left no doubt
that ‘God is with us, God is for justice’.29
   Most people anticipated a long siege and therefore laid in plenty of
stocks of food, but, although no supplies reached Copenhagen from
outside, prices rose remarkably little. Normal trading in the city itself
continued in many ways unaltered. On their own initiative, a number
of citizens began to make collections as early as 16 August to help the
‘defenders of the fatherland’. This was such a success that the people
manning the ramparts and the batteries in the harbour received double
rations of everything from aquavit to bread, cheese, soup and meat. The
fact that there were many men on the ramparts, however, meant that
many families in Copenhagen had been deprived of a breadwinner, so
collections were also made for them. These private initiatives enjoyed
widespread support and were followed up by similar public measures.
   The British fleet was kept at a suitable distance from the city by
Commodore Steen Bille’s efficient gunboats, which inflicted consider-
able losses on the British to the noisy rapture of the many Copenhageners
following the battles from the harbour. Yet optimism and solidarity
became mixed with growing dissatisfaction with the military leader-
ship. During the first days of the siege, the citizen artillery on the ram-
parts shot at anything and anybody outside the city. However, when
the supreme command, in an attempt not to squander gunpowder
and shot, forbade unnecessary shooting, the inhabitants saw this as
an example of the generals’ lack of fighting spirit, or perhaps even as
a sign of treachery. A total of five sorties were made to clear the ter-
rain around the capital of buildings and trees, which helped in some
degree to restore good spirits. This applied in particular to the sortie of
31 August, which was supported by heavily armed gunboats that fired
on the British from the coast. The 2200 men were led by the supreme
commander of the fortress, General Peymann, who was seriously
wounded during the incident. There was a widespread assumption at
the time that the ageing general was deliberately seeking an honourable
death on the battlefield in order to be relieved of the responsibility for
a task that was doomed to failure.


The Bombardment

There was disagreement among the besiegers as to how to force the
city to surrender. As in 1801, an attack from the sea was ruled out,
as the Danish defensive works had been considerably strengthened to
seaward. Recently built Danish gunboats and batteries defending the
