                                 The Bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807   37


Volunteers

The city had its own citizen corps and, in theory, every male civilian
citizen between the ages of 20 and 50 had a duty to serve in them. These
corps were not always popular, and civil servants in particular were
exempted, but the First Battle of Copenhagen had aroused enthusiasm
for them among students and younger citizens. The Crown Prince’s
Volunteer Lifeguard was founded in 1801 for these students, while more
well-to-do citizens joined the King’s Fusiliers. The student corps was
voluntary in theory, but in reality serving in it was made obligatory
by the university, by the general public and by social pressure. During
the siege of Copenhagen in 1807, many members of the general public
who were not officially citizens and were not, therefore, part of the citi-
zen corps were promised a cash reward if they joined the colours. This
brought in more than enough willing hands, but many of those who
volunteered had to be turned down because they were either suffering
from consumption, scabies or other diseases. The military spirit seemed
pervasive, and during the years after 1807 Denmark was described as a
great military camp filled with soldiers on exercises and citizen corps.21


The Militia and the Battle of the Clogs at Køge

The only faint ray of hope for the rapid relief of Copenhagen was pinned
on the peasant militias that had been established in 1801. The underly-
ing idea of the militias was that the common man would defend his
home, province and fatherland against any invading enemy. Here the
patriotic and national ideals of the middle classes met head on with the
local and regional reality of the peasants. The peasant militias had been
based on the idea of an armed people, an ideological notion that can be
traced back to ancient Rome and the idea that the peasant who fought
in defence of his home made the best, most patriotic soldier. This idea
would be put to the test when the British landed on Zealand in 1807
and the peasant militias on Zealand and Lolland-Falster, the islands just
south of Zealand, were mobilised.22
  During the six years that the peasant militias had been in existence,
they had received virtually no military training. There was a fatal lack
of officers, and those who were available were often ‘old men, weak in
body and addled in mind’. Nor was the situation any better with regard
to equipment, as the militias had been given only a limited number of
weapons from the military stores in Copenhagen in time. In order to
solve the problem, the crown prince gave orders for people to collect
