                                 The Bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807   35


the inhabitants and their property were treated roughly. On the other
hand, there were examples, particularly at the beginning of the occu-
pation, of good relations between the local inhabitants and British sol-
diers. The only people the British killed in this connection were four
of their own soldiers, who were executed for looting and other assaults
on civilians. The supreme commander, General Lord William Cathcart,
had given strict orders in advance that the local inhabitants should not
be molested and warned that brutality would not be tolerated.17
   On 16 August, the date of the landings, Admiral Gambier and General
Cathcart had already proclaimed that all foodstuffs consumed by the
army would be paid for. However, it was made clear to public officials
that if they refused to cooperate, the British would take what they
needed by force. Bearing this in mind, the local authorities everywhere
met the British demands in order to protect local inhabitants, who were
busy with the harvest.
   In the northern area of Copenhagen County, however, the British
ran into what was later described as ‘patriotic collaboration’. The chief
administrative officer and the district revenue officer both lived in
Copenhagen and had therefore been isolated when the occupation
began. The British instead contacted the local priest, Bonne Falch
Rønne, who, in order to avoid military excursions and troops being
quartered on them, agreed to help the enemy to obtain supplies. Rønne
was soon seconded by the wealthy merchant Frédéric de Coninck at
the manor of Dronninggård and by Count Schulin at Frederiksdal. This
self-constituted commission, which was appointed by Cathcart as a
British field commissariat, had the count as a figurehead, the merchant
as entrepreneur and the priest as an energetic motive force. The three
regarded themselves as true patriots, but their ‘policy of collaboration’
aroused considerable antagonism among Copenhageners. Realising
that they were in an embarrassing situation, they sent a letter to the
commandant in the besieged Copenhagen, General Peymann, to per-
suade him to concede that they had de facto taken over the duties that
rightly belonged to the king’s civil servants. This is a partial parallel to
what happened in the Rhineland, where both the local elites and civil
servants found themselves between a rock and a hard place with their
princes on one side and the French occupying forces on the other.18
   The commission, however, did not receive the reply for which they
had hoped. Paradoxically, Peymann refused to admit that the chief
administrative officer and the district revenue officer, who were stuck
in the besieged city, were unable to perform their duties outside the city.
Instead he warned the commission that their activities were usurping
