40 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


People simply did not fear the enemy when they remembered the ‘lick-
ing’ the British had been given at the last encounter.
  The crown prince had issued orders that all British property should
be confiscated and all Britons gaoled. The latter presented the com-
mandant with a problem of interpretation as it was not clear whether
the order applied to the many Britons who had become naturalised
citizens of Copenhagen. Peymann pragmatically refrained from
arresting the latter, but the British-born inhabitants of Copenhagen
found themselves in a difficult position, as Danes did not trust them
to take part in the defence of the city. The siege also triggered an
unfortunate combination of patriotic fervour and paranoia in some
inhabitants, which resulted in harassment for anybody who appeared
suspicious. American seamen in particular were liable to suspicion
because of their language, but Russians, Swedes and even one drunk
Norwegian were reported or dragged before the police by overzealous
and suspicious patriots. 28
  The experience of Copenhageners of the British bombs in 1801 led
many to believe that a bombardment was not really dangerous. At the
time a sport had even developed among students to try to extract the
fuses from bombs before they exploded. The bombs that flew in over
Copenhagen during the first days of the siege did little to change the
impression of its inhabitants. Many of the missiles exploded in the air
high above the city, while others landed without effect. It was only
when a man was injured by one of these bombs on 24 August that peo-
ple began to get an inkling of what was in store for them.
  Writing in newspapers, periodicals and sermons, the learned and
the clergy incited the public to fight and, if necessary, die for king and
country. They often referred to the deeds of their forefathers, not only
to the ‘glorious 2 April’ of 1801, but also to Copenhageners’ courage and
prowess during the Swedish siege of the capital in 1658–59. According
to contemporary observers, the memory of the Swedish Wars in the
middle of the seventeenth century was still very much alive and only
fuelled the disappointment that must have been felt when the crown
prince returned to the army in Holstein instead of declaring that he
was willing to ‘die in his nest’ like Frederick III in 1658. The message
from the pulpit was mixed. The ungodliness of the British and the inno-
cence of the Danish government were emphasised, but citizens were
also berated for having taken peace for granted and for allowing them-
selves to be corrupted by materialism. God had permitted this attack
on the law of nations in order to awake the people to renewed piety and
‘Danishness’. The war was thus used as a means of intimidating Danes
