                                 The Bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807   43


The first night of the bombing seemed worse than the second as
the Copenhageners had got over the initial shock of the fires and the
bombs. But it was the third night that went down in history as
the worst. With more than 3000 members drawn from among its citi-
zens, Copenhagen had a fire brigade that was modern and well organ-
ised by contemporary standards and, to the great vexation of the British,
was remarkably efficient in keeping the fires under control during the
first two nights. But on the third night, the fire brigade had to succumb
to the sustained pressure. The rain of bombs was concentrated in the
area around the Church of Our Lady, where the more than 120-metre-
high church spire made an excellent target for the enemy mortars.
   Large numbers of the city’s inhabitants began to flee from the
inner city. According to the historian E.C. Werlauff, who experienced
1807 himself, about 30,000 citizens sought refuge on the islands of
Christianshavn and Amager to the south where they felt they would
be safe. This perfectly rational mass migration, which appears to have
taken place without panic, made it easier for the fires to spread, as there
were fewer people to fight them.
   The third night of the bombardment broke the will of many Copen-
hageners to defend the city – including that of the generals in com-
mand. The spire of the Church of Our Lady collapsed to the raucous
cheers of the British and created an inextinguishable conflagration.
Petitions from the city’s merchants and noblewomen and from many
members of the city’s corporation and the 32-man council (a coun-
cil elected by citizens) arrived at the sickbed of the wounded General
Peymann at Raus Hotel (today, paradoxically, Hotel d’Angleterre). All of
the petitions argued for surrender. Subjected to this pressure, and after
having consulted generals Gedde and Bielefeldt, Peymann asked the
British for a truce.
   The British, however, were only willing to agree to a truce on the
condition that negotiations for the city’s capitulation were begun. They
also made it clear that they would not accept the destruction of the
Danish fleet, which they had good reason to fear after having inter-
cepted the crown prince’s orders to Peymann. A council, comprising
the city’s leading military and civilian authorities, decided to begin
negotiations for a capitulation on 6 September. Their hope was that the
British would settle for the surrender of the fleet as a pledge of the king-
dom’s continued neutrality, but the rules of the game had changed. The
British now demanded the fleet not only for the remainder of the war
but as their permanent property. The Danes were shocked and furious
but were unable to do anything. The only one among the leading men
