42    Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


island of Amager immediately to the south of Copenhagen also meant
that to land and launch an attack from there was deemed too risky.
General Cathcart was apprehensive about the consequences of a bom-
bardment as the bombs could hit a girls’ school. Arthur Wellesley was
also said to be concerned about a bombardment. His alternative was
more traditional but hardly more humane, namely a protracted siege
to starve the city into submission. This would almost certainly have
led to a far greater number of deaths from hunger or infectious dis-
eases. During a year-long siege of Danzig in 1813, 17,000 people died of
typhoid. However, the final decision to launch a bombardment has to
be seen in the light of the pressure of time the leadership of the British
army was under. Weather conditions meant that the Royal Navy could
only remain in Danish waters for a limited period, and the arrival of
winter was expected to enable the deployment of the Danish army from
the duchies to Zealand, possibly accompanied by the French troops.
   Bombs, grenades and incendiary rockets rained down on the city for
three consecutive nights. The latter, the ‘Congreve rockets’, named for
their inventor, William Congreve, who instructed the soldiers how to
fire them, created the greatest consternation. Their screaming flight
also contributed to their alarming effect. The rockets were new and
unfamiliar and could, in Peymann’s words, be considered as ‘weapons
that are not usually used by refined [i.e. civilised] nations’. Historian
Arnold D. Harvey has calculated that this was one of the most intensive
bombardments before 1914, and that three times as much gunpowder
was used as at the Battle of Waterloo.30
   The bombardment began on 2 September 1807, at half-past eight in
the evening. Those who experienced it at close quarters often found it
difficult to describe their experiences and feelings with any precision.
A Norwegian wrote to his family in Norway,

     It is difficult to think of anything more frightful and terrible than
     this bombardment, and nobody who was not there can have any real
     idea of the horror of it. Imagine the air filled with rapidly moving
     [ ... ] shooting stars [ ... ] imagine them flying along with a piercing
     scream and crashing down into a house and smashing roofs, ceil-
     ings, beams and floors and several storeys to pieces with a shocking
     din and exploding with a fearful bang, then flames breaking out
     through windows, ceilings, doors etc. Etc. [sic], and this will give you
     a vague picture of the sight we have witnessed almost every second.
     To this must be added that with almost every bomb we saw people
     either killed or with injuries to arms and legs [ ... ].31
