                                 The Bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807   45


of 1813 and the crisis after the peace, and it took almost two decades
to rebuild the city. The Church of Our Lady was only reconsecrated in
1829, while the main building of the university was unable to admit
students until 1836.
   Danish historiography has varied in its estimates of the number of
deaths caused by the bombardment. In most accounts it has been set
at 1600, while some have put it as high as 2000 to 3000. These figures,
which can be found in English-language publications, can for the most
part be traced back to a historical work from 1845. The problem with the
information in this book is that it stems in all probability from a highly
polemical, anti-British propaganda pamphlet from the autumn of 1807.
It was not until 2007 that a Danish and a Norwegian historian scruti-
nised the figures. We now know with reasonable certainty that at least
186 civilians lost their lives during the bombardment, but missing regis-
ters and doubts about the causes of some deaths in the available records
mean that the figure was probably slightly higher. The loss of 183 lives
in the military during the siege and the bombardment must be added
to the civilian losses. Where the number of wounded is concerned, the
figure remains unknown, but according to the director-general of the
Royal Surgical Academy, those maimed by grenades, bombs and collaps-
ing buildings were chiefly women, children and the elderly. British casu-
alties during the siege were 56 dead and 145 wounded.33


Reactions in Denmark-Norway

The misery in the capital was not only due to the immediate destruc-
tion of property. Its formerly flourishing commercial life was also
ruined. Many people sought consolation and an explanation for what
had happened from the church. The message from the church was that
this was the Lord’s just castigation of his people. Danes had thought
of nothing but ‘worldly self-indulgence and worldly superfluity’ and
had neglected ‘feelings of love towards God, of friendship to their fel-
lows, of loyalty to and ardour for their homes and the country of their
birth’. Want of faith, deceit and evil had been punished, and Danes
could once again turn to God and serve their king and country with
genuine Danishness.34
   The American sociologist Randall Collins has written of ‘time-bubbles
of nationalism’,35 when a terrible event triggers a period a massive
national mobilisation, which then declines after three to six months.
In some cases it is possible to maintain a sense of national solidarity, but
its intensity does not last and attempts to maintain such mobilisation
