                                The Bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807   53


of prints illustrating the Bombardment of Copenhagen and the seizure
of the fleet. In Britain, the opposition’s attack was supported by radi-
cal and humanitarian critics in intellectual circles, who stated that the
expedition had been an infringement of international law, while the
bombardment of the city and the seizure of the Danish-Norwegian fleet
would be a lasting stain on the honour of the British nation. It also gave
rise to the contemporary expression, ‘as shameful as Copenhagen’.53


The Return of the Crown Prince

The crown prince returned to the capital on 6 November, and all who
had led the defence of the city were placed under arrest (with the excep-
tion of Steen Bille). A legal review in the wake of the capitulation was
to be expected. However, it soon became clear that the crown prince
was hunting for scapegoats in order to pander to public opinion and
divert criticism from himself, while demonstrating to Napoleon that
the defeat had not been due to a general lack of political or military
will and/or strength on the part of Denmark-Norway but must solely
be ascribed to the faulty judgement of a few officers. A court martial
sentenced generals Peymann and Bielefeldt to ‘forfeit their honour and
their lives’ and to have their property confiscated, while General Gedde
was graciously permitted to retain his honour, but was sentenced to
death. Several of the other accused were given prison sentences. The
view of contemporaries was that the proceedings and the sentences had
no foundation in law, and Frederick VI came to his senses and par-
doned the three generals once the case had served its political purpose,
but they were not fully rehabilitated until 1815, that is, after the fall
of Napoleon. The ‘patriotic collaborators’, Count Schulin, Frédéric de
Coninck and Bonne Falch Rønne, were brought before a court of spe-
cial jurisdiction and charged with high treason for having assumed
the powers of the public authorities and for having been functioned
by appointment to an enemy general. All three were acquitted, as their
activities were considered to have protected the local population, but
they were ordered to pay the costs of the proceedings and their reputa-
tions were tainted ever afterwards.54


The Defence of the Fatherland and the Function of History

The British attack triggered a mental mobilisation in Denmark and
Norway that found written and oral expression in newspapers, peri-
odicals, pamphlets and sermons. According to contemporary views, the
