                                 The Bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807   47


Norway. There may be a number of reasons for this. Holstein had been
annexed to the Danish state the year before, after the dissolution of the
Holy Roman Empire, and the government was beginning to harmonise
it with the rest of the state. These measures were a contributory factor in
aggravating the antipathy that already existed in certain circles between
Danes and Germans. There was also a distinct anti-French and pro-British
attitude in large areas of the north German region.37


Scapegoats

Inwardly, the population was hunting for scapegoats. Initially the mili-
tary command, who had not only failed to do their duty but were consid-
ered cowardly and incompetent by the majority or were even accused of
having colluded with the enemy, were in the line of fire. The surrender
had barely been signed before such talk was spreading to every corner of
the kingdoms. The population’s view of the military was not improved
by the wholesale desertions that took place during the period after the
capitulation. It was first and foremost the enlisted marine corps, who
were regarded by the population ‘as a horde from foreign parts, espe-
cially Germany, a motley rabble’, known for drunkenness, theft and
brawling, who deserted en masse. All in all 89 per cent of the Marine
Regiment changed sides after the surrender of the city. There were also
desertions from other corps and regiments, although far fewer. Those
who were caught attempting to desert were immediately brought before
a court martial and either shot or hanged within a few hours. This was
not solely a Danish problem, however, as many Britons also deserted.38
  The army was not the only organisation to be accused of shirking its
responsibilities. The government and the crown prince were fully aware of
the mood of indignation in the capital. After the capitulation, the crown
prince had forbidden all communication between the besieged Zealand
and other parts of the state, and all letters from Zealand were confiscated
and sent to Kiel, where they underwent scrupulous examination by civil
servants. This led a prominent civil servant to conclude that

  The mood in Copenhagen is extremely unfavourable. People heap
  abuse on the government, on the crown prince and on the min-
  istries. The great merchants are so English-minded that they wish
  nothing more than to be under English rule. The common man also
  likes English guineas and curses their bombs. The better half are in
  the minority and are obliged to hold their tongues, at least while the
  English are there.39
