48    Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


The criticism was directed in particular at Foreign Minister Christian
Bernstorff, Permanent Secretary Joachim Bernstorff and the rest of the
diplomatic corps. The Bernstorff brothers were reproached for failing to
react to the many warnings of a British attack.
   The two brothers in the foreign ministry, however, were not the only
ones to be criticised. A priest wrote in his diary that respect for the
crown prince had declined and would be difficult to restore. Antipathy
towards the crown prince arose because he had abandoned Copenhagen
in its hour of need and, by stationing the Danish army in Holstein, had
left the city defenceless against Britain. Due to the de facto censorship
imposed by the state, there was scarcely a voice that dared to openly
criticise the crown prince’s dispositions.40
   After the separation of Denmark and Norway, the following state-
ment could be found in a Norwegian newspaper:

     In 1807 all patriotic pens were busy writing about the inappropri-
     ateness of the army sojourning in Holstein while the English cabi-
     net were hatching their shameful plot to steal the Danish fleet, but
     nobody dared to express his thoughts about this in public for fear of
     a civil servant’s indictment [ ... ] and the Danish fleet was lost!41

One Copenhagener, however, dared to write an open letter to the crown
prince asking for greater freedom of the press so that citizens could
freely offer patriotic advice for the good of the country. Under other
circumstances, a request of this kind would have been unthinkable,
but the fact that it could be printed in one of the capital’s most popular
newspapers shows how much the royal house had been shaken by the
Bombardment of Copenhagen.42


Collections after the Bombardment of Copenhagen

Although the bombardment produced a mood of great anger and dis-
satisfaction, it did not undermine citizens’ patriotism. News of the
capital’s fate led immediately to substantial collections of funds among
private individuals throughout Denmark-Norway. This enabled the
middle-class elites to affirm their patriotism to themselves and to their
countrymen – without risking their lives. In itself, the phenomenon
was neither new nor particularly Danish-Norwegian. Something simi-
lar had been seen to accompany the Christiansborg Palace fire in 1794
and the First Battle of Copenhagen in 1801, and similar collections had
occurred in France to assist the building of an invasion fleet to cross the
