46    Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


often result in exhaustion. In the Danish-Norwegian state of 1807, this
could be called a ‘time-bubble of state patriotism’. The outbreak of war
and the siege of Copenhagen created a feeling of anger and uncer-
tainty in Norway, as nobody knew what had really happened in the
capital, where many people had sons, daughters, brothers and friends.
People’s sympathies were unanimously for the ‘gallant’ Copenhageners.
The British, on the other hand, were seen as robbers and firebrands by
Norwegians. Like the Holsteiners, the Norwegians collected money to
help victims of the fire and for the defence of the state.
  According to a naval officer, the mood in Norway before the bom-
bardment had been confident:

     Nobody thought about the loss that a war with England would
     inflict on those whose only, or most important, trade was with that
     country. Everybody expressed indignation and the desire to fight
     this aggressor and, while they longed for news from Copenhagen, it
     was without any fear of such a course as that they would all too soon
     see the battle take. Everybody expected a repetition of the glory of
     2 April [i.e. the Battle of Copenhagen 1801].36

The news of the capital’s fall and the loss of the fleet created a mood
of grief, commiseration and anger in Norway, but the Norwegians also
feared what the future might bring now that the state had been thrown
into a war with their most important trading partner, which, with the
help of the Royal Navy, could cut off Norway from the rest of the world.
This fear only intensified as the war progressed. Developments in
Norway appear to have followed Collin’s ‘time-bubble’ theory. However,
it was impossible to keep the Norwegians’ anger towards the British on
the boil for any length of time, and their solidarity with the Danes
waned in step with their privations. The strong sense of state patriotism
in the autumn of 1807 was increasingly replaced by a growing sense of
national patriotism, which, for some people, began to approach true
Norwegian nationalism, as we shall see in the following chapters.
   There was a similar development in Holstein, but it did not go to the
same extremes. Mobilisation was less widespread in 1807, but in reality
separatist tendencies never made an appearance in either of the two duch-
ies during the period up to the end of the Napoleonic Wars. Volunteer citi-
zen and student corps had already been established, newspapers praised
the government’s policy of striving for peace, and the public gave its sup-
port to the collections in support of the people of Copenhagen. A mood
of state patriotism prevailed in Holstein, but it was hardly as strong as in
