52   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


protested vehemently but to no avail. The Citadel, which belonged to
the army, was treated in a similar manner.51
   Even more salt was rubbed in the wound when the British resorted
to destroying anything they could not take with them, including three
ships under construction. Attempts were also made to demolish ship-
yards and docks. News of the British embarkation on 20 October spread
like wildfire through Copenhagen. The immediate reaction was relief:
‘Praise God! They have gone!’ But gone, too, was the fleet that had been
the pride of the two kingdoms for generations, their ‘most splendid
common property’, the loss of which aroused indignation both north
and south of the Skagerrak. However, the impressive British-Danish-
Norwegian armada of more than 300 ships did not reach Great Britain
unharmed. Violent autumn storms split up the fleet before it had left
the Kattegat, and several of the British transports sank in the North
Sea, drowning many hundreds. Not surprisingly, the Danes saw this
as God’s punishment, but it is quite likely that there would have been
Danes and Norwegians among the many dead. The British had nowhere
near sufficient crews to man the Danish-Norwegian fleet, so there had
been a recruitment campaign to find seamen capable of sailing it to the
British Isles.52


Reactions in Great Britain

From a military point of view, the Bombardment of Copenhagen or,
to use the more neutral terms used in British historiography, the
Copenhagen Expedition or the Second Battle of Copenhagen, was a
brilliant strategic success brought about by an unprovoked attack by
a great power on a weaker, unprepared and neutral state. It was com-
mon knowledge, however, that George III had been opposed to the
expedition, and at home in Great Britain it triggered a steady stream of
criticism. The opposition accused the government of isolating Britain
diplomatically by acting rashly and ruthlessly on the basis of unreliable
rumours and, in so doing, of throwing a neutral, well-disposed state
into the arms of Napoleon instead of helping and supporting Denmark-
Norway. The result of the British government’s actions had, in fact,
made thousands of well-trained Danish and Norwegian seamen avail-
able to Napoleon and on the continent had created a public relations
catastrophe of undreamt-of dimensions. This last point was emphasised
by the Danish-Norwegian government doing everything in its power to
inflame public opinion in Europe by publishing newspaper articles and
pamphlets in German, French and English and by distributing a host
