                                 The Bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807   51


patriot than in our day.’ A stereotypical view of the Englishman arose
as the polar opposite of the Dane, and this image of the enemy was
constantly supported with the help of selective references to specific
English acts such as the Bombardment of Copenhagen, the seizure of
the fleet, looting at Holmen and the blockade of Norway.49
   This overpitched response must be seen in the light of the fact that
the Danish-Norwegian world picture had disintegrated. Denmark-
Norway was no longer the home of peace but a state engaged in a fight
for survival, so people did their utmost to mobilise each other in the
struggle against foreign and domestic enemies. The British bombard-
ment of the civilian population of Copenhagen was described as a ‘war
of destruction [ ... ] against the unarmed, against the aged and women’.
A British prisoner of war noted that the government’s violently anti-
British rhetoric was a major factor in influencing the Danish popula-
tion. He had been captured after the frigate HMS Crescent, one of the
Danish ships seized in 1807, was wrecked off the west coast of Jutland.
The loss of the frigate and the capture of its British crew were naturally
interpreted as God’s punishment on the ungodly British. According to
his own statement, the British prisoner was treated fairly well during
his imprisonment and he had every opportunity to observe that the
Danes believed the worst of the British nation, almost without reserva-
tion. The intense hatred of Great Britain abated during the course of
the war as more and more people became aware of the extent to which
their continuing war with the British and their alliance with the self-
serving French Empire was eating away at the Danish-Norwegian state
and threatening its very existence. Views such as these could be found
among the business community in Copenhagen in particular and in
famine-hit Norway.50


Looting at Holmen and the Loss of the Fleet

British conduct at Holmen, Copenhagen’s naval base, contributed to
their image as a brutal and predatory people. The terms of the surren-
der entitled the British to seize not only the fleet but also whatever
belonged to it. The British interpretation of the concept ‘naval stores’
was rather broader than the Danes had reckoned with. Under the lead-
ership of British naval officer Home Popham, British confiscations at
Holmen turned into outright looting. They took everything that could
be used in any way or was of value. The doors, windows and locks of
the buildings were broken open to enable the British to remove stoves,
furniture, books and maps – and even pairs of office scissors. The Danes
