50 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


flames like ‘our capital’, the day would certainly come when the enemy,
with ‘Vengeance’ written in blood on his forehead and back, would
learn what it meant to do battle with the Danes and Norwegians whom
the British had dared to mock. Danish reactions were similar to those of
the Norwegians. A flood of pamphlets were published during the period
after the Bombardment of Copenhagen, a recurring theme being that
the preventive attack on Zealand had been an unprecedented breach of
international law. This was a view that was, not surprisingly, shared by
Britain’s critics, from Tsar Alexander to US President Thomas Jefferson.46
   For Danes, the matter was made even graver by the fact that it
involved two peoples and two royal families who were related by blood.
Crown Prince Frederick was George III’s nephew, while the British were
descended from Angles, Vikings and Normans, so they were ‘the sons
of gallant Danes’. However, the contemporary view of Great Britain was
complex and self-contradictory. Many writers attempted to make an
explicit distinction between the British government and the people.
The anger of the Danish nation should rather be directed towards the
cabinet in Downing Street, even more so as the British opposition had
vociferously criticised the attack on Copenhagen. A number of writers
challenged the British and George III to dismiss a government that was
an insult to the ‘many outstanding, upright, honest men of all classes’
in the English nation. The flattering words about the English in these
pamphlets, a number of which were translated, even into English, were
in glaring contrast to the judgement of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs,
whose members were described as ‘highwaymen’ and firebrands and
who were headed by the satanic foreign minister, George Canning.47
   In public at least, there was virtually no one who accepted the British
claim that they had been forced to take the offensive after the Franco–
Russian treaty in the summer of 1807. Most writers interpreted the
attack on Zealand as a classic example of British imperialist and com-
mercial policy. One of them accused the British of attempting to extend
their ‘bloody yoke’ to the Baltic – just as they had previously subjugated
India. Another felt that the mean British ‘shop-keeping spirit’ threat-
ened to transform hell from an ‘image to spread fear among the faint-
hearted’ into a reality on earth, while both a Norwegian and a Danish
philosopher stated that British policy was a non sequitur given Great
Britain’s commercial national character.48
   Some Danes and Norwegians tried publicly to combat the tendency
to direct anger towards the British as a whole, but in vain. One writer
noted dryly that ‘If patriotism comprises nothing more than heaping
abuse on the English, there has never been a better occasion to be a
