44 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


who refused to sign the capitulation was the head of the naval defence,
Steen Bille. He wanted a sortie against the British positions by all of
the men in the city who were capable of bearing arms. Bille was fully
aware that such a suicidal attack would only bring him and those who
followed him ‘an honourable death’, but a sortie would make it possible
to destroy the fleet in the meantime.
   Bille’s proposal did not find favour with the generals, and nor did
citizens wish to sacrifice their lives on the altar of the fatherland for no
conceivable purpose, so Copenhagen capitulated on 7 September. The
mood changed later, and Bille now appeared as a true patriot while the
rest of the advisory assembly were regarded as defeatists or traitors. This
could be the real reason for Bille’s proposal, as it enabled him to avoid
being involved in the subsequent judicial purge.
   When the surrender was made public in the city’s squares, most peo-
ple greeted it with relief and pleasure, and the occasional cheer and
‘Long live the king!’ made themselves heard. The demand to surrender
the fleet, however, aroused widespread grief and anger, and it was con-
sidered necessary to have the cavalry patrol the streets to maintain order.
This failed to deter the sailors and the carpenters from Holmen, whose
livelihoods depended on the fleet. Armed with axes, they marched
through the city to the military headquarters at the Raus Hotel where
the ‘traitor’ General Peymann was staying. Fearing that the mob would
storm the building, students from the King’s Volunteer Corps were
called in to break up the demonstration. This was a wise choice as the
students – unlike the army – were highly respected by seamen, car-
penters and citizens, and they succeeded in defusing the situation in a
peaceful manner.


Death and Destruction

Calculated statistically, there were fewer burnt-out buildings after the
bombardment of 1807 – a total of 305 houses – than after the two
conflagrations that had ravaged the capital in 1728 and 1795. But sev-
eral thousand houses in Copenhagen had been damaged to a greater
or lesser extent. Naturally, there were many homeless people after the
bombardment, and it has been calculated that about 7000 people were
forced to leave their homes.32 The most impoverished of them often
had to resort to desperate measures and make their homes in tents or
covered passageways. Ruins and piles of bricks remained part of the
street scene for many years. Rebuilding was slow as the economy had
been left in tatters by the expenses of the war, the state bankruptcy
