                                The Bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807   49


English Channel during the years 1803–05 and in Germany during the
‘Wars of Liberation’ against Napoleon in 1813.43
   In principle, such donations can be divided into three categories. The
first category was to support those whose houses and belongings had
been burned. The second category was for the many people who had
been injured and bereaved, while the third category was to assist the
rebuilding of the lost fleet. After the capitulation several new commis-
sions had been set up, but after 8 April 1808 they were all amalgamated
in a common fund. The fund gradually came to benefit everybody who
had been injured, wounded or taken prisoner during the war, and it
was subsidised by the state, the commission for the wounded and fallen
after the First Battle of Copenhagen in 1801 and by many private indi-
viduals. As early as November 1807, help had been given to more than
8000 people, especially the so-called more ‘socially useful groups of the
population’. The most impoverished people were often referred to ordi-
nary poor relief, which was a factor in overburdening what was already
a hard-pressed system during the war.44
   There was a widespread spirit of self-sacrifice throughout the state,
and both rich and poor played their part. Owners of estates and wood-
land all over Denmark donated huge quantities of oak for new ships;
some citizens gave everything they owned. There was no shortage of
inventiveness among the citizens, and the collections were not limited
to subscriptions. Books, pamphlets, sermons, poems and memorial
works were published, plays were put on, exhibitions were opened and
ceremonies were held with profits going to one or more of the collec-
tions mentioned. Yet there were still those who did not feel that the
nation’s collective patriotic contributions matched its collective wealth.
An anonymous author, who had read through the many lists of dona-
tions in the newspapers, felt it was beneath the nation’s dignity that
many wealthy people had given no more than what they might lose at
gambling. If this did not change, the fiery patriot challenged the gov-
ernment to force wealthy men to pay part of the national debt. In its
own way, the state did precisely this, by increasing taxes on an ongoing
basis and introducing progressive income tax for the first time.45


‘That damned thief the Englishman’

A storm of anger over Great Britain and its government spread through-
out Denmark and Norway. A correspondent wrote in a Norwegian
newspaper that although he would probably never experience the day
when Saint Paul’s Cathedral and Portsmouth’s dockyards went up in
