                                 The Bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807   57


premises has been handed down to posterity, which might be able to
challenge the tendentious, but dominant, Roman version of events. The
victors write history. The articles were intended to present the loser’s
view.61


Jesus, the Patriot

In Lutheran Denmark-Norway, the king was the head of the church, so
there were close ties between state and church. This meant that priests
were the primary disseminators of propaganda to the man in the street.
The clergy performed this service with a zeal and spirit that showed
that men of the cloth were often among the most bellicose citizens in
the two kingdoms.
   The war had barely broken out before Danish and Norwegian bish-
ops were ordered to write prayers to be read out in the dioceses with
the aim of promoting loyalty to king and country and to encourage
patriotic acts and true love of the fatherland.62 Christianity’s universal
message of love was replaced by the fatherland’s message of rightful war
against an ungodly enemy whose wickedness would be obliterated by
an all-powerful God. In the late summer of 1807, the Bishop of Funen
explained to his parishioners that the piety of the Danish people meant
that God would animate and inspire love of the country of their birth
and loyalty to the king. In a similar manner, the old Bishop of Zealand
demonstrated an almost maniacal energy that came to expression in
his daily sermons on the ramparts of the besieged city and in proclama-
tions to citizens.63
   Their contents could give comfort to the courageous defenders of the
fatherland when they read that only ‘the body and not the soul would
fall’ if they died in battle. Bishop Boisen’s Catechism of the Fatherland
(1811) also promised eternal salvation to those who sacrificed their lives
on the altar of the fatherland. In his prayer, a thousand copies of which
were distributed to soldiers, the Bishop of Trondheim actually wrote
that ‘the first hour of our bliss begins at the moment of death’. In this
manner the clergy used Christianity to teach Danes and Norwegians
about the value of ‘the honourable death for the fatherland’.64
   Like its poets, the state’s priests used the Danish and Norwegian
heroes of the past as examples of self-sacrifice for the fatherland. The
men of the cloth also increased the number of role models available to
contemporary soldiers by adding the old biblical warriors. At Fanefjord
Church on the island of Møen, local inhabitants were told in the New
Year sermon what they could learn from Gideon, Barak, Samson,
