62 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


Sweden were tense, the Danish-Norwegian government was desperately
trying to avoid a conflict – even more so after signing the Fontainebleau
Treaty. What the Danish-Norwegian government wished to avoid above
all was assisting what would in effect be a Russian military conquest
of Finland. A Russian conquest of Finland would render Denmark-
Norway useless as Russia’s future ally, as it would remove the threat
from Sweden to the other side of the Baltic, and almost certainly fur-
ther embolden Sweden to take steps to conquer Norway as compensa-
tion. Foreign Minister Christian Bernstorff viewed developments in the
winter of 1807–08 as shaping a nightmare for the Danish-Norwegian
state and saw Sweden’s joining of the Continental Blockade as the only
real release. In St Petersburg, the Danish-Norwegian ambassador, Otto
von Blome, stayed in constant contact with his Swedish counterpart,
Curt von Stedingk, to emphasise the potential gravity of the situation.
Stedingk reported this to Stockholm, but yet he failed to convince
Gustav IV Adolph that war with Russia was unavoidable, let alone that
such a war was likely to be only a few weeks away. This convinced the
Danish-Norwegian government that a Scandinavian war could hardly
be avoided, especially given the Swedes’ renewed negotiations for an
alliance with Great Britain. Crown Prince Frederick consoled himself
with the thought that, with the help of the French and Russians, a war
with Sweden might allow him to regain some of the territories that
had been lost in the seventeenth century. This, however, did absolutely
nothing to allay the deep concerns felt by Bernstorff, who was power-
less to do anything other than watch these events as they unfolded.5
   In St Petersburg the Russian government quickly came to the conclu-
sion that Sweden had no intention of joining the Continental Blockade,
and in December the Russians began to plan and prepare for an attack
on Finland. It was perfectly clear to the Russian military that an attack
on Finland stood the best chance of success during the winter, so they
agitated for rapid action and, at the same time, demanded a Danish-
Norwegian attack on the western and southern regions of Sweden.
Denmark-Norway was also encouraged to ask for French help in this.
The outcome of the negotiations was an agreement to attack Sweden
from the east, south and west; not only with Russian, Danish and
Norwegian forces but with the addition of 35,000 Spanish, Dutch and
French troops under the command of Marshal Jean Baptiste Bernadotte.6
   The Russian army’s crossing of the River Kymme into Finland on
21 February was the signal that the time had come for the Danish-
Norwegian government to declare war on Sweden. By the time the
Danish-Norwegian declaration of war was announced in Stockholm on
