56 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


government that espoused state patriotism but was wary of national-
ism. Some elements of it could, however, be found in the Danish school
reform of 1814, and teaching in schools gradually began to emphasise
language, history, geography and attachment to the fatherland – first in
Denmark and then in Norway.58


History as a Battlefield

The past was also mobilised in more concrete terms. Danes and
Norwegians used historical parallels and a selective reading of England’s
history to support the existing view of the nation. Used in this way,
history appeared to confirm the image of England/Great Britain as a
greedy empire, addicted to expansion and the economic exploitation of
the rest of the world. Denmark-Norway, on the other hand, had learned
from the past and had found its natural borders. At the same time,
Denmark had defended free shipping and international law and justice
since antiquity, while Great Britain had always made light of all mari-
time rules. Such selectivity in the use of history was underlined when
other patriots suggested making incursions on the coast of Scotland
and, as in the Viking age, demanding Danegeld. This means that Danes
had an image of themselves, at one and the same time, as a peace-loving
people and as bloodthirsty Vikings prepared to rape and pillage British
civilians.59
   The contemporary academic elite were strongly influenced by their
education in Latin schools, and their world of ideas was coloured by the
history of antiquity. It was a matter of course for them to compare Great
Britain with Carthage, the arch-enemy of Rome, a parallel frequently
seen in contemporary French and German literature. From the Roman
point of view, ‘Punic faith’, that is, bad faith, duplicity and unreliability,
was a characteristic of the Punics, as they called the Carthaginians. This
was due to the fact that they were a commercial nation and, broadly
speaking, in all premodern civilisations merchants ranged far below the
aristocracy, priests and farmers. So, with clear reference to the Punics,
Great Britain was now called ‘perfidious Albion’, and learned Danes
referred to Britain as the new Carthage, which would perish as a conse-
quence of its own greed, just as its predecessor had done.60
   A Danish writer used this historical parallel in a more novel and crea-
tive manner when he wrote three articles based on Carthage. The paral-
lel was: like peace-loving Carthage, Copenhagen had been destroyed
by a cynical empire bent on military conquest. However, the defeat of
Carthage meant that no historical account based on the Carthaginians’
