                                 The Bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807   55


historical figures, and they emphasised the deeds of the heroes who had
either saved the fatherland or sacrificed their lives for it.57
   Others, such as Professor Laurits Engelstoft, did everything they could
to teach young people to serve the nation, body and soul. He wrote
his principal work, Thoughts regarding National Upbringing as the Most
Effective Means of Promoting Public-Spiritedness and Love of the Fatherland
(1808) during the Bombardment of Copenhagen. Like Fichte’s speeches
to the German nation, Engelstoft’s work was a product of war, but, for
all their similarities, his reasoning was, unlike Fichte’s, still marked
by eighteenth-century thinking and not least by the impressions that
had left their mark on him during his stay in revolutionary France
from 1798–99. The work was clearly influenced by French thinking
about using school and national festivities as tools in a patriotic pro-
ject. However, Engelstoft combined this thinking with a nationalistic
cultivation of Danish language and history, which placed the book at
the intersection between state patriotism, cultural nationalism and an
unspoken political nationalism.
   In general, as a closet liberal, Engelstoft wanted to use the education
system to create free, equal and patriotic citizens and to form a unified
national character by stimulating the minds of the young. At the intel-
lectual level, this involved broadening their knowledge of the father-
land’s geography, history and native language in order to give them a
sense of a common national character. Geography should teach chil-
dren that all of the benefits they associated with home should rather be
associated with the fatherland as a whole. However, the most important
factor for Engelstoft was language, since he claimed, along similar lines
to Herder, that the spirit and culture of the entire nation was bound up
with its language. The nation and its language stood and fell together,
so a nation that lost its language would perish.
   The idea of using education to create an ostensible sense of commu-
nity can be found in other textbooks, and it characterises a shift in
the concept of community from family to nation at this period. One
of the elements in Engelstoft’s model of Bildung was the physical ele-
ment that would strengthen the nation’s spirit, culture and character
and, inspired by the civic virtues of antiquity and the idea of intro-
ducing general conscription, would make the citizen the defender of
the fatherland. This can be seen as a parallel to ‘Turnvater’ Friedrich
Ludwig Jahn’s nationalistic gymnastics movement in Germany, but
similar thinking in Denmark-Norway can be traced back to the mili-
tary reforms of 1788. The idea of a national programme of Bildung did
not triumph immediately in Denmark due to a lack of resources and a
