                                              Scandinavian War, 1808–09   61


Britain, it was first and foremost Napoleon who reaped the benefits of
the treaty, as it had been carefully adapted to further the aims of the
Continental Blockade. First, it enabled him to close a considerable gap
in the Continental Blockade as the ports of Tønning and Husum in
Schleswig would now be closed to the British. Second, the treaty of alli-
ance contained a secret supplementary clause that obliged Denmark-
Norway to assist France and Russia to force Sweden to break with
Great Britain and join the Continental Blockade. To the anguish of the
Danish-Norwegian government, this amounted to an obligation to go
to war unless the Swedes bowed to the French and Russian demands.
   Gustav IV Adolph, however, had no intention of doing anything of
the sort. Joining the Continental Blockade would first and foremost be
a financial catastrophe for Sweden and that weighed far more heavily in
his assessment of the situation than any personal aversion to Napoleon
he might have had at the time. When Russia declared war on Great
Britain on 8 November – citing the Bombardment of Copenhagen as
its moral justification – and then began to use sharper language with
regard to Sweden, Gustav IV Adolph took the initiative to renew nego-
tiations for a fresh alliance, the Swedish–British alliance of 1805 having
expired the month before. Yet, for all his attempts to renew this alli-
ance, Gustav IV Adolph still hoped that war with Russia could somehow
be avoided altogether, and, if that were not possible, at least that its out-
break could be postponed until the spring when the British fleet would
be at hand to aid Sweden. The king therefore chose to refrain from
implementing any military measures on the Russian border in Finland
in order to avoid provoking war, a decision later cited as evidence of
Gustav IV Adolph’s incompetence and utter failure to grasp the serious
threat posed by the Russians after the Peace of Tilsit.4
   As for Denmark-Norway, the Swedish government was blissfully un-
aware of the secret clause in the Fontainebleau alliance. Gustav IV
Adolph was clearly aware that Denmark-Norway might pose a threat
in the event of a war with Russia and France, but he was confident that
the Danes and Norwegians could be held in check by British landings
in Denmark or Norway. British military aid was therefore discussed by
the Swedish and British governments as part of the negotiations for an
alliance. Yet, despite the risks, Gustav IV Adolph refrained from imple-
menting any extraordinary military measures in western and southern
Sweden. As was the case with Finland, he had no desire to do anything
that might provoke a military conflict on Sweden’s borders.
   Gustav IV Adolph’s wish to avoid a Scandinavian war was shared in
full by the Danish-Norwegian government. Even though relations with
