                                            Scandinavian War, 1808–09   63


14 March, Bernadotte’s troops had arrived in Jutland, and an invasion
of Scania across the Sound from Zealand was in the offing, while the
Norwegian army had received orders to mobilise and undertake an inva-
sion of western Sweden. The first major Scandinavian war in 90 years
had now broken out, and a joint Danish-Norwegian-French-Russian
invasion of Swedish territory on several fronts seemed imminent.


The Swedish Attack on Norway

During the winter months the British fleet kept clear of Danish and
Norwegian waters to avoid the storms and freezing conditions.
Therefore, the invasion of Sweden from Denmark and Norway had to
be undertaken before the British ships returned to take control of these
waters. Denmark-Norway, however, was far from prepared to invade
Sweden when Russian troops entered Finland. The mobilisation order
to the Norwegian army was not issued until 1 March, while Napoleon’s
orders to Bernadotte to leave north Germany for Denmark were not
issued until two days later. By the time Danish-Norwegian military
preparations were finally concluded, matters had become extremely
urgent as the return of the British fleet was imminent.
   The reaction in Sweden to the Russian attack on Finland was one
of indignation and – perhaps rather paradoxically – of surprise, per-
haps chiefly because it had been undertaken without a formal declara-
tion of war. After the Russian invasion, the question for the Swedes was
what Denmark-Norway would do. At the beginning of March Gustav
IV Adolph had received reliable intelligence that Denmark-Norway seri-
ously intended to attack Sweden, but this was only confirmed as late
as on 7 March. On the previous day Gustav IV Adolph’s general staff
had issued their first orders for the defence of Scania and of the border
with Norway. This had given Gustav IV Adolph and his advisers time to
prepare before they were officially informed of the Danish-Norwegian
declaration of war a week later.7
   In the meantime Bernadotte’s troops had reached Jutland and Funen
in the expectation of being taken across the Great Belt to Zealand. The
march from north Germany had been delayed due to logistical problems
and, not least, because of a disagreement with Crown Prince Frederick as
to who should have supreme command of the troops during the opera-
tions in Scania. Moreover, on 18 March Bernadotte received orders from
Napoleon to redeploy his troops, which lost him more valuable time.
By now, the first British ships had been sighted in Danish waters, and
the crown prince, who was proclaimed King Frederick VI on 16 March
