60   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


it be understood that Sweden might occupy Zealand or take Norway.
Canning’s intimations led to a furious communication from the Danish-
Norwegian government to Stockholm in December, followed by the
mutual closing of vital mail routes. While this measure was mainly a
source of irritation for Sweden, it was much more serious for the Danish-
Norwegian government, which now found all communication between
Denmark and Norway severed.2
   For all the tensions in the autumn of 1807, neither of the two govern-
ments wanted a war in Scandinavia. The fact that a Scandinavian war
would nevertheless become inevitable during the winter of 1807–08
was primarily due to a number of other circumstances. The Peace of
Tilsit had in practice turned the Scandinavian countries into pawns in
the game being played by the great powers. This became painfully obvi-
ous in Denmark-Norway after the Bombardment of Copenhagen had
prompted the Danish-Norwegian government to enter into an alliance
with Napoleon in Fontainebleau on 31 October.
   The alliance originated in a personal appeal from Frederick to Napoleon
shortly after the surrender of Copenhagen, written with the purpose of
saving the Danish-Norwegian state from extinction. Without an ally
and without defences it would be impossible for Denmark-Norway to
resist the great powers. If the worst came to the worst Denmark-Norway
could in fact find itself at war with them all. A British offer for an alli-
ance was turned down by the furious king and would have been impos-
sible for him to accept under any circumstances after what had passed.
Thus, when Napoleon responded favourably to Frederick’s almost des-
perate personal appeal by offering him an alliance, it was the best the
king could hope for, even more so as Denmark-Norway was no longer
a particularly attractive military ally, having little to offer Napoleon in
terms of manpower and resources. By then the British had occupied
the island of Heligoland off the Schleswig coast and following a formal
declaration of war on 4 November the British proceeded to occupy the
Danish-Norwegian colonies in the West Indies (Christmas day 1807)
and the East Indies (12 February 1808). However, the British did not
occupy the Danish-Norwegian possessions on the Gold Coast nor its
North Atlantic dependencies. The exception was a brief occupation of
Iceland in the wake of an attempt at a coup d’état by the Danish adven-
turer Jørgen Jürgensen in the company of a British merchant.3
   The Fontainebleau alliance was not favourable to Denmark-Norway,
but Crown Prince Frederick had no option but to agree to Napoleon’s
demands. While it is true that the treaty of alliance included promises
of a French loan and of French help to recover the fleet from Great
