54   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


‘sacred flame’ in the patriot’s breast would never burn brighter than
when the fatherland was in danger, as was the case when the war with
Great Britain broke out. For the true patriot, freedom and defence were
indissolubly connected. Nothing was considered more noble than sac-
rificing one’s life on the altar of the fatherland. A professor expressed
the spirit of the time when he wrote of the true patriot that ‘Life is of
value to him as long as it is fruitful for the state. If the moment arrives
when its salvation must be bought at the price of his death, he will face
a thousand whining bullets with joy.’55 In the wake of the outbreak of
war this patriotic rhetoric was so overwhelming that a Norwegian law-
yer was led to remark that it had loosened a screw in people’s heads. The
outbreak of war had not only mobilised the nation’s soldiers, it had also
mobilised its legendary heroes of the past. After the 1807 Bombardment
of Copenhagen, civil society needed soldiers, as was illustrated by Major
General Johann von Ewald’s work on war heroes through the ages.
Ewald was among the first to write about what was known as the ‘little
war’ or guerrilla war, which was based on the idea of a completely new
type of motivated soldier who fought for a cause or for a fatherland.
The major general’s work became a source of inspiration for Carl von
Clausewitz, who frequently quoted Ewald.56
   Danish newspapers and literature in general were laden with refer-
ences to Nordic gods, ancient kings and heroes, while privateers were
named after legendary figures from the Viking age. Here as elsewhere
the warriors of the past were not only an ideal but were depicted as
almost symbiotically connected with contemporary heroes. Being a
Danish soldier meant possessing a number of special qualities and an
‘inherited gallantry’ that had not been lost during the 80-year ‘sleep’ of
peace. By no means everyone at the time, however, felt that the present
lived up to the example set in the past. Nordic antiquity was regarded
as a golden age characterised by virtues such as chivalry, generosity,
moderation, self-sacrifice, stamina, loyalty – and, not least, patriotism.
Moralistic writers believed that these qualities no longer existed. The
nation did not have the strength of former times, but it could be rein-
vigorated. The belief was that war and adversity could ‘wake a nation
from its slumber’, and show that the ‘Northman’s spirit had not been
extinguished’. Those who refused to learn from the past or considered
giving up the struggle were described by patriots as ‘degenerate chil-
dren of brave forefathers’. The pattern in Norway was the same as in
Denmark, where poets harked back to Nordic mythology and referred
to Danes and Norwegians as the sons and daughters of Thor and
Woden. They referred to forefathers in an abstract sense and to specific
