                                             Scandinavian War, 1808–09   69


purely Norwegian victory and as proof that Norway could stand on its
own two feet.21
  The establishment of Norwegian news media after the outbreak of
war in 1807 broke Copenhagen’s monopoly on providing Norway with
news. What was more, the war years marked a major difference in the
conditions for freedom of expression in Denmark and Norway. Public
debate was sharply curtailed by various government measures. Postal
censorship was introduced from 1807, fettering public opinion, particu-
larly in Denmark. A lawyer stated in 1808 that he never wrote anything
that was contrary to his convictions, but that he kept quiet when his
opinions conflicted with those of the government. A Norwegian priest,
although not one to be cowed, remarked that he was divided between
love of the fatherland, which required him to speak ‘the truth’, and his
family, which was dependent on his remaining in office. Still, while the
public in Copenhagen was bound hand and foot, control in Norway
was relaxed, so there could be more open opposition in a political and
national sense.22
  At the same time, the Government Commission in Norway exercised
strict control over what was printed because it ‘hoped to provide the
inhabitants of Norway with the information that could be made avail-
able and which it believed would serve to calm and encourage ordi-
nary people’. To this end one of the Government Commission’s key
members, Enevold de Falsen, established a newspaper called Budstikken
(The Baton), which very much became the commission’s mouthpiece.
Budstikken was exploited to whip up the national patriotic mood in
Norway during the spring and summer of 1808 and was a mixed bag of
war reports, war poetry and patriotic proclamations that had a power-
ful influence on its readers. Patriotic song lyrics, penned by de Falsen
and printed in the newspaper, were particularly popular and were seem-
ingly on everybody’s lips, much to the dismay of Swedish officers who
lamented that the songs and other propaganda had an immense effect
even on the populace.23
  But patriotism in Norway also had its limits. When the war contin-
ued even after the Swedish withdrawal in June, the mood cooled con-
siderably. Some civil servants reported that the opinion of Norwegians
peasants was that they had nothing against the Swedes and saw the
war as meaningless and as primarily the work of the government in
Copenhagen. This opinion could also be found in higher social spheres.
In October 1808 the merchant prince Peder Anker wrote, ‘I say it yet
again – this war is not ours.’ Sentiments such as these constituted a clear
danger to the cohesion of the Danish-Norwegian state, albeit chiefly
