66   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


how long Norwegian food supplies would last. Harvests were for the
most part meagre in 1807, and a number of organisational and practi-
cal problems had severely limited the much-needed corn supplies from
Jutland during the winter. In addition, it soon became clear what the
Swedes were up to. Having been informed by Frederick VI on 7 April
that the planned invasion of Scania had been definitively cancelled,
Prince Christian August was extremely concerned at the possibility that
Gustav IV Adolph might be able to keep the Russians in check with the
help of British naval power, which would allow him to deploy consider-
able forces against Norway. To top it all, Sweden might also receive help
from British troops, in which case Norway would effectively be at the
mercy of Sweden and Britain.12
   In the Swedish camp, General Armfelt had been busy preparing the
campaign against Norway since 14 March. But his preparations were
beset by considerable challenges relating to supplies, logistics and com-
munications between the various Swedish military divisions. In the
end, these factors all combined to make it impossible either to carry out
the invasion of Norway on the date or in the manner that Armfelt had
planned, or to abide by his original intention of conquering the coun-
try by military means. When Armfelt finally advanced into Norway
between 14 and 17 April, it was only with about 8000 of the total of
about 15,000 men in what was known as the ‘Western Army’. Moreover,
a few days previously, the goal for the invasion, by agreement with the
king, had been scaled down from conquest by military means to recon-
noitring the Norwegian border areas until the remainder of the Western
Army could catch up and the anticipated help from Britain could arrive.
In other words, unlike some historians have asserted, the Swedish aim
was not ‘a rapid conquest of Norway’.13
   Armfelt advanced into Norway on a broad front in the hope that this
would confuse the Norwegians. The disadvantage of this strategy was
that he also divided his own army, something that became a catastro-
phe for the Swedes when Christian August realised what Armfelt was up
to. This resulted in a handful of relatively small-scale Norwegian mili-
tary triumphs close to the border, some of which later gained mythical
status in Norwegian national history. Matters were not improved for
Armfelt when the remaining 6000 troops of his Western Army crossed
southern areas of the Norwegian border at the end of April without his
even being aware of it and were halted. At that, the Swedish military
offensive came to a complete standstill.14
   Armfelt therefore clung to the hope of British help. ‘If the English will
help us in accordance with my plan, the conquest of Norway will not
