                                            Scandinavian War, 1808–09   71


and this was bound to leave the country’s economy in tatters, since it
put a stranglehold on Norwegian exports. Furthermore, a war would in
itself be a tremendous burden because it would involve the mobilisation
of a large number of military personnel along the coast and in the areas
bordering on Sweden. This in turn would make great demands on sup-
plies and manpower and would further aggravate Norway’s situation by
making major inroads into their supplies and taking men away from
agricultural work. As matters stood in the spring of 1808, the Swedish
government could offer peace, corn and trade. However, the price the
Norwegians would have to pay was to turn their backs on Denmark
and voluntarily unite with Sweden. In the light of the critical situation
the Norwegians were in, it was not unreasonable to expect that this
was exactly what they would be inclined to do once Swedish troops
appeared on the Norwegian side of the border.
   Reports from Swedish spies in Norway written in February and March
1808 painted a picture of widespread shortages of food and other sup-
plies as well as dissatisfaction that Denmark-Norway had been drawn
into the Napoleonic Wars. The Norwegian army, so one of the spies
reported, could only be fully mobilised for a very limited period before
lack of supplies would force it to be disbanded and lead to a breakdown
of morale. This was not an unrealistic assertion even though, during
the course of 1808, it turned out that – to the great surprise of the
Swedish and Norwegian army commanders – military stores in Norway
were never completely exhausted.27
   A report from another spy at the end of March, signed by Armfelt’s
own aide-de-camp, became a kind of blueprint for the strategy the
Swedes came to pursue in Norway in the spring of 1808. The report
emphasised that the Norwegians in general were preparing for war with
Sweden, but in Christiania, ‘where trade interests always trump patriot-
ism, they are no strangers to the idea of uniting with Sweden to revive
trade relations and food imports’. In the eyes of the aide-de-camp, this
was an opportunity not to be missed and he therefore suggested issuing
a proclamation that ‘promised that they could retain their own laws,
property and trade relations’ in order to ‘separate Norwegian interests
from Danish interests’ – but, he warned, ‘without duping them, because
they have the greatest misgivings about the administrative talents of
our government’. Armfelt eagerly endorsed this suggestion to print
and issue a proclamation and passed it on to Gustav IV Adolph, who
promptly repeated the promises – except for the retention of Norway’s
own laws – in a proclamation he issued for the troops to distribute in
Norway.28
