                                            Scandinavian War, 1808–09   67


take long’, he promised the king. Although the government in London
had been deeply averse to helping Sweden with anything but cash sub-
sidies, at the end of April the Swedish government succeeded in negoti-
ating the support of a British corps of about 12,000 men who would be
shipped to Sweden from Great Britain. But no agreement was reached as
to precisely how these troops were to be deployed, which left this open
to interpretation. Probably due to discussions during the negotiations
in London about using them either against Denmark or Norway, the
Swedes were of the opinion that this was the purpose of sending the
troops to Sweden.15
   The British contingent would have none of it, however. First, there
could be no question of placing the auxiliaries under Swedish com-
mand and, second, Great Britain had, to put it mildly, little interest in
risking its troops in offensive operations against Denmark or Norway.
After a farcical quarrel between Gustav IV Adolph and the commander
of the British corps, General John Moore, the British simply sailed away
from Gothenburg on 3 July without even having set foot on Swedish
soil.16 By now the last Swedish troops had been pulled out of Norwegian
territory, after Armfelt had misinterpreted the king’s order to take up a
defensive position in Norwegian territory as an order to withdraw com-
pletely. In practice, the brief border war of the spring of 1808 was over,
even though a state of war between Denmark-Norway and Sweden still
existed and would do so for another year and a half.


Danish-Norwegian Reactions to the War with Sweden

The British bombardment and the seizure of the fleet had outraged pub-
lic opinion both in Denmark and Norway and led to a resurgence of
patriotism in both countries. But very few understood why it should be
necessary for Denmark-Norway to go to war with Sweden, unfamiliar
as they were with the secret provisions in the Fontainebleau treaty. It
was, therefore, vital for the government in Copenhagen to prepare the
public for the forthcoming war and justify it. With this in mind, it was
decided in January 1808 to leak and publish diplomatic correspondence
in Copenhagen that ostensibly proved the Swedes’ evil intentions with
regard to Denmark-Norway.17
   In Norway, Prince Christian August was hoping that Gustav IV Adolph
could be provoked into being the first to declare war, so that it could be
clearly represented to Norwegians as a defensive war. There were sev-
eral reasons why Christian August was particularly keen on this. First,
an apparently unprovoked Danish-Norwegian declaration of war on
