68   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


Sweden, at a time when Norway’s position was already precarious,
would place Frederick and his government in Copenhagen in a very un-
favourable light. Furthermore, Christian August knew that Norwegians
traditionally nursed a strong antipathy to wars of aggression. In the sev-
enteenth century peasants conscripted into the Norwegian army had
even flatly refused to cross the border into Sweden. Moreover, it was a
mere 20 years since the extremely unpopular invasion of the Swedish
province of Båhuslen, referred to by some people – alarmingly for the
government in Copenhagen – as the war of the Danes. This made it
important for Prince Christian August to present the war as a defensive
action, particularly if there was to be a Norwegian invasion of western
Sweden in collaboration with the Franco-Danish troops from Zealand.18
   Not surprisingly, it came as a blow to Christian August and the
Government Commission that Crown Prince Frederick was forced to be
the first to declare war. Gustav IV Adolph had no intention whatsoever
of making war on Denmark-Norway, but he knew very well how to use
the Danish-Norwegian declaration of war as propaganda. A proclama-
tion distributed in the Norwegian borderlands emphatically stressed
that the ‘Danish government has declared war on Sweden without rea-
son’.19 This forced the Norwegian authorities to begin immediate dam-
age control, followed by press statements and frantic attempts to prevent
Frederick’s declaration of war from being distributed in Norway. As the
Government Commission wrote to the king, it would be ‘more favour-
able if the common people could be convinced that the Swedish inva-
sion of Norway was solely a situation of their own making and prompted
by the direct order of the Swedish government’. It was too late, however,
and it did not take long before the majority were aware how matters
really stood. One observer later wrote in his memoirs that there had
probably never been any event in Norway during the years from 1807–
14 that had aroused more ‘fear and discontent than this inopportune
and ill-considered declaration of war’.20
   Yet, at least to begin with, the government and the authorities were
in a sense saved by the Swedish invasion, which made the war appear
to the Norwegians as being one of Swedish aggression, aims of con-
quest and amalgamation. There can be no doubt that the defensive war
during the period from April to June led to a considerable upsurge of
national patriotism in a large segment of the Norwegian population,
but without this undermining loyalty to the state and to the govern-
ment in Copenhagen. Indeed, when the Swedish army withdrew from
Norwegian territory in June, it was not declared as a victory for Norway,
but a ‘victory for Dania’. Many Norwegians, however, still saw this as a
