72 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


   In addition to the general goal of wooing and winning hearts and
minds, Armfelt’s strategy with regard to the Norwegians had two related
basic goals. The first was to ensure he had as many collaborators as
possible, the second to reduce Norwegian opposition to a minimum.
The first goal required a certain degree of manipulation and involved
giving the Norwegians sufficient incentives to ensure they would sup-
port a union with Sweden and cooperate in bringing it about, while the
second goal required giving the Norwegians as few reasons to oppose
the Swedish army as possible. In the proclamation and in the Swedish
army’s propaganda much emphasis was placed on peace, trade and
food, while they also contained promises that Swedish soldiers would
behave in an exemplary manner. This last point was further stressed by
Armfelt’s strict and repeated orders that the troops must treat the inhab-
itants well and not molest them in any way. Such promises should not
be shrugged off as ‘the timeless rhetoric of invading armies’, as Armfelt
was at pains to ensure that the promises were kept and ruthlessly pun-
ished anyone who acted contrary to them.29
   Armfelt had high hopes that the Norwegians could be convinced that
their interests lay in a union with Sweden. After winning an important
battle against the Norwegians near Kongsvinger on 18 April, and in
doing so having secured control over a crucial area of the front stretch-
ing up to the Glomma, Norway’s longest river, he wrote to the king, ‘the
people are now beginning to get used to us and gradually, with the help
of kindness and a little generosity, I think they will appreciate what
they have gained through the change’. Shortly afterwards, he opened
the border between Sweden and the occupied areas for trade, so that the
Norwegians could be given a taste of what they could expect if a union
were to become a reality. Gustav IV Adolph attempted to make the
bait even more enticing by arranging a free-trade agreement between
Sweden and the other areas of Norway that had not been occupied, but
this was flatly refused by the Norwegian authorities. Still, the Swedes
met with no success in ingratiating themselves with the Norwegians.30


Popular Resistance in Norway

One of the highpoints of Norwegian national historiography, the war
of 1808 has been represented as a nationally motivated defensive war
that united the entire population in the struggle against the Swedish
arch-enemy. As such traditional historiography bears some semblance
to that of Prussia’s war of liberation in 1813. Officers, soldiers and civil-
ians have been depicted as national heroes, whose memory has been
