64   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


after this father’s death two days before, had serious cause for concern.
This only deepened when his only remaining ship of the line, Prinds
Christian Frederik, was destroyed off Sjællands Odde on 22 March.8 The
destruction of this ship and Bernadotte’s delay marked the end of plans
for an invasion of Scania. Towards the end of March Frederick thus had
to acknowledge that there would be no invasion of Swedish territory.
   On the evening of 14 March Gustav IV Adolph summoned his closest
military and political advisers to a council of war at Stockholm Castle.
According to his aide-de-camp, it was at this meeting that the king
decided to attack Norway, a decision that would come to be regarded as
sheer madness given the situation Sweden was in. Most Scandinavian
historians have viewed the attack on Norway in 1808 as a spontane-
ous manifestation of Gustav IV Adolph’s long-standing dream of con-
quering the country, which he had allegedly nurtured ever since he had
ascended the throne in 1796. Viewed in this light, the decision to attack
and conquer Norway in 1808 – while the Russian army was on the march
through Finland – was irrational and proof that the king was not sane.9
   Yet, this is a faulty and unjust evaluation of the Swedish king’s deci-
sion. First, Gustav IV Adolph was certainly not so bent on conquering
Norway as many historians would have it, and his decision to attack the
country was not made in the face of stiff opposition from his collec-
tive body of advisers, although they claimed that it was after the king’s
fall. Second, few Swedish military officers thought it would be possi-
ble to defend Finland against a major Russian attack. General Gustav
Mauritz Armfelt, for instance, urged that, in the event of a Russian
attack, an attempt should be made to conquer Norway and Zealand to
compensate for what would almost certainly be a loss of Finland. As
if a testament to his influence on the king, Armfelt was put in com-
mand of most of the troops along Sweden’s western border. Third, the
decisive factor in Gustav IV Adolph’s decision to attack Norway was
in fact the prospect of British help. Assistance from the British made a
war of aggression against Norway far from the kind of madcap venture
it has often been portrayed as, even more so since it would prevent
Norwegian troops from taking the war into Swedish territory. The latter
was in fact a crucial concern to Gustav IV Adolph, who knew that the
Danish-Norwegian government aimed to bring the war to Swedish soil.
Moreover, during negotiations in previous months the British govern-
ment had hinted that help in the form of expeditions against Zealand
and Norway might be a possibility in the event of a Scandinavian con-
flict. Gustav IV Adolph therefore had more reason to expect help from
the British than it might seem in retrospect.10
