70 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


in the longer term. During the spring of 1808 the war had appeared
to strengthen Danish-Norwegian ties in the face of common foes, but
these ties were becoming frayed.24
   Denmark was not as vulnerable in the war with Sweden as was Norway.
This meant not only that the main burden of the war gradually came
to rest on Norwegian shoulders, but also that Frederick’s declaration of
war was not as potentially explosive in the eyes of Danes as it was to
the Norwegians. The Norwegian defensive war, however, aroused great
enthusiasm and support among Danes, who sang cheerfully about how
the ‘Swedes were decisively defeated by the brave Norwegians’. Military
reports printed in Budstikken were read with the greatest interest south
of the Skagerrak and the inhabitants of Copenhagen took the initia-
tive to organise collections for ‘their stalwart Norwegian brothers’. By
the summer a considerable amount of cash had been collected. In one
respect this helped to bring Norway and Denmark closer together in
the wake of the outbreak of war, but the mood of harmony would not
last long and the Swedes did everything they could to undermine it.25


Wooing and Winning the Norwegians

When General Armfelt realised he would not be able to conquer the
country by military means, he pulled out another card, which the
Swedes had previously played in the years 1801–03. In a word, this
involved wooing and winning Norwegian hearts and minds by empha-
sising all the advantages Norwegians would gain from uniting with
Sweden, and in this way encouraging them to voluntarily support such
a union.26 This strategy was based on three underlying perceptions on
the part of the Swedes: first, that Norwegian dissatisfaction with Danish
rule was already relatively widespread and could be used to advan-
tage by Sweden; second, that many Norwegians felt that a union with
Sweden would be in their own interests; and third, that Norwegians
and Swedes were really one and the same people and, as such, so closely
related that it would be no great problem to incorporate and integrate
Norway into Sweden – which the incorporation of provinces conquered
in the seventeenth century seemed to confirm.
   Armfelt’s goal – rather paradoxically perhaps – was to use the war
and the occupation to create a pro-Swedish mood among Norwegians
and turn them against the Danish government by showing them how
a union with Sweden could benefit them in practice. His basic idea was
not as inept nor his strategy as far-fetched as it might appear at first
glance. The British blockade had already cut off corn supplies to Norway,
