                                           Scandinavian War, 1808–09   65


  Mobilisation in Norway was so slow, and the supply shortages in the
army were so great that it could well be argued that the Norwegians
would not have been capable of invading Sweden even if Bernadotte
and Frederick had crossed over to Scania. Supplying the Norwegian
army for any length of time, one general concluded, was a ‘physical
impossibility’. Norway depended entirely on imports and the real prob-
lem was that, as supplies were consumed, the British blockade prevented
their replenishment. The blockade also prevented supplies of military
equipment from reaching Norway, because the Danish-Norwegian war
industry was located chiefly on Zealand. Nor would living off the land
in sparsely populated western Sweden where there was little food have
been an alternative. When in early April the news arrived in Norway
that there would be no invasion of Scania, reactions of regret were
tinged with a measure of relief, perhaps even more so as most still
thought it improbable that the Swedes would dare to make an attack as
long as the Russian army was advancing in Finland. This view would
soon change, however.11


The Swedish–Norwegian Border War

In practice, the war with Great Britain had all but cut off communica-
tions between Denmark and Norway, and Norway had been isolated.
Immediately after the British attack, therefore, Crown Prince Frederick
decided to establish a body in Norway to enforce the government’s
power. The Government Commission, as this body was known, met for
the first time on 2 September 1807 and was chaired by Prince Christian
August of Augustenburg, who had been the general in command of
southern Norway since 1804. This meant that, in practice, his position
at the head of the Government Commission made him the supreme
military and political leader of Norway. Christian August was scepti-
cal of joining forces with Russia and, not least, of invading Sweden. He
was also fully aware of the critical position Norway had landed in as a
consequence of the war with Britain. The most important task of the
Government Commission was thus to obtain enough corn for Norway
before the British blockade was able to come fully into force once the
winter was over.
   The situation that arose when the British fleet returned at the end
of March 1808 only served to further aggravate the Norwegian posi-
tion. Now Norway not only found itself isolated and under blockade,
but also under direct military threat from the sea and the land by
both Great Britain and Sweden. At the same time, there were limits to
