                                             Scandinavian War, 1808–09   73


preserved in memorials, celebrations and myths. While the number of
historians who believe in the more antiquated interpretations of the
war of 1808 has dwindled, the view that it united the elite and the
people in a national patriotic struggle is still relatively common among
Norwegian historians and the public.31
   There can be no doubt that there at least initially was a strong desire
at all levels of Norwegian society to put up a solid defence against the
Swedes. As was the case in Denmark in 1807, citizens and townspeople –
who were exempt from regular military service – established several vol-
unteer corps, made up chiefly of artisans, clerks and workers. Many of
them marched to the front to the sound of drums beating, imbued with
patriotic sentiments. ‘Nobody must shirk the duty he owes his fatherland,
the king and you’, were the words written to Prince Christian August by
one. While it is true that the majority of these untrained volunteers had
often had their fill of campaigning after only a few weeks, their first
reactions nevertheless bear witness to a genuine desire to march to the
border to risk their lives for the fatherland. Still, some of them hardly
saw reason to protect places that were not their own cities.32
   Among the peasantry motives were very complex. Some of the peas-
ant lads who had been conscripted into the regular army were obliged
to march far away from their native villages and lost any sense that their
main purpose was to defend their homes. A number of the Norwegian
soldiers who had gone to the Swedish border in southeastern Norway
wrote proudly home that they had marched on the enemy to ‘defend
the fatherland and we did this as brave soldiers’, ‘fought in God’s name
for the King and the country’s best’ and ‘protected the fatherland’.
Another soldier wrote with equal pride that ‘it was read out to us at
the fortress that our King is well-pleased with what the Norwegian has
done in struggling to defend his country’. In this way, the defensive
war was explicitly connected with God, king, fatherland and a sense
of being Norwegian. It could be objected that these were words that
had been read out to the soldiers by their officers and had merely been
paraphrased, but they were still meaningful enough for the soldiers to
put them in context, write home about them and indeed to expect that
what they wrote would resonate among recipients.33
   But what did this fatherland mean to the soldiers? Their letters plainly
give the impression that they perceived Norway as a territorial entity,
and there can be no doubt that they were fully aware that this territor-
ial entity was part of the composite Danish state. They also knew that
they were Norwegians by virtue of the fact that they were the king’s
subjects, born and resident in his Norwegian territory. Yet they never
