                                             Scandinavian War, 1808–09   81


Occupation, Recalcitrance and Collaboration

The war with Sweden in 1808 naturally involved more for Norwegians
than simply defending their own homes against plundering raiding
parties and brigands. It also potentially involved Swedish rule, and all
Norwegians realised that the war implied the real danger of a Swedish
conquest. Such attempts on the part of the Swedes were nothing new
to Norwegians. In past centuries a series of prejudices about Swedes, or
rather about Swedish rule, had grown up in Norway and resurfaced dur-
ing the Napoleonic Wars.
   In retrospect, Armfelt’s hopes of winning Norwegian hearts by means
of a military occupation may at best seem paradoxical, given the bur-
dens military occupations usually involve in terms of quartering, sup-
plies and requisitions, and the need for labour and transport services to
be supplied by the occupied population. As Tim Blanning has shown,
the French occupation of the Rhineland in the 1790s – however much
it had initially been intended as one to bring liberty, equality and fra-
ternity to the Rhinelanders – was hardly a good way to make friends.51
The Russian occupation of Finland in 1808, during which the Russians
strove very hard to pacify the populace, also ultimately proved intoler-
able for the inhabitants and was a prime cause of the fierce guerrilla
war that broke out in some parts of the country.52 Things never reached
such a pass in Norway, but no matter how much General Armfelt strove
to keep the burdens of military presence to an absolute minimum, he
never succeeded in erasing the perception that the Norwegians were
under military occupation.
   The occupation was a logistical nightmare for the Swedish army. When
the supply system practically broke down shortly after the invasion com-
menced, there was no way to avoid requisitioning food and transport
services from the occupied population – even though Armfelt and his
officers strove energetically to keep requisitions to a minimum and to
make sure they were carried out in an orderly manner and generously
paid for. Despite this, requisitions of supplies and manpower bred much
resentment and recalcitrance. Cash payment was of little comfort to
the inhabitants when there was little or no food to be bought and new
horses could not be found to replace those requisitioned by the occupiers.
Things became worse when the Swedish army ran out of cash and had
to issue promissory notes instead. Armfelt’s promises that they could be
exchanged for cash later counted for little in the eyes of the peasants, as
did his efforts to round them up for transport tasks and work on roads
