74 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


wrote of ‘we Norwegians’ but rather referred to ‘the Norwegian’ in the
third person and, moreover, usually made clear distinctions between
soldiers and civilians. This might suggest that they had some difficulty
in perceiving themselves as part of a national social group based on
mutual solidarity and a sense of community. While too much should
obviously not be read into the relatively few letters containing such
expressions, the ways in which Norwegian soldiers in 1808 referred to
and used terms such as ‘Norway’ and ‘Norwegian’ bear a strong resem-
blance to the way in which Danish soldiers related to ‘Denmark’ and
‘Danish’ during the war of 1848–51. This has been studied in some
detail by the Danish historian Søren Frost, who concludes that while
the soldiers did have some sense of Denmark as their territorial father-
land, albeit not unambiguously so, they had much greater difficulty in
conceiving of themselves as members of a national community.34
  Many Norwegian conscript soldiers also developed something of a
military identity, which was related to the army as a whole and to the
regiments they served in. Triumphs on the field of battle and heroic
feats became associated with their identity as soldiers and with their
regiments. Their sense of military identification was revealed by phrases
such as ‘we Bergenhusers’, ‘we the 4th Grenadier Division’, and ‘our 3rd
division’ – all in reference to military units. This was perhaps not so
very different to the ‘regimental worlds’ of British soldiers, which, as
John Cookson has argued – in opposition to Linda Colley – carried more
weight than did British identities during the Napoleonic Wars. Yet, even
here solidarity had its limits. When the troops from Bergenhus in west-
ern Norway arrived at the border in August 1808, one of their officers
reported that they were given a chilly reception by the soldiers from the
eastern part of southern Norway, against whom they had to be on their
guard ‘as though we had Swedes among us’, and that many of them
‘would just as much have liked to see us in Swedish captivity as Swedes
in Norwegian [captivity]’.35
  Ultimately, the soldiers turned to God to find meaning, comfort and
hope, especially as the war dragged on while conditions along the bor-
der deteriorated and death rates soared. The soldiers neither believed in
nor were indoctrinated to believe in a cult of death for the fatherland,
unlike the middle classes and their officers. The extent of any such a cult
was limited even among officers trying to cope with the horrors of war.
While it is true that a few fallen officers were buried during the summer
of 1808 with a ceremonious display that powerfully symbolised their
ultimate sacrifice on the altar of the fatherland, most others were buried
without any ceremony at all. Any impression the ordinary rank and file
