80   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


   Danes and Norwegians did not, however, necessarily invoke the same
forefathers. Although there are many examples of contemporary refer-
ences to a common Nordic past or simply to a group of unidentified fore-
fathers, Norwegians often referred explicitly to the ancient Norwegian
warriors. Their national past made it possible for them to differentiate
themselves from Danes and affirm their national identity. Nordic anti-
quity, the Viking age and the Middle Ages were seen in Denmark and
Norway as ages characterised by the liberty of the people but, particu-
larly in Norway, there was a tendency to see the Norwegians of the past
as stronger, braver and freer than everybody else.48 While Danes first
and foremost also praised their own ‘Danish’ heroes, there are many
examples of them setting up Norwegian heroes – including those from
the days before the union of 1380 – as historical models. On the other
hand, the Norwegian-born heroes from the time after the union, such as
the naval hero Tordenskjold (literally, Thunder-shield), were to a certain
extent ‘Danicised’ in patriotic Danish songs.
   Sometimes contemporary equivalents of the heroes of the past could
be found. After a peasant girl had saved a Norwegian soldier from a
Swedish patrol on the border at Magnor in October 1808, an enthu-
siastic officer reported that her act had borne witness to ‘the nation’s
ingenuity and presence of mind’ and that she ‘deserved a place next to
Anne Colbjørnsdatter’, a well-known heroine in Norway from the Great
Northern War. Her heroic deed was quickly forgotten, however, and a
crofter’s wife from Prestebakke became posterity’s central heroine, albeit
anonymous, of the war in Norway in 1808, even though the story of her
deeds lacks substantiated documentary evidence. This serves to show
how random, but yet selective, posterity’s construction – or reconstruc-
tion – of national heroes and heroines can be.49
   Heroes, great deeds and virtues of the past did not always match
contemporary reactions or the ideals espoused by educated élites. In
May 1808, Prince Christian August lamented that his ‘consolation is
the bold troops I command, absolutely unlike the inhabitants, whom
I cannot trust, as now and then they are traitors, are dull, timid and
do not show the Norwegian’s spirit’. By the ‘Norwegian’s spirit’ here
he meant a special, warlike spirit. Norwegians were often described
as a wall of iron-willed mountain dwellers and spirited naval heroes
who instilled fear into the country’s enemies. In practice, however,
this ideal was not always borne out, which could arouse anger in
those who took such supposedly inherent national attributes very
literally. 50
