                                             Scandinavian War, 1808–09   77


   This tactic could also backfire, however, by scaring the peasants out
of their wits. When the Swedish army crossed the border in the middle
of April, they found that several villages and farms were completely
deserted after what, in some cases, had been mass flights before the
arrival of its advance guard. General Armfelt was dismayed by the mass
evacuation of the border areas and by the way ‘we are portrayed in
all publications, war songs etc. as nothing but grim Swedes who are
ready to treat the Norwegian people in the most barbaric way’. This, he
concluded, had instilled ‘a senseless fear’ into the Norwegians, Armfelt
concluded, and ‘surely only time can eradicate such deep-rooted impres-
sions’. One of his brigade commanders was less pessimistic, however,
and noted that ‘all of the peasants have fled from their farms, at least for
the time being, but will soon return once they learn how they will be
treated in accordance with the orders of the Commanding General’.41
   This particular officer was right, because it took the majority of the
peasants little time to find out that the Swedes were not the monsters
they had been depicted as. Most of them therefore went back to their
homes. This also meant that it became increasingly difficult to get the
peasants to join the militias, as they no longer felt that the threat to
them and their nearest and dearest was so acute. As the conflict devel-
oped into a kind of ‘phoney war’ in the late summer and autumn of
1808 after the Swedes had retreated across the border, there were rum-
blings of rebellion in some places during peasant militia exercises,
because the peasants could no longer understand why weapons train-
ing should still be necessary.
   The reasons why there was never really a question of irregular resist-
ance to any significant extent, if at all, in Norway – unlike the resistance
to the French in the Italian peninsula, in Switzerland and in Spain –
are complex, but in general it could be said that it was because the
Norwegians never had any reason to offer such desperate resistance.
No attempt should be made to paint the Swedish occupation in rosy
colours, but it was relatively mild and far from as hard on the popu-
lation as it could have been. Requisitions were minimal, looting and
assaults were rare, and the Swedish troops generally behaved very well.
Even when they could have acted ruthlessly, they refrained from doing
so. When armed peasants were arrested by Swedish troops, they were
released after being given a warning instead of being executed as mar-
tial law permitted. This in turn helped to prevent violence from escalat-
ing through acts of retaliation, as it had done during the brutal guerrilla
wars in Spain, Calabria and Vendée, for example.42
