78   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


   As long as the peasants in Norway, just as in most other European
countries, were primarily interested in protecting their own families,
homes and provinces, their attitude could be categorised as one of local-
ism and regionalism. We have to be cautious, however, of allowing this
to provide a basis for concluding that every conception of fatherland,
state patriotism and national patriotism was completely alien to the
populace as a whole, as many historians have tended to do. Localism
and regionalism were not ideologies that necessarily excluded other
identities and loyalties. As one Norwegian historian has written, all
adults in their right mind knew that they lived in Norway and that, as
such, they were Norwegians. Norwegian soldiers – similarly to Finnish
peasants, for instance – also demonstrated a remarkable ability to debate
the international situation and international politics, which reveals
that they were keenly aware of the world beyond their own backyard,
not to mention beyond their own national borders. Yet, this awareness
did not mean that patriotism, still less nationalism, were primary fac-
tors in motivating popular reactions and resistance. Awareness did not
necessarily translate into activism.43
   The motives and actions of the peasants and the elites could appear to
fall into line as long as the goal was to defend the country against what was
seen as a common enemy. Differences between what certain people would
defend and specifically whom they would defend themselves against were
less important in this context. Precisely how the interests and motives of
the elite and the peasantry could run parallel rather than being one and
the same is mostly clearly visible in the comprehensive, voluntary contri-
butions made to the Norwegian army during the war of 1808. Until the
circumstances under which these contributions were made are examined
more closely, they appear as patriotic acts across all levels of society. In
reality, however, this was often a question either of a variety of motives
meeting in one action or of elements of compunction. For example, in
some cases contributions took on a more or less compulsory character,
because priests read out lists of contributors’ names in churches. Those
who had not made contributions risked being treated as suspects, a com-
mon occurrence in France during the Revolutionary wars.44
   While the middle classes and civil servants were motivated by love of
country and made their contributions to the army as a whole, peasants’
contributions were usually earmarked for soldiers from their own fami-
lies, villages and parishes. Even then the peasants were all too aware of
how to exploit patriotic discourse themselves, such as for example to
obtain free transport, applications for which were usually larded with
patriotic rhetoric.45
