                                            Scandinavian War, 1808–09   79


To Die for an Ideal

As was the case in 1807, the outbreak of war with Sweden in 1808 mobil-
ised patriotic and nationalist energies in Denmark-Norway, at least in
more educated layers of society. This mental mobilisation focused not
only on encouraging the population to defend their country but also on
investing meaning in the war and in their own lives and identity. But how
should people react when their sons, brothers, husbands or sweethearts
followed in the footsteps of their ancestors and of Christ and sacrificed
their lives on the altar of the fatherland? There was no mistaking the
ideal: dying for the fatherland was an honour and the ultimate sacrifice
an individual could make. To Western eyes this reaction may now appear
a world away, but only a few generations ago it was a widespread attitude
and, at the beginning of the nineteenth century, was particularly com-
mon among the officer class. When a Norwegian colonel enrolled his
son at the naval academy, he hoped that ‘he would defend the honour of
the Norwegian and union flag to the utmost of his ability. An honourable
death for the fatherland is far to be preferred to a long life.’46
   For many Danes and Norwegians, the Norwegian defensive war
became a living image of the very ideal of fighting and making sacrifices
for the fatherland, even though the real motivation for resistance was
more complex. Many publicists, however, held this complexity as less
important than the ideals they believed in and sought to promote. To
some, the most important thing was that the defence of Norway should
give the impression of being a war for the dual Danish-Norwegian
fatherland. It was not just a war to prevent Norway being conquered
by Sweden but a war to defend the state as a whole. The contempo-
rary image of Danish and Norwegian soldiers, however, was not to be
constructed solely from the period’s patriotic discourse but also from a
perception of common historical destiny that could be expressed both
as state patriotism and as national patriotism. The past could at one
and the same time remind Danes and Norwegians of their true char-
acter and give them a model to live up to. It was common throughout
Europe to view great men and legendary figures of the past as incarna-
tions of the various national communities: William Tell in Switzerland,
Jeanne d’Arc in France and Holger Danske in Denmark, to mention a
few. Whether these old heroes had actually lived or were simply mythi-
cal figures was less important. The virtues of the great forefathers of
the nation were the virtues of the nation, and in that way such heroes
personified contemporary hopes of reawakening moral qualities and
reviving the glorious past.47
