76 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


units of bailiwicks and parishes, they were local and regional in structure.
The peasant militiamen were obliged to fend for themselves where supplies
were concerned, and this meant that they were unable to travel far from
their homes. Thus the militias remained chiefly local.
   Peasants were usually willing enough when it came to defending their
own homes and families against looting expeditions or against brig-
ands and bandits, but they made it quite clear to the authorities that
under no circumstances did they wish to fight regular Swedish troops.
Probably for this reason, efforts to recruit men from the militias into the
regular army were widely resisted. This does not mean that the idea of
fighting for their fatherland itself was foreign to them, but very few had
any intention of risking life and limb in fighting experienced soldiers,
even to defend their own homes.38
   The fear of looting by small raiding parties, robbers and bandits, how-
ever, was well founded among the peasantry in those parts of Norway
near the Swedish border during the spring and summer of 1808. A peas-
ant who lived close to the border wrote that he dared not sleep at night
for fear that he would be molested and robbed, while a local officer of
the peace cried out, ‘God let us not be assaulted by the dreadful and
terrible Swedes and brigands, which is to say: there is fear of an assault
everywhere here.’39 Popular perceptions of traumatic events involving
Swedish soldiers related to the brutality and depredations of the seven-
teenth and early eighteenth centuries. This was not surprising, because
Norway had not been invaded by foreign troops since 1718, and the
folklore dealing with wars was therefore virtually the only point of ref-
erence, and guidance, the peasants had to war.
   There were many contemporary civil servants and military officers
who were fully aware that the peasants were motivated much less by
the threat to the fatherland and the nation than by the fear of being
assaulted and plundered. Yet, this fear was convenient for the authori-
ties’ wish to protect the fatherland in that it could be exploited to
mobilise as many people as possible for the war effort. The general in
command of Trondheim, Georg Frederick von Krogh, had a blustering
article published in the press – well aware that its message would reach
all layers of society – in which he encouraged people to take part in
a guerrilla war and to conduct a scorched-earth policy to deprive the
enemy of the ‘means to destroy you – to kill you and your families’.
By describing the Swedes as ‘plundering hordes’, ‘barbarians’, ‘robbers’
and ‘rogues’ the authorities succeeded on many occasions in getting the
peasants to take up arms and patrol their local areas.40
