                                               Scandinavian War, 1808–09   75


may have received of the patriotic ideals of the elite was not clear, then,
still less particularly forceful, especially as dead soldiers were unceremo-
niously buried where they fell. There was not even any observance of
religious rituals when soldiers were interred, much to the disgust and
fury of the Bishop of Christiania. In other words, there was little in
practice to give soldiers the impression that, by adopting the patriotic
ideal of sacrificing their lives on the altar of the fatherland, they would
be honoured in the name of the fatherland after their deaths. It was
rather the case that the soldiers’ letters and notes expressed both the
absolute horror of what they witnessed and their increasing disillusion-
ment with the war in general. One disillusioned soldier wrote that he
had ‘seen all this misery several times; to see a human being in a state
like this is a terrible sight. Many of the wounded are dead, many will
probably recover but will remain crippled as long as they live.’ Another
was even more desperate to find relief from his nightmare and simply
concluded, ‘God help us to get away from this place’.36
   In other words, there was a marked difference in the perceptions of
ordinary people and of the educated burgher elites as regards the cult of
death for the fatherland and the ideal of personal sacrifice for king and
country. Those publicising the war, in particular the clergy, did what they
could to instil in the masses a patriotic notion of death for the fatherland
as being honourable and even desirable, but their efforts hardly had any
practical effect on the battlefield. Instead military officers seem to have
adopted a pragmatic stance to casualties of the war, and there is no evi-
dence that military chaplains – of whom there were few anyway – did
much to promulgate patriotic sermons and texts at the front.
   In addition to approximately 30,000 regular conscripts, somewhere
between 15,000 and 20,000 men were enrolled in various types of mili-
tia in the Norwegian border areas in the years 1808 and 1809. The big-
gest of these were the peasant militias. They resembled the militias in
border areas elsewhere in Europe, in which peasants often had a rela-
tively free rein to organise border defences as they wished, largely in the
form of highly localised militias.37 In Norway the organisation of these
militias was usually left to bailiffs, who in turn generally allowed the
peasants to choose their own leaders, which gave them an air of democ-
racy, not unlike the French revolutionary armies. The authorities in
Norway and the leaders themselves, however, soon discovered that this
system was hardly the most reliable way of ensuring discipline among
militiamen, so these leaders were usually replaced by retired officers.
   The militiamen’s war was a completely different one from that waged by
the regular soldiers. As the peasant militias were based on the administrative
