                                           Scandinavian War, 1808–09   83


in 1658–60, when about 2000 Norwegian peasants were conscripted
into the Swedish army and sent to the Baltic, from where very few of
them returned. In fact, when in 1808 Swedish troops set about system-
atically registering the inhabitants in some areas to keep track of them
and prevent espionage, it did not take long before rumours began to
circulate that this was a military draft, prompting many to flee.56
   In other words, there was little support for the Swedes among the
Norwegian population and collaboration was also a relatively rare occur-
rence. The military and civilian authorities in Norway, however, were
deeply suspicious of the people who lived in the border regions. Several
hundred people were seized by military and civilian authorities during
and shortly after the occupation in what amounted to a witch hunt.
When tried, however, few of them turned out to have done anything
wrong. Even the few – less than 50 – who were convicted for having
collaborated with Swedish troops had generally done so less in support
of the Swedish cause than with a view to personal gain of some kind.
Most of them belonged to the lower orders of peasant society and were
utterly impoverished.57
   The majority of the inhabitants in the Norwegian border areas found
the prospect of Swedish rule repugnant. In peacetime, there had been
extensive trading and social relations across the border, but this did
not mean that the borderers would prefer Norway to be united with
Sweden rather than with Denmark. Even though the peasantry were
accustomed to trading across the border and were on good terms with
their Swedish neighbours and relations, prejudice against the Swedish
state and Swedish social conditions was deep-rooted, and the occupa-
tion of 1808 only made matters worse. Swedish politicians and military
personnel could never really understand why the Norwegians refused
to embrace Swedish rule when they had so many dealings with Sweden
and would derive considerable financial and social benefits from a
union. Nevertheless, the belief that the Norwegians could be tempted
to turn their backs on the Danish government and willingly unite with
Sweden remained firmly entrenched in Swedish political and military
circles during subsequent years, as Denmark-Norway’s war with Britain
wore on and increased the misery and desperation of the situation in
Norway.


An Amicable Occupation

Although the war between Denmark-Norway and Sweden during the
years 1808–09 was primarily fought in Norway, its effects and the
