82 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


and canals. It mattered little to them that the occupiers were doing this
in order to maximise the efficiency of transporting supplies from Sweden
to make requisitioning of food and transports in Norway unnecessary.
The occupied population not only began to shirk work and transport
assignments, they also spied on the occupiers and provided Norwegian
troops with intelligence in the hope of hastening the end of the occu-
pation. Women took a particularly prominent part in the gathering of
military intelligence, in no small part because they could wander about
behind Swedish lines without evoking much suspicion.53
   Popular resistance and recalcitrance in turn frustrated Swedish offic-
ers, who grew increasingly impatient and sometimes lost their tempers
altogether. They saw such acts of resistance and recalcitrance as plain
ingratitude because – as was stated in a proclamation towards the end of
the occupation – ‘Since Swedish troops invaded the country, Norway’s
inhabitants have all experienced the friendliest treatment and Swedish
troops have stayed in the country more as friends than as enemies.’54
Swedish officers genuinely believed this and they were shocked that,
instead of responding with gratitude and embraces, the Norwegians
dug their heels in and resisted.
   Consequently the Swedish army began to apply somewhat harsher
methods to force the inhabitants to comply with their demands. Not
surprisingly, this went down even worse with the occupied popula-
tion. When the Swedish army left Norway in June, relations with the
inhabitants of the occupied areas had become strained, to say the least.
‘The inhabitants in this area are very exasperated with the Swedes’, one
military officer wrote after the Swedish retreat, something he could
not quite understand, as he also noted how the Swedish army had not
engaged in looting and had paid generously for everything they had
requisitioned.55
   Antagonism towards the Swedes among the occupied inhabitants was
not due exclusively to reactions against the occupation itself. There were
also serious antipathies towards and prejudices about Sweden. In 1808
Armfelt concluded that ‘Norway, if it were conquered, would be a hell for
us’, and went on to complain that ‘we are hated by the Norwegians, that
is to say they are afraid of our government, our customs and excises, our
restrictive constitution’. He complained to the king about ‘the inhabit-
ants’ patriotic and unceasing devotion to their authorities, which it is
beyond all attempts [to end] even though they acknowledge that our
military treats them better than their own’. Fear of being conscripted
into the Swedish army could also prompt Norwegian peasants to react.
This was a remnant of the Swedish rule over the county of Trondheim
