86   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


country but a fear of what the war and the rebellion could mean for
their families, homes and provinces. The upshot was that a handful of
Spanish officers led by Pedro Caro, Marquis de la Romana, took the lead
in a rebellion involving a large number of the Spanish troops, of whom
10,000 managed to make away on 21 August with the help of the Royal
Navy. The remaining Spanish troops were immediately interned and
later sent to France as prisoners of war. While Frederick VI was incensed
about the rebellion and the subsequent flight of the Spaniards, he
could see that the event had its silver lining. It signalled the end of the
amicable occupation of Denmark and meant that there were fewer sol-
diers to quarter and fewer mouths to feed. Money is a resource far less
easily renewed than food, however, and the brief sojourn of Marshall
Bernadotte’s army in Denmark had been an enormous strain on the
Danish economy. The rebellion and flight of the Spanish troops had
also shown how helpless Denmark-Norway would be in a war with
Great Britain.


Crisis and Devastation

Crisis struck both Norway and Sweden in the autumn of 1808. The
Swedes were frantically attempting to defend Finland, but the Russian
army gradually pushed them northwards towards the border to Sweden
proper. The British government began to regard Sweden as an obstacle
to a British–Russian rapprochement and also made it clear that it would
not come to the aid of Sweden. This left Gustav IV Adolph with none
but his own forces to defend Finland. The problem was that consider-
able numbers of his troops would be bound up along the Norwegian
border. In order to free up troops for the war in Finland, therefore, and
probably also in an attempt to get Norway to secede from Denmark,
the Swedes made a number of approaches to the Norwegians in the late
summer of 1808 to arrange a separate truce, which were all rejected.
  Yet, the Norwegians began to accept the need for a truce as the
autumn progressed. The lack of food forced them to grant leave to
as many soldiers as possible to conserve provisions. Not only was the
army in the field making deep inroads into the provisions in the mili-
tary stores, but the harvest had also been delayed because of the many
peasants who had been conscripted. The harvest also failed in parts of
southern Norway in 1808, and the blockade hindered the vital corn
imports. All of these problems, and recognition of the fact that it would
be impossible to make war during the winter under any circumstances,
prompted Christian August to agree to the Swedish request for a truce in
