90 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


   The new plan for invading Scania involved marching the entire
Danish army across the frozen Sound when conditions would make it
impossible for the British fleet to intervene. The Danish army accord-
ingly assembled in Zealand at the turn of the year 1808–09 and made
ready for offensive operations against Sweden. The preparations and
plans were comprehensive: more than 30,000 men would march across
the Sound as soon as the ice was sufficiently thick. There can be no
doubt that, had this invasion been carried out, it would have led to
considerable problems for the Swedes and might have helped to bring
Gustav IV Adolph to his knees before matters had gone so far as to bring
about a revolution in Sweden. It could be argued, on the other hand,
that the Danish army would have found themselves in a precarious situ-
ation as soon as the ice in the Sound had broken up and the British fleet
could gain access to it. The government in Copenhagen made this clear
when the Danish emissary in Paris was told to explain to Napoleon
that ‘even in the event of our being able to join forces to put an army
corps ashore, what means would be at our disposal to provision it in a
country divested of everything, while our enemy would be in undisput-
able command of the sea?’69 It is therefore impossible to know what the
outcome of a successful invasion of Scania would have been, since it
was dependent on many more circumstances and factors than simply
whether or not the Danish army could have crossed the Sound.
   The reason why the invasion never took place was that, when it came to
it, Frederick would not risk marching the Danish army across the Sound.
The ice on the Sound was simply too unsafe and, after the march had
been cancelled several times, it broke up during a thaw that set in on the
night of 29 January and continued for the next few days. The invasion was
therefore deferred until the temperature fell sufficiently for the ice to bear,
and this did not happen during the winter of 1809. At the beginning of
March, Frederick VI was once again obliged to acknowledge that it would
be impossible to make the crossing to Scania as planned. However, this
does not mean, as some historians have claimed, that he was not seriously
considering an invasion of Scania. Not only had extensive preparations
been made with regard both to planning the campaign and to moving
troops; Frederick VI had also had proclamations flown by balloon over
to Scania encouraging the population to submit to a ‘Nordic Frederick’.
When the invasion failed to materialise, the entire enterprise appeared
nothing other than farcical, and the proclamation had no other effect
than to bring about a furious exchange of letters with Gustav IV Adolph.70
   A Norwegian invasion of Sweden in 1809 never came to anything
either. The dearth of supplies in Norway was so critical that there could
