                                             Scandinavian War, 1808–09   87


October. Negotiations were begun and resulted in a cessation of hostili-
ties between Sweden and southern and eastern Norway on 7 December.
   The irregularity of communications between Norway and Denmark
meant that Christian August had no idea whether or not he had nego-
tiated with the approval of Frederick IV. In his letters to the king dur-
ing the autumn of 1808, the increasingly desperate Christian August
informed him of the critical situation in Norway and attempted by
these means to justify the negotiations he had entered into without
the king’s orders. Frederick VI’s weeks-old rejection reached Christiania
only a few hours after the truce with Sweden had in fact been signed
on 7 December. By then the separate Norwegian–Swedish truce had in
any case become a fait accompli, one that was made easier for Frederick
VI to accept by Russia’s truce with Sweden signed at Olkijoki on
19 November.
   The Norwegian–Swedish truce failed to solve the Norwegians’ prob-
lems. As it could be rescinded at only 48 hours’ notice, it meant that
the Norwegian and Swedish armies both had to stay in their quarters
along the border through the winter. This created extreme hardship on
both sides of the border for soldiers and civilians alike, especially after
epidemic diseases began to spread from the military camps and food
supplies dwindled.
   Although conditions were bad enough in western Sweden,62 they
were undoubtedly worst in the eastern parts of Norway. These areas
had not only been the scenes of war and occupation during the spring
and summer of 1808, they had also suffered due to the presence of the
Norwegian army. While the army attempted to steer clear of quartering
and food requisitions, it was impossible to avoid imposing other bur-
dens on the populace, such as transport and supplies of wood. Nor could
anything be done about the steady depletion of food for civilians. Many
of the inhabitants had to resort to mixing bark and Iceland moss with
their flour during the autumn and winter of 1808–09, both in accord-
ance with an old custom and on the encouragement of the authorities.
Even though cash contributions from the populace and extraordinary
loans from the government in Copenhagen were distributed among the
most needy living on the Norwegian borderers, this gave them little
comfort in the short term as they could buy nothing with the money –
and prices for the little that could be bought skyrocketed.63
   Disease, famine and death in the winter of 1808–09 virtually turned
some parts of the border regions in Norway into wastelands. There are
countless accounts of misery from these areas, some describing how
‘many families have been completely obliterated’, others how there
