                                           Scandinavian War, 1808–09   93


   The war with Russia in northern Sweden continued because the
new Swedish government, hoping that Napoleon would eventually
turn against Russia, refused to break with Great Britain and join the
Continental Blockade. In the meantime Frederick attempted to gain
possession of Swedish territories at any cost, as he knew perfectly well
that the Swedish–Russian war would not last long. The Russian foreign
minister made it clear that the only Swedish territories that could fall
to Denmark-Norway were those that it might be able to conquer itself,
which was in line with what had been agreed between Napoleon and
Alexander at Erfurt the previous autumn. Moreover, in the absence of
the invasion of Sweden from the west and south that had been agreed
in Fontainebleau, he did not conceal his dissatisfaction at what St
Petersburg saw as a half-hearted Danish-Norwegian effort in the war
with Sweden. This in turn made Frederick VI even more desperate to take
the offensive from fear of evoking the fury of the tsar and Napoleon. As
he was unable to invade Sweden from Denmark because of the British
blockade, he ordered Christian August to mount an invasion. However,
the Norwegian army was still completely incapable of taking offensive
action, and, because Christian August was extremely unwilling to attack
Sweden, he refused to obey the king’s order. His election as the succes-
sor to the Swedish throne may have played a role in this, but, as his
biographer Lee Sather has convincingly demonstrated, it was first and
foremost the fear of a permanent Russian presence in Scandinavia and
his genuine desire for peace in Scandinavia that prompted the prince to
refuse to invade Sweden. By invading Sweden, he reasoned, he would
only help the Russians gain a permanent foothold in Sweden proper,
which he told the king would eventually ‘turn your Majesty’s faithful
Norwegians into slaves of the Russians’.73
   Here Frederick VI had fewer scruples, however. He was furious with
Christian August for what appeared to him to be a downright refusal
to obey his orders. In his desperation to seize Swedish territories,
he suggested to Tsar Alexander I that Denmark-Norway and Russia
should divide Sweden between them along a line some 150 kilometres
north of Stockholm. Alexander flatly refused and, at the beginning of
August, Frederick VI was obliged to back down and sue for peace. He
took steps to placate Britain by forbidding privateering, and he gave
Christian August permission to accept the offer of succession as soon
as peace with Sweden was formally concluded. He also agreed to nego-
tiate a peace with the Swedes, after which negotiations proper began
in the Swedish town of Jönköping in November. In the meantime,
Sweden and Russia had signed a peace treaty in Frederikshavn on
