                                            Scandinavian War, 1808–09   91


be no serious question of military operations. The situation in Norway
became so desperate in the late winter of 1809 that the Government
Commission hinted to Frederick VI that a separate peace with Great
Britain might be Norway’s only salvation. The proposal was not well
received in Copenhagen, where the king was painfully aware that such
a peace would constitute a lethal threat to the composite state, since it
would almost surely set Norway adrift. But the proposal nevertheless
did show that war and deprivation had forced high-ranking Norwegian
civil servants, including Prince Christian August, to consider solutions
that had previously been beyond the realms of the thinkable.71
   Influential civil servants in Sweden had also begun thinking along
forbidden lines. Even when the Russian army advanced into northern
Sweden, Gustav IV Adolph refused to accept the loss of Finland, to with-
draw from the British alliance and to make peace with his neighbours.
Instead, he levied new taxes and made preparations to continue the war.
Fearing that the very existence of Sweden was under threat, a group
of officers decided to dethrone the king and succeeded in doing so in
a palace revolution in Stockholm on 13 March. To assist in the coup,
troops in the county of Värmland marched on Stockholm under the
command of the colonel and politician Georg Adlersparre, and, having
informed the Norwegians of their intention, opened up the border to
Norway in the process.
   Frederick VI’s standing order to the Norwegian army was to invade
Sweden as soon as circumstances permitted. But the Norwegians failed
to take the opportunity to invade Värmland. Some Scandinavian his-
torians have wondered whether this was because Christian August had
been informed that he was a likely candidate for the Swedish throne
and therefore decided to disobey the king’s order for personal, egoistical
reasons. Others have discussed whether Christian August exceeded his
authority by letting the Swedes know that they would be given ten or
twelve days’ notice if Frederick VI gave the Norwegians a direct order to
attack – sufficient warning to eliminate any chance of the Norwegian
army catching them by surprise. This discussion is essentially irrelevant
because, even though the border was wide open, problems with sup-
plies and epidemics in the Norwegian army made them incapable of
crossing it in any case. The Swedes knew this and by the time an emis-
sary was sent to Norway to inform of what was going on, Adlersparre
and his army were already on their way. Therefore, the Swedish revolu-
tion of 1809 was not carried out through the good offices of Norway.
   The fall of Gustav IV Adolph opened the door to new opportunities
in Scandinavia – primarily the opportunity to unite the Scandinavian
