                                             Scandinavian War, 1808–09   85


impressions became rosier in retrospect, as memories of quartering
and requisitions faded while those of exotic sights, language, noises
and food remained or were forged later in the collective memory and
in stories. In fact, memories were usually so fond that claims of hav-
ing Spanish ancestry became quite common as the nineteenth century
progressed, although painstaking searches for firm evidence of this in
parish registers and other public records have yet to yield any substan-
tial results. Even when Spanish troops were blamed for the burning of
Koldinghus Castle in Jutland on the night of 30 March, the news was
received with indulgence, as the Spaniards were simply said to have
been a bit too extravagant in their attempts to keep warm during a cold
night in early spring.59
   In Norway, however, there was very little enthusiasm for the presence
of any of the foreign troops in Denmark. ‘Our allies are still in Jutland
eating the provisions intended for us’, wrote Prince Christian August
sarcastically at the beginning of May,60 and there was also great irrita-
tion about a whole fleet of ships being held in readiness to take troops
from Denmark to Scania that could otherwise have been employed in
taking corn to Norway. Norwegians would later come to feel that all the
resources devoted to the planned invasion of Scania in 1808 illustrated
the failure of the king to come to the relief of his Norwegian subjects.
   However, Bernadotte’s army did not stay long in Denmark after the
invasion of Scania had been cancelled. In April the French and Dutch
soldiers were marched south to Hamburg and the duchies, while the
Spanish contingent remained in Denmark. But nor did they remain
long. In spite of frantic attempts to limit and censor news from Spain, it
took little time for the news of Napoleon’s invasion of the country to cre-
ate unrest among the Spanish troops under Bernadotte’s command. The
situation became even worse when Napoleon removed the Bourbons
from the Spanish throne and put his brother Joseph there instead, and
then ordered that the Spanish contingent of his army should swear an
oath of loyalty to him. Many of the soldiers refused outright, and when
they were assembled to swear the new oath, there was a near riot and
shouts of ‘death to Napoleon’ and ‘long live Ferdinand VII’.61
   Dynastic loyalty appears to have played a significant role in the grow-
ing reluctance of the Spanish troops to remain under French command
in Denmark, something that the British government knew how to
exploit. Newspapers and propaganda left on Danish beaches kept the
Spanish troops fully updated on what was happening in their native
country, which left many with a burning desire to return to Spain.
Their motives for going home were not necessarily the defence of their
