92   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


kingdoms under one crown. Initially, these opportunities depended on
who his successor would be. The idea of uniting Sweden, Denmark and
Norway under Frederick VI’s rule was not in itself anathema to revolu-
tionary Swedish circles, but the problem – from the point of view of the
Danish-Norwegian king – was that they wanted a constitutional mon-
archy and not an autocracy based on the Danish-Norwegian model.
Frederick VI solved the issue of his own candidacy by brusquely dis-
missing a Swedish officer on a peace mission to Copenhagen at the end
of March with the words that ‘any negotiation is difficult with a nation
that has to be regarded as nothing but insurgents’. After that, his candi-
dacy understandably lost its appeal for most Swedes.72
   A group of influential Norwegian merchants and civil servants had
hoped that the Swedish revolution would pave the way for a consti-
tutional Scandinavian kingdom. Frederick VI’s reaction was naturally
a disappointment to this group, but at the same time they were left
with the feeling that Frederick would be unsuitable as the head of a
united kingdom and that his reactionary views and his personality
were an obstacle to a unification of Scandinavia and consequently to a
Scandinavian peace. They began instead to work on a project with the
aim of uniting Norway with Sweden under Prince Christian August and
in this they were supported by the revolutionaries in general and in par-
ticular by Adlersparre, by then their leading figure. The spring and sum-
mer months of 1809 saw intense conspiratorial activity to bring their
project to fruition. The outcome was that the dethroned king’s uncle,
Count Charles of Södermanland, was elected king, while Christian
August was elected as the successor to the Swedish throne in July.
   This made Christian August’s position extremely awkward. He had
been unaware of the conspiracies that had been going on and was
extremely reluctant to go behind his king’s back. For his part, Frederick
VI had realised that his prospects of gaining the Swedish throne had
evaporated, and he initiated an aggressive policy with the aim of con-
quering Sweden. Frederick had no intention of uniting Sweden with
Denmark-Norway but of subjugating the country, which was a com-
pletely unrealistic ambition. The kings of the Scandinavian union of
Calmar in the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries had never been
able to govern the Swedes against their will – so nor would a king in
Copenhagen have been able to do so in the nineteenth century. A union
could only be sustained if it were established on a voluntary basis and
in the form of a federation with a constitution. Yet the idea of having
a constitutional monarchy in just part of his state – in the event of a
union – held very little appeal for Frederick VI.
