84 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


hardships it brought with it also had significant impact on Denmark
and the duchies. The Danish-Norwegian government had been appre-
hensive about French troops entering Danish territory ever since the
British landings in Zealand, and Marshal Bernadotte’s offer of French
assistance was refused both in August and September. This was first and
foremost because the government was afraid that French troops would
enter Denmark for the sole purpose of exploiting Danish resources. This
apprehension grew after the Fontainebleau Alliance and became acute
when the Russian government broached the question of an invasion of
Scania. It was therefore an extremely hesitant Danish-Norwegian gov-
ernment that began negotiations with Marshal Bernadotte towards the
end of January. The consolation, or hope, was that the problems would
disappear once the crossing to Scania – known as Sweden’s breadbasket –
had been effected. The cancellation of the Scanian landing two months
later, however, turned Danish nightmares into brutal reality as some
35,000 troops under French command were left stranded in Jutland,
Funen and Zealand and had to be fed and housed.
   The initial reception of Marshall Bernadotte’s troops, particularly
in Schleswig and Holstein, had been anything but enthusiastic. In the
city of Schleswig, some of Marshall Bernadotte’s adjutants and senior
officers found themselves surrounded by an angry mob of about 500
people, who hurled abuse as well as stones and bricks at them. Brawls,
fights and even skirmishes between civilians and Bernadotte’s troops
became commonplace. Clearly, the overwhelmingly German-speaking
population of the duchies had heard enough about how the French had
recently acted elsewhere in northern Germany to be much inclined to
welcome them to their own cities and villages, while unruly behav-
iour on the part of the French troops was also a source of much pop-
ular resentment. Bernadotte’s troops were slightly better received in
Denmark proper, however, although here, too, there were brawls with
peasants and other civilians, usually due to military demands for sup-
plies and quartering.58
   On the other hand, the Spanish troops in particular seem to have
got on well with the civilian population. Both contemporary and
later Danish accounts provide a generally favourable impression of
the Spanish, which seems largely to have originated in a kind of well-
disposed inquisitiveness about these exotic strangers. It was naturally
to their advantage that the Spanish troops acted amicably towards
the civil population, while the French gained a reputation for being
inconsiderate, unsympathetic and arrogant. There was also a good
deal of mythologising about the Spanish troops afterwards. People’s
