88 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


were so many corpses in some areas that there was neither the time nor
the space to bury them. The traumatised peasantry lapsed into religious
fervour or superstition in many places. This appears to have been a rela-
tively common reaction in many other European countries where the
miseries of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars had strengthened
the religious beliefs and affinities of the people and made them look to
the past rather than to the future. It was only later, with the culture of
memorials and remembrance that grew up in Europe, that sacrifice for
the nation was used to give meaning to the suffering and traumas of the
Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars.64
   The crisis in Norway during the period 1808–09 tested solidarity with
and loyalty to the Danish-Norwegian state at various levels. First, it was
a question of what people in Denmark could and would do to help the
Norwegians, a question that has been hotly debated by Norwegian
and Danish historians. Norwegian historians have often been of the
opinion that Frederick VI and his government failed to do enough to
help Norway during the war, while Danish historians have been more
inclined to point out what was actually done in Denmark.65
   Both opinions also reflect contemporary views. There are sound argu-
ments for both points of view, but an important fact has often been
overlooked, namely that the rigorous British blockade in itself severely
restricted what could be done on the part of the Danes. Very few Danish
ships evaded the blockade from the spring to the late autumn of 1808,
and when the British fleet left Danish-Norwegian waters in the winter of
1808–09, the Skagerrak froze so extensively that hardly any ships were
able to make the crossing from January to March 1809. It must have
appeared to the increasingly desperate Norwegians that this absence of
ships from Denmark was due to incompetence and lack of interest – a
view to which many influential Norwegians began to subscribe. But
even though some of the king’s measures were unsuccesful in their
execution and in their results, there can be no doubt that both the
government and the middle classes in Denmark empathised with the
suffering of the Norwegians and tried to help to the best of their ability.
However, such moral support provided scant consolation when there
was little evidence of any practical effect, and a vicious circle arose in
the Danish-Norwegian state with Norwegians accusing Danes of not
doing enough, while these accusations increasingly aroused irritation
in Denmark, where people believed that everything that was humanly
possible was being done to come to the relief of Norway.
   In Norway the crisis and the war also raised once again the issue
of solidarity between the various parts of the country that together
