                                            Naval and Economic Warfare 99


important, however, was the fleet’s symbolic significance. As a symbol
of the king and of the security, prosperity and pride of the state, there
was more to the rebuilding of the fleet than sheer military necessity.
   Initially, popular measures resulted in comprehensive collections
and gifts. The admiralty in Copenhagen received huge sums of money
and quantities of valuable silverware. The patriotic symbolism of these
donations was emphasised when the silver was melted down and used to
mint coins which, by a royal decree of December 1808, were embossed
with the words ‘voluntary donation for the fatherland’ surrounded by
an oak wreath to symbolise a sacrifice for civil society. The voluntary
contributions came not only in the form of money and silverware, but
also included timber and even ships. This was the case with the town of
Tønning in Schleswig, for instance, which donated a ship as a ‘Gift on
the altar of the fatherland as a pledge of its loyalty’.1
   From a military standpoint it was absolutely decisive to build a fleet
as quickly as possible. This excluded major ships of the line, which
required more time and resources than the Danish-Norwegian gov-
ernment had at its disposal. The solution was to build smaller vessels,
collectively known as gunboats, which had the advantage that they
could be rapidly built, cost relatively little and – perhaps above all –
were highly manoeuvrable and therefore suitable for use in skerries and
shallow coastal waters. It says much about the extent of the voluntary
collections made during the war years, of the low price of the gunboats
and of their utility that voluntary contributions could finance the con-
struction of 173 such vessels in Denmark and about 100 in Norway. By
comparison, only four frigates and one ship of the line, appropriately
named Phoenix, were built during the same period. A Swedish naval
lieutenant who was a prisoner of war in Norway noticed the under-
lying patriotism that motivated the building of the gunboats and the
patriotism it in turn created and said, when he was released in August
1808, that ‘the mood of the people is good and even enthusiastic, which
can be seen from the fact that donations to build their entire flotilla
of gunboats have been received and they are now beginning to build
them at the expense of the king’.2 This was in sharp contrast to Swedish
expectations that the war and the blockade would soon demoralise the
Norwegians and prompt them to throw themselves into the arms of
Sweden.
   Although Denmark-Norway had in no sense been able to build up a
new fleet of ships of the line that could measure up to the fleet that had
been lost in Copenhagen in 1807, Danes and Norwegians still managed
to launch a fleet that could put up good resistance under favourable
