94 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


17 September 1809, and in doing so had formally placed Finland
under Russian rule.74
   The events of 1809 had a number of important consequences and
implications. First, the election of Christian August as the successor to
the Swedish throne opened new doors for Danish–Norwegian–Swedish
relations. There was much speculation as to how he would fulfil his
office as Swedish crown prince and considerable expectation both in
the government in Copenhagen and in those Norwegian circles that
still wanted to see the end of Frederick VI’s autocratic rule. Second, the
loss of Finland meant that Sweden began to look around for some form
of compensation, while at the same time Denmark-Norway became
worthless as Russia’s ally, much as Danish-Norwegian foreign ministers
had feared for almost a century. Both of these factors came into play
when Russian diplomats negotiating with the Swedes in Frederikshavn
discreetly pointed a finger at Norway. In so doing, they were turn-
ing Denmark-Norway’s nightmare scenario into a reality, although
Christian August’s indisputable loyalty to Frederick VI meant that that
reality was kept at bay for the time being. There were also other groups
in Sweden and Norway that had begun working to bring about the
Swedish–Norwegian solution as early as 1809.


Discontent and Conspiracies

On 22 August 1809, Count Herman Wedel Jarlsberg summoned a num-
ber of influential merchants and ironworks proprietors to a meeting at
Bærum Ironworks immediately south of Christiania. Wedel Jarlsberg
was the son of a diplomat and one of the few Norwegian nobles. Despite
having been born in Montpellier and having spent much of his youth
in continental Europe, he had a strong Norwegian identity. Having
been private secretary to the minister of finance in Copenhagen, he
became governor of the county of Buskerud in 1805 and two years later
he married into the merchant elite in Norway, thereby joining the elite
of wealth and influence in Norway despite its essentially ‘middle-class’
composition. After the outbreak of war with Great Britain, the young,
energetic Wedel Jarlsberg became involved in the supply sector, know-
ing full well that the war would cause tremendous problems with regard
to the procurement of corn. His efforts in this matter, however, only
convinced him that the Danish government was not doing enough for
Norway and, even worse, did not care. And that was not all. All the
other unfortunate consequences that the wars with Great Britain and
Sweden had for Norway also left him with a feeling that Danish and
