                                          Naval and Economic Warfare 103


had made, with the implicit message not to let this sacrifice have been
made in vain. The memorial at Sjællands Odde was also erected with
the help of private contributions without any mention of the king, and
the monument itself was a column topped by an urn to symbolise the
altar of the fatherland on which the dead from the ship of the line
Prinds Christian Frederik, sunk there in March 1808, had sacrificed their
lives. The fallen were honoured as sons of the common fatherland, as
the names of both the Danish and Norwegian dead were listed side by
side on a memorial plaque in the church at Sjællands Odde.


Imprisoned Sailors

Although the fleet had been lost in Copenhagen in 1807, its seamen
did not suffer the same fate, with the exception of the approximately
1000 men of the Marine Regiment who had volunteered for British ser-
vice. For their part, the remaining Danish-Norwegian seamen were left
wondering what to do as the British sailed away from Zealand with
the Danish-Norwegian fleet in tow. Several of the officers were afraid
that their military careers in Denmark-Norway were over and reported
to the French minister in Copenhagen with a request to enter French
service.9
  When the alliance was signed, the French government had hinted
that they would send two ships of the line and two frigates to Denmark
on the condition that they were to be manned by Danish-Norwegian
officers and seamen but would remain under French command. In
April 1808 Danish-Norwegian crews were therefore sent to Napoleon’s
naval shipyard at the mouth of the River Scheldt to man two French
ships of the line. This was where problems began to crop up. It soon
became clear that the French ships of the line would stand no chance
of passing through the English Channel, while countless disagreements
about who would be in command of them, about manning and other
practical matters, created an unpleasant atmosphere among the Danish-
Norwegian crews. When a few French sailors were posted to the ships,
this led to new conflicts.10
  National conflicts, however, were nothing new in the Danish-Norwegian
navy, which was a unified state institution with seamen from the vari-
ous parts of the state serving side by side. Although the great majority
of the seamen were Danes and Norwegians, it was no accident that, in
the eighteenth century, seamen of the same nationality were forbidden
to help each other in brawls, albeit Norwegian seamen were excepted
from this rule in 1771. The fact of the matter was that conflicts could
