100 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


circumstances. Initially, this involved a number of smaller vessels,
which were easy to build and cost little, for use in coastal waters. This
meant that it was also possible to begin large-scale shipbuilding for civil
purposes in Denmark-Norway during the war years, even more so as
trade with Great Britain from the autumn of 1809 created a tremendous
economic upswing that encouraged extensive maritime trade.


Naval War

On the one hand, the new fleet of gunboats was to defend strategically
important points along the coast and harass British ships in Danish-
Norwegian waters, while on the other a more offensive tactic for naval
war would be organised in the form of a privateering offensive, whereby
civilian ships could attack the enemy’s merchant ships with the bless-
ing of the government. The gunboats were active throughout the war,
and became more so as their number increased. Although these ves-
sels were, generally speaking, on the small side and not particularly
awe-inspiring to look at, they could be very effective under the right
circumstances. Their chief advantage, perhaps rather paradoxically,
was their small size and their oars, which meant they could be flex-
ibly and rapidly manoeuvred in narrow coastal waters and fjords, and
could therefore choose suitable ambush points and hiding places. This
ability was used to advantage to seize or sink several British brigs in
Danish and Norwegian waters, particularly in the summer of 1808.3 On
the other hand, the gunboats were extremely vulnerable if there was a
strong wind that enabled the bigger ships to turn their guns on them.
   From a military point of view, Great Britain chiefly had two measures
it could use against Denmark-Norway. One was the blockade, which
basically involved stationing a cordon of men-of-war along the Danish-
Norwegian coasts that could intercept any vessels that attempted to
sneak through the line. The other was to attack points along the Danish-
Norwegian coastlines, primarily towns and fortified installations. The
first of such attacks came as early as the late summer of 1807 along
the south coast of Norway, and they continued sporadically throughout
the war, resulting in the destruction of military installations, looting
and the capture of prisoners. In Denmark, too, British ships could con-
stantly be seen patrolling the belts and the Sound.
   Neither gunboats, batteries nor militias could do anything to restrict
the range of the British navy or their freedom to choose their points of
attack. British raids on the Danish-Norwegian coasts occurred regularly,
particularly on ports where there were merchant ships and stores of corn
