102   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


day for the duration of the war. Several of the few remaining and of
the newly built Danish-Norwegian vessels were also destroyed, costing
hundreds of Danish-Norwegian seamen their lives. Nor were other
areas of the naval war particularly successful. Attempts in 1810 and
1811 to reconquer the strategically important island of Anholt, north of
Zealand – which had been occupied by the British in 1809 – ended in
fiasco and aroused suspicions that the islanders were perfectly content
with the British presence. In a similar case, a number of Norwegians
found themselves in the dock for having assisted a British frigate that
had entered Bergen harbour in May 1808.7
   Losses and defeats at sea were also viewed in a national patriotic light
and were invested with significance as sacrifices on the altar of the
fatherland. During the summer of 1813, the Danish actor H.C. Knudsen
was on tour in Norway as he had been in Denmark, both in 1801 and
1807. Knudsen’s productions had a strong element of state patriotism,
and their aim was to boost patriotism among the Norwegians within
the firm framework of the monarchy and the state. In doing so, how-
ever, Knudsen made deliberate use of national patriotic elements. The
main attraction of the production was a block of stone decorated with
sprigs of spruce and engraved with the names of the officers who had
fallen in in action on the Swedish border in 1808. There was also a
broken ship’s mast decorated with the royal flag and engraved with the
names of the officers who had died when the frigate Najaden was sunk
in a Norwegian port in July 1812. Girls dressed in white and children
holding wreaths and garlands stood on each side of the stage, and the
two groups met at an altar on which the public’s money was placed.
This merged national patriotism with state patriotism, as the altar sym-
bolised sacrifice for the fatherland, both natural and civic. The chief
impression made by Knudsen’s productions in Norway, however, could
also be of a national patriotic character. A Norwegian officer recalled
how one production at Sandefjord was held as a harvest thanksgiving
celebration that concluded with a dinner and dance. The officer explic-
itly associated this with the heightened sense of Norwegian independ-
ence that arose towards the end of the war years. Seen in this light,
the kind of national patriotism that Knudsen played on could move in
the direction of nationalism, according to the way in which his public
interpreted the symbolism of his productions.8
   Several monuments were erected in Denmark, at Sjællands Odde
(1808) and at Store Magleby (1809), for example, in memory of those
who had fallen in the war. The monuments honoured the dead and
reminded contemporary and future generations of the sacrifice they
