96   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


would unite behind the tremendously popular prince and join forces
with Sweden, which would dissolve the union with Denmark and
leave Norway with extensive autonomy in a constitutional union with
Sweden.
   After the election of Christian August as the Swedish successor in
July, Wedel Jarlsberg felt he could begin his work of arranging a union
between Norway and Sweden in earnest. However, during the meeting
with the merchants at Bærum Ironworks he did not receive the sup-
port he had hoped for. Most felt that the count had gone too far, while
others warned him that he would not find much support for his plans
for a union with Sweden among the Norwegian peasantry. Having pre-
viously gone so far as to consider an uprising against Danish rule in
Norway with the help of a peasant army, Wedel Jarlsberg backed down
somewhat after the sobering experience at Bærum. But even though
few people were prepared to give their total support to his plans, Wedel
Jarlsberg’s activism in 1809 was a clear indication that the war had cre-
ated a mood among many Norwegians that went beyond dissatisfac-
tion with certain aspects of Danish rule and indicated dissatisfaction
with Danish rule in general to the point that a cession from the Danish
Empire was considered by some.
   There had already been certain signs of discontent in Norway in
the spring of 1808, including increasing misgivings with Danish rule.
Popular discontent should not be exaggerated, but reports from some
places in eastern Norway leave little doubt that in some instances the
peasants ‘blamed the Danes for every mishap’ and uttered ‘angry words
about Copenhagen and the government’.80 It was therefore not without
reason that the Norwegian authorities strongly suspected that Swedish
proclamations found many eager readers among the peasants of eastern
Norway while Wedel Jarlsberg took this as reason to believe that his
ideas were capable of arousing much popular support.
   For Wedel Jarlsberg, national patriotism moved towards a desire for
political and national autonomy and marked in practice the dawning of
modern Norwegian nationalism. For others, their national patriotism
had undoubtedly been considerably strengthened during the war at the
cost of their loyalty to the composite state, but there were still very few
people who were willing to go so far as to conspire against Frederick
VI to wrest Norway from the grasp of Denmark or to work for a union
between Norway and Sweden. The war in 1808 and 1809 showed quite
clearly that war with Sweden and Great Britain at the same time would
be catastrophic for Norway in the long run – to a far greater degree than
it was for Denmark. Set alongside a recognition of the fact that Norway
