                                           Naval and Economic Warfare 101


and other goods. In 1809 and 1812, ship traffic between Arkhangelsk
in Russia and Norway tempted British vessels to sail all the way to the
northernmost parts of the Norwegian coast.
  At the end of July 1809 even Hammerfest – a town of some 1000
inhabitants close to the North Cape – was attacked by British ships.
After exchanging fire with about 50 local militiamen, the British occu-
pied the town and proceeded to loot and partly destroy it. One of the
town’s inhabitants gave clear expression to the way he experienced the
event and, not least, to what he thought of the British:

  We were convinced that we were dealing with robbers, but as we had
  treated them in accordance with the rules of war, we expected them
  to do the same, but we were completely mistaken – no sooner had
  they treacherously disarmed these few men than they began to rob
  and plunder, which was the very opposite of what they had promised
  orally and in writing: that nobody would be molested if we stopped
  opposing them – nothing more could be done against such villains
  except to avoid personal injury. Everybody went on their way and
  left the robbers to their deceitful deeds.4

It was not unusual for British raids of this type to turn into pure loot-
ing expeditions to the dismay of the inhabitants along the Danish-
Norwegian coasts, but their number and extent should not be
exaggerated. In fact, they were relatively rare and seem to have been at
their height during the years from 1807 to 1809. They appear to have
been even rarer in Denmark and the duchies than in Norway, probably
because British naval activity seems to have been most extensive in
Norwegian waters because of the blockade.5
   Even though it was not always successful, the defensive war along
the coast helped to heighten the patriotic mood both in Denmark
and Norway. There were a number of occasions when British troops
who had gone ashore were driven off by the coastal militias, and such
events were always duly reported in the Danish and Norwegian press
and propaganda. The greatest propaganda scoops, however, were when
gunboats succeeded in capturing larger British vessels. These events
were not only presented as military triumphs in the Danish-Norwegian
press, they were also expressions of revenge, of the ability of the state
to defend itself and, not least symbolically, of patriotic efforts and sac-
rifices for the fatherland.6
   Still, some 1400 Danish-Norwegian ships ended up in British hands
during the war years, which is equivalent to about one ship every other
