110   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


would be madness to risk arousing the wrath of the British by maintain-
ing privateering expeditions. Furthermore, British trading licences were
often offered in return for letters of safe conduct from Frederick VI for
British skippers, which enabled them to sail freely and sell their goods in
ports that gave access to the continental European market.22
  King Frederick’s attempts to encourage privateering in the late sum-
mer of 1813, when Sweden and Great Britain had yet again joined forces
against Denmark-Norway, proved to be in vain. Even though licensed
trade had been suspended by the British government, and the blockade
reinstated, six years of war ensured that there were in practice neither
the finances nor the men to conduct another extended privateering
campaign. By the very end of 1813 there were simply no active Danish
and Norwegian privateers left.23


The Double Blockade

After Trafalgar and Napoleon’s subsequent sweep across continental
Europe, Great Britain and France were almost incapable of threaten-
ing each other by military means. Therefore, the two antagonists
were obliged to find other ways of striking out at each other. It was
against this background that Napoleon issued the Berlin Decree on
21 November 1806, which in practice blocked imports of British goods to
European countries under French control. This decree, as well as a num-
ber of British orders-in-council issued in 1807, firmly placed finance at
the centre of the war, turning economic warfare, in the words of Paul
W. Schroeder, from ‘a covert, secondary, unsystematic aspect of the war’
into ‘a primary, central, highly organized one’. This change of focus had
an effect not least on Denmark-Norway both in 1807 and during the
years that followed.24
  In addition to obtaining military assistance to force Sweden’s hand,
Napoleon’s primary purpose in the Danish–Norwegian alliance signed
at Fontainebleau in October 1807 was to make sure that Denmark-
Norway joined the Continental Blockade. He had his way when Crown
Prince Frederick the same month prohibited all trade and connections
with Great Britain. While this may not have been a wholehearted
acceptance of the Continental Blockade as such – not least because
Danish-Norwegian trade with Sweden was still possible, which at least
in theory implied a way in for British goods – the prohibition was good
enough for Napoleon for the time being.
  The outbreak of war with Sweden in March 1808 also meant that
Denmark-Norway joined the Continental Blockade in full. On 14 March,
