112   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


   The Danish-Norwegian king also ensured stricter enforcement of the
blockade from 1812 by increasing the presence of customs officers at
Danish-Norwegian ports and tightening up controls in coastal towns
through regular searches and raids. This in turn enraged large num-
bers of the inhabitants who could naturally see the connection between
these interventions, the alliance with Napoleon, the Continental
Blockade and their own financial ruin. There were in fact outright bat-
tles between customs officers and smugglers in the town of Bergen in
Norway, even though there are also many examples that show that it was
not always easy – or even desirable – for the Danish-Norwegian authori-
ties to enforce the Continental Blockade equally strictly throughout
Norway, let alone in Schleswig and Holstein.
   Nevertheless, tightening up the Continental Blockade was little help
in making the alliance with Napoleon – let alone the Danish-Norwegian
government – more popular in the eyes of the general public. By the
years 1812–13, there was no longer any enthusiasm whatsoever for
Napoleonic France in the duchies and southern Jutland, where eco-
nomic life had rapidly deteriorated. In Norway, too, resentment toward
France and the government in Copenhagen was widespread, above all
as a result of the British blockade being tightened yet again after mid-
1812 and from then on implemented more vigorously than ever. A brief,
but very strong, economic upswing that had lasted since the autumn
of 1809 made the Norwegian recession of 1812 even harder to bear and
increased general anger at the government and at the alliance with
Napoleon.29
   However, the double blockade did not leave Denmark-Norway totally
isolated for the entire duration of the war, as demonstrated by the trade
licenses introduced in 1809. Nor was the double blockade a result of
the Danish-Norwegian government’s own willing policy, even though
Frederick had been the first to forbid all trade with Great Britain and had
tightened up the enforcement of the Continental Blockade. In the final
analysis, Frederick VI was perhaps Napoleon’s most loyal ally and even
the strictest enforcer of the Continental Blockade, at least in compari-
son with the Emperor’s other continental allies, but it was not because
he was in complete agreement with Napoleon’s policy and supported
him wholeheartedly, as his critics have claimed. With the French in
control of northern Germany, with superior French troops only a few
days’ march from the duchies and Jutland and with barely concealed
threats from Napoleon, the king had no choice, knowing full well that
even the slightest confrontation with Napoleon in matters concerning
the blockade could have catastrophic consequences.
