                                           Naval and Economic Warfare 111


the same day that the declaration of war was announced in Stockholm,
all trade and communications with Sweden were prohibited and in the
same way as with Britain, although some minor trade limitations had
in the meantime already been introduced to prevent exports of mili-
tary necessities such as horses from Norway. Moreover, a royal decree of
14 October 1808 considerably extended the scope of Danish-Norwegian
export prohibition and made it almost total as regards food products. In
this way Denmark-Norway’s foreign trade was limited even further.25
  It could be asked why the Danish-Norwegian government took the
trouble to enforce the Continental Blockade, as the state had already
been blockaded by Great Britain and was incapable of importing and
exporting goods by sea anyway. The answer lies first and foremost in
the British presence on the island of Heligoland, which had been occu-
pied in 1807, and, although to a considerably lesser degree, in Norway’s
extended border with Sweden. To all intents and purposes, Heligoland
had become a warehouse for British colonial goods during the years
after 1807, because the distance from there to the coast of Schleswig
and Holstein was short. Furthermore, as the British were in command
of the sea, it was a simple matter to smuggle large quantities of goods to
ports in Schleswig and Holstein under cover of darkness and transport
them from there further into continental Europe. Indeed, the British
were already familiar with the ports and beaches in Schleswig follow-
ing their own blockade of the Elbe, the banks of which Napoleon on his
part made sure were guarded by some 300 customs men in 1806 alone,
a number that would only increase in the coming years.26 The duchies
consequently became a smuggler’s haven and, at least for a time, they
made a significant hole in the Continental Blockade.27
  This was not to King Frederick VI’s liking, however, and gave all the
more reason to enforce the Continental Blockade, as Napoleon was
certainly not happy with the duchies virtually serving as free ports
for British goods. Napoleon’s annexation of the Netherlands and the
Hanseatic towns during 1810 and at the beginning of 1811 showed how
far he was willing to go to enforce the blockade. The Emperor did not
hesitate to use this as a warning shot to the Danish-Norwegian govern-
ment, clearly with the duchies in mind. When the alliance between
Denmark-Norway and France was renewed on 7 March 1812, one of its
main terms was that the Danish-Norwegian government must enforce
the Continental Blockade even more strictly than had hitherto been
the case. Frederick VI duly complied with this demand and on 23 May
he decreed a prohibition against imports of virtually every conceivable
product from Britain and its colonies.28
