104   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


arise between Danish and Norwegian seamen, and there had also been
constant conflicts between seamen and the predominantly German
recruits in the Marine Regiment before 1807. In other words, there can
be no doubt that serving in the navy strengthened the ethnic iden-
tity and orientation of the seamen and perhaps especially that of the
approximately 2000 Danish and Norwegian seamen who found them-
selves in the company of French sailors on the River Scheldt. Here, the
scene was set for major conflicts, with Danish and Norwegian seamen
joining forces against the French.11
   Dissatisfaction among the Danish-Norwegian seamen and officers
serving with the Scheldt fleet was almost constant and, when Napoleon
ordered the Danish-Norwegian contingent to Brest in January 1809,
some of them were close to mutinying. Many of the seamen sim-
ply wanted to go home and were supported in this by their officers.
This in turn led to complications between the Danish-Norwegian and
French governments, which initially attempted to smooth things over
by recalling their senior officers. However, the problems could not be
solved and remained a running sore in relations between Napoleon and
Frederick VI up to the late winter of 1813 when – on the pretext of an
allied threat to Holstein – the king ordered his seamen and officers to
return to Denmark. In the meantime, obligations to man foreign ships
on the Scheldt had also created unrest in Norway. On 13 December
1810 a revolt erupted in the city of Christiansand when seamen were to
be conscripted for service in the Scheldt fleet. The seamen had just as
little desire to serve outside their country’s borders as had the peasant
soldiers in the army. The rebellion at Christiansand naturally caused
concern in Copenhagen, and, in January 1811, Foreign Minister Niels
Rosenkrantz warned the king that ‘Conscripting seamen from Norway
has made an unfavourable impression in that country.’ This did not
mean, on the face of it, that the resistance to the conscription of sea-
men in 1810 was politically motivated, but it was a strong indication
of growing discontent among Norwegians with the war in general and
in particular with the burdens it placed on their shoulders. The Swedes
naturally followed developments in Norway closely, and the rebellion
at Christiansand even appears to have triggered preparations for a new
propaganda campaign directed at Norway in the winter of 1811.12
   The Danish-Norwegian seamen and officers on the River Scheldt were
not alone in having to spend the war years in exile. About 7000 seamen –
of whom 5000 were Norwegian and 2000 were Danes – crews from
warships and merchant ships – ended up as British prisoners after their
ships had been captured, most being housed in decommissioned naval
