                                            Naval and Economic Warfare 107


people and rob them of their property’. In a similar vein, Frederick VI
compensated Swedish fishermen who had been attacked by Danish pri-
vateers to prevent the escalation of war and violence.17
   A remarkably broad segment of the population was involved in pri-
vateering. In a sense, every privateer functioned as a limited company
with one or more investors, and the crews of these vessels were entitled
to a share of the spoils. This tempted many people to take on privateers,
not only seamen from the fleet, but also peasants and labourers. The
latter flocked to coastal towns to take part in privateering expeditions,
to such an extent that merchants and factory owners had difficulty
in obtaining sufficient workers. This in turn increased the demand for
manpower, and those who remained in their jobs did not hesitate to
demand higher wages. However, the crews of privateers were also at
great risk of being sunk or captured by the British. It was little consola-
tion that the possession of a letter of marque entitled them to be treated
as prisoners of war, given the wretched conditions in the British ‘hulks’.
   The profit from privateering appears to have been greatest during the
two years between the outbreak of war in 1807 up to the late summer
of 1809. Some 100 million rix-dollars’ worth of ships and cargos were
seized over the course of the war, and that is only counting official sta-
tistics. Although it is tempting to conclude by saying that the profitabil-
ity of privateering was limited in the long term due to losses of men and
vessels, it must be remembered that the 100 million rix-dollars was still
an enormous sum, in spite of the decline in monetary value and infla-
tion. In 1810, for example, Denmark-Norway’s exports amounted to 14
million rix-dollars, while imports totalled 36 million rix-dollars, and that
at a time when the licensed trade with Great Britain had breathed new
life into Danish-Norwegian commerce.18
   But the costs and the risks were considerable, not least for the crews of
the vessels. Still, many citizens, seamen and fishermen took full part in
this ‘patriotic’ piracy, where fortunes were made and lost. In southern
Norway, the privateering campaign created great private wealth, but it is
important to emphasise that this in the end affected relatively few peo-
ple. For most Norwegians the war led only to crisis and ruin, something
that in turn created tension between the few new rich and the majority
of the population. This may also help to explain why some people were
so violently opposed to the fortunes made by privateer owners and the
luxurious consumption that they encouraged. Criticism of privateering,
both then and later, was extensive in Denmark and Norway.19
   The middle class, patriots and ordinary people who suffered during
the hard times naturally focused most on the dissolute lives led by many
