108 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


privateers, and this left its mark on how both they and posterity have
judged the privateers. This, however, overlooks three things. First, if the
moral distaste some people may have for whoring, drinking and exces-
sive luxury and for brutal, state-sponsored piracy are ignored, there is no
doubt that the privateers’ debauchery helped keep the wheels of society
turning. Their consumption created jobs not only in alehouses, brew-
eries and brothels – where much money made from privateering was
spent – but also in the protected domestic industries whose goods the
privateers bought, or in whose production they invested. Furthermore,
customs duties had – in theory at least – to be paid on the luxury goods
that were imported.
   Second, a good portion of the money for the prizes seized went to
the destitute Treasury through special taxes levied on prizes, and this
helps to explain why the king and government ministers did their best
to promote and support this ‘patriotic’ piracy. Unlike the memoirs of
the middle class and civil servants, who tended to condemn piracy as
something unfortunate and immoral, contemporary newspapers were
generally filled with apologies for privateering as a necessary and patri-
otic institution. This view found some echo among the populace, who
regarded successful privateer captains as folk heroes taking revenge for
the Bombardment of Copenhagen and for the many miseries the British
had inflicted on them through their attack in 1807 and the blockade.
   Third, most of the money ended up in the pockets of the backers.
The backers were generally fairly well-off merchants and traders who
possessed the necessary capital and were willing to take the risk of
investing in the purchase of larger or smaller privateers. Some of the
privateer owners ended up owning regular fleets of up to 50 smaller
ships. All in all, these Danish and Norwegian backers owned about
900 vessels (600 in Denmark and 300 in Norway). They invested their
earnings chiefly in industry, property and manor houses, so they put
their money to work. Like everybody else in the Danish-Norwegian
state, many of them were hard hit, first by the national bankruptcy and
later by the peace crisis, but several of these enterprising men from the
middle class became pillars of society who had medals pinned on them
and were given distinguished titles. The motives of these backers can
hardly be said to be state patriotism or national patriotism, even though
this could have been a contributory factor, but primarily necessity. The
war had brought normal trade to a standstill, so it became necessary to
look to any new opportunities that presented themselves.
   The privateering campaign also brought political complications with
it. First, the alliance between France and Denmark-Norway gave French
