                                            Naval and Economic Warfare 109


privateers access to Danish-Norwegian waters and ports. The problem
here was not so much that this meant competition for the Danish and
Norwegian privateers, but that the French privateers were not always
very particular about which ships they seized. They presented an added
risk for Danish and Norwegian merchant ships and corn ships attempt-
ing to evade the British blockade. Furthermore, the privateering cam-
paign was a delicate matter even between hostile states. While it is true
that attempts were made on the part of the Danes, Norwegians and
Swedes to keep the military campaign under control, it was no acci-
dent that privateering was a central issue during the peace negotiations
between the two countries from the late summer of 1809 and was given
a good deal of space in the final peace treaty in December. Nor was it by
chance that the privateering campaign was one of the first things that
King Frederick VI toned down when he realised the need for peace with
Sweden at the beginning of August of the same year, while also attempt-
ing to persuade the British to ease their Norwegian blockade. Viewed in
this light, privateering was a political instrument that could be used in
relation to Great Britain and Sweden, which also shows that it had had
an effect. In some cases Danish and Norwegian privateers had operated
as far away as along the coast of Scotland, to the irritation of British
merchants who, it must be said, had no qualms about equipping pri-
vateers themselves and sending them to Danish-Norwegian waters.20
   Privateering presented both problems and irritation for neutral ships
sailing in northern European waters, so their numbers decreased as
they began to avoid these waters. It was symptomatic that in the sum-
mer of 1809 an American merchant offered to take grain and other
supplies to Norway in return for a guarantee that his ships would not
be seized by Danish and Norwegian privateers. Neutral mercantile trade
with Denmark-Norway was one of the things Frederick VI attempted
to encourage when he prohibited privateering. However, not all Danes
and Norwegians were enthusiastic about the introduction of this pro-
hibition as it meant the disappearance of a potential source of income,
and because the prohibition in itself was no guarantee that the British
blockade would be less strictly enforced.21
   The fact that Frederick made no noise when he repermitted privateer-
ing in March 1810 was also evidence that its importance had waned. This
was due not least to the opening up of a far more lucrative – and far less
risky – licensed trade with Great Britain. This trade was carried on without
the knowledge of the French privateers, who continued to hunt for prey in
the English Channel and the North Sea. As long as the licensed trade with
Britain continued, Norwegian shipowners and merchants realised that it
