                                           Naval and Economic Warfare 105


vessels known as ‘hulks’. Danes and Norwegians came to refer to sea-
men’s captivity as ‘prisonen’, and it took on gruesome associations as
conditions were often appalling on board the prison ‘hulks’. One way
out of captivity for the seamen was to sign up to serve on British ships,
and the British conducted energetic campaigns among the prisoners,
some of whom did not hesitate to enter British service. The fact that, in
spite of the terrible conditions they lived under, many of them resisted
such a tempting offer was naturally used for propaganda purposes in the
Danish-Norwegian press, and it appears that some of the prisoners did
refuse to enter British service on patriotic grounds. The officer of a pri-
vateer, for instance, wrote in his diary about a seaman who had entered
British service that it was ‘in my opinion a poor thing for a Norwegian to
have done’. Some of the imprisoned seamen and officers even celebrated
the king’s birthday on 28 January in the approved patriotic manner;
sometimes with processions, songs, dancing and symbolic acts.13
  There was also a patriotic response in Denmark-Norway to accounts
of prisoners’ conditions. What were sometimes massive collections were
made for the Danish-Norwegian captives, and some newspapers, such
as Budstikken in Norway, even donated the profits from their sales to the
seamen. Alongside the collections for rebuilding the fleet, collections
in aid of Danes and Norwegians in British captivity were a relatively
common type of patriotic enterprise during the war years and could be
associated with both the civil and natural fatherland. For many of those
who remained in British captivity throughout the war, these patriotic
manifestations had a hollow ring. The licensed trade that was permitted
from 1809 brought Danish and Norwegian ships and seamen to Britain
for commercial purposes but did nothing to assist in gaining the release
of most of the prisoners.


Privateering

Privateering was naturally nothing new to European or Scandinavian
wars, and France had conducted what was sometimes an intensive
privateering campaign against Britain ever since the 1790s. Denmark-
Norway and Sweden also had experience of privateering, as both sides
had at times engaged in what could be profitable privateering expe-
ditions against hostile and neutral ships during the Great Northern
War (1709–21). In practice, privateering was a kind of state-sanctioned
piracy which, put simply, involved private individuals and companies
obtaining the permission of the authorities to equip vessels and seize
hostile merchant ships and neutral ships carrying contraband of war.
