120   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


and 1813, also made considerable inroads into state finances. War was
expensive and the state simply had to find a way to finance it. The
solution, as so often in financial crises, was to print more bank notes
and levy extraordinary taxes, duties and charges. Progressive income
tax was introduced in 1810, for example, and a real estate transfer tax
was introduced during the same year. Stamp duty had already been
increased the year before by a massive 50 per cent. Unsurprisingly, this
only contributed to widespread public displeasure. The government,
however, placed most faith in customs income, which was expected to
follow the licensed trade that was introduced in 1809, but here a twofold
problem arose. First, the major price increases meant that customs tar-
iffs did not keep up with the real value of goods. Second, soaring infla-
tion meant that in reality customs tariffs contributed a pittance to the
state coffers, which contributed to a major reduction of state income –
and this at the same time as there was an explosive growth in state
expenditure.
   After more than five years of war, the state treasury was empty, state
incomes had almost disappeared and monetary value was at a mini-
mum because the amount of paper money in circulation was enor-
mous. Even small denomination coins had gradually been replaced by
bank notes. An attempt to mint so-called war coins of copper was little
help. Monetary value had fallen from 145 Danish rix-dollars for 100 rix-
dollars at Hamburg banco in 1807 to 1680 Danish rix-dollars for 100
rix-dollars in December 1812. The monetary value of the old rix-dollar
at the beginning of 1813 had fallen to 7 per cent of its nominal value.
In this respect Denmark-Norway shared a similar fate to that of Austria,
where the constant wars with Revolutionary and Napoleonic France,
the disastrous defeat of 1809 and the exorbitant reparations demanded
by Napoleon emptied the treasury. The response in Austria was similar
to that in Denmark-Norway – more money was printed in parallel with
tax increases, which led to galloping inflation and, in 1811, to state
bankruptcy.47
   Denmark-Norway went bankrupt on 5 January 1813. It may not have
been a bankruptcy in a strictly technical sense, insofar as the state did
not end its payments or eliminate the claims of its creditors, but, when
the entire Danish-Norwegian monetary system – including the duch-
ies’ own currency – was converted and a new bank was established,
it amounted to a proclamation of bankruptcy. The former so-called
Kurant Bank was replaced by a new national bank for Denmark-Norway
and the duchies as a whole, meaning an end to the duchies’ monetary
independence. The monetary unit, the Danish rix-dollar and the silver
