118   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


work. However, not all parts of Norway were equally hard hit financially
by the war and the blockade, as is shown by the income derived from
privateering in a few coastal towns as well as the economic upswing
in most parts of the country in the years 1809–11. Nevertheless, the
overall picture was very gloomy, especially as the areas that were hit the
hardest were also the most populous.
   The outbreak of war and the liquidity problems in the autumn of
1807 necessitated immediate measures to cover two specific needs in
Norway: cash and loans. Neither the Government Commission nor
businessmen were satisfied with the time it took for the government in
Copenhagen to solve these problems, however. The Copenhagen gov-
ernment was certainly aware of Norway’s problems and needs, but the
king was reluctant to leave the Government Commission with what
he considered too much autonomy over the country’s finances from
fear of this spilling over into desire for national independence, while
his financial advisers were equally reluctant to print bank notes from
fear of inflation. A small credit institution was eventually established in
Norway in March 1808 financed by special credit notes printed in Altona
in Holstein to compensate for the lack of cash. From a Norwegian point
of view, however, these measures were inadequate. The credit institu-
tion had a very conservative lending policy and at any rate the cash
reserves were too meagre to cover Norwegian needs in the longer run.
Irrespective of the fact that the most acute liquidity was avoided with
the help of loans and the credit notes from Altona, there was a prospect
of economic and financial chaos in the long term, not least due to the
inflation that would unavoidably be the result of printing bank notes at
a time when incomes were low.43
   It says much about the lack of cash in Norway during the war years
that the merchant magnate Peder Anker, to conserve his own cash
reserves, went so far as to pay his workers in money he had minted
himself. Anker, who experienced the problems first-hand, made no
bones about what he thought of the general economic situation caused
by the war. In October 1808, clearly addressing the government in
Copenhagen, he fulminated that when ‘Norway is now deprived of its
livelihood and its trade and is abused and mistreated’ it ‘filled every
Norwegian with resentment’.44
   The situation in some other parts of the Danish-Norwegian state was
not as entirely gloomy as in Norway, however. During the war years
the economy even rallied in Jutland, above all because there were still
markets for the province’s agricultural produce. It is true that exporting
corn to Norway became extremely difficult, at times even impossible,
