                                           Naval and Economic Warfare 121


coin in the duchies were replaced by the new ‘national bank daler’.
Six rix-dollars were to be exhanged for one new ‘national bank daler’.
The monetary conversion also meant that the paper money in circula-
tion was devalued to about 10 per cent of its face value, which in effect
reduced the state’s debt by 90 per cent. The government’s chief aim
was to control the issue of new bank notes throughout the state in an
attempt to halt the inflation that had plagued the Danish-Norwegian
monetary system and, not least, to introduce a unified monetary policy.
The monetary conversion can therefore also be seen as part of King
Frederick’s unitary state policy.
   Instead of using silver, which had become almost impossible to
obtain, the state secured the bank note issue with a first-priority, 6 per
cent mortgage on all real property in the country, which had either
to be redeemed or carry interest at the rate of 6.5 per cent. The inten-
tion of taking security in real property was to create trust in the new
system. The population was also asked to make loans or voluntary
donations of silver to ensure an even firmer foundation for the new
national bank daler. It was to little avail, however, as the war continued
to make extreme demands on the state’s coffers, while revenues were
minimal. After only nine months, the state had spent all its cash and
the quantity of silver received from the government’s request for patri-
otic contributions was at best minimal. In a telling report, a bailiff in
the southeastern part of Norway despaired at how none of his measures
could persuade the populace to part with any of their silver for the new
national bank.48
   Thus the printing presses were put to work again turning out bank-
notes, and the little trust there might have been in the new system
abruptly evaporated. By 10 September 1813, the new national bank
daler was worth 8.5 per cent of its nominal value. A catastrophe for
creditors could no longer be averted, and, on 14 September 1813, the
government even had to prohibit debtors from repaying what they
owed unless they did so in pure silver. There was also a drastic fall in
the value of wages, which took still more people to the brink of personal
ruin and bankruptcy – among them civil servants. The government’s
goal of stabilising monetary value was therefore to all intents and pur-
poses a complete fiasco and propelled Denmark into a state of economic
chaos that would continue for decades after the war ended.49
   The state bankruptcy and monetary reform were objects of much
hatred in the duchies. Unlike Norway, Holstein had its own bank
in Altona as well as its own currency which, at least compared with
the Danish-Norwegian currency, had been relatively unaffected by
