122   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


inflation during the war years. This economic autonomy, however, dis-
appeared in 1813 with the establishment of the new national bank and
the national bank daler. This in turn threw the duchies into a mon-
etary chaos that they had been unaccustomed to and at a time when
trade had already suffered badly from the effects of the Continental
Blockade. Credit in Schleswig and Holstein was all but ruined, and
capital began to flow to Hamburg, while high prices, inflation and the
virtual cancellation of outstanding debts sent many people and busi-
nesses spiralling into bankruptcy. Moreover, many people were now
left unable to pay their taxes and increasingly so as new taxes were
introduced on top of the unpopular taxes introduced earlier in the
war. Those still able to pay deeply resented the new ones, such as a levy
imposed on capital.50
  Ultimately, the reform and taxes left many Schleswigers and Holsteiners
with a sense that they were forced to pay for what was increasingly
perceived as the irresponsible foreign and economic policies of the gov-
ernment in Copenhagen. Danish officials, on the other hand, saw no
reason why the duchies should not bear their share of the economic
burdens of war and indignantly labelled Schleswig-Holstein’s resistance
to the government’s economic policies and measures as unpatriotic.
Such differences in perception and mutual dissatisfaction were politi-
cal dynamite and pushed public opinion in Holstein in an increasingly
anti-Danish direction. It says something about the furious reactions and
the opposition in the duchies that in the summer of 1813 Frederick VI
was forced to back down as far as the introduction of the new national
bank daler was concerned.51
  People in Denmark proper were not happy either. Anonymous letters
accusing the king of misusing the treasury and swindling the country,
and the author of one letter threatened to ‘buy a charge of gunpowder
and saltpetre to blow up the king and all his royal apparatus’.52 Danish
creditors and wage-earners were equally hard hit by the monetary con-
version as the rest of the population. The state bankruptcy was also a
hard and unpopular blow for Norwegians. The Norwegian priest, Claus
Pavels, a state patriot, attempted to console himself with the thought
that state bankruptcy and the measures on the part of the government
that ensued were ‘probably necessary in order to prevent what was
even worse, and if it can lead to a desirable result in the future and
ward off similar misery for us and our successors, we must put up with
the present-day distress’. Others were not so optimistic and without
mincing words characterised the monetary decree of 5 January as an
‘abomination’.53
