                                           Naval and Economic Warfare 123


   The exchange rate for Danish-Norwegian currency in relation to
foreign currencies fell like a stone, which was yet another blow for
Norwegian foreign trade that was already hard pressed. Furthermore,
prices had risen dramatically in Norway at the same time as cash con-
tinued to flow out of the country and credit was unavailable, despite an
economic upturn after 1809. The state bankruptcy and the monetary
decree of 5 January 1813 were not only the causes, but they exacerbated
the serious economic problems Norway already had, and, as was the
case in Schleswig-Holstein, irrevocably altered public opinion, shook
confidence in the government in Copenhagen and increasingly led to
the view of the royal power as ‘Danish’ and therefore as incompatible
with the interests of Schleswig-Holstein or Norway. As such it mattered
little that the reforms had been implemented by the government in the
belief that peace was forthcoming. While peace would probably have
made the reforms of 1813 more effective, it was not to come and the
reforms thus only helped worsen Denmark-Norway’s economic misery.
Perhaps even worse, public trust in the state’s finances and its financial
institutions waned, if not wholly disappeared.


Patriotic Societies

The inhabitants of Denmark-Norway did not stand passively by as the
economic crisis unfolded before their eyes. Nor was it the case that the
crisis alone created a deep sense of dissatisfaction with the situation
in general and with the government in particular. The war and the
blockades made it necessary to set aside the economic liberalism that
had evolved during the years before the war and to make the econ-
omy and production more self-sufficient. After the outbreak of war this
resulted in the establishment of a number of national patriotic socie-
ties in various parts of Denmark-Norway, whose common aim was to
strive for autarky. The practical economic effect of their activities can
be discussed, but a very important point that can easily be overlooked
is that they led to a development at the economic level that was clearly
connected with the idea of national autonomy and unity.
   In the 1890s a Danish historian wrote that the economic develop-
ment after 1807 had been a return to ‘government mercantilism’. This
is inaccurate, however, as the initiative for the new national economy
was not taken by the government but by the middle class. It was rather
a question, as a Norwegian historian recently wrote, of cameralism.
Cameralism was a popular concept with elite civil servants in Europe at
the time, and, among other things, its goal was to replace foreign trade
