                                          Naval and Economic Warfare 115


  The ‘customs terror’ introduced after the Fontainebleau decree of
1810 also had a negative effect in other ways. French customs offic-
ers and gendarmes searched everyone, including women and children,
who passed through the town gates of Hamburg, which was naturally
experienced as deeply offensive by the inhabitants of both Hamburg
and Altona. It was, therefore, not without reason that French customs
officers on the border between Altona and Hamburg were regularly
assaulted, something that in turn on several occasions created crises
in Danish–French relations. But the customs barrier could also have
unexpected effects, such as when the inhabitants of Holstein expressed
a desire for a closer attachment to France – in some cases to be actually
annexed to France proper – to make it easier for them to sell their prod-
ucts. This was more illustrative of desperation in Holstein than of any
pro-French feeling, however, as Napoleon’s treatment of the inhabitants
of the neighbouring town of Hamburg after the annexation of 1811
could hardly have made the prospect of French rule very tempting.36


Economic Crisis and State Bankruptcy

Seen as a whole, the consequences of the double blockade were predom-
inantly negative and in many ways outright catastrophic for Denmark-
Norway – even though there were periods of economic recovery during
the war years of 1807–14 while some areas certainly escaped the worst
ravages of the blockade. However, the state bankruptcy in January
1813 still stands as unambiguous proof of the shattering effects of the
war and the blockade on economic, political and even social life in
Denmark-Norway. The loss of the fleet, the general decline in foreign
trade and, not least, the ruinous cost of the war itself meant that state
and private enterprises in Denmark-Norway were eventually bled dry.
   Frederick VI’s prohibition against all trade and communications
with Great Britain in October 1807 also reflected the king’s embit-
terment after the Bombardment of Copenhagen. But although this
was shared by the merchants and citizens of Copenhagen, they were
still clear-sighted enough to understand what war with Great Britain
would mean in the long term. A number of merchants therefore peti-
tioned the king shortly before he issued his prohibition against any
contact with Britain at least to defer the most aggressive reactions
against Britain, such as confiscating British goods, ships and property
and starting a privateering campaign, until it was known for certain
what the British government would do in the future. But their petition
was simply ignored. There were also several merchants and citizens in
