                                           Naval and Economic Warfare 119


but there was not much difficulty in finding other markets for it,
chiefly in the duchies and in northern Germany. Furthermore, while
agricultural produce remained a stable commodity because price rises
compensated for inflation, monetary inflation made it easier for farm-
ers in Jutland to pay their workers, pay off their debts and pay their
taxes, at least as long as there was cash to go round. The many small
Danish market towns also got through the war years reasonably well
as their economies were closely tied to those of the farmers, but many
small artisans were hit by the lack of work and the high cost of living.
Ships from provincial towns chiefly plied the coasting trade or sailed to
Norway, and even though the latter ran at a loss, the losses in provincial
towns were far more affordable than those experienced in the capital.45
  Copenhagen was hardest hit by war and the blockade, as it lost its
position as a transit port for overseas goods and for the Baltic trade.
This had been a major source of freight and customs income before the
war but shrank considerably after 1807. The same was also true of the
capital’s merchant fleet. While the fleet had carried 35,000 shiploads
in 1806, this was reduced to 16,000 shiploads eight years later – which
was even a substantial increase compared with the worst crisis year of
1808.46 In its capacity as the centre of gravity of the Danish-Norwegian
state, Copenhagen would be severely affected by the war, since neither
trade nor the economy in the capital would return to their former lev-
els after it ended. In many respects the position previously occupied
by Copenhagen was filled by Altona and, in particular, Hamburg. The
war was an economic catastrophe for Copenhagen, and it only really
recovered during the second half of the nineteenth century. Its politi-
cal status as the centre of a Danish-Norwegian-German mini-empire
would, however, never be re-established.
  The most numerous and largest-scale bankruptcies among Danish-
Norwegian merchants came after the war, although by then many busi-
ness houses had been on the verge of folding for many years. During the
war on the other hand it was the state itself that went bankrupt, basically
because, as customs and tax income dwindled, its income fell dramati-
cally, and its expenditure – chiefly for the military – rose correspond-
ingly. It was, of course, no help for the Danish-Norwegian state that
Napoleon never honoured the vague promises of favourable loans and
subsidies made in the Fontainebleau Treaty of 1807, while Frederick VI
was left to foot the entire bill for the French troops’ sojourn in Denmark
in 1808. The extraordinary costs incurred through the planned cross-
ing to Scania in the winter of 1809, and not least the auxiliaries he was
obliged to place at Napoleon’s disposal in northern Germany in 1812
