116   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


Norway who were deeply sceptical about the war with Britain, even
though Norwegian support for Frederick’s policy in the wake of the
British attack on Copenhagen should not be underestimated. Nor did
patriotism and embitterment in Norway blind people to the long-
term negative consequences of war. During the winter of 1808 even
the peasants in a small and remote parish near the Swedish border
complained about the war with Britain, because they had neither corn
nor money, while the war had brought the timber trade, vital to their
living, to a complete standstill. This emphasises another aspect of the
British blockade of Denmark-Norway: it dealt a hard blow to a wide
range of people and was in practice a kind of warfare waged against the
entire population.37
   Both the British blockade and the Continental Blockade were major
factors in the destruction of the domestic trade cycle and the joint mar-
ket in Denmark-Norway, and they virtually put an end to overseas trade.
One of the worst years was 1808, which saw the Continental Blockade
being enforced rigidly by King Frederick VI right across the board, while
the British fleet tightened its grip on the Danish-Norwegian coasts. As
early as April 1808, the British consul at Helsingborg could report to
London that Danish-Norwegian commerce was to all intents and pur-
poses non-existent. Norwegians were worst effected, as their economic
survival was deeply dependent on timber exports to European – and
above all, British – ports. Some 59 per cent of Norwegian timber was
exported to Great Britain, counting for some 80 per cent of the total
value of all timber exports combined. Total Norwegian timber exports
in 1808 were reduced by over 99 per cent by comparison with 1806, the
last whole year of peace. It is true that 1806 represented a peak, but this
only made the reduction harder to bear two years later, even more so as
more timber than ever had been prepared for export in the summer of
1807 in anticipation that the lucrative times would continue. This was
nothing less than an economic catastrophe of enormous proportions,
not only for the major merchants and exporters but also for the vast
number of workers in their service, including the lumberjacks deep in
the forests, who were suddenly deprived of work and of most of their
income and, in some cases, their investments.38
   The British blockade also had a major impact on coastal areas, where
fish exports in western and northern Norway, for instance, went into a
steep decline as early as the autumn of 1807 at the beginning of what
should have been the export season for salted, dried cod and stock-
fish. It was no light matter to send ships out to sea, since almost all of
them were seized by the British. During the autumn of 1807 alone, 553
