114   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


created major problems in the duchies. First, the decrees and their
enforcement gave the kiss of death to most of the smuggling networks,
not least because the Fontainebleau Decree contained draconian pen-
alties for smuggling British goods that were not covered by the provi-
sions of the decrees, that is, British manufactured goods in particular.
This was coupled with a much higher concentration of French troops
and gendarmes in north Germany, who served the double function of
guarding ports and beaches and enforcing Napoleon’s conscription laws.
French control of the North Sea coastline was thus severely tightened,
and Denmark-Norway had no choice but to follow his lead. Furthermore,
the British government increasingly began to make use of Swedish ports
such as Gothenburg to smuggle goods into Pomerania and Prussia, which
moved the pivotal point of smuggling from the North Sea to the Baltic.34
   From about 1810 Heligoland therefore lost its importance as a British
warehouse, which sent Schleswig and Holstein spiralling into a deep
economic crisis, since it put an end to the black economy that had
softened the worst effects of the war and the blockade. The Trianon
and Fontainebleau decrees also had another very negative effect on the
duchies as they now not only found themeselves outside the French
empire’s customs barriers but also cut off from their traditional markets
in the areas annexed to France, particularly Hamburg. In this dilemma,
the alliance between Denmark-Norway and France was of no help at
all as it made no mention of duty-free trade between the two partners.
   Relations between the cities of Altona and Hamburg can serve as an
example of how the duchies were struck by the events of late 1810 and
early 1811. While smuggling of British goods from Altona to Hamburg
had been both lively and creative in the years after Denmark-Norway’s
entry into the war – and had in practice developed into its own black
economic system, which also included quite a few corrupt French civil
servants and military officers – the Trianon and Fontainebleau decrees
brought to Hamburg a horde of French soldiers, civil servants and cus-
toms officers who proceeded to enclose the town in an iron ring. In
November 1810 alone, French officials confiscated British goods valued
at more than 800,000 francs in Hamburg – plenty of which had doubt-
lessly come via Holstein – and some of the goods were burned outside
the walls of the town as a symbolic act in full view of the inhabitants of
neighbouring Altona. Furthermore, peasants from Holstein who hith-
erto had somehow been allowed to enter the city to sell their produce
at their traditional markets in Hamburg found themselves unable to
bring their hard-earned cash back across the border because all exports
of money from the empire were prohibited.35
