                                           Naval and Economic Warfare 117


Norwegian vessels were lost in this way. Nor was the licensed trade
with Britain from 1809 particularly lucrative for the Norwegian fish-
ing industry, which was vital to economic life in many coastal areas in
western and northern Norway. In peacetime most fish exports had gone
to the continent and the Iberian peninsula, but, while the British did
buy timber from Norway under license from 1809, the British had no
intention of allowing licenses to supply Napoleon’s empire with fish.
   The economic consequences of the war and the blockades were exac-
erbated by the fact that, in the absence of banks or other suitable credit
institutions, Norwegian merchants had little or no capital reserves.
Broadly speaking, this meant that the flow of money went out of
Norway, which led to cash shortages even in peacetime while purchases
and investments were mainly done via credit. This was a major reason
why Norwegian merchants, whose fortunes were mostly based on prop-
erty rather than capital reserves, had argued for decades that Norway
was in dire need of a bank of its own.39 Indeed, after the outbreak of
war, a relatively well-to-do merchant in the city of Trondheim noted
with astonishment that he was all but unable to obtain cash. Moreover,
many merchants who were owed substantial amounts in Great Britain
discovered that their dues had been confiscated by the British govern-
ment at the outbreak of war. This not only drained their cash reserves
severely but also left them with reduced creditworthiness. Norwegian
businessmen normally drew bills on private banks in Copenhagen,
Hamburg, Amsterdam and London, but the war had made this impossi-
ble, ‘because’, one merchant noted, ‘when nothing is exported, nothing
can be withdrawn from the banks there’.40
   This created serious liquidity problems for most Norwegian merchants
in addition to the lack of hard cash. Peder Anker, the most influential
and richest merchant in Norway, only narrowly escaped bankruptcy in
the autumn of 1808 through the king’s direct intervention, which took
the form of a huge loan. Many Norwegian farmers, on their part, had
no money to pay their taxes in the autumn of that year, which was one
of the reasons why the interim government in Norway opposed a tax
increase decreed by the king in the spring.41
   The war with Sweden made matters even worse for Norwegians,
because it brought an end to what was usually a lively trade across the
Swedish border. Ironworks in the eastern parts of Norway, for example,
no longer had access to pig iron and bar iron from Sweden, which was a
major problem for many of them, as their production depended on it.42
And the knock-on effect of the war and the blockade was dire, because
it meant that many workers lost their jobs and were unable to find other
