132 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


The idea of directly starving the Norwegians had little attraction for
him, and he did, in fact, find himself forced to devote much energy
to countering its adherents. ‘In my view’, he remarked, ‘it would be
very good if the Danish contingent in Norway began to rely on Swedish
supplies, neglected other means of supply and assistance, and was later
deprived of them.’ Thus, when ‘the inhabitants have gained a taste for
it and attached some hope to it, the arrangement could be abruptly
cancelled and the blame placed on Denmark’, which he thought would
ensure ‘the greatest possible effect’. However, this was not tantamount
to actually starving the Norwegians but instead would show them their
dependence on Sweden and turn them against the Danes. Whilst he
reluctantly agreed to a blockade of the Norwegian coast, he insisted that
the Swedish border remained open. For all the unreliability of much of
what Adlersparre wrote, his practical actions in this matter do reveal
that he was not out to starve the Norwegians into submission.74
   Yet, there were still those in Adlersparre’s closest circle that seem
to have favoured a less lenient approach to the Norwegians than did
Adlersparre. The historians Birger Sjövall and Lee Sather argue that
Adlersparre was less in favour of a policy of starving Norway than, for
example, Count Wedel Jarlsberg, Baron Baltazar von Platen and Colonel
Carl Pontus Gahn, all key figures in the conspiracies across the bor-
der in 1809. The count, Sather argues, even suggested starving Norway
on his own initative. This raises the question of whether Count Wedel
Jarlsberg was, in fact, prepared to starve his countrymen for the benefit
of a union with Sweden in what, at least in his eyes, would have been a
patriotic act to save Norway from incompetent Danish absolutism. The
count’s sympathetic biographer, Yngvar Nielsen, thinks not and stresses
that the count ‘did not want to starve his countrymen’. Naturally,
Count Wedel Jarlsberg would not have been as foolish as to leave hard
evidence of such an opinion, let alone to openly display it in Norway,
even more so as he was still a member of the Provisioning Commission
and as such keen to avoid suspicion. Yet, when he was unexpectedly
summoned to Copenhagen in February 1811 the count made sure to
burn many of his private papers, which clearly shows that he had some-
thing to hide. In the light of both the king’s and Adlersparre’s misgiv-
ings against the ‘system of starvation’, it seems even more reasonable to
believe that its main advocates were found elsewhere. In any event, the
introduction of licensed trade with Britain in August and September
soon put all thoughts of either using corn as bait or starving Norway
to an end and instead forced the Swedes and Count Wedel Jarlsberg to
consider other strategies and methods to unite Norway with Sweden.75
