                                          Naval and Economic Warfare 131


opposed to 50 in 1807 and 1808, and 38 in 1810. In fact, the population
in Onsøy was reduced by 6 per cent in 1809 alone. In the entire country
there were 35.9 dead per 1000 in the year 1809 against a normal figure
of about 20 per 1000.71
  Sweden was quick to exploit the famine and misery that ravaged
Norway. This, they reasoned, would force the Norwegians to surren-
der and to all intents and purposes place the country in the hands of
Sweden. Swedish strategy towards Norway was therefore determined
in no small part by the country’s food shortages, although Norwegian
responses did not necessarily take the forms the Swedes expected. The
Swedish revolution in March 1809 was followed by renewed efforts
to unite Norway with Sweden. In the late summer and autumn the
Swedes made a determined effort to win and woo Norwegian hearts
and minds. Peace, trade, food and constitutional rule were among the
promises made to the Norwegians by Swedish propaganda, but behind
them there was also a stick at hand to beat them with. The question,
however, was how to use the stick.
  One idea was to mercilessly starve the Norwegians and in this way vir-
tually force them, if only from sheer desperation, to come crawling into
the arms of Sweden. This would involve a very strict enforcement of the
blockade in cooperation with Britain, still Sweden’s ally. Another idea
was to proceed in a more subtle manner, allowing trade and corn across
the border only to cut it off after a while to demonstrate Norwegian
dependency on Sweden and the inability of the Danish government to
provide for them. At some point Sweden was to appear on the scene as
angels of mercy. With this in mind corn and other commodities were
stockpiled in western Swedish ports ready to be shipped to Norway.72
  The question of who wanted to starve Norway outright and who pre-
ferred a more lenient approach warrants some discussion. The Swedish
king, for one, altogether opposed the ‘system of starvation’, as he came
to call it, and held that military might was a far more reliable means of
annexing Norway. General Gustav Mauritz Armfelt, who resumed his
military command on the Norwegian border shortly after the revolution
only to fall out of favour with the government in late August, argued for
his part that the only workable means was to starve the Norwegians and
force them to open their ports for the British and the Swedes, which he
thought would inevitably separate Norway from Denmark.73
  Yet, in the end the major influence on Sweden’s policy towards
Norway in 1809 came neither from the king nor Armfelt but Georg
Adlersparre – now a government minister – who, while certainly will-
ing to make use of the stick, was all in favour of a lenient approach.
