                                          Naval and Economic Warfare 129


The quantity of corn being shipped to Norway was simply insufficient
and the blame for having brought Norway to this miserable pass and
for being incapable of remedying it was heaped on the government in
Copenhagen and on the union with Denmark.65
   However, corn could also be shipped to Norway via the North Cape.
With the help of the Danish-Norwegian envoy in St Petersburg – and at
the request of the Government Commission – Frederick VI arranged for
Russian corn to be bought and shipped from Arkhangelsk to Trondheim
in September 1808 on board Russian and Norwegian ships. In this
instance, Denmark-Norway derived some benefit from its alliance with
Russia. Most of the Russian corn was hauled laboriously across the
mountains from Trondheim to eastern Norway, an operation which in
itself once again emphasised the gravity of the situation. Other food
supplies were also sent to eastern Norway from other, less needy parts
of Norway. This can to some extent be interpreted as an expression of
national solidarity, although this solidarity did not always come about
of its own accord.66
   The shortage of corn in Norway was undoubtedly greatest in the
spring and summer of 1809 when famine ravaged parts of the coun-
try following a year and a half of war, blockades and military mobi-
lisation. The situation changed overnight, however, in August 1809,
when licensed trade with Britain was permitted. Norwegian ships sailed
from port carrying cargos of timber and returned with corn. Between
1 September 1809 and 1 September 1810, no less than 1.15 million
bushels of corn were imported into Norway – both from Danish and
other ports – followed by another million bushels between September
1810 and September 1812. For the time being this brought an end to the
most acute corn shortages.
   Still, prices were high. For example, one observer concluded in March
1810 that even though ‘there is plenty of corn for sale in Norway’s mar-
ket towns’, inflation meant that ‘farmers would not sell their domestic
produce at less than three or four times the normal price’. The upshot of
this was that food was only available to those who were well-off enough
to afford it. What was more, food was not always readily available even
after the introduction of licensed trade. ‘All grocery and provisions
shops are empty’, was the report from Christiania, which showed that
consumption outstripped imports.67
   In 1811 the government in Copenhagen did introduce a system of
rewards to encourage Danish and Norwegian merchants to ship corn
to Norway and, not least, to depress prices. The idea was to exploit the
favourable economic conditions brought about by the licensed trade in
