                                           Naval and Economic Warfare 127


enough, this did not go down well in Norway, and the desperate situa-
tion in 1808 further reinforced the criticism, especially after the debacle
surrounding the plans for an invasion of Scania. Stocks of corn in the
public and military granaries were already at a dangerously low level
even before the Swedish invasion, and the likelihood of receiving new
supplies before the crops could be harvested in July seemed remote. It is
against this background that the critical corn shortage and the growing
unrest in Norway during the war years of 1808–09 must be seen.
   Several Norwegian historians believe that the government in Copen-
hagen simply did not appreciate how serious the shortages in Norway
were until the summer of 1808 at the earliest, and there is a good deal of
evidence to suggest they are right. The delay in establishing permanent
insurance schemes and the authorities’ problems in organising corn
shipments between Jutland and Norway clearly show the government’s
irresolution as well as a lack of knowledge of conditions in Norway.
But this should not be confused or equated with plain indifference, as
many Norwegians then and since have tended to do. One problem was
that, given King Frederick’s centralist and absolutist rule, few dared to
take major initiatives without the king’s explicit orders. Unfortunately
it was not until July 1808 that the king ordered an officer to be sent to
Jutland to manage and coordinate the corn supply so it could be taken
on to Norway. This was the first meaningful step that the government
had taken, but the officer did not arrive in Jutland until September and
it was only then that the king issued a regular order to levy approx-
imately 648,000 bushels of corn from Danish farmers to be sent to
Norway.62
   Furthermore, in August 1808, Count Herman Wedel Jarlsberg under-
took yet another trip from Norway to Denmark. This was initially to
find out what was happening in Jutland in an attempt to speed up corn
shipments to Norway, and the steps the king had just taken made the
date of his arrival there timely. Wedel Jarlsberg was given a seat on
a newly established commission whose purpose was to function as a
link between the Government Commission in Christiania and the
Exchequer in Copenhagen to ensure the best possible communication
and coordination between parts of the state and thereby facilitate corn
shipments. But there still appeared to be more problems than solutions.
There was enough corn and a sufficient number of ships in Denmark,
reported Wedel Jarlsberg, but there was a lack of seamen to crew them
as most sailors were serving on gunboats. The Skagerrak was also still
full of British men-of-war and the light summer nights often made it
easy for them to spot their prey among Danish and Norwegian vessels.
