                                           Naval and Economic Warfare 133


Postwar Ruin

Essentially, the war was an economic catastrophe for Denmark-Norway,
with repercussions that lasted well into the 1830s. During the years
between 1816 and 1820, many Danish business houses went into liq-
uidation. These represented a substantial proportion of Danish busi-
nesses, including most larger ones. These hard times after the war made
the ‘palmy days’ before 1807 seem like a veritable golden age to business
communities in Denmark and Norway.76
   A major contributing factor was that the business houses found it
difficult to adapt to the new conditions after the war. During the war
and the blockade, many of them had invested their money in goods
and industry, which had flourished in what was largely a closed, pro-
tected market. After the war, however, it was impossible for industry to
compete with British factories and goods, even though an attempt was
made to protect the market by using customs barriers. Industry was par-
ticularly hard hit because state subsidies – which had been maintained
during the war on the grounds that they were necessary to ensure sup-
plies for the army and navy – had to be abruptly withdrawn as a con-
sequence of the state’s financial difficulties. At the same time, industry
was exposed to fierce international competition. But it is worth not-
ing that, in spite of a huge decline in what was an artificially inflated
Danish industry, production was stabilised in the textile industry, for
instance, at a level that was higher than before the outbreak of war in
1807. The businesses that survived were those that had invested in new
machinery and rationalised production, while amateurs and specula-
tors lost everything.77
   Landed estates proved unsaleable and were now in practice often
worthless, which was a hard blow for the landowners and business
houses that had invested in these properties. The international agricul-
tural crisis also hit Denmark hard, first because the end of the war and
demobilisation brought a reduction in the demand for the corn from
which Jutland farmers in particular had made a good living. Second,
the loss of Norway as a domestic market and the introduction of highly
protectionist corn laws in Britain in 1815 preceded an even worse situ-
ation as a consequence of the international decline in prices in 1818.
   The crisis in Denmark-Norway was further exacerbated as the often
closely intertwined structure of Danish and Norwegian business houses
led to them dragging each other down into bankruptcy. This was
largely because the domestic business cycle in the Danish-Norwegian
state had been broken in May 1814, when Frederick IV declared that
