126   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


Corn to Norway and Criticism of Denmark

Few things came to cause so much dissatisfaction and open criticism
in Norway during the Napoleonic Wars as the perceived failure of the
government in Copenhagen to supply Norway with corn. Shortly after
the news of the Bombardment of Copenhagen reached Norway, Count
Herman Wedel Jarlsberg went to Denmark to help organise corn supplies
from Jutland and to urge the government to act rapidly. The count went
to Denmark twice during the autumn of 1807 and succeeded in buying a
large quantity of corn, including a considerable amount in Gothenburg
in Sweden. In November, he also obtained a seat on a special commis-
sion in Christiania, known as the Provisioning Commission, which was
responsible for supervising corn supplies to Norway. Furthermore, civil
servants and merchants in the southern Norwegian coastal towns were
also working tirelessly to obtain corn from Denmark. These relatively
large amounts of corn were bought in Denmark both at private and
public expense, and were stored in Jutland to be shipped across the
Skagerrak to Norway. Here, however, the problems began in earnest.60
  Although the British blockade had not been so rigidly enforced in
the autumn of 1807 as it would be later on in the war, sailing across
the Skagerrak was precarious enough. It therefore became necessary to
establish insurance and incentive schemes to encourage Danish and
Norwegian shipowners and merchants to take it upon themselves to
ship corn across the Skagerrak, since the Danish-Norwegian state was
unable to do so itself. The question, however, was who should defray the
shipping costs. The Government Commission in Norway was unwilling
to promise compensation for corn ships that might be seized or sunk,
as this was a public expense that should be paid by the government in
Copenhagen. The Danish government, on its part, was equally hesitant
to give promises that could impose major and potentially unmanage-
able expenses on the state. In the winter of 1807–08 a major problem
was, therefore, the inability to agree on the insurance issue, which only
increased the reluctance of private players to take on large-scale, risky
corn shipments.61
  Many people also began to question how much effort the govern-
ment was putting into organising corn shipments to Norway during
the winter. Norwegians naturally felt that the government should be
taking the intiative to employ vessels to transport corn to Norway at its
own expense and risk. Time and again, however, it was pointed out in
Denmark that the shortage of vessels was the reason why more corn was
not being sent to Norway at the government’s expense. Understandably
