128   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


   The consequence of all this was that in spite of the more targeted
measures initiated by the government, only negligible quantities of
corn reached Norway during the late summer and autumn of 1808.
Even the postal route across the Skagerrak was completely cut off for
long periods of time. In July, Christian August urged Frederick in the
strongest terms to ‘keep provisioning in mind, for God’s sake’, and the
following month the Government Commission launched harsh criti-
cism directly at the king in a lengthy report addressed to him con-
cerning the critical extent of the shortcomings. Some corn had been
transported on private initiatives, wrote the Government Commission,
but the state had been responsible for none of it, and the commission
even went so far as to echo what was being said by many critical voices,
namely that Denmark was not doing enough. Christian August and the
Government Commission could hardly have expressed their criticism
in stronger terms, which is a measure of how desperate the situation
had become and how dissatisfaction was growing. This is the back-
ground against which Count Wedel Jarlsberg’s mounting criticism of
the regime should be seen, and which gradually prompted him and
several like-minded Norwegians to question the union with Denmark
as a whole.63
   An even greater furore was caused by the Government Commission
making known to the public the criticism it had addressed to the gov-
ernment when it became necessary to requisition corn from farmers
in eastern Norway to secure supplies for the military. The requisitions
were a risky measure, given the shortages among the peasants in this
war-ravaged part of the country, and the Government Commission’s
decision to voice what amounted to open criticism of the government
reflects how serious the measure was considered to be. The message to
the peasants was absolutely clear: the government in Copenhagen had
not been able to obtain corn, so the Norwegians would have to fend for
themselves. These were strong words coming from the body that had
been appointed to represent and enforce the royal power in Norway.64
   The situation would become even worse, however. Not only did the
harvest fail in most parts of Norway in the autumn of 1808, but the
Skagerrak and Norwegian coastal waters froze so hard during the winter
of 1808–09 that hardly any ships could make the crossing, either with
corn or post. In August 1808 Prince Christian August made it clear to
the king that at least 800,000 bushels of corn were needed for southern
Norway alone, while by the spring of 1809 only some 406,000 bush-
els from Denmark had made it across the Skagerrak – no more than
a quarter of which had been shipped at the expense of the crown.
