130 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


order to ensure adequate corn supplies to Norway by stimulating these
shipments instead of the more profitable business of shipping British
colonial produce and industrial goods. Put simply, ships were to carry
corn rather than British colonial goods, especially those that had sailed
to Britain with timber and other products from Denmark-Norway.68
   In this case, too, the effect could be discussed. As the profit on the
sale of colonial goods brought back from Great Britain after selling
timber there during this period was broadly speaking greater than the
profit from the sale of corn, it is hardly surprising that merchants and
shipowners gave the former higher priority. It was therefore no accident
that Norway was reputed to be awash with British colonial and indus-
trial goods, at least until both warring parties further tightened up the
blockade in 1812. The general problem was that, while immediate corn
requirements were generally covered, these imports were insufficient to
enable the establishment of larger stocks of corn in public and military
magazines. This meant that serious deprivation was staring Norway
in the face when the British yet again imposed rigorous limitations
on the licensed trade from 1812, while at the same time the screw of
the Continental Blockade was tightened even more by Napoleon and
Frederick VI, and harvests in Norway failed catastrophically.


Famine Exploited

Conditions especially in southeastern Norway, the most populous part
of the country and the main theatre of military operations in the war
with Sweden, had already become extreme in the summer of 1808. In
July a vicar described how ‘destitution from hunger has now increased
noticeably’ because ‘people are found lying [h]alf-dead [ ... ] not only on
roads and rocks, but also in their homes’. Even those who were gener-
ally well-off, he continued, were starving.69 In the summer of 1809,
an officer reported from a parish near the Swedish border that ‘entire
families are pretty much extinct’.70
  Moreover, several civil servants and vicars described how church-
yards were too small for all the dead, how rotting corpses were left in
view of the disgusted populace, while a vicar described how death often
came as a relief to those who were starving or suffering from disease. In
1809 there were 21,391 dead in Akershus Stiftamt, the administrative
entity spanning most of southeastern Norway, compared to a median
of 8278 per year in the years 1803–07. In 1808 12,679 people died in
Akershus Stift. The small parish of Onsøy near the city of Fredrikstad
can serve as a concrete example. Here, there were 141 dead in 1809 as
