124   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


with domestic production. This involved making use of a nations’ raw
materials, educating its population, improving methods of production
and building up industry in order to create an autonomous state or an
autonomous national economy.54
  This was partly a question of old wine in new skins for Denmark-
Norway. Patriotic societies had been established in the eighteenth cen-
tury throughout Europe – including Denmark-Norway – and in the
United States. They worked for the best interests of their state by describ-
ing their national geography and resources and by improving agricul-
ture, business and industry. Contrary to the recent claim of a Danish
historian, Danish and Norwegian patriotic societies were characterised
by a national rhetoric and clear national polar opposite identities. In
other words, in contrast to earlier in the eighteenth century, after the
outbreak of the Napoleonic Wars state patriotism was not the primary
motive of these societies.
  The first patriotic societies were already springing up in the win-
ter of 1807–08, their chief goals being to support domestic manu-
facturing and damage the enemy’s economy by refusing to buy
British products. In Denmark, for example, the Society for National
Handicrafts was founded in the winter of 1808. Its activities and dis-
course centred around Denmark, and its members actively promoted
Danish industry with the aim of awakening a spirit of competition
and ‘convincing ourselves of our national merit’. 55 These exhibi-
tions, which were a great success to begin with, applied to Denmark
and not to the state as a whole, which emphasises the existence of
the idea of national autonomy and unity and points in the direc-
tion of Danish national patriotism. It is true that the practical sig-
nificance and effect of the societies was at best debatable, but these
initiatives bear witness to an energy bound up with an identity more
as a nation than as a state.
  The clearest example of this development can be found in Norway.
The outbreak of war and the blockades made it necessary to attempt
to establish a domestic war industry, as the Norwegian army was
completely dependent on imports of equipment from Denmark. The
problem initially was that by and large there were no industrial plants
in Norway, but field guns and cannonballs were soon being cast at a
number of ironworks. However, attempts to establish factories that
could supply the army with muskets, clothing and ammunition were
blocked on several occasions by the government in Copenhagen. The
reason frequently given was the absence of some form of realistic plan
for establishing and operating such factories. But beneath the surface
