                         Internal Changes and External Threats, 1810–12   141


management or management board could in a sense resemble a gov-
ernment body. Moreover, most of the 1500 or so members who had
joined the society before the end of 1810 probably saw the society as
little more than an all-round or state-patriotic organisation designed
to promote the material interests of Norway.6 The real political dyna-
mite lay where these interests were not in harmony with the wishes
of the government in Copenhagen. There were two areas in particular
where the interests of Norway and those of the government collided:
the questions of a bank and a university. These issues generated express
Norwegian national demands that the members of the Society for the
Welfare of Norway generally supported.


Norwegian Demands

The failure to establish a Norwegian bank and university had been
one of the prime causes of complaint among Norwegians for decades.
These demands were reiterated forcefully after the outbreak of war
in 1807 when Norway’s isolated and desperate situation emphasised
the country’s helplessness. A lengthy letter from the influential mer-
chant Jacob Aall, who held a prominent standing in Norway’s elite, to
Prince Christian August, dated 21 September 1809, contained an assess-
ment of Norway’s situation and a summary of the country’s demands.
Unsurprisingly, Norway’s critical situation was a matter of discussion
and Aall’s letter was written at the request of Christian August. For this
reason it was probably somewhat bolder than it might otherwise have
been. One passage is worth quoting at length:

  There are a multitude of limitations on trade, the scope of industry
  has been restricted in many ways, the paths of education are blocked.
  No bank, no free trade, no academy, few of the country’s own men
  have been entrusted with the most important posts. Most applica-
  tions arrive too late and the decisions made are often left to men
  with little knowledge of the country’s situation. It sometimes hap-
  pens that applications from the country’s honourable and wealthy
  citizens are set aside for such a long time that the best-intentioned
  plans are never brought to execution.7

Put briefly, this was an expression of dissatisfaction with the immediate
state of affairs and even with the state of the union at a more general,
structural level. Aall clearly stated that something must be done and
in his frustration expressed the wish that ‘the Danish government [be]
