136 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


Michael Broers, for example, argues that total war ‘was in the mind, and
even on the drawing board, but not yet on the battlefield’.82
   While a definition of the concept of total war such as ‘the complete
mobilization of a society’s resources to achieve the absolute destruc-
tion of an enemy, with all distinction erased between combatants and
non-combatants’ is perhaps not very helpful as it is very unlikely that
such an event would occur,83 the distinction – or lack of it – between
combatants and non-combatants is nevertheless important as far as
gauging the scope and effect of war. Indeed, there can be no doubt that
the distinction between combatants and non-combatants was erased
in many cases during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars – at least
compared with what had been the case in most European wars in the
latter half of the eighteenth century.
   On the one hand, this was the case in parts of Spain and Italy, for
example, where resistance to Napoleon took the form of guerrilla war-
fare and, in the eyes of French soldiers, made the entire population
potential enemies. On the other hand, it also came to expression in
the case of Denmark-Norway, when the British blockade made the
entire population the target of warfare. Or, in other words, the entire
population, and therefore the state, had to be brought to their knees
and forced to break with Napoleon. This was seen at its most extreme
in Norway, which was completely cut off from its foreign economic
connections and, not least, from access to vital imports of food. Even
though the British blockade can hardly be called a case of total war, it
clearly showed how warfare could come to include non-combatants.
This does not mean that the methods used by the British government
to wage war on Denmark-Norway and on its overseas possessions can
be regarded as completely ruthless. At the explicit wishes and orders
of King George III, links and supplies to Iceland, Greenland and the
Faeroes were allowed to continue during the war, albeit on the condi-
tion that all ships on route to these dependencies visited a British port to
be checked and inspected.84 The case of Norway was different, however,
since it was far more closely tied to British interests – certainly as far as
forcing the government in Copenhagen to surrender was concerned –
so purely humanitarian considerations played a less central role in this
respect. Furthermore, the famines in Norway in 1809 and 1812 could
not be blamed solely on the British government. They would probably
not have occurred, at least not to the same extent, had the Norwegian
harvests not failed. Moreover, Great Britain permitted licensed trade
with Norway at certain times during the war, which also helped to
bring food supplies to Norway. There were therefore several underlying
