140   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


society, as was the custom when establishing patriotic societies in the
Danish-Norwegian state. Another departure from the usual practice was
the omission of a dedication to the king in the invitation to join the
society.
   Wedel Jarlsberg regarded the society as a launchpad for a future
national government once ties with Denmark had been severed. It comes
as no surprise, then, that the outlines of liberalism and civil administra-
tion can be discerned in the way the society was organised. The society
would eventually gain as many as 2652 members – or practically speak-
ing almost the entire Norwegian political and socioeconomic elite, and
the underlying idea was indeed to unite the entire country. It is no
accident that the society’s first task was to set to work energetically con-
necting Norwegian towns using new stagecoach and freight routes, in
other words carrying out a national infrastructure project.
   Frederick VI was far from pleased at the creation of the society. He was
also warned in no uncertain terms by his brother-in-law, the Deputy
Governor of Norway, Prince Frederick of Hesse, that it was a ‘Jacobin’
society that could ‘very easily become a dangerous instrument’, as it
‘ignores all formality and intervenes in government department affairs’.
But the king was painfully aware of the discontent rife in some circles
in Norway and knew he had to tread carefully. He would run the risk of
alienating virtually the entire Norwegian elite by opposing the society,
something that he wished to avoid under any circumstances. Therefore,
instead of banning the society outright, the king opted in the spring
of 1810 to sanction and support it on condition that it be renamed the
Royal Society for the Welfare of Norway.4
   By then he no longer regarded it as an overly serious political threat,
since communications between Denmark and Norway had been
restored, the autonomy of the Government Commission had been con-
siderably curtailed and other special Norwegian institutions established
to deal with the crisis, such as a temporary Supreme Court, had been
closed. Yet the Society for the Welfare of Norway was nevertheless a
reminder that Norwegian loyalty to the monarch and the state could
not be taken for granted. Furthermore, its cameralist belief in a self-
sufficient – and therefore possibly politically independent – national
economy was also a potential threat to the intricate economic system
that bound the Danish-Norwegian state together.5
   On the other hand, neither the political aspirations nor the homo-
geneity of the Society for the Welfare of Norway should be exagger-
ated. It was divided into seven branches, and while its practical dealings
were not concerned mainly with politics, it is true that its central
