                                           Naval and Economic Warfare 135


colonial produce and creating an economic upturn in the capital. The
strategy failed dismally, not only due to competition but because of fall-
ing sugar prices. Sugar beet had arrived in Europe, and sugar production
had also begun in the East. Besides which, the Danish sugar produced
in St Croix was not ideal for large-scale production. Matters were only
made worse by the sugar refineries in Copenhagen being outdated tech-
nologically and unable to survive in the face of competition. Danish
sugar exports fell dramatically, and soon only the domestic market was
left. The number of ships sailing to the West Indies began to decline
as early as 1817, and the decline continued in 1820 when the price of
sugar fell to a quarter of its former levels. This resulted in bankrupt-
cies not only among plantation owners in the Danish West Indies but
also among the merchants and shipowners in Copenhagen who had
invested heavily in new ships or in the West Indies trade.80
   To make matters worse, the value of money fell considerably in the
wake of state bankruptcy and the peace. The decline in monetary value
along with inflation had already created major problems during the
war, but the problems for Denmark became more acute after 1814, when
the amount of paper money in circulation, which had been calculated
for the entire Danish state in 1813, was now legal tender only in the
Kingdom of Denmark. As a result its value fell even further. In 1816 it
corresponded to only 30 per cent of its face value, but this rose to 70
to 75 per cent a year later, while it was close to par in 1818. The dis-
count rate also fell, and the credit market, which had been through ter-
rible times, briefly recovered. However, the development was due to the
extension of credit on foreign loans, and the consistency of the state’s
monetary policy meant removing as many bank notes from circulation
as possible. This itself had negative consequences for the business com-
munity, but the crisis was only felt in earnest when corn prices fell in
1818, knocking out many businesses – and once again bringing down
the value of paper currency - which only returned to par in 1838.


The Scope of War

While some scholars remain somehow unconvinced, most tend to agree
with Clausewitz that the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars were ‘peo-
ple’s wars’. David A. Bell has recently gone further, however, and referred
collectively to these wars as ‘the first total war’. The fusion of war and
politics, Bell argues, ‘drove the participants relentlessly toward a condi-
tion of total engagement and the abandonment of restraints’.81 Although
accepted by some historians, others are less convinced by Bell’s views.
