                          Internal Changes and External Threats, 1810–12   139


  Yet the most serious threat to Denmark-Norway was external. While
Sweden’s peace with France in January 1810 brought her into Napoleon’s
camp, Sweden was never destined to be a really faithful ally of Napoleonic
France. And while Christian August’s arrival in Stockholm, also in
January 1810, signalled friendlier Scandinavian relations, his tenure as
Crown Prince Carl (Charles) August – the name he assumed after he
crossed the border – proved to be brief. He suffered a stroke and died on
28 May 1810, which caused renewed destabilisation of the political situ-
ation in Scandinavia, as his death made it necessary to settle the issue of
the Swedish succession once more.


The Society for the Welfare of Norway

The Norwegians held a magnificent farewell celebration for Christian
August in Christiania on 29 December 1809. The entire town was illu-
minated, and its prominent citizens had been invited to a dinner in
the rooms of the Cathedral School in honour of the prince. On the face
of it, the celebration and the dinner seemed an innocent event for an
extremely popular prince who had guided Norway through two years of
deep crisis and, in the eyes of many people, had saved the country from
destruction. Beneath the surface of the celebration, however, there was
a clear political undertone that was packed with dynamite.
  Count Herman Wedel Jarlsberg’s efforts earlier in the summer and
autumn of 1809 to pave the way for a union of Norway and Sweden
had yielded few, if any, practical results.2 Wedel Jarlsberg was obliged
to change his plans and strategies, but his aim remained the same: to
separate Norway from Denmark and unite it with Sweden. This was
the reason underlying the foundation of the Society for the Welfare of
Norway as part of the farewell festivities for Christian August. All who
attended the dinner received an invitation to join the society, and the
response was overwhelming, some 200 prominent citizens immediately
accepting it.
  Once the decision had been made to set up the society at a private
meeting in Christiania on 9 December 1809, Count Wedel Jarlsberg
energetically opposed its official founding on 28 January, which was
Frederick VI’s birthday.3 Instead he wanted it to coincide with the fare-
well celebration for Christian August so that it would take on a com-
pletely different symbolic significance. This reflected the count’s desire
to link the society to a new political course for Norway under Christian
August and, by implication, to a union with Sweden. Furthermore, Count
Wedel Jarlsberg refused to attach the prefix ‘Royal’ to the name of the
