                         Internal Changes and External Threats, 1810–12   143


much vigour by the Society for the Welfare of Norway.11 However, fear-
ful of the idea of establishing a university in Norway, the central gov-
ernment bodies in Copenhagen and King Frederick VI were simply not
prepared to agree to it. Yet, knowing full well that the seeds of discon-
tent had been growing in Norway and that the society had tremendous
backing from the Norwegian elites, they were nonetheless cautious
about openly opposing the society by rejecting its demands outright.
This saved Hount from the courtroom.
  In the first quarter of 1810, Frederick VI nevertheless tightened his
grip on Norway and made it clear to Deputy Governor Frederick of
Hesse, sent to Norway in the later summer of 1809, that Norwegian
policy must to be guided by the primacy and principles of the unitary
state. For this reason the king made it clear that he was not prepared
to grant Norway a bank, because an independent Norwegian bank, he
feared, would essentially tie itself to Britain and as such ‘turn Britain
into Norway’s master’. A university, he suspected might become a breed-
ing ground for separatist ideas that could fuel demands for national
economic independence.12 Yet, such ideas had already taken root in the
Society for the Welfare of Norway, and the king was anxious to prevent
them developing and gaining more momentum.
  However, for all these reservations, the king was about to change
his mind. On 28 February 1811 he suddenly ordered that prepara-
tions should be made to establish a university in Christiania, less
than a year after he had rejected the idea. The ostensible reason for
the king’s sudden change of heart was his awareness that the demand
for a university had become a national cause that was increasingly
defined in terms of opposition to the government in Copenhagen.
This found clear expression in 1811 when a priest, Nicolai Wergeland,
wrote a prize paper on a Norwegian university in a competition
mounted by the Society for the Welfare of Norway. This paper was,
to say the least, a highly controversial work, as it balanced on a knife
edge between extreme national patriotism and outright demands for
national independence. Reactions in Denmark were anything but
muted, with one reviewer fulminating against the ‘morbid national-
ism’ of Wergeland’s paper.13 The politically explosive nature of the
demand for a Norwegian university lay, therefore, not only in the
concept of national separatism that at times underlies such demands,
but also in the regular conflict it could trigger between Denmark and
Norway.
  Public exchanges of this kind naturally made an impression on the
king and the government. They also renewed King Frederick’s suspicion
