142   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


more willing than it has been to listen to the complaints harboured and
presented by us Norwegians’. To help remedy this, he suggested setting
up a convention of ‘the better part of the country’s citizens’ to assess
the situation and present the government in Copenhagen with specific
suggestions for measures to improve the situation. In essence, this was
a call for some kind of a national Norwegian representative/executive
body.
  Aall’s comments were not intended as fundamental criticism of the
union per se. What Aall wanted first and foremost was change and
reform, which he saw as preconditions for the continued existence of
the union. Some Norwegian historians have called this a ‘third way’
between the continuation of a unionist status quo and outright seces-
sion from the union with Denmark. This third way reflected a desire for
greater Norwegian autonomy, but still within the framework of a union
with Denmark.8 Aall was not alone in his desire for autonomy and in
1809 he no doubt enjoyed the support of many of the influential mer-
chant patriciate in eastern Norway. However, while they stopped short
of demanding a separation, such complaints and demands were still
unmistakable signs that all was not well within the Danish-Norwegian
state, even though Wedel Jarlsberg had failed to drum up much support
for his schemes in 1809.
  Yet, while few were as outspoken as Count Wedel Jarlsberg, some lent
their support to his views and even made them public. The priest, Peter
Hount, was one of them, presenting his views in a fiery article entitled
‘Norway’s Just and Reasonable Wishes’.9 He pulled no punches in this
article, which contained an explicit demand that Norway be granted
a bank and a university of its own, and he also hinted that Denmark
was deliberately exploiting Norway for its own purposes. Before the
war and the interruption to communications between Denmark and
Norway, an article such as this would have been redacted by the cen-
sor’s pen. However, after 1807 something of a separate public sphere
emerged in Norway and made it possible for Hount to mount his fiery
criticism and to make public his demands. Nonetheless, even though
the liberal Government Commission in Norway showed tolerance to
public opinion during most of the war, at least compared to what was
deemed acceptable in Copenhagen, Hount went far beyond what it was
prepared to tolerate. However, after having considered bringing formal
charges against him, the authorities backed down when they learned
that Hount enjoyed widespread support.10
  The demand for a university, in particular, was endorsed by the vast
majority of Norway’s educated elite and for this reason pursued with
