134 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


Norway should be regarded as a foreign country. This meant that cus-
toms duties were imposed on imports and exports between the two
countries before trade was completely broken off during the war of 1814
under pressure from the great powers. When trade was resumed in the
autumn, Denmark no longer had a de facto monopoly on corn sales
to Norway, as had previously been the case despite the formal aboli-
tion of the monopoly in 1788, and it became necessary to compete on
international market terms, which was a major problem. Danish corn
was considered an inferior product because it was not adequately dried.
The best had formerly been sold abroad, while the remainder was sent
to Norway. The loss of a large share of the Norwegian market hit Danish
corn merchants and farmers like a boomerang, and it was particularly
hard on provincial merchants, who often had goods and money owing
to them in Norway, which, as it turned out, they never saw. In this
way the provinces lost a considerable share of their market, while at
the same time prices fell and the number of farmers and agricultural
labourers rose dramatically as demobilised soldiers gradually returned
to their homes. The crisis was, if possible, even worse, then, at rural vil-
lage level than it was in towns. Furthermore, corn sales to Norway had
been invaluable to the Danish economy since the Norwegians paid in
silver, which they had received for timber exports.78
   Silver was of decisive importance for Denmark’s trade with the Orient,
where it was the preferred method of payment. However, much of the
overseas trade had also been lost, as the French and the Dutch had taken
over many of the markets that Denmark-Norway and Great Britain had
dominated during the 1790s. There was still a certain amount of trade
with India, but Denmark had lost its foothold in the Chinese market. A
Danish poet, who had accompanied the last Danish expedition to the
Orient, described how the rich sons of Java and even Batavia’s declining
merchants mocked Denmark ‘as a tiny, impoverished country’.
   The state of affairs in the West Indies was somewhat better, at least
for a while. As a well-functioning free port, the Danish colony of St
Thomas became an important centre for Caribbean trade and commu-
nication after the Napoleonic Wars. In the words of one Danish his-
torian, this had ‘a certain influence on the fact that the Danish West
Indies enjoyed a period with excellent financial conditions, not least
because St. Thomas plied a fast growing and, as time went on, very con-
siderable trade with Venezuela, Colombia and Panama’.79 However, this
had little knock-on effect in Copenhagen. Here, government strategy
had consigned about one-third of the ships in Copenhagen to the West
India trade with the intention of supplying the entire Baltic region with
