                          Internal Changes and External Threats, 1810–12   145


The First Turning Point:
The Sudden Death of Crown Prince Carl August

Relations between Denmark-Norway and Sweden improved after
Christian (Carl) August arrived in Stockholm on 20 January 1810 and
tentatively grasped the reins of the Swedish government in the place
of the ailing King Charles XIII. As the supreme authority in Norway,
Christian August had showed himself to be unwilling to contribute to
Adlersparre’s and Wedel Jarlsberg’s plans to bring about a Norwegian–
Swedish union. There is also a good deal to suggest that he made it very
clear to Adlersparre that he had no intention whatsoever of conduct-
ing an offensive policy towards Norway even as Swedish crown prince.
This did not mean that he had given up the dreams of a Scandinavian
union that had so enthused him in 1809, but as the Swedish crown
prince, he wished to realise his dreams in a peaceful manner. One of the
thoughts that crossed his mind was to turn over the Swedish throne to
Frederick VI on his accession or to marry one of the Danish-Norwegian
king’s daughters. However, these hardly amounted to more than mere
thoughts that he soon abandoned anyway.16
  Carl August could certainly envision political change in Scandinavia
in the form of the establishment of a constitutional Scandinavian
union, but such change would have to be brought about through peace-
ful means and was hardly something he thought could be realised in
the short term. At all events, none of this played a significant role. Carl
August died of a stroke during a military parade in Scania on 28 May
1810, which once again created a vacuum in Swedish and Scandinavian
politics, which many sought to exploit and the outcome of which would
determine the course of Scandinavian politics and even history.
  Carl August’s death was very unexpected and at first sight even
improbable. He had not yet turned 42, had a relatively healthy physi-
cal constitution and lived a simple life. As such there was no reason to
expect that he would die at a young age. His untimely death caused
a sensation in Sweden and Denmark-Norway alike, with the majority
believing that he had been murdered as a result of the political tensions
with which Sweden had come to be associated. It did not take long
for rumours to emerge – albeit false ones, as subsequent investigations
would prove – that the Swedish nobility was responsible for poison-
ing him. ‘On 28 May the devilish deed was carried out, after all other
attempts had failed’, noted one observer in Norway in her diary, while
Frederick VI dispatched a representative to Sweden to find out what
had actually happened.17 Suspicions that the crown prince had been
