                          Internal Changes and External Threats, 1810–12   149


scenes to secure his own election even before the Riksdag in Sweden was
aware of his candidacy. Napoleon, who had recently voiced his support
for Frederick Christian, remained vague and non-committal, which
Bernadotte exploited to give the Swedes the firm impression that he was
the Emperor’s preferred candidate. Bernadotte immediately launched
what amounted to a PR campaign targeting Swedish Riksdag deputies,
which included frequent references not only to his military record, but
also to his vast personal fortune, which would enable him to offer gen-
erous loans to Sweden’s exhausted treasury at a low rate of interest. The
marshal’s financial standing also allowed him to use bribes and rewards
to win support for his candidacy. So, even though the young Lieutenant
Mörner’s activities in Paris had initially been ill received in Stockholm,
particularly by the king, and actually led to his imprisonment on his
return, they did also bring about Bernadotte’s election as crown prince
of Sweden by the Riksdag on 21 August.
  This was, to put it mildly, a highly improbable outcome to the second
Swedish succession crisis. In fact, most contemporary observers were
astonished at the Riksdag’s choice, not least King Frederick, who could
not understand how the Swedish throne had slipped out of his dynas-
ty’s hands. But Bernadotte had three main advantages over his oppo-
nents: he was believed to have Napoleon’s endorsement, he had a proven
military record and he possessed the financial means that enabled him
to tip the balance in his favour. Furthermore, his revolutionary and
Napoleonic background put him on an equal footing with the liberal-
leaning Duke Frederick Christian and Prince Christian Frederick, and
was in stark contrast to the absolutism of Frederick VI, who for all his
efforts was unable to convince the Swedes that he would respect their
constitution, laws, political culture and territorial integrity.
  Nevertheless the key factor had been Napoleon, an indication of
the influence the French emperor had even in matters that were at
best of secondary importance to him and on which he exerted little
direct pressure. In fact, in the case of the second Swedish succession
crisis, it was basically a matter of interpreting the alleged wishes of the
Emperor. It is no exaggeration to assume that if Napoleon had given
his unambiguous, firm and explicit support to one of the candidates,
that candidate would have been elected. Niels Rosenkrantz, the new
Danish-Norwegian foreign minister who had assumed office during the
crisis, therefore bitterly lamented that his predecessor and Frederick VI
had not done more to secure Napoleon’s direct support for a Danish-
Norwegian candidate. Rosenkrantz’s irritation was shared by the heir
to the throne, Christian Frederick, who told the king exactly what he
