                          Internal Changes and External Threats, 1810–12   153


The Annexation of Holstein

Duke Frederick Christian and King Frederick VI had been in disagree-
ment about Schleswig and Holstein since 1806, when Holstein was
annexed by Frederick. The duchy of Schleswig, which was roughly half-
Danish and half-German, and the German duchy of Holstein consti-
tute a very complex and complicated chapter of Danish-Norwegian and
even European history. Lord Palmerston, the British statesman, report-
edly sighed in 1864 that ‘only three people [ ... ] have ever really under-
stood the Schleswig-Holstein business – the Prince Consort [Albert],
who is dead – a German professor, who has gone mad – and I, who have
forgotten all about it’.30 The duchies made up an intricate territorial,
ethnic and legal patchwork, and this made them a very delicate matter
for the Danish government to handle, both in terms of domestic and
foreign policy. While the most serious and pressing foreign policy prob-
lems concerning the duchies had been formally resolved in 1773 by a
Danish-Russian settlement of various territorial and hereditary claims
and conflicts, several potential domestic problems had still been left
unresolved and would remain so until 1864.
   Political, social, economic and legal order in the duchies at the turn
of the nineteenth century was uneasily balanced between the king
in Copenhagen’s dual function as the monarch of parts of Schleswig
and as Duke of Holstein on the one side, the Imperial Knights and
the Holy Roman Empire (of which Holstein – unlike Schleswig – was
a part) on another, and then a wide range of ancient rights and privi-
leges in the duchies and a variety of concessions and compromises
that had been arrived at because of them. This balance also relied
upon a range of multi-layered and overlapping loyalties and identi-
ties. Loyalty to the Oldenburg dynasty and the state generally ran deep
in the duchies, but there was also a deep sense of local attachment
and orientation. However, as was the case in Norway, attachments
and identities in the duchies – even if they were substantially more
local in kind and scope – ran parallel to dynastic loyalty and state
patriotism.
   In so far as a greater sense of regionalism or a more abstract iden-
tity was felt, it was bound primarily either to Schleswig or to Holstein.
The population in the duchies during the war years therefore rarely
referred to themselves as ‘Schleswig-Holsteiners’, but rather as ‘Danish
Holsteiners’ (in Schleswig) or ‘Holsteiners’. To a certain extent this
reflected the ethnic composition of the duchies. But, as a Danish
