                          Internal Changes and External Threats, 1810–12   147


certain amount of influence. This made itself felt in the intense diplo-
matic activity, the lobbying and bribery that took place in the summer
of 1810, when several candidates were proposed by Sweden, Denmark-
Norway and by other elements in a battle for the acceptance of the
Swedish Riksdag on the one hand, and Napoleon’s support on the other.
  Meanwhile, in Copenhagen, Frederick VI had by no means forgotten
his brief candidacy to the Swedish throne during the previous year and
did not hesitate to promote it once again. In Paris the Danish-Norwegian
emissary was made to understand that the Emperor was not opposed
to Frederick becoming a candidate. Hearing this, King Frederick began
single-mindedly to promote his candidacy, using lobbying, bribery,
diplomatic soundings and, finally, a personal letter to King Charles
XIII to ensure he would be elected.20 The problem was that the great
majority of people in Sweden had no desire whatsoever to see Frederick
on the throne of Sweden. Chiefly associated with despotism, reaction-
ary stubbornness and military pedantry, Frederick was widely disliked.
Napoleon’s apparent endorsement of his candidacy therefore worried
Swedish political circles. Consequently, the Swedish government began
to look for alternatives to Frederick who would still be acceptable to
Napoleon.
  In the immediate aftermath of Carl Augusts’s death, one faction,
which included Adlersparre and King Charles XIII, had already been
considering as their preferred candidate the liberal-minded Duke
Frederick Christian of Augustenburg, King Frederick’s brother-in-law
and a minister of the Danish-Norwegian government. The duke was
the deceased Swedish Crown Prince’s elder brother, and the support for
his candidacy in Sweden was probably in large part due to fondness for
Carl August. However, King Charles XIII was soon waxing enthusiastic
about the prospect of yet another candidate, who had been suggested as
a counter-move to Frederick VI’s candidacy. Prince Christian Frederick,
the intelligent, charming and fairly liberal-minded 24-year-old heir
to the Danish-Norwegian throne, was considered by many people in
Sweden – including Foreign Minister Lars von Engeström – as a prefer-
able and more suitable candidate were Napoleon already to have reserved
the Swedish throne for the Oldenburg dynasty. Frantic attempts were
therefore made to convince Napoleon that Christian Frederick was a bet-
ter candidate than Frederick VI, and that all arguments in favour of the
Danish-Norwegian King’s candidacy – dynastic and otherwise – were
also applicable to his heir. Finally, a minor faction, chiefly consisting of
those still in favour of the deposed dynasty, proposed Prince Gustav, the
son of Gustav IV Adolph, as the rightful Swedish heir.
