148   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


   There is no room in this book to follow in detail the intricacies of
the diplomatic intrigues that surrounded these candidates. Ultimately
Napoleon – although he had minimal interest in Scandinavian affairs –
favoured Duke Frederick Christian of Augustenburg, or the Prince of
Denmark, as the Emperor referred to him. Frederick VI, for his part,
still clung to his own candidacy, with Prince Christian Frederick as his
second choice.21 This laid the foundation for a quarrel and, eventually,
a major conflict between Duke Frederick Christian and Frederick VI,
which ultimately prompted the latter to set up a naval blockade around
the island of Als, where the Duke resided, to prevent him from travelling
to Sweden while the Riksdag was convening in the town of Örebro to
elect Carl August’s successor. Needless to say, Duke Frederick Christian
was infuriated by this, and not least because he believed that a formal
offer from Sweden was, in fact, imminent. With relations between the
Duke and the King already deeply soured because of the King’s annexa-
tion of Holstein in 1806, their conflict over the question of the Swedish
succession brought about a final breach between the two men.
   However, when the Swedish Riksdag convened in early August, both
men were left high and dry. There was a feeling in Swedish military
circles that the Duke of Augustenburg’s total lack of experience and
interest in military matters made him unsuitable as a Swedish regent,
an aspect that also appears to have been decisive in sowing doubt in the
otherwise sympathetically inclined King Charles XIII. The same consid-
erations applied to Prince Christian Frederick, who had hardly any mili-
tary experience worth mentioning either. After all, many Swedes had
reconquest of Finland in mind. This led a number of Swedish officers to
start thinking of alternatives who were better qualified from a military
point of view as successors to the Danish-Norwegian throne, and who
would nevertheless be acceptable to Napoleon. One of these officers
looking for alternatives was a young lieutenant, Otto Mörner, who in
June had been sent as the official emissary to Paris to hear Napoleon’s
opinion.22
   Having arrived in Paris, the undoubtedly fearless lieutenant fla-
grantly exceeded his authority initially by paying a visit to Marshal
Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte and then exceeded it further when he as good
as offered him the Swedish throne if Bernadotte – and Napoleon – were
willing. Bernadotte was given the impression that the Riksdag was deter-
mined to elect a French candidate regardless, which only added incen-
tive for the marshal as he was falling out of favour with Napoleon as a
military commander. So, parallel to the tug-of-war between Frederick
Christian and Frederick VI, Bernadotte began working behind the
