                          Internal Changes and External Threats, 1810–12   151


between Frederick VI and Christian August was that Frederick ‘did not
regard a Scandinavian union as the ultimate goal of his foreign policy
but rather as a means to his ultimate purpose, the acquisition of addi-
tional territory by Denmark’.26 The propaganda for which Frederick VI
was largely responsible – or that he at least sanctioned – both in 1809 and
1810 made active and quite novel use of terms like the Nordic countries
and Scandinavia and gave them a dynastic-political content in line with
the idea of a united Scandinavia under a single monarch.
   For many people proto-Scandinavianism was above all committed to
peace and political stability on the grounds that a unified Scandinavia
would mean an end to centuries of Danish-Norwegian and Swedish
rivalry and war. This was why the idea became so prominent in many
influential circles during and after the calamities of the war of 1808–09.
The prospect of Scandinavian peace and unity was the primary motive
behind Prince Christian August’s efforts to secure the Swedish throne
for Frederick in the spring of 1809, and was the main reason why he
ultimately came to accept it himself. On the one hand, the prince’s
stance stemmed from the realisation that the war of 1808–09 had been
forced on the Scandinavian powers against their wishes and interests,
and similar scenarios could be prevented in the future if Scandinavia
were united under one crown. Such dynastic Scandinavianist tenden-
cies were strengthened by the peace and by Christian August’s election
in 1809. Swedes were often described as a brave people in Danish-
Norwegian publications after the peace at Jönköping in December the
same year. War between the Scandinavian states was unnatural, as a
number of writers pointed out. It is true that there had been such state-
ments as early as 1808, but while in that context they should be under-
stood as propaganda aimed at turning the Swedish people against their
government, they were undoubtedly meant far more sincerely after
1809.27
   On the other hand a fragmented Scandinavia beset by internal hostil-
ities could be highly vulnerable to Russian ambitions. Christian August
was therefore desperate to avoid aiding Russian territorial conquests
that would lead directly to threats against Danish-Norwegian borders.
From that point on, he feared, it would only be a matter of time before
Russia conquered all of Scandinavia. These fears also reflected a cul-
tural perception in which Scandinavian culture as a whole was con-
trasted with the ‘barbaric yoke’ of Russia. Consequently, a perceived
threat from Russia could help to further Scandinavian unity by creating
a negative stereotype of Russia that could be fed into perceptions of a
Scandinavian cultural and ethnic ‘self’.
