150 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


felt about the matter, although in rather cautious terms. ‘If one sits qui-
etly in inactivity, one must give up any thought of unification of the
kingdoms’, he wrote on 13 August, and concluded, ‘Unfortunately, the
moment to win Sweden’s crown peacefully by a vote of the Rigsdag
appears to have been lost.’23
   The election of Bernadotte as Crown Prince Charles John of Sweden
was a decisive turning point. Had Frederick VI or Christian Frederick
been elected, the most likely outcome - sooner or later - would have been
some sort of Scandinavian union. A Scandinavian union would have
been less likely in the event of the election of Duke Frederick Christian,
but it seems highly improbable that the Duke would have pursued the
same political course as Charles John eventually did in abandoning the
idea of reconquering Finland in favour of seizing Norway. Nevertheless,
the election of Charles John put Swedish foreign policy far beyond the
influence of the Danish-Norwegian government. Moreover, with the
election of Charles John the proto-Scandinavianist ideas that the two
succession crises had engendered were left dead in the water.


Proto-Scandinavianism

While he was still intending to invade Scania in February 1809, Frederick
VI launched balloons to which proclamations hailing him as ‘Nordic
Frederick’ were attached. These were sent drifting across the Sound into
Scania with the aim of convincing the Swedes that they would ben-
efit from a Scandinavian union under his rule. The problem was that
Frederick VI regarded a Scandinavian union less as a kind of federal
structure than as an annexation and incorporation of Sweden into the
absolutist Danish-Norwegian state, which was hardly very attractive to
the Swedes.
  Notions of a Scandinavian union and what might well be called proto-
Scandinavianist sentiments had, at least for some people, close ties to
constitutionalism. Christian August had also thought along these lines
and, after leaving Norway at the turn of 1809–10, went so far as to sug-
gest that the way to ensure Norwegians’ loyalty and to secure Norway
for Denmark in the future was to give Norwegians political influence.24
In the spring of 1809 he had also made it clear to Frederick VI that the
key to the Swedish throne lay in promising a constitution ‘for all of
Scandinavia’.25 Even the reactionary Frederick VI would eventually see
how the land lay, which was why he went so far with his promises and
guarantees to Sweden in 1810. However, he had no intention of introduc-
ing a constitution in his domains. As Lee Sather writes, the difference
