144   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


of Count Wedel Jarlsberg because of his overt conspiracy with the Swedes
in 1809. The count found himself the object of the king’s close scrutiny
during the winter of 1810–11 after the turmoil generated in Sweden by
the election of the new heir to the throne in the late summer of 1810.
He was eventually summoned to the king’s headquarters in Copenhagen
in February 1811, ostensibly to be questioned about his overtures to the
Swedes.14 Wedel Jarlsberg arrived in the capital only a few days later
on 28 February, but was extremely surprised to learn that Frederick VI
was basically appointing him to establish a university in Christiania.
Nothing could have been further from the confrontation and charge of
high treason he had been expecting.
   A number of Danish and Norwegian historians have attributed this
surprising turn of events to the fact that Wedel Jarlsberg arrived in
Copenhagen so soon after he was summoned that it left the king with
no time to obtain sufficient evidence against him, which forced him to
use the university as a pretext for having called upon the count. While
there may be something in this, there is also reason to believe that,
by the time Frederick VI summoned Wedel Jarlsberg, he nevertheless
had begun to sense that new crises were looming on the horizon and
that measures would have to be taken to accommodate the Norwegians.
And Frederick did succeed in this, at least in the short term. His deci-
sion to grant Norway a university gave cause for much celebration, and
the Norwegians’ gratitude was confirmed in the form of nationwide
festivities following the king’s decision, during which he was praised
for his generosity. This reflected, and generated, strengthened loyalty
and state patriotism. At the same time the university festivities had a
strong national undertone and derived inspiration from revolutionary
France in cultivating abstract concepts such as freedom and wisdom.
The awareness that the university celebrations were nationwide created
a perception of a Norwegian national community, even for some com-
mon people who attended the festivities to be fed at public expense.15
Yet, for the time being, this perception went hand in hand with loyalty
to the king and the state.
   However, there were also dark clouds on the horizon for the Danish-
Norwegian government. Events in Sweden were among the main rea-
sons Frederick was so anxious about Norwegian loyalty in 1811. While
Frederick VI had felt it was quite certain that Charles John would fur-
ther strengthen Sweden’s ties with Napoleon’s camp it appeared increas-
ingly clear that the Swedish crown prince had a completely different
aim which, at the beginning of 1811, would once again make Sweden
the primary foreign threat to Denmark-Norway.
