                         Internal Changes and External Threats, 1810–12   163


Renewed Threat from Sweden

Charles John’s Norwegian policy took shape during the years from
1811 to 1812 and posed a new and very serious threat to Denmark-
Norway. Many of the Riksdag members who had voted for Charles John
in 1810 had done so with a view to reconquering Finland, a task for
which the French marshal seemed well suited. However, this was not
Charles John’s goal. He held a firm view that Sweden would not stand
a chance in a protracted conflict with Russia and that Finland could
not be defended in the long run. Instead, he wanted to consolidate and
strengthen Sweden by acquiring Norway, as that would then make it
almost impossible to penetrate the Scandinavian peninsula and leave
Sweden as the dominant Scandinavian power.
   Far from cementing relations between Sweden and France, like many
Swedish officers certainly wanted, Charles John’s foreign policy dis-
tanced him from Napoleon and constituted an approach to Britain
and Russia. Charles John’s aim was on the one hand to tie Denmark-
Norway’s hands by obtaining British and Russian support and guaran-
tees and, on the other, to continue the Swedish policy of conquering
Norway from within by fomenting and exploiting anti-Danish and
pro-Swedish sentiments. In this way, the Swedes once again set out to
manipulate and exploit Norwegian identity and loyalties by playing up
Norwegian misgivings towards Danish rule.
   A Swedish propaganda campaign in Norway had been prepared as
early as the spring of 1811, but it was temporarily abandoned as Charles
John gave higher priority to his diplomatic efforts, while at the same
time doing what he could to strengthen his army and secure his own
standing in Sweden. His extension of conscription in 1811 proved to
be tremendously unpopular, however, and led to a popular uprising in
Scania. But he succeeded in extending it and in implementing a num-
ber of military reforms, which was obviously a source of concern for
the Danish-Norwegian government and led to counter-measures in
Norway. This also made it clear to Norwegians that a new Scandinavian
conflict was in the offing.
   Faced with the renewed threat from Sweden, Frederick attempted
to appease the Norwegians to secure their loyalty. The university at
Christiania was formally opened on 2 September 1811 and its first stu-
dents were enrolled in 1813. Furthermore, Charles John’s Norwegian
ambition gave King Frederick VI another reason to stay loyal to
Napoleon, although the military threat to Holstein and Jutland was
still the main reason why Frederick was at pains to avoid war with the
