                         Internal Changes and External Threats, 1810–12   157


the Holsteiners were excluded because they were different in most of
these respects. Thus, the feeling of incompability in Denmark-Norway
and Holstein was to some extent mutual.
   Some Holsteiners viewed the reforms that were implemented or pro-
posed after 1806 as signals that the government in Copenhagen was
increasingly being moved by Danish national chauvinism and bent on
de-Germanification and ‘Danicisation’ of Holstein by eradication of all
of the duchy’s peculiarities and cultural characteristics. This seemed to
be confirmed not only by the sacking or resignation of most of the king’s
German-born- and speaking ministers in the years after 1806, but even
more so by a series of ill-considered remarks made by the celebrated
Danish author Frederik Høegh-Guldberg. Høegh-Guldberg was tutor to
Princess Caroline (King Frederick’s daughter) in Kiel during the years
from 1805–10 and as such a part of the king’s entourage. His remarks
probably reflected Frederick’s own opinions, then, although he might
have gone rather further than the monarch had desired or intended. For
Høegh-Guldberg language made the difference between ‘us’ and ‘them’,
so, as far as he was concerned, the subjects of the Danish-Norwegian
king were only foreigners in the places where Danish was not spoken.36
This view made the language barrier the border of the fatherland and
of the Danish community, a barrier that excluded Holsteiners and
included Norwegians.
   While enthusiastically encouraging the duchies to embrace Denmark
and all things Danish, Høegh-Guldberg also remarked that the purpose
of so doing was ‘so that they might amount to something’ and then
predicted that the very name of the German people would sooner or
later vanish. A speech he held at the University of Kiel on the king’s
birthday in January 1809 particularly displeased the Holsteiners, not
only because it contained what they felt to be downright insults, but
also because it was in Danish. His remarks, which appeared to be lit-
tle more than expressions of national chauvinism, stirred up a great
deal of resentment among many German speakers in Schleswig and
Holstein, even more so in subsequent decades when German national-
ists in Holstein set out to prove that the Danes were bent on eradicating
all things German from the duchies.37
   The linguistic reforms were not the only cause of resentment in
Schleswig and Holstein. Only a week after the annexation of Holstein
in August 1806, Crown Prince Frederick made preparations to intro-
duce an absolutist constitution in Holstein as well as in those parts of
Schleswig that had not hitherto been directly under Danish-Norwegian
rule. This would amount to the introduction of autocracy in Holstein,
