                         Internal Changes and External Threats, 1810–12   161


some members of Holstein’s intellectual elite from 1806 onwards increas-
ingly began to feel a linguistic attachment to Germany as a cultural
nation, no doubt heavily inspired by their reading of Fichte. However,
this also led to the Danish language being perceived as a cultural threat.
   Yet, none of this equated with German nationalism in any political
sense. As far as statehood went, most were happy to accept and support
the Danish-Norwegian state as their civic fatherland as long as the rights
and privileges of their natural fatherland Holstein were respected. The
permanent secretary of the foreign ministry, Joachim Bernstorff, may
prove a case in point. While Bernstorff certainly felt a linguistic and
cultural attachment to Germany, he regarded Holstein as his natural
fatherland and Denmark as his civic fatherland. However, he wanted
to limit the king’s power in Holstein to preserve the duchy’s traditional
rights and – contrary to Frederick’s expectations – he saw absolutely no
reason to approve of the incorporation of Holstein into Denmark proper
in 1806, which in his view marked the ruin of his Holstein fatherland.
   The feeling of Holstein being ruined and Danicisised was rein-
forced by the material grievances caused by the Napoleonic wars. The
state bankruptcy of 1813 exacerbated the severe economic crisis that
had beset Holstein ever since the implementation of the Trianon and
Fontainebleau decrees just over two years earlier. The establishment of
the National Bank and the currency conversion introduced in January
1813 were extremely unpopular, especially as this deprived the duch-
ies of the economic independence from which they had previously
benefited. What was more, these measures were even seen by some
as a blatant attempt by the government to transfer its own economic
problems to the duchies. In addition, some people linked the currency
conversion with the policy of Danicisation after 1806, which gave the
currency conversion an added impetus. However, as with the linguistic
reforms that for the most part remained unimplemented, the currency
conversion and National Bank nevertheless aroused much suspicion in
Holstein as to the government’s true intentions.
   There was also much resentment in the duchies about Frederick’s for-
eign policy. The war with Britain and Frederick’s alliance with France
were both very unpopular. The ruthlessness of the French customs offic-
ers and gendarmes was well known to most, not least the inhabitants of
nearby Altona. As such it is not much of a surprise that some Holsteiners
chose to vent their outrage in various fora. Anti-French statements
made by Holsteiners left Frederick treading very carefully with regard
to Napoleon, and already in 1807 he had been obliged to issue an edict
forbidding Holstein’s civil servants to show pleasure over any military
