                         Internal Changes and External Threats, 1810–12   159


dynasty. This was intolerable to some. Duke Frederick Christian of
Augustenburg also claimed a hereditary right to the duchies on behalf
of his family and was not prepared to relinquish this in favour of the
Oldenburgs. The fact that the King had introduced the absolutist consti-
tution in Holstein without even consulting Frederick Christian before-
hand made matters even worse and sent the outraged duke into a fury. Set
alongside the second Swedish succession crisis of 1810, this was a major
reason why Frederick Christian eventually turned his back on the king
altogether and decided to live in what amounted to domestic exile in
his residence until his death in June 1814. During this period he wrote
a text explaining and justifying the Augustenburgs’ claim to Schleswig-
Holstein, which alongside the memory of Frederick Christian’s conflict
with Frederick VI came to play a central role in the attempts of his son,
Duke Christian August of Augustenburg, to promote the secession of the
duchies from Denmark in the 1840s.
   Although the commission set up to investigate the constitutional
implications of the full incorporation of Holstein into the Danish-
Norwegian state was supposed to complete its work by 1 January 1808,
Denmark-Norway’s entry into the Napoleonic Wars in the autumn of
1807 brought the work to a standstill and postponed it indefinitely.
Consequently, little came of plans to introduce new laws and the abso-
lutist constitution in Holstein, although in practice Frederick came to
rule Holstein in the war years as an absolute monarch. Danish laws were
only introduced in the armed forces, where the introduction of Danish
military laws also implied that the official language of command was
changed from German to Danish.39 Frederick also closed down the
military academy at Rendsburg in Schleswig in 1811 in order to cre-
ate a unitary officers’ corps with similar training and backgrounds and
to make sure that all officers from Holstein received their training in
Copenhagen. They also had to learn Danish and familiarise themselves
with Danish culture in accordance with Frederick’s ambition to stand-
ardise his state apparatus.
   The introduction of the national bank daler following the state bank-
ruptcy of 1813 was also seen as part of the Danicisation of Holstein,
even though the government’s motives in introducing it were national-
political considerations and pressing economic necessity. But the reac-
tions of the Holsteiners did not always take account of the government’s
actual and stated intentions, which shows how easily resentment and
distrust can be directed against what were clearly national and regional
concerns by reinforcing or even creating a sense of ‘us’ and ‘them’.
