154   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


historian points out, while the Holsteiners were the first Germans the
Danes would encounter whenever they travelled south, they were also
a neighbour population and a border population, and thus a transi-
tional population. For this reason the ‘German’ Holstein subjects of the
Danish king were often regarded elsewhere in the Holy Roman Empire
as half-Danish and half-German. Nevertheless, most Holsteiners could
certainly perceive of themselves as Germans, though this did not stop
them also regarding themselves as ‘Dänen’ in the sense of being sub-
jects of the Oldenburg dynasty or citizens of the Danish state. Yet,
as in Norway, problems were bound to arise once the idea of being a
Holsteiner or a German was felt to be incompatible with owing loyalty
to the Danish king. This was what increasingly happened after 1806.31
   The annexation of Holstein in 1806 was motivated by several con-
cerns, state-building and modernisation being two of them. These were
not all new concerns to Frederick, however, and reforms were indeed
nothing new in Holstein after 1806. Just a few years previously in his
capacity as duke, Frederick had introduced a number of modernisation
processes, among them a reform of the army and of tax legislation and
the abolition of feudalism. This indicated a move towards state forma-
tion, consolidation and modernisation, and it was a process Frederick
attempted to continue after 1806, with the outspoken aim of consoli-
dating the Danish-Norwegian state by fully incorporating and integrat-
ing Holstein into it. In this respect, his endeavours differed little from
the policies pursued by many other European governments at about
the same time. However, if Holstein were to be incorporated into the
Danish-Norwegian state the Holsteiners would have to relinquish their
regional characteristics and identity and become ‘Danish’, as Holstein
and its inhabitants would be placed on an equal footing with the rest
of Denmark.
   Foreign policy considerations also played a major role in his assess-
ment of the situation. Holstein had been shielded by Denmark-
Norway’s policy of neutrality since the outbreak of the revolutionary
wars and by the Prussian-led northern German neutrality zone estab-
lished in 1795, but Napoleon’s invasion of Hanover in 1803 had
brought the Napoleonic wars to north Germany. The dissolution of
the Holy Roman Empire and the creation of the Confederation of the
Rhine the following August caused serious worries in Copenhagen that
Prussia would seize Holstein to strenghten its strategic position and
influence in north Germany vis-à-vis Napoleon. These worries seemed
to be confirmed when in the late summer of 1806 Prussia suggested the
creation of a northern German confederation to compensate for the
