                         Internal Changes and External Threats, 1810–12   155


Confederation of the Rhine, which was virtually under Napoleon’s
control.32 As a consequence, the process of annexing and integrating
Holstein into the Danish-Norwegian state was accelerated.
   The process of incorporating Holstein was implemented in a number
of ways. As soon as the annexation had come into force, the chancellery
in Copenhagen responsible for affairs in the duchies was renamed ‘The
Schleswig-Holstein Chancellery’ having shed its original name, the
‘German Chancellery’, on the grounds that the duchies no longer had
any connection with Germany. Furthermore, the crown prince sum-
moned the Cabinet and other advisers to draw up a charter formalising
the annexation, but the wording of the charter was the subject of much
controversy in government circles. Many ethnic Danes followed the
king himself and had full annexation in mind. Most people of German
origin in central government institutions, including most of the king’s
senior ministers such as Foreign Minister Christian Bernstorff, opposed
the annexation of Holstein altogether. This faction, sometimes referred
to as the ‘German bureaucratic nobility’, eventually succeeded in word-
ing parts of the charter in such vague terms that much of it remained
at least open to interpretation. This meant that the two different fac-
tions had quite different views of what had, in fact, been agreed. Yet,
sufficient tension had been created in both camps to sow the seeds of
mutual alienation.
   The means used for annexing and integrating Holstein into the
Danish-Norwegian state were increasingly interpreted – and resisted – by
many Holsteiners who constituted something of a national anti-Danish
faction, although this did not yet amount to German nationalism. Still,
differences between Danes and Germans were central to the conflict.
Most officials in Schleswig and Holstein were Germans. They included
3500 civil servants and 9000 teachers and priests, and for obvious rea-
sons German was their native language. In fact, most of them were
unable to write or speak Danish, except for some from certain parts
of Schleswig. Therefore, the linguistic reforms introduced by Frederick
following the annexation were not well received in these essentially
German circles and, while they were varied in kind, they all pointed
in the same direction. In 1807 the Schleswig-Holstein Chancellery,
the General Customs House and the Commerce Department were
instructed to issue all ordinances, patents and edicts in German and
Danish. From 1809 all commissions were exclusively issued in Danish,
while two years later the Schleswig-Holstein Chancellery and the royal
departments were instructed to state whether candidates for official
posts in Schleswig and Holstein mastered Danish and, if they did,
