156   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


they were to be preferred. In January 1811 it was also decided that the
Danish language should be used in schools, churches and in law courts
in those parts of Schleswig where the majority of the population spoke
Danish. Furthermore, a chair in Danish literature was established at
the University of Kiel in 1811 to promote the Danish language in the
duchies.33
  This certainly looked like a deliberate national chauvinist attempt to
eradicate the German language in the duchies and simply replace it with
Danish. But as far as Frederick and the government in Copenhagen were
concerned, the chief intention of all of the reforms was to standardise
the administration of Holstein and facilitate its full incorporation into
the Danish-Norwegian state. This was made even clearer by the king,
who remarked that he did not regard language as a symbol of culture
and patriotism but as a means of creating standardisation and state uni-
formity. That he favoured Danish rather than the German language in
these reforms was due to the fact that Danes (and Norwegians) were the
ethnic majority, and probably also because – unlike his forefathers –
German was not his first language and one he was not very comfort-
able speaking. All told, there was no great difference between the king’s
intentions in introducing linguistic reforms in Holstein and Joseph II’s
replacement of Latin with German as the language of administration
in the Habsburg domains in the 1780s, which in Joseph’s view was less
a matter of nationality than of improving administrative efficiency.34
  Frederick and the government found support for their policy of Danici-
sation in Holstein among some segments of the public in Denmark. For
nationalistically inclined Danish citizens, Holstein and the German-
speaking population constituted the chief threat to the cohesion of the
state. These views were in line with Frederick’s intentions, but it was
not the case that the majority of the Danish public agitated for the
annexation or ‘Danicisation’ of Holstein because of their national chau-
vinist leanings. On the contrary, Holstein continued to be perceived
by some as an essentially foreign territory united with Denmark only
through the Oldenburg state. Even though most Danish schoolbooks of
the period normally defined the fatherland in state-patriotic terms, this
definition was not so clear-cut to all. In one schoolbook it was made
quite clear that Holstein was part of Germany, while Schleswig was part
of Denmark. A similar tendency could be detected in a highly respected
Norwegian-born teacher who described Norway in 1806 as part of the
fatherland while passing over Holstein in silence.35 The general ten-
dency in Denmark was to include Norwegians in a community based
on language, culture, history and common myths of origin from which
