162   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


progress made by the enemies of France. The situation was not improved
when the Duke of Augustenburg openly supported Austria in its war with
Napoleon in 1809. Furthermore, civil servants in the duchies would often
turn a blind eye to smuggling, if they were not actively involved in it.
   As if to highlight the decline of state patriotism in the duchies as a
result of the war, there was also indifference regarding Norway. This
was clearly demonstrated in 1813, when the traditionally state-patriotic
and loyal newspaper Altonaer Mercur made apathetic reference to the
possibility that King Frederick could lose Norway. The king was furious
and fulminated that in the Danish-Norwegian state there should be
no noticeable distinction in the patriotic tone of articles, irrespective
of whether they were published in Norwegian or German newspapers,
and that he would not tolerate what he called ‘pseudo Danes’.43 As in
Norway, the war also heightened the tendency towards fragmentation
in the duchies and created more antagonism between the peripheral
areas of the state and Copenhagen at its centre.
   In spite of everything, Denmark-Norway’s alliance with Napoleon
meant that Schleswig and Holstein emerged from the Napoleonic Wars
relatively unscathed – at least by comparison with Norway or other
parts of Germany subjected to invasions and occupations – even though
the duchies were obliged to endure a year of allied occupation from
December 1813 onwards. Even then, there was no agitation of any seri-
ous extent, either against Frederick’s government or in favour of the so-
called German war of liberation against Napoleon. The chief desire in
the duchies was to return to the old state of affairs, preferably with much
autonomy in a personal union with Denmark, and above all through
the re-establishment of their old administrative and judicial autonomy.
   For most Holsteiners, the war strengthened local and regional identi-
ties and characteristics that they felt had been threatened both by the
government’s policy during the war and by German nationalist move-
ments elsehwere in the German Confederation after the war.44 It was
only during the 1830s that the conflict with Denmark took on clear
national overtones, but even then for many years it still had a decidedly
regional core. Conversely, it was also only at this time that the conflict
began increasingly to be seen in Denmark in national terms, as the sep-
arate ‘Holstein’ element gradually metamorphosed into a larger image
of an enemy that was German. While this does not mean that there were
no negative stereotypes of a peculiar ‘Germanness’ in many Danish cir-
cles before 1814 – stereotypes that were even occasionally attributed
to Holsteiners – it took much longer for such concepts to became com-
monplace and take on any semblance of modern nationalism.
