158 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


which Frederick VI had officially ruled as an elected duke until the
annexation. Under constitutional law the duchies had previously been
kept separate from the rest of the state, because (in theory) the king did
not rule autocratically there but ruled as a duke alongside and supported
by the Imperial Knights. The introduction of absolutism in Holstein
was, to say the least, controversial, especially among the nobility and
the Imperial Knights, who enjoyed special rights and privileges, which
they now quite rightly felt were seriously threatened. In step with the
current measures to increase standardisation and improve efficiency,
the Danish Chancellery had been agitating for some time for the intro-
duction of a common code of laws throughout the Danish-Norwegian
state in order to facilitate administration. The desire for uniform legis-
lation in Denmark, Norway and Holstein at the Schleswig-Holstein
Chancellery was motivated by the need for a unitary state policy.
Undoubtedly modelled on Napoleon’s Civil Code, the entire Danish-
Norwegian-Holstein state was to be unified through a common legal
system.38
   It is true that nothing came of this proposal – while the question of
the extent to which it was made known to the public remains open –
but it still indicated a process that was perceived in Holstein as a very
serious threat. Holstein’s distinctive constitution and code of laws were
regarded as central characteristics of the duchy, which meant that the
introduction of an absolutist constitution and other new laws that orig-
inated in Copenhagen was considered a threat to the Holstein identity.
Already in 1806, many had opposed annexation and reforms on the
grounds of Holstein’s ancient rights and privileges, dynastic hereditary
rights and indeed the traditional privileges of the Imperial Knights.
   It is an axiom of research into nationalism that threats strengthen
identities, and this is what happened in Holstein, although primarily
on a regional level. Holsteinian identity was steadily strengthened and
presented as a contrast to what was generally perceived and disliked
as ‘Danish’, and through a process that witnessed class interests and
regional independence taking on an increasingly articulate Holsteinian
identity. A variety of concerns and interests in Holstein were chan-
nelled into an ethnic, regional and cultural way of thinking that, to
many Holsteiners, amplified the implicit threat of the policies of the
government.
   The introduction of the absolutist constitution in Holstein also pre-
sented a cause of conflict in Frederick’s inner circle, as it would mean that
the duchies would become the sole hereditary territories of the Oldenburg
