                          Internal Changes and External Threats, 1810–12   165


should Frederick decide to terminate the alliance or simply fail to com-
ply with Napoleon’s terms. In fact, whenever Napoleon was unhappy
with the Danish-Norwegian government, as regards the holes it had
left in the Continental Blockade in the duchies, for instance, he bluntly
hinted to Frederick that it would be most favourable for France if the
imperial borders were moved further north.46
   Such hints were a continuous source of concern for the Danish-
Norwegian government, as shown in numerous dispatches sent to
Denmark-Norway’s envoys in Europe. A French occupation and pos-
sible annexation of the duchies and Jutland would cripple the Danish-
Norwegian state and threaten the very existence of the monarchy. It
would cut off the state from Jutland, which was Norway’s vital granary,
and from Holstein as one of the state’s most important economic cen-
tres and the granary for Zealand. Frederick VI therefore dreaded and
desperately sought to avoid such a nightmarish prospect at all costs. In
the absence of a real alternative to the French alliance, or of military aid
that could help him to defend his territory against Napoleon, Frederick
felt that he had no choice but to stick with Napoleon and avoid provok-
ing any conflict.47
   What would have happened if Frederick had decided to abandon
Napoleon at some point after 1807 is, of course, pure conjecture. In the
eyes of some historians an alliance with Britain at the cost of French
occupation of the duchies and of Jutland – or at least of some kind of
neutrality – would still have created major problems in terms of corn
supplies to Norway, as these came mostly from Jutland. Therefore, neu-
trality or an alliance with Britain would probably have led to grain
shortages and discontent among the Norwegians under any circum-
stances. How far Britain would have made an effort – or could have
adequately managed – to aid Norway is an open question, but if Britain
had failed to do so, the corn shortages in Norway could possibly have
been just as severe as they became in the event, although this is cer-
tainly a disputed matter among historians.48
   Furthermore, it is likely that a deliberate break with Napoleon and a
subsequent French invasion and annexation of Schleswig and Holstein
would have generated a feeling in Jutland and the duchies that they
had been abandoned by the king and government, perhaps much the
same as many Norwegians actually came to feel as the war progressed.
Since Jutland and the duchies collectively had a larger population than
Norway, the potential for unrest would have been greater. Therefore,
regardless of which side he had chosen, structural conditions would have
made it impossible for Frederick VI to satisfy everyone in his dominions.
