170 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


attention and energy to the complexities of handling the entire civil
and military leadership of the state. During the early years of the war,
for instance, Christian August in Norway was irritated by the lack of
instructions from Frederick, and this was not only due to the difficulty
of communicating across the Skagerrak created by the British blockade.
Frederick VI was also often vague in his communications with Deputy
Governor Frederick of Hesse and seemingly incapable of specifying or
implementing measures necessary for ensuring supplies to Norway.
This was very much in evidence after the catastrophic failure of the har-
vest there in 1812, when the king’s reactions were chiefly restricted to
more or less non-committal lamentations and promises. As these vague
expressions of sympathy and promises – however well-meant they
might have been – only emphasised the inability of the king and his
government to provide sufficient supplies of corn to Norway, or even to
organise shipments of corn in general, frustration and resentment were
bound to arise. One particular issue was King Frederick’s inability to
coordinate the bodies responsible for supplying Norway, while for their
part these bodies were reluctant to take any independent initiatives for
fear of somehow acting contrary to the king’s orders and intentions.
This resulted in a series of inconsistencies and contradictory measures
that simply aggravated the problem of food supplies and created even
more dissatisfaction among Norwegians.58


Dawning Separatism in Norway

The Napoleonic Wars showed that Norway was in many respects able
to fend for itself, even though Norwegians only fully appreciated this
after 1814. In the first place, the country had faced and overcome tre-
mendous challenges during the war years. In spite of the famine in vari-
ous parts of the country and the economic ruin caused by the British
blockade, the Norwegians not only survived the years of war and crisis,
they were also able to ward off the Swedish invasion of 1808. This was
crucial, because it left the Norwegians with the conviction that they
had prevented an outright Swedish military conquest, and in turn cre-
ated the feeling that they were quite capable of defending themselves
by military means.
  Second, Norwegians had also gained experience of political auton-
omy. Although the Government Commission, established in 1807, was
intended as the king’s executive body, it came to function in practice
as the Norwegians’ own government, and this could not be ignored.
The Norwegian civil servants Marcus Gjøe Rosenkrantz and Herman
