168   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


dinners – enabled the Red Feathers to exert increasing influence on
him. Their standing was enhanced by the king’s keen interest in mili-
tary matters and by the immense enjoyment he derived from their com-
pany, which also contributed to their informal power.53
   The growing influence of the Red Feathers was considered a seri-
ous problem by the king’s civilian ministers. Foreign Minister Niels
Rosenkrantz lamented their influence on several occasions, especially
with his growing frustration over being kept on the political margin of
the king’s cabinet. Civil servants, on their part, were furious at being
instructed to take orders from the Red Feathers. Thanks to their rela-
tions with the king, the Red Feathers had a great deal of latitude, but
this has also made it difficult to assess accurately how much power and
influence they had over the king, and to uncover how many of his deci-
sions could actually be attributed to their counsel. This did not mean
that Frederick VI was simply a puppet in the hands of the General Staff;
he remained fully capable of and determined to exercise his personal
power autocratically, but it did influence the king’s perceptions and
opinions.
   It was no secret to the contemporary Danish-Norwegian public that
the Red Feathers enjoyed a special standing with the king and, as their
influence was felt to have a detrimental effect on Danish-Norwegian
policy, they were widely detested. There was also resentment of the
economic benefits they appeared to enjoy at a time when other civil
servants found their wages dwindling as a result of inflation. The role
played by the Red Feathers in activities such as burning confiscated
colonial goods was also a source of resentment, and their unpopularity
was emphasised when posters abusing the king’s adjutants and their
arrogance began to appear on walls all over Copenhagen, reputedly
hung up by members of the public.54 These posters were probably also
intended as criticism of the king himself. While few people would dare
to openly criticise the king, they vented their anger instead on his closest
circle of advisers, who allegedly kept the wise and just king in the dark
about matters of state and prevented him making the right decisions.
This indirect criticism of the king was also apparent in Norway, where a
growing number of carefully worded complaints began to appear in the
press and other publications.55 Discontent with Frederick’s absolutism
and policies was spreading in Denmark, Norway and the duchies, and
at a level that would have been unthinkable before the war.
   Another cause of complaint about the king’s increasingly authoritar-
ian rule and the influence of the Red Feathers was the censorship of
news and information. Not only were the civilian ministers deprived of
