                         Internal Changes and External Threats, 1810–12   167


during the course of the Napoleonic Wars, Frederick alienated the abler
members of his government and key ministers, surrounding himself
mainly with less capable men from his close circle of military adjutants
whose faulty judgement only compounded his own.


Frederick’s Absolutism and the ‘Red Feathers’

The Napoleonic Wars created a political and social state of emergency
in Denmark-Norway, which also had consequences for the king’s
exercise of power. Having initially held fairly liberal views and been
willing to take the advice of his senior ministers, Frederick became
more authoritarian and self-willed after the death of Foreign Minister
Andreas Peter Bernstorff in 1797. Conflicts arose between the king and
some of his ministers, leading to the resignation of some, while others
were removed or otherwise fell out of favour during the course of the
war years. Gradually the king began to take power into his own hands
and increasingly ignored his remaining ministers. By 1808 the Cabinet
had already been seriously weakened and consisted of only three min-
isters: the foreign minister, the finance minister and the prime minis-
ter.51 After 1808 it ceased convening, which left the king to decide most
matters on his own without taking formal advice from his ministers
through meetings in the council.
   The year 1810 saw a wave of resignations from Frederick’s govern-
ment, owing much to his foreign policy and conflicts over the incor-
poration of Holstein.52 By 1813 all the king’s senior ministers – most of
whom were German-born – were gone. The new ministers that came
in their stead were generally middle-class Danes and Norwegians who,
although they were generally capable men, were more in awe of the king
and loath to openly challenge his decisions. Moreover, their influence
was limited by the fact that the vacuum left by their predecessors had
been filled by the king himself, as well as the circle of adjutants with
whom he had increasingly come to be associated as Denmark-Norway
was gradually drawn into the sphere of the Napoleonic Wars.
   Frederick’s corps of adjutants and advisers were known collectively as
the ‘Red Feathers’, because of the red feather they were entitled to wear
in their hats as members of the General Staff. As such the Red Feathers
originated after the formal creation of the General Staff on 20 January
1808, which – perhaps symbolically in the light of subsequent events –
was followed by the abandonment of the Geheimestatsraad on 19 March
1808. Their daily relations with the king – which included everything
from military planning sessions and drills to games, hunting and
