166   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


   Faced with this choice between the devil and the deep blue sea,
Frederick chose to remain by Napoleon’s side on the grounds that
the Emperor constituted the most serious threat to Denmark-Norway.
Referring to the Norwegian desires for peace with Britain and for a
break with Napoleon in 1813, the king sternly warned the country
against ‘satisfying the needs of the moment by putting itself in a posi-
tion whereby it will never be able to obtain corn and food; for nature
has determined that Denmark is its only larder’. It could be argued that
such statements represented a desperate attempt by Frederick to give
the Danish-Norwegian union a rationale. However, at least initially,
his standpoint was supported by the Norwegian-born Foreign Minister,
Niels Rosenkrantz, who feared France both as a friend and as an enemy.
Rosenkrantz agreed that the Norwegians would starve if the French
occupied the duchies and Jutland, but he was also concerned that
Norway might then turn towards Britain. In that case he predicted that
loyalty to the government in Copenhagen would disintegrate, since
‘necessity has determined that dealings with England have become per-
missible for them’.49
   Frederick’s decision to stay in Napoleon’s camp, at least until early
1813, shows that the heartlands of his empire were his ultimate con-
cern. Many contemporary and later historians – especially in Norway –
considered this a lamentable, deliberate sacrifice of Norway to protect
the centre of Denmark from the ravages of war that came to afflict the
Norwegians. However, in the context of his concern for the state as a
whole, Frederick’s policies were reminiscent of the Austrian govern-
ment’s decision not to risk the dismemberment of the core areas of
the Habsburg Monarchy – Austria, Bohemia and Hungary – in 1809
by supporting a prolonged and increasingly hopeless war in Tyrol.50
Seen in this light, the accusation that King Frederick VI deliberately
abandoned Norway is biased because it largely ignores the imperial
context on which his decision was based, and it also obscures the fact
that Norway was actually central to his policies and concerns in 1812
and 1813, even if the practical effects of this were not much to the
Norwegians’ liking.
   On the other hand Frederick’s continued alliance with Napoleon also
revealed his reluctance to take risks, his inability to foresee possible
political outcomes and, decisively, his increasing failure to listen to the
advice he was given by his civilian ministers. There is no doubt that
such failings originated, at least in part, from his personal character
and views, but they probably owed most to the shortcomings of his
absolutist methods. Becoming increasingly reactionary and autocratic
