                         Internal Changes and External Threats, 1810–12   171


Wedel Jarlsberg were the leading figures in the commission, and it was
no accident that, when Enevold de Falsen, a Danish-born, but pro-
Norwegian, member of the commission, had to be replaced after his
death in November 1808, Prince Christian August asked the king to
appoint ‘native Norwegians’ to serve on the commission. ‘Your Majesty
is familiar with the character of the Norwegian nation’, urged Christian
August, ‘but a principal feature of this character is a sense of honour, a
certain national pride. A feature that bears excellent fruit and, in view
of Norwegians’ proven loyalty to the king and fatherland, should, in my
very humble opinion, be encouraged as one of the cornerstones of our
independence’.59
   This was a clear expression of the prince’s conviction that Norwegians
should be granted a greater degree of autonomy. His successor, Prince
Frederick of Hesse, agreed and wrote a lengthy memorandum in which
he proposed what amounted to a new model for the administration
of Norway, which left all administrative institutions and decisions –
except those relating to foreign policy and financial affairs – to
Norwegians. The memorandum was probably not passed on to the
king, but Frederick of Hesse left a copy with Prince Christian Frederick,
who succeeded him as the king’s chief representative in Norway in May
1813. In other words, the lamentations voiced by many members of the
elite in Norway were echoed by the king’s primary representatives in
Norway during the war years.
   Furthermore, Christian August, Frederick of Hesse and Christian
Frederick went so far as to suggest that the only way to safeguard
Norway for the Oldenburg monarchy was to somehow conclude a sepa-
rate peace with Britain. Prince Christian August had suggested as much
already on 17 February 1809, while Frederick of Hesse warned the king
in September 1810 that ‘the mood in Norway is such that the conclusion
of peace with Britain is regarded as the only means of saving Norway’.
Christian Frederick came to the same conclusion three years later, dur-
ing Denmark-Norway’s desperate situation in late 1813. Such a radical
measure, he explained to King Frederick, could be justified as it was
essentially the only way to secure ‘the independence of this hereditary
kingdom from the Swedish yoke’.60
   When such a conclusion had been arrived at and expressed directly
by the king’s own representatives in Norway – not least including the
heir to his throne – it is no surprise that leading figures in the country
had come to a similar conclusion.61 War with Britain, many Norwegians
reasoned, would be so inimical to Norway’s interests that it could com-
pletely destroy the country. There was such a vast difference between
