172   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


the ability of Denmark to survive a war with Britain and that of Norway,
especially if such a war should continue for any length of time, that
even loyal civil servants in Norway could see no other possibility than
some kind of separate Norwegian–British treaty. Nevertheless, pro-
posals involving a separate Norwegian foreign policy represented an
extremely radical step seen in the light of the king’s domestic and for-
eign policies. Not surprisingly, the king always rejected such proposals
from north of the Skagerrak as being completely out of the question.
   Even if, at least before 1812–13, most influential Norwegians were pri-
marily looking for a ‘third way’ to greater Norwegian autonomy within
the Danish-Norwegian state, their desire for some kind of separate agree-
ment with Britain reflected the obvious fact that Norwegian and Danish
political and economic interests were not always identical, and in some
situations were completely opposed. In January 1811, Foreign Minister
Niels Rosenkrantz warned the king that ‘the lack of bread is the greatest
challenge a people can face’.62 His predictions came true a little over a
year later. In the winter of 1812 the merchant Peder Anker wrote angrily
that, ‘Politics, Copenhagen politics, have not only destroyed our liveli-
hood and brought starvation and ruin on us, they have now deprived
us of the hope ever of experiencing happy times again.’63 Like many
Holsteiners, Anker felt that Norway was being treated no better by the
king and his government than some overseas colony. Furthermore, in
1812 some peasants began to question whether Denmark was, in fact,
able to function as the kind of ‘larder’ that King Frederick believed that
nature had marked Denmark out to be for Norway.64
   Yet, the fact that few were thinking in terms of outright separatism
makes it difficult to attribute Norway’s independence later that year to a
carefully planned and orchestrated separatist project developed during
the preceding years by a united Norwegian elite. However, dominant
socio-economic circles in Norway were adamant that something had to
be done about the country’s dire situation and were at best deeply frus-
trated by the handling of the war and ensuing crises by the government
in Copenhagen. By mid to late 1813 many people had become deeply
disillusioned with Danish rule, and they were certainly more inclined
to the views of Wedel Jarlsberg than towards the ‘third way’ advocated
by Jacob Aall in 1809. If national independence, with or without a loose
union with Sweden, was not yet a feasible project, it was certainly not
an inconceivable idea.
   To add to the crisis in Danish-Norwegian relations, the increasing
misgivings in Norway about what was perceived to be a lack of effort
and interest on the part of the Danes aroused indignation in Denmark.
