164   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


emperor. However, Charles John’s diplomatic manoeuvring during
the build-up to what was increasingly seen as an unavoidable Franco–
Russian war in 1812 further convinced Frederick VI that he was safest
with the French Emperor, as he could not imagine French military fail-
ure in a conflict with Russia and Britain.45
   In Swedish historiography, Charles John’s political manoeuvring dur-
ing the years from 1811–12, which culminated in alliances with Russia
and Britain, is known as the ‘Policy of the Year 1812’ and is seen as
a watershed in Swedish history. Although its real significance lay in
its execution rather than its novelty, it also marked a crucial depar-
ture in the history of Denmark and Norway, as it would eventually give
the coup de grâce to the Danish-Norwegian union in 1814. At the time,
it confronted Denmark-Norway with a renewed and forceful external
threat that would do much to determine King Frederick’s foreign and
domestic policies during the years from 1812–14.


The Threat from Napoleon

Even though Sweden was an almost constant threat to Denmark-
Norway during the Napoleonic Wars, it was not the chief threat as far
as King Frederick was concerned. The war of 1808 had shown him that
there were limits to what Sweden could accomplish against Norway
even when allied with Britain, and the Danish-Norwegian king also
regarded Sweden’s alliance with Russia – perhaps on the basis of his own
experiences of 1808 and 1809 – as of limited military value. He regarded
the threat from Napoleon, however, as far more menacing and even
came to regard the Emperor as invincible, although he was certainly
not alone in this. Perhaps for good reasons, the king felt that failure to
comply with Napoleon’s terms and policies would terminate the alli-
ance and expose Denmark-Norway to French military sanctions. The
fact of the matter was that fear of a French invasion of the duchies and
Jutland was one of the main reasons why Frederick had opted to throw
in his lot with Napoleon.
  The significance of this threat for the Danish-Norwegian govern-
ment’s foreign and domestic policies during the Napoleonic Wars can
hardly be exaggerated, even though the degree to which Frederick
allowed it to dominate these policies is open to discussion. The strong
French military presence in northern Germany since 1806 and, more
tellingly, Napoleon’s annexation of the Hanseatic cities, were pain-
ful reminders to the Danish-Norwegian government that Napoleon
could rapidly defeat the Danish army and flow into Danish territories
