                         Internal Changes and External Threats, 1810–12   169


information about what was going on in the king’s closest circles and
what the Red Feathers were doing, they were also unable to obtain recent
news of what was happening elsewhere in Europe. The king issued a
series of censorship decrees, some of which were motivated by fear of
public criticism of Napoleon and of the alliance with France. Concern
that defamatory statements might also compromise Denmark-Norway’s
international reputation effectively prevented the reporting of interna-
tional events and of French military setbacks.56 As a result of the news
censorship, a bubble of unreality seems to have formed around the king
and the Red Feathers, which prevented them from acknowledging the
extent of Napoleon’s defeat in Russia in the autumn of 1812.
   One Danish historian believes that Frederick ‘lived in a strange and
limited fantasy world, at whose centre was an almost childish trust in
the Emperor Napoleon and a view that Austria would never dare to
oppose Napoleon together with Prussia and Russia’. One contemporary
observer thought more of the king but suspected that he was being
kept in ignorance by his adjutants and was only fed selected news and
reports that favoured Napoleon. The lack of news and information,
even as late as December 1813, left several of Frederick’s civilian minis-
ters largely unaware of the extent of Napoleon’s defeats and, by exten-
sion, of how precarious Denmark-Norway’s situation had become. This,
in turn, prevented them from offering the king much useful advice
even when he eventually reconvened the Geheimestatsraad in December
1813 – the first since 1808 – to assess the gravity of the situation. Even
Prince Christian Frederick, who was sent to Norway as governor in May
1813, complained to the king that he was not being informed of what
was really going on in Europe.57
   While some administrative decentralisation was taking place in some
parts of Denmark-Norway during the Napoleonic Wars, with extended
administrative powers being granted to temporary bodies such as the
Government Commission and the office of the governor in Norway,
the overall political tendency was for power to become concentrated in
King Frederick’s hands. This meant that he came to rely on the advice
of informal bodies such as the Red Feathers, rather than on the well-
considered advice that he needed during the turmoil created by the
Napoleonic Wars, the rapid succession of events and shifting alliances.
But even when his civilian ministers bypassed his other advisers and
tried to offer him their advice directly, Frederick was often reluctant or
unwilling to listen to them.
   Another consequence of Frederick’s autocratic hold on power was
that it became increasingly difficult for him to devote the necessary
