182   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


The significance of such conservative and legitimist considerations on
the part of the king can hardly be overestimated, and can be illustrated
by the fact that the eventual cession of Norway in January 1814 brought
him to the verge of a nervous breakdown.
   Even if Frederick, in spite of the considerations outlined above, had
agreed to the territorial exchange proposed by Russia and Sweden, it
would in effect only be exchanging one problem for another. As of
late 1812 and early 1813, all of the areas offered as compensation were
still under French control, and it would therefore be necessary to con-
quer them before they could be taken over. Rosenkrantz pointed out
that even if this could be done successfully, the areas promised would
only weaken the Danish state financially and make it more strategi-
cally exposed and vulnerable to future continental European policies
and wars. This was in fact precisely the reason why Sweden had been
attempting to get rid of Pomerania and exchange it for Norway for quite
a long time.17 Furthermore, exchanging Norway for northern German
territories would tip the ethnic balance of the state and mean that
Germans would become a majority. Previous tensions, as well as those
that had flared up after the annexation of Holstein in 1806, had con-
vinced the government in Copenhagen that this was not a good idea.
In addition, both the king and his foreign minister regarded the Danish
Empire as first and foremost Scandinavian and were not prepared to
exchange this Scandinavian identity for a German or a continental one.
   Meanwhile in the winter of 1813 pressure from Russia and Sweden
was rapidly increasing, and, faced with the prospect of Russian troops
marching into northern Germany, it had become imperative for the
Danish-Norwegian government to ensure either that they won the
support of Britain without dragging Sweden and Russia into the fray,
or that Napoleon made peace with the allies in the hope that this
would make Russia less enthusiastic in its support of Sweden’s territor-
ial demands. A cooling of Russo–Swedish relations was precisely what
the Danish-Norwegian government hoped lay behind a surprising visit
to Copenhagen in late March by an emissary from the Tsar’s intimate
entourage, Count Sergei Dolgoruki.
   Count Dolgoruki hinted to the Danish-Norwegian government that
the question of Norway could be postponed until the establishment of
a general peace if Denmark-Norway terminated her Napoleonic alliance
and immediately joined the allies. This made it appear as if Russia were
prepared to sacrifice Sweden’s interests in order to deprive Napoleon of
an ally, which was exactly what the Danish-Norwegian government was
hoping for. Whether sending Count Dolgoruki to Copenhagen meant
