                                                   Endgames 1812–13   181


with any other of the allied powers. This latter fact also encouraged the
hope that the Russian army could be kept out of northern Germany, as
the government in Copenhagen quite rightly feared that a Russian take-
over of the Hanseatic cities would be a direct threat to the duchies and
as such a signal for the Swedish army to invade Norway. Rosenkrantz
therefore suggested that Frederick should persuade Napoleon to let
Danish-Norwegian troops occupy France’s northern German posses-
sions in the hope that this would prevent a Russian incursion as it would
involve attacking an army with which it was not officially at war.15
   In the meantime, Frederick had assured Napoleon that he was still
loyal to their alliance. Napoleon’s bulletin from Russia issued on
3 December made it perfectly clear that the Emperor intended to continue
the war, which in turn meant that the threat to the duchies and Jutland
remained. On 5 January 1813 the French emissary to Copenhagen asked
Frederick to confirm his commitment to their alliance, which the king
duly did. Furthermore, Napoleon assured Frederick in a personal letter
that the extent of his defeat in Russia had been wildly exaggerated by
the allied powers, adding, ‘I still guarantee your majesty Norway’ – a
vow coupled with the promise that ‘no-one in the world will be able to
deprive your majesty of any part of your territory’.16
   Territorial integrity was indeed the main reason why Frederick was
still loyal to Napoleon in the winter of 1813. Yet, at the same time he
was manoeuvring to broker a peace with the allies or at least to obtain
a guarantee of neutrality. The main issue was Norway, and the only
guarantee that the country would not have to be surrendered was com-
ing from Napoleon, at least for the time being. True, Frederick had
been offered Dutch and north German territories as compensation for
Norway but he simply did not consider these Russo-Swedish proposals
for territorial exchanges a viable option. This was mainly because of
the geographical spread and territorial integrity of the Oldenburg mon-
archy and the Danish Empire. In spite of all Norwegian and Holstein
suspicions to the contrary, for Frederick the Napoleonic Wars did not
solely involve ensuring the well-being of the Danish heartlands, or
what would become the Danish nation-state. His concern was the pres-
ervation of his empire and state in its entirety. This was the reason
why retaining Norway became his sine qua non, but there were also
other factors to take into account. Deeply conscious of dynastic and
legitimist considerations, Frederick was painfully aware that it would
be in breach of the absolutist constitution and as such a betrayal of his
forefathers to cede any territory voluntarily. Frederick was adamant in
his determination to retain the monarchy he had inherited from them.
