                                                     Endgames 1812–13   179


ports for neutral shipping and gradually began to align the country
with Great Britain. This meant that war with France was also brewing
and that the Russian government was extremely anxious for Sweden to
stay out of Finland. The advantage for Russia and Sweden was that this
allowed the interests of both to join in Charles John’s desire to conquer
Norway – which in turn increased the threat to Denmark-Norway.
   Charles John’s policy from 1811 was by no means plain sailing. The
break with Napoleon came as a great surprise to most people. There
were many admirers of Napoleon’s military skills among Swedish offic-
ers, as there were in Denmark-Norway, while others favoured France
because it was Sweden’s traditional ally. Like in Denmark-Norway, most
tended to regard Napoleon as invincible and therefore believed that a
French alliance was Sweden’s safest bet, even more so if Finland were
to be reconquered. Even for those who had no truck with Napoleon or
who regarded Finland as a lost cause in any event, there were major
problems in accepting an alliance with the old arch-enemy, Russia. On
this point Charles John’s ‘1812 policy’, as it would become known, con-
stituted a substantial risk in terms of domestic policy, as he had still not
consolidated his position in Sweden.11 In other words, he was staking
everything on the success of his foreign policy.
   Sweden and Russia joined forces by signing the Treaty of St Petersburg
on 5 April 1812. This was the realisation of a centuries-old nightmare
in Copenhagen, as it emphatically showed that Russia no longer needed
Denmark-Norway as a counterweight to Sweden and now regarded
Denmark-Norway as expendable. Russia’s main concern was that
Sweden kept her hands off Finland and not threaten St Petersburg while
the Russian army would be fighting Napoleon further to the south,
and in return for this guaranteed support for a Swedish acquisition of
Norway. There were also other matters at stake for Russia. As the Russian
government was seeking a rapprochement with Britain, the alliance
with Sweden was also intended as an overture to London.12
   A meeting in the Finnish city of Åbo on 27 August 1812 not only con-
firmed the Treaty of St Petersburg but also strengthened the personal
bond between Tsar Alexander and Crown Prince Charles John. At Åbo,
Alexander and Charles John pledged mutual military support and in
all probability also made plans for a joint Swedish-Russian attack on
Zealand in order to wrest Norway from King Frederick’s hands. Swedish
military preparations commenced immediately, and by early September
1812 Sweden and Denmark-Norway were heading towards war.
   With great confidence and unwilling to consider other options,
Frederick VI had placed Denmark-Norway’s fate in Napoleon’s hands
