178 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


parted company with Russia, Austria and Prussia were both still sub-
stantially under French influence. All things considered, breaking with
Napoleon hardly seemed a realistic option for Frederick, perhaps even
less so as it meant that Denmark-Norway – or what would be left of
it after a French campaign – would be placed at the mercy of Britain.
This was still not regarded as an option in Copenhagen in the light of
Britain’s onslaught on the city less than five years previously.


The Russo–Swedish Alliance

The Continental Blockade was destined to be as much of an economic
disaster for Sweden as it would turn out to be for Denmark-Norway.
Even after having made peace with France in January 1810 and declar-
ing war on Britain the following November, the Swedes never really
enforced it and ended up constituting a major hole in the blockade. The
declaration of war on Britain was in fact chiefly for the sake of appear-
ances, with both parties basically agreeing that it was one way to keep
Napoleon at a distance from Sweden. This meant that Swedish harbours
remained safe havens for British goods and smuggling, increasingly so
after Napoleon tightened his grip on northern Europe from 1810–11.
British smuggling activities therefore moved from the North Sea into
the Baltic region, while the Danish-Norwegian government – fearing
that Napoleon would set his sights on the Sound and the Baltic – chose
to keep as quiet as possible about the extent of it. British goods were
smuggled into Swedish Pomerania from ports in western and southern
Sweden, particularly Gothenburg, until Napoleon decided that enough
was enough and seized the province in January 1812. It had been
returned to Sweden upon the conclusion of the Franco–Swedish peace
in January 1810, but its reoccupation by French troops exactly two years
later led to a decisive breach between Sweden and France.10
   This development reflected a decisive geostrategic difference between
Denmark-Norway and Sweden: as long as he did not have control of
the sea, Napoleon could not pose a direct military threat to Sweden
in the same way as he could with Denmark-Norway on land. At the
same time, Sweden was territorially smaller and more coherent than the
Danish-Norwegian Empire and could therefore not be threatened by
Britain in the same way that Denmark-Norway was. This in turn gave
the Swedish government substantially more room to manoeuvre with
regard to its foreign policy, especially as Russia was also distancing itself
from France. On 31 December 1810 Tsar Alexander had in practice lifted
Russia’s part of the Continental Blockade by allowing access to Russian
