180   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


in the autumn of 1812. Consequently, when in December the Emperor
returned from Russia ahead of the pitiful remains of his 650,000 strong
army, the corner into which Frederick had been pushed had become so
tight that it would create serious problems for him in the following year
when he did his utmost to escape from it.


Denmark-Norway and Napoleon’s Defeat

If Frederick had in September found intelligence of the Russo–Swedish
alliance to be exaggerated, its full extent became clear to him two
months later when Charles John presented the Danish-Norwegian gov-
ernment directly with his demand for Norway. The Russian govern-
ment soon followed suit and even offered Denmark-Norway a way out.
In late November the Danish-Norwegian emissary to St Petersburg was
told in no uncertain terms that Russia had guaranteed Sweden posses-
sion of Norway, but that the Russian government was prepared to offer
Frederick VI territories in northern Germany and the Netherlands if he
gave up Norway and joined the anti-Napoleonic coalition.13
   Yet still, King Frederick was not too concerned, being blissfully un-
aware of the extent of Napoleon’s defeat in Russia. Furthermore, con-
versations between the Danish-Norwegian emissary to St Petersburg
and his British colleague seemed to suggest that the British govern-
ment would not agree to the Swedish demands regarding Norway and
would be prepared to support the Danish-Norwegian government. This
appeared to signal that extending the hand of friendship to the British
government could eventually lead to peace and to a way of joining the
anti-Napoleonic coalition without ceding Norway as the price of member-
ship. Even if Napoleon were defeated, Frederick believed there would be
time for Denmark-Norway to find a way out. The longer it took for Russia
and Sweden to fulfil their plans, the greater the chance that domestic
pressure would force Charles John to switch his focus from Norway to
Finland, which would in turn terminate the Russian alliance. Or so the
king hoped in his continued underestimation of Charles John.14
   This was nevertheless a faint hope, and Foreign Minister Rosenkrantz,
whose anticipations regarding Napoleon’s war with Russia seemed to be
confirmed, had much more faith in the tentative peace feelers he had
initiated with Britain with the king’s blessing. An emissary was sent to
London in January 1813, ostensibly to negotiate British licences for corn
shipments to Norway but mainly to sound out the British government
about the possibility of peace. Peace with Britain, it was hoped, would
at least make neutrality possible, as Denmark-Norway was not yet at war
