                                                      Endgames 1812–13    175


   For reasons such as these Napoleon made repeated references to King
Frederick as his most faithful ally and even remarked during his exile
on St Helena that he regretted not having done more to help such a
loyal ally. The view of King Frederick as a loyal Napoleonic ally was
shared by many contemporaries, some of whom could not bring them-
selves to believe that the Danish-Norwegian king remained loyal to the
Emperor even after his crushing defeats in 1812–13. Many later histori-
ans, too, have come to regard Denmark-Norway’s alliance with France
as one based on the king’s personal loyalty to Napoleon. In the words
of Eli F. Heckscher, Frederick VI was Napoleon’s ‘sincere collaborator’ –
and eventually paid dearly for it.2
   Such views, however, rather miss the point. Napoleon’s praise of
Frederick at St Helena, for example, should certainly not be taken at face
value. Ultimately, King Frederick’s loyal support of Napoleon was not
due to unthinking devotion but because he had no option if he were to
safeguard the territorial integrity of his state which, in the final analysis,
only Napoleon could guarantee. This was the main difference between
Frederick VI and several other European rulers who collaborated with
Napoleon, such as Grand Duke Charles of Baden, King Maximilian I
of Bavaria and King Frederick I of Württemberg. Unlike the Danish-
Norwegian king, these monarchs were able to successfully switch sides
in 1813 after securing allied pledges for the territorial integrity of their
domains. And, in contrast to Charles, Maximilian and Frederick I of
Württemberg, Frederick VI was sidelined by his opponents during the
final struggle with Napoleon. Ultimately, King Frederick’s personal fail-
ings and the shortcomings of his absolutist rule made it impossible for
him to ensure he had the same level of diplomatic manoeuvrability as
many other monarchs allied to Napoleon, a manoeuvrability that made
it possible for them to turn their backs on Napoleon and secure a place
at the victors’ table.3
   Napoleon’s ever-present threat to the duchies and Jutland was under-
pinned by Frederick’s recognition, and even admiration, of Napoleon’s
military ability, but this should not be confused with affection. This is
an important distinction, because it helps explain why Frederick clung
on to his Napoleonic alliance for so long. He did not do so because he
had anything in the vein of personal loyalty to Napoleon but because
he regarded the Emperor as invincible. The fact that this view was
shared by the Red Feathers influenced discussions in the king’s immedi-
ate circle and, not least, military planning activities at his headquarters.
   This was why Napoleon’s defeat in Russia was a major shock to the
king, but even then he can be forgiven for having doubted the possibility
