                                                   Endgames 1812–13   183


that Alexander seriously intended to open the door to the coalition for
King Frederick and ignore Charles John’s designs on Norway, or sim-
ply trick Frederick into abandoning Napoleon, is a matter of debate.18
Whatever his real intentions might have been, Alexander had second
thoughts after Charles John’s furious reaction to the Copenhagen mis-
sion. Alexander’s rapid recall of Dolgoruki does indicate that he was not
at all prepared to sacrifice his friendship and alliance with Sweden in
favour of Denmark-Norway. In late April he therefore stated to a Danish-
Norwegian emissary that for all his warm feelings towards Denmark-
Norway, he still stood by the promises he had made to Sweden.
   But in the meantime, Dolgoruki’s mission had nevertheless raised
Frederick’s hopes that he could make peace and retain Norway. Therefore,
in early April, he sent yet another Danish emissary to London as well
as one to the Tsar’s headquarters in Kalisch. His hope was that Russo–
Danish rapproachment would please the British government – and that
Denmark-Norway’s approach to Britain would please the Russians – and
bring about Denmark-Norway’s entry into the anti-Napoleonic coali-
tion by the backdoor and as such leave Charles John out in the cold. To
attract Russian sympathy the emissary sent to Tsar Alexander was also
instructed to point out how disastrous it would be for the Oldenburg
dynasty to exchange Norway for German and Dutch territories, while
this would also decisively weaken the Danish state and strengthen
Sweden to the point that Sweden would be able to take control of all of
Scandinavia. This, the king supposed, would surely not be in Russia’s
best interest.19
   In April and early May, therefore, Frederick VI came very close to
abandoning Napoleon. All he needed was a sign of some kind from
Russia and/or Britain that the Swedish demand for Norway was nego-
tiable, or for the Austrian government to somehow manage to mediate
and negotiate a general peace. It was not to be, however, even though by
late April and early May hopes were high in Copenhagen that a way out
of Napoleon’s grasp was just within reach that did not involve ceding
Norway. This made it all the harder for Frederick when the reality of his
situation hit home.


Fighting Napoleon

On 12 May 1813, Danish troops opened fire on the French in Hamburg
when French troops tried to retake the city from the Russian army. For a
moment it looked as though Denmark-Norway had changed sides in the
thick of battle and joined the allies, like Saxony would do amidst the
