                                                      Endgames 1812–13   177


20 September that he would ‘continue with my system and remain
allied with France, in accordance with which you must absolutely and
unchangeably obey my instructions’.7
   Seeing what appeared to be Napoleon’s full control of continental
Europe on the one hand and a new threat from Sweden on the other,
Frederick VI had renewed his alliance with France on 7 March 1812. The
new treaty involved mutual military obligations, and Napoleon made
little attempt to conceal the fact that his primary aim was to ensure
Danish-Norwegian support for his forthcoming Russian campaign.8
The Danish-Norwegian government managed to duck the obligation to
provide troops for the campaign itself, but it had to place 10,000 fully
equipped and supplied men at Napoleon’s disposal to be used between
Lake Zuider and the mouth of the River Oder in Germany. In return,
Napoleon offered the struggling Danish-Norwegian state a commer-
cial treaty and the promise of military support in the event of British
or Swedish attacks But these were hollow promises. The commercial
treaty stipulated in the renewed alliance of 1812 was never honoured,
while the military support offered by Napoleon was unwelcome, as the
Danish-Norwegian government did not want to see French troops cross
the Elbe into Holstein under any circumstances. ‘No matter under what
pretext French troops might cross the border’, Rosenkrantz warned
Frederick VI, ‘the state will be destroyed, its independence completely
crushed, and Denmark’s connection with Norway dissolved’.9
   Frederick VI renewed his alliance with Napoleon in 1812 under the
impression of Napoleon’s unlimited might. Relations between Denmark-
Norway and France were not particularly warm, however. The Danish-
Norwegian government had been saddled with the bill for the military
collaboration of 1808 and received nothing in return for its participa-
tion in the war with Sweden. Nor had Napoleon provided financial help
of any kind in spite of the promises of loans on favourable terms stipu-
lated in the Fontainebleau Treaty of October 1807. Instead, Danish mer-
chant ships had been detained by French customs officers in northern
Germany in 1810 and only released two years later. The overzealousness
of the French customs officers in Hamburg was also a constant source
of friction as it dislocated traditional trade relations in Holstein. To this
could be added Napoleon’s repeated and quite overt threats to occupy
the duchies to enforce the Continental Blockade and lack of outspoken
support for Frederick VI’s Swedish candidacy in 1810.
   Yet, at least until the latter half or third of 1812, there seemed to be
no alternative to the alliance with France. In March 1812 Napoleon’s
empire still covered most of mainland Europe and even though he had
