176   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


of success for the formidable coalition formed against France over the
course of 1813, when Prussia and Austria joined the ranks of Russia,
Great Britain and Sweden, given the failure of no less than five previ-
ous coalitions against France. Indeed, as Paul W. Schroeder has demon-
strated, it was only with the Sixth Coalition that the major European
powers managed to fully cooperate on grounds of a common goal, and
even then there were many stumbling blocks along the way.4
   Nevertheless, Frederick’s failure to join the Sixth Coalition even when
Napoleon’s defeat seemed certain also shows up Frederick’s inability to
manoeuvre in the international political arena, itself largely due to his
inability to grasp changes in political and diplomatic constellations, let
alone anticipate them. Foreign policy for Frederick was quite a static entity
and, in the words of one historian, ‘problems were addressed when they
emerged on his desk – but not before’.5 This made King Frederick miss the
windows of opportunity that occasionally opened and that would have
enabled him to terminate his alliance with France, most notably in 1812.
   Still, there was no shortage of warnings to the king about the dan-
gers to which an alliance with Napoleon could expose the state in the
long term. As early as September 1810, the heir to the throne, Prince
Christian Frederick, had advised him to break with Napoleon, even
though it might lead to a French occupation of the duchies and Jutland,
and in the following years he continued to urge the king to break
with France before it was too late. His pleas fell on deaf ears, for the
king kept him well away from government circles and, more impor-
tantly, had little faith in Christian Frederick’s military evaluations and
qualities. The king also continued to receive warnings from Foreign
Minister Niels Rosenkrantz. Although too much may have been made
of Rosenkrantz’s allegedly intimate knowledge of Russia due to his mar-
riage into the Russian nobility and to his earlier service as an envoy to
St Petersburg, Rosenkrantz nevertheless demonstrated his deep insight
into the connection between military operations and diplomacy on
19 September 1812, at the height of Napoleon’s Russian campaign,
when he told Frederick VI that he could not see how Napoleon could
decisively defeat Russia.6
   For these reasons, warned Rosenkrantz, Napoleon’s occupation of
Moscow meant little, as he would never be able to control all of Russia.
He therefore advised Frederick to abandon Napoleon, especially as the
campaign in Russia had weakened the French military presence in
northern Germany. These words of warning made no impression on the
king, however. Regarding a Napoleonic victory as imminent precisely
because of the fall of Moscow, he replied firmly to Rosenkrantz on
