184   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


battle of Leipzig five months later. Prior to this incident, Danish troops
in Holstein had been instructed to maintain good relations with the
Russian troops who entered Hamburg on 18 March 1813 after the French
had withdrawn from the city. Denmark-Norway was still not formally
at war with any of the allied powers except Britain. The general goal
in the spring of 1813 was therefore to institute a Danish-Norwegian
policy of neutrality in north Germany. During the next two months,
relations between the Danish forces in Altona and the Russian troops
in Hamburg were therefore quite cordial, with occasional close con-
tacts between Commandant Haffner in Altona and the Russian General
Tettenborn in Hamburg. Knowing that Austria was trying to mediate
between Napoleon and the allies, there were hopes in Copenhagen for
a general peace and, moreover, there was a firm belief that it would only
be a matter of time before peace could be concluded with Britain on
the understanding that Frederick would retain Norway, which would be
an effective counterweight to the Russo–Swedish alliance. These were
the hopes that peaked on 12 May, when Danish troops suddenly found
themselves firing on the French in Hamburg.20
   The general background to this situation was the confusion prevail-
ing in north Germany in the winter and spring of 1813. Allied troops
were advancing rapidly towards the French army, while Denmark-
Norway was frantically attempting to remain neutral in spite of its
alliance with France. Things were also extremely tense, as the allies’
expulsion of French troops from Hamburg in March was followed by a
French counter-offensive from Hanover beginning at the end of April,
which also evoked the question of Danish participation in the offen-
sive to honour its French alliance. This left Denmark-Norway’s alle-
giances blowing in the wind while in late April and early May Danish
troops in Holstein were not necessarily aware of who was friend or foe.
Indeed, in the event of peace between Denmark-Norway and Britain,
which Frederick was convinced would be forthcoming, news could very
well reach the French headquarters before it reached the commanding
officer in Altona. This prompted King Frederick to issue standing orders
to his troops in Holstein on 2 May to attack the French – who by then
had pushed forward to Harburg – if they crossed the Elbe and descended
on Hamburg.
   Frederick’s most immediate goal was to keep the French and Russian
troops apart – and more specifically to keep the French forces out of
Hamburg – until the allies and Napoleon had concluded a general
peace, or at least until Frederick had landed peace and an alliance with
Britain. This way he also hoped to prevent Danish troops in Altona
