190   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


autumn of 1812, the patience of the Norwegians was soon stretched to
breaking point. The government in Copenhagen was painfully aware
of this. Rosenkrantz emphasised that it was ‘important to pay the clos-
est attention to Norway’s needs and to the mood of its inhabitants’.
He wrote this exhortation in the knowledge that Charles John would
pursue his Norwegian ambitions not only by military means but also
by the more subtle means of propaganda. This also placed restrictions
on what the government could achieve in the diplomatic field. Even
if interest in the Russo-Swedish offer of a territorial exchange were
feigned for purely tactical reasons, wrote Rosenkrantz, it would enable
Charles John ‘to abuse it by spreading the news in Sweden and Norway
in an attempt to weaken Norwegians’ loyalty and devotion, as has so
often been attempted before’.30


Sweden’s Designs on Norway

For two centuries many Scandinavian historians have argued that
Charles John’s aims and strategies with regard to Norway were novel.
However, propaganda, diplomatic fait accomplis and offers for territor-
ial exchanges had been attempted by previous Swedish governments.
Put briefly, the only novelty in Charles John’s policies regarding Norway
after his arrival in Sweden in 1810 was the simple – but still crucial –
fact that, unlike those of previous Swedish regents, they were ultimately
successful.
   Swedish attempts to breathe life into pro-Swedish sentiment in the
eastern area of Norway in the autumn of 1809, led primarily by Georg
Adlersparre, had not produced any results.31 Nor had Count Wedel
Jarlsberg had any success worth mentioning in encouraging members of
the Norwegian elite to support the idea of a union with Sweden, which all
but cost him the confidence of his Swedish friends and co-conspirators.
When Charles John made it clear to the Swedish government in the
winter of 1811 that he regarded the acquisition of Norway as the chief
goal of his foreign policy, Adlersparre wrote ‘that the intervention must
be made, not through Count Wedel but through the entire mass of the
population, including him’. The idea was thus to create a broad popu-
lar movement in Norway in favour of Sweden by inciting anti-Danish
sentiment through such means as exposing Norwegians again to the
effects of the war and the blockade. This way ‘the Norwegian peasant
would, in the midst of peace, experience the suffering of war through
transports, requisitions, etc., which should make him not only want a
union but also contribute to it’. Such ideas were, in fact, not foreign to
