192   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


  Sweden’s propaganda efforts in Norway reveal a great deal about feel-
ings and identities prevalent in Norway, as they addressed a number
of fairly widespread prejudices about and antipathies towards Sweden.
These, in turn, shed some light on how the Norwegians saw themselves,
including the popular classes, who were the primary targets for much
of the Swedish propaganda. These antipathies and prejudices about
Sweden included above all deep-rooted misgivings about the Swedish
nobility, about what was perceived as a semi-feudal social structure,
about conscription and about Sweden’s foreign policies and taxes.
Moreover, expressions of perhaps more harmless kinds – but still ones
revealing that there was no love to be found for Sweden – were heard
in the streets of Christiania and Copenhagen alike, such as ‘to make a
Swede of oneself’ (meaning cowardice) and ‘to Swede’ (meaning fraud).
  In August 1810 one Swedish observer remarked that the fear among
Norwegians of ‘an aristocratic subjugation’ in the event of a union
bordered on ‘childishness’. Consequently, the primary Swedish con-
cern was to counter such prejudices. There was hardly any nobility in
Norway, and the number of wealthy landowners was relatively limited.
Allodial rights meant that many Norwegians possessed their own land,
which again made them all the more concerned about anything resem-
bling what was basically and widely regarded as a Swedish manorial sys-
tem of sorts or an influx into Norway of Swedish nobles. One Swedish
agent remarked that although he had not yet met a Norwegian who
was directly opposed to a union if concluded on certain conditions,
and although the Norwegians generally seemed to think ‘favourably of
Sweden’, they ‘maintained a certain distrust of the nobility’. Swedish
propaganda was therefore at pains to counter such sentiments and preju-
dices. Sweden would never limit Norway’s liberties and privileges, as
was asserted in several pamphlets, and, moreover, nobles in Sweden
had ‘not a single oppressive right over their subordinates that could
be compared with those exercised by the Danish nobility’. According
to Crown Prince Charles John, a constitution in Norway would be an
‘improvement on Danish absolutism [which] should make a deep and
favourable impression on the Norwegians’.34
  Conscription and foreign policy were two other concerns. The Swedes
were still considered by many Norwegians as a people who were des-
perate to regain the status of a great power for their country and who
therefore would be fully prepared to make war on other countries, for
which general conscription would be required. This threat was used
on a number of occasions and served as effective scare-mongering to
the Norwegian peasantry. The introduction of Swedish conscription
