                                                   Endgames 1812–13   189


   Some Norwegian historians have made much of the unrest and pro-
tests in the spring of 1813, citing them as evidence of increasing popular
political discontent with Danish rule and even growing aspirations to
national independence. Such conclusions, however, attach far too much
weight to the protests. Without exception, incidents of active peas-
ant protests in Norway were highly localised and stemmed from very
real suspicions and grievances. As such they were hardly very differ-
ent in kind – although less violent – from peasant protests elsewhere in
Napoleonic Europe, like those in the Italian province of Emilia-Romagna
in 1809. Even more significantly, the protests were not primarily aimed
at the authorities or the government. Only in the case of a bailiff in the
parish of Toten being confronted by some 200 peasants was a concerted
collective protest aimed directly at the authorities, and even then it was
based on concrete and highly local grievances that had little connection
with more abstract political concerns and aspirations.28
   Yet, even if popular protests in Norway were not motivated by anti-
Danish or overt political concerns, the government in Copenhagen
did not escape popular resentment and complaints. One peasant
expressed his hope that ‘Our government will take measures to bring
about some kind of change, and if they were aware of the state of the
country they would surely be quite baffled.’ This remark had a politi-
cal sting to it. By hinting that the king in Copenhagen might not be
aware of the desperate situation in Norway, the implication was that
the king’s advisors, they being in Denmark or Norway, were not doing
enough to help remedy the shortages and were keeping the king in the
dark about them. Surely the mild and well-meaning king would not
let the peasants starve and the merchants ruin them if he knew what
was going on? By implication, if the king did in fact know what was
going on, it followed that his rule was flawed. One group of peasants in
the southeastern Norwegian borderlands also pointed to this question
when in 1812 they angrily complained that what little grain had been
shipped across the Skagerrak from Denmark had ‘absolutely not gone
to the indigent’ among the populace, who had been left to fend for
themselves.29 While this was far from an expression of overt national
separatism, such remarks do show that the peasantry in Norway were
perfectly able to understand the national-political discourse that was
evolving to an increasing extent among some members of the educated
middle-class elites, also owing to their experience of economic disrup-
tion and shortages.
   When the effects of war, blockade, financial crisis and lack of food
once again manifested themselves to the full in Norway from the
