                                                     Endgames 1812–13   191


influential Norwegians either. On a visit to Gothenburg in March 1811,
Count Wedel Jarlsberg and Peder Anker, his influential father-in-law,
allegedly maintained that it would be easier for Sweden to wrest Norway
from Danish hands in the event of another war between the two coun-
tries, as the hardships it would bring about would probably make the
Norwegians turn against the government in Copenhagen.32
   After the conclusion of the Treaty of St Petersburg in April 1812, a con-
certed Swedish propaganda campaign was launched in the Norwegian
borderlands with the aim of convincing the population and the elites of
the benefits of a union with Sweden, as well as of the shortcomings and
the exploitative nature of Danish rule. The Swedish propaganda oper-
ated across a broad front, ranging from the distribution of pamphlets
and proclamations in the Norwegian borderlands by agents, to efforts
designed to justify Sweden’s claim for possession of Norway with regard
to Britain. In a series of letters, pamphlets and articles in Swedish news-
papers, a union with Sweden was touted as Norway’s salvation from
war, financial crisis and famine and was linked with promises of loans,
promises to reorganise the Norwegian financial system and, not least,
promises of corn. Adlersparre’s and Charles John’s own propaganda
went even further, promising Norway also extensive independence in
a union with Sweden guaranteed by a constitution. In 1812 this propa-
ganda had a dual aim, namely to encourage pro-Swedish sentiment
among Norwegians and, perhaps equally important, to prevent them
putting up resistance if Swedish troops entered Norway, which was the
plan in the late summer of 1812. ‘In the event of an attack on Norway’,
argued Adlersparre, ‘it would certainly not be without significance to
have slanted public opinion and to have friends and supporters every-
where’.33
   There were also disagreements in Swedish political and military cir-
cles as to how Norway was to be acquired. On the one hand, there was
a faction spearheaded by Foreign Minister Lars von Engeström that
wanted to wrest Norway from Danish hands either by diplomatic or
military means – that is, by the threat or use of force, supported by one
or more of the great powers. On the other hand, Georg Adlersparre’s
strategy was first and foremost to stir up popular resentment of Danish
rule in Norway with the aim of inciting a popular uprising and then
exploiting it to prompt Norwegians to unite with Sweden voluntarily.
Ultimately, Charles John decided to combine the two strategies by seek-
ing to woo and win hearts and minds in parallel with diplomatic efforts
and at the same time being prepared to use military means if the inter-
national situation permitted.
