188   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


Crisis in Norway

The period from the autumn of 1812 to the summer of 1813 was a time
of crisis for Norway. The licensed trade with Britain, which had been
lucrative from 1810 to 1811, practically dried up as fewer and fewer
licences were issued and the threat of war became open conflict. A
change in British customs regulations in 1811 also made it possible for
Canada to step in and virtually take over the British timber market.
However, while the financial crisis hit Norway hard, there was worse to
come. In the autumn of 1812, the harvest in most areas of Norway failed
due to frost, at the same time as the British tightened up the blockade
and prevented corn imports. This resulted in a famine that by European
standards was only paralleled by the famine that ravaged Madrid from
1811–12. However, the absence of epidemics, probably owing to the fact
that the army was not quartered on the peasant population, prevented
Norwegian death rates from reaching the shocking levels of 1808–09
although the famine was much more severe. Still, in some rural districts
it was not uncommon to see the corpses of those who had died from
exhaustion and starvation lying exposed. The deputy governor asserted
in early April 1813 that if Norway ‘does not soon receive the neces-
sary supplies, the consequences for this unfortunate country will be
absolutely incalculable’, adding that a quarter of the population would
probably perish if things did not improve rapidly.26
   The severe food shortages also caused domestic tension. In some of the
wealthiest rural areas, which had escaped the worst effects of the frost,
well-to-do farmers profited from the famine and soaring food prices
by hoarding grain, while elsewhere their fellow farmers and country-
men starved. But starving farmers did not turn on the profiteers from
their own ranks. Their rage was primarily reserved for the merchants
in major ports who were accused of stockpiling imported grain and
waiting for prices to rise, while the rural population starved to death.
This was the reason for peasant marches on several cities in the first
half of 1813, when only swift intervention by the civilian and military
authorities – followed by inspections of the merchants’ largely empty
warehouses – prevented serious unrest. As a rule, peasants turned to the
government and authorities rather than against them in venting their
anger at the merchants. ‘God knows how little [corn] will be available
here for us many miserable peasants if the merchants are to be the peo-
ple to trade with us’, wrote one peasant to his nearest bailiff. He went
on to vent his fury at what he perceived of as sheer greed among the
class of merchants.27
