                                                  Endgames 1812–13   185


from prematurely becoming entangled in fighting with French troops.
The Danish-Norwegian emissaries therefore proposed that the small
islands of Peut, Veddel and Wilhelmsburg in the Elbe between Hamburg
and Harburg should constitute a neutral zone. The emissary sent to the
French headquarters was also instructed to make it clear to the French
that they could expect resistance from the Danish army – and in prac-
tice war – if they attacked Hamburg.
   None of this made any impression on the French, however, even less
so as the emissary sent to their headquarters failed to deliver the mes-
sage properly. On 12 May a French attack was launched against Russian
positions at Wilhelmsburg, which rapidly drove off the ill-prepared
Russians. In the meantime, Danish troops in Altona had made prepara-
tions for joint action with the Russians in accordance with the king’s
orders of 2 May, and upon the French attack two companies were imne-
diately shipped across the Elbe to the island of Veddel where they found
themselves among Russian-led allied detachments. In the chaos that
followed the Russian retreat from Wilhelmsburg, the French mounted
a surprise attack on Veddel, which led to an exchange of fire between
Danish and French troops, while the Russian commander – keen to drive
a decisive wedge between Denmark-Norway and France – persuaded the
captain of a Danish gunboat to fire on a house occupied by French
troops in order to ‘impress them’.
   On 12 May, then, it appeared that Denmark-Norway had finally aban-
doned Napoleon and joined the allies or at least come very close to
doing so. While the Veddel incident, taken as a whole, was probably
more the outcome of chance and misunderstanding in the chaos of
battle than an indication of a final Danish-Norwegian change of sides,
the desire to abandon Napoleon and prevent a renewed French occu-
pation of Hamburg had taken Danish troops behind allied lines. But
chaos prevailed, and the officer in command of the Danish forces on
the island of Veddel, utterly confused, eventually found it necessary to
send an emissary to the French headquarters to enquire whether or not
Denmark-Norway and France were in fact at war. In other words, too
much should not be read into the Veddel incident itself. It was hardly
the case that Danish and Russian troops joined forces ‘for a few weeks’,
as suggested by some historians, but there can be no doubt that the
Danish-Norwegian government had come extremely close to a break
with Napoleon at this time.21
   Understandably, French officers who had taken part in the action at
Veddel believed that such a break had indeed taken place. This placed
King Frederick in an extremely difficult situation. Shortly before the
