186   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


Veddel incident he had learned that Tsar Alexander intended to stand
by the promises he had made to Charles John. On 13 May, the day after
the incident at Veddel, he learnt that the two emissaries sent to the
British government in January and April respectively had been told in
no uncertain terms that Britain’s Foreign Minister Lord Castlereagh was
not prepared to allow Denmark-Norway to enter the anti-Napoleonic
coalition at the expense of Sweden and possibly Russia, let alone to offer
any guarantees that Frederick could retain Norway.22
   In the light of what had happened at Veddel, this was extremely
unwelcome news. Moreover, Napoleon’s victories at Lützen on 2 May,
Gross-Görschen the day after and then at Bautzen in Saxony on the
20th seemed to suggest that the Emperor was about to halt the allied
offensive and maintain his German hegemony, which would make it
possible for him to severely punish Denmark-Norway’s apparent defec-
tion. This left Frederick, who was now absolutely desperate, with the
prospect of a simultaneous war with the allies and Napoleon – the very
scenario he had dreaded after the Bombardment of Copenhagen six
years previously.
   With no chance of entering the anti-Napoleonic coalition without
having to cede Norway – even less so as both Britain and Prussia had
both formally joined the coalition and now openly and officially sup-
ported Sweden’s demands – Frederick decided to try to make amends
for the incident. In order to patch up his relationship with Napoleon
and to explain that what had happened at Veddel had been due to a
gross misunderstanding, Frederick paved the way for a renewed alliance
between France and Denmark-Norway, which was eventually signed in
Copenhagen on 10 July 1813. The alliance bound Frederick to Napoleon
more closely than ever. First, it obliged him to support Napoleon with
an auxiliary corps to be placed entirely at Marshall Davout’s disposal.
Second, it obliged Denmark-Norway to declare war on all of Napoleon’s
enemies in return for vague promises of aid for the defence of Jutland
and even vaguer promises of Dutch loans.23 Yet, as with all Frederick’s
previous treaties with Napoleon, the Emperor kept none of his promises.
   During the latter half of 1813 all that could save Frederick VI from
total disaster was a French victory or a negotiated general peace
between the Emperor and the allies. At least in the latter respect there
was genuine hope, if faint. In the summer of 1813 a general peace did
seem to be within reach, as Austria, represented by Prince Metternich,
was attempting to mediate between Napoleon and the allies. On 4 June
a six-week armistice between the allies and Napoleon was agreed at
Pleswitz to pave the way for a peace conference to be held in Prague.
