                                                      Endgames 1812–13   187


The desperate Frederick remarked on 18 June that he expected Napoleon
to attend the forthcoming peace conference and, if so, he presumed
that the Emperor would ‘work to ensure the best for the Danish monar-
chy in every respect and particularly that he would persuade the allied
powers to withdraw their contention that Norway should be surren-
dered to Sweden’.24
   The allies had certainly not yet resolved to dethrone Napoleon and
Metternich’s efforts to arrange such a peace conference made it natural
enough for Frederick VI to stick with Napoleon so that the Emperor
could plead Denmark-Norway’s cause. But the prospect of a peace con-
ference with Austrian mediation also meant that Denmark-Norway
was pinning its hopes on Austria. There was therefore a great deal of
excitement about what Christian Bernstorff, who had returned to the
foreign ministry in 1812 as a diplomat, would be able to accomplish as
an emissary to Vienna, even more so as Austria appeared to be favour-
ably inclined towards Denmark-Norway and had already indicated that
Charles John’s claim to Norway seemed unreasonable.
   However, the renewal of the alliance with Napoleon on 10 July did
a great deal to harm Denmark-Norway’s cause in Austrian eyes. To
compound the damage, as Napoleon was not interested in a negotiated
peace, and as Austria subsequently declared war on France on 11 August,
Denmark-Norway’s fate was as good as sealed. By then, diplomatic rela-
tions with Sweden had already been broken off for four months, while
the Russian, British and Swedish governments had all formally voiced
their demands that Frederick VI immediately cede Norway in part or
in whole to Sweden. Consequently, in accordance with the renewed
alliance with Napoleon, Denmark-Norway declared war on all of the
allies, except Austria, in the autumn of 1813 and, with the Russian
and Swedish armies in control of northern Germany after the battle of
Leipzig, it was only a matter of time before Denmark-Norway would be
cornered by superior allied forces.
   The course of Frederick’s foreign policy for the last two years had been
determined almost solely by the issue of Norway, whose possession only
Napoleon was prepared to guarantee. By the time Frederick was pre-
pared to abandon Napoleon, he had already been outmanoeuvred and
outsmarted by Charles John. In a final desperate moral outburst, the
angry Frederick instructed his foreign minister to inform the Swedes
that he had not ‘accepted the principle that they [the Norwegians] could
be given away to strangers as one replaces furniture or exchanges one
herd of cattle for another’.25 It is ironic that, in the final analysis, this
would be precisely what the Norwegians felt that Frederick had done.
