                                                  Endgames 1812–13   193


laws, one observer noted, would ‘turn Norway under our sceptre into
an absolute wasteland’.35 Although Norway was often refered to as a
Nordic Sparta with an extensive conscription, there was deep aversion
to fighting wars beyond Norway’s borders.
  As a consequence, Charles John and Adlersparre were at pains to
assert that Sweden would act responsibly in international politics, that
Norwegian peasants would not be sent to fight wars abroad and that
Norway could retain her existing laws and privileges. Another concern
was Swedish taxes, which many Norwegians believed would be beyond
the means of the peasantry. A Norwegian peasant visiting the head-
quarters of one of Charles John’s adjutants remarked that ‘we peasants
might well want to become Swedes’, but emphasised that the ‘current
tax levels are quite moderate’ in Norway. Other Swedish agents fre-
quently pointed out the popular fear of increased taxes, and in 1809
Adlersparre had been careful to stress in his written propaganda that
‘Sweden will not pay Norwegian taxes: Norway will not pay Swedish
taxes’.36
  As was the case in 1809, corn supplies to Norway also played a part
in the Swedish strategy. The British blockade was tightened up again in
the autumn of 1812 and, when Great Britain formally became Sweden’s
ally in the spring of 1813, the blockade could be even more rigorously
enforced. However, this time the Norwegians and the government in
Copenhagen succeeded in shipping large quantities of corn across the
Skagerrak before the blockade could be properly organised while the
British ships kept out of Danish-Norwegian waters during the winter
months. Norway was therefore reasonably well supplied with corn dur-
ing the winter and spring of 1814 when it had to decide which course
to follow.
  The differences between the means and strategies of what could
loosely be called the Adlersparre and Engeström factions mentioned
above were also paralleled by their different aims. The latter faction –
which, in addition to the foreign minister included a considerable num-
ber of military officers and leading statesmen who had been relatively
close to Gustav III and Gustav IV Adolph – basically envisaged a whole-
sale incorporation of Norway into Sweden. Adlersparre and his faction
saw things in a different light, however. In 1809 Adlersparre had been
prepared to grant Norway a constitution and quite extensive independ-
ence if a union could be achieved, and this was also the stance taken by
Charles John from 1811 onwards.
  The main consequence of these different strategies and goals, however,
was that Swedish propaganda and arguments became ambiguous and
