                                                   Endgames 1812–13   201


received from the inhabitants of Hamburg when they entered the
city in May. In their view, anything was preferable to French occupa-
tion. Later that month, when the inhabitants realised that the French
would reoccupy the city, many of them fled to Holstein. Furthermore,
the inhabitants of the Hanseatic cities soon found out that the Danes
treated them better than the allies, who sometimes sought revenge for
what they considered active collaboration with the French. Men from
the Hanseatic cities serving in the Hanseatic Legion – which was incor-
porated into Charles John’s army in 1813 – were therefore generally on
friendly terms with the local inhabitants when they played their part in
the allied occupation of Holstein and Schleswig in 1813–14.55
   Napoleon and the French, on the other hand, were as unpopular in
the duchies as they were elsewhere in northern Germany. Denmark-
Norway’s alliance with Napoleon was becoming increasingly unpopu-
lar also with army officers in Holstein, who sensed that Napoleon was
heading for a fall. Nor was it particularly popular with many of those
who served in the Danish army in Holstein and northern Germany,
most of whom hailed from the duchies. Squabbles and brawls between
French and Danish troops were not uncommon in 1813. Needless to say,
this infuriated both the French and Frederick VI and the hard-pressed
king found it necessary to order his officers and troops not to ‘politi-
cise’ or ‘enter into political conversations or to give expression to such
principles whereby one wishes to demonstrate one’s wisdom in uttering
opinions other than those we have approved, which must be those that
are to the true benefit of the state’.56
   In spite of the growing discontent with the French alliance and the
reluctance of the Danish auxiliary corps in northern Germany to side
with the French, the end of the European ceasefire in early August left
them with no choice but to join forces with the French army. This not
only aroused the moral dissatisfaction of the Danish officer corps in
Holstein, it was also an economic disaster for the entire state. If the
French troops had cost the Danish-Norwegian government a fortune in
1808, the cost of the troops placed at Napoleon’s disposal in 1812 and
1813 was even higher and was a major reason why the financial crisis
in the Danish-Norwegian state only increased after the introduction
of the reforms in January 1813. Nor were Danish-Norwegian finances
helped by the fact that a significant capital sum, owned by the Bank of
Altona but deposited in the Bank of Hamburg, was confiscated by the
French and sent to Paris, leaving the Bank of Altona on the verge of
bankruptcy and making it appear yet again as if Frederick was blindly
supporting Napoleon by any means available.
