194   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


self-contradictory as players from both factions were actively engaged in
agitation. What might in some pamphlets appear to be tempting prom-
ises and proclamations were often undermined in other publications
written in more threatening terms. In other words, Norwegians were
unable to form an unequivocal impression of what they could expect
from a union with Sweden, and this also developed into a question of
trust. For this reason, one Norwegian author warned his countrymen
in 1814 that even if Sweden respected Norway’s liberties and independ-
ence, the Swedish army would probably invade Norway sooner or later
and annex it, after which the Swedish nobility would follow in its wake
and turn ‘Norwegian farms into their estates’.37
   Throughout the Napoleonic wars, there was a remarkably persistent
perception in leading Swedish political and military circles that the
majority of the population in Norway, including the peasantry and most
members of the middle class, were Norwegians, while civil servants,
military officers and other individuals working for the state adminis-
tration and government bodies were Danes. Although there were some
Norwegians who favoured a union, one Swedish agent remarked, ‘these
[people] are not in majority, and they are being counteracted by the
civil servants there, who are Danes’.38
   Assumptions such as these ignored both the level of social cohe-
sion in Norway and the important fact that civil servants in Norway
were largely self-recruiting and had close ties with leading merchants.
Therefore, the elites and those serving in high-ranking administrative
and government posts were not ‘Danish’ as opposed to ‘Norwegian’,
but rather Danish and Norwegian by virtue of the parallel concepts of
the civic and natural fatherland. In other words, the complex identi-
ties of the middle-class elites in Denmark-Norway were also difficult
for contemporaries to disentangle. In one case, a Danish professor of
linguistics, who was travelling in the Norwegian borderlands in the
summer of 1812, saw a furious peasant woman who wanted to cross the
border from Sweden into Norway with her dying husband. When she
was denied entry back into her native country by a military officer, the
professor – standing on the Norwegian side of the border – was aston-
ished to hear her exclaim, ‘I shall damned well not stay in Sweden! I
am a Norwegian, and if my poor husband is to die, then he shall be laid
to rest in Danish soil.’ This particular woman perceived herself to be a
Norwegian, but regarded the territory on which Norwegians lived as
‘Danish’, quite possibly linking territory to her concept of the Danish
state. Furthermore, the army in Norway – even though it was manned
solely by ethnic Norwegians and was completely separate from the
