                                                   Endgames 1812–13   195


Danish army as an institution – was often referred to as ‘Danish’, not
only by the Swedes who regarded it as an institution of the Danish state
but also by Norwegian peasants. The same Danish professor also wrote
of his surprise when a young peasant boy who was conducting him on a
tour of the battlefields of 1808 in the Norwegian borderlands told him,
‘there stood the enemy, there the Danes (as he called them), there we
took so and so many, there this or that person fell, etc.’.39
   This was also quite a mystery to the Swedes, as was the identity and
ethnic composition of the elites in Norway, which the Swedes regarded
as Danish. In the end, this influenced Swedish perceptions and expecta-
tions in the sense that the Swedes considerably exaggerated the conflict
between Norwegians and Danes. However, it does not mean that they
were completely mistaken. Many Norwegians nurtured genuine dissat-
isfaction with the government in Copenhagen and with the union with
Denmark, but the implications of this were not always in line with the
Swedes’ conclusions.


The Effects of Swedish Propaganda

According to Georg Adlersparre, the general mood in Norway was
overtly pro-Swedish in 1811, slightly less so in 1812, and it then swung
increasingly in favour of Sweden following the disastrous famine dur-
ing the winter of 1812–13. Although what he wrote cannot always be
trusted, Adlersparre’s assertion does at least indicate how the Swedes
perceived the general mood in Norway and how this was sometimes
attributed to the effects of Swedish propaganda. ‘The people in gen-
eral’, a Swedish agent reported in the late summer of 1812, ‘complain
bitterly about their situation and want an end to it in every conceiv-
able way’. In October, another agent argued that because ‘the political
mindset in the regular army and among the masses in the country is
against the Danish government, and at least divided on the question of
a union with Sweden, I think the right time to mount a serious attack
on Norway is now or never’. Another optimistic report from an agent
related that ‘the Norwegians generally wish for a union with Sweden’,
while another wrote that although ‘the peasants here are not inclined
to let themselves be convinced’ he was happy to say that ‘vicars, burgh-
ers in general and especially merchants very much want the move to
be fulfilled’.40
   But Adlersparre and many of the agents were often too optimis-
tic and frequently failed to recognise the real effects of their efforts.
Even among people mostly likely to favour Swedish rule – primarily
