                                                    Endgames 1812–13   197


  Prince Christian Frederick’s arrival in Norway was an instant success.
He rode into Christiania in the afternoon of 22 May to the accompani-
ment of fanfares, and one observer noted in his diary the same even-
ing, ‘I now have no doubt of Norway’s salvation’. The Swedes, on the
other hand, were worried. Shortly after the prince’s arrival, the county
governor of Värmland in western Sweden, bordering on Norway,
reported that the prince had ‘won the love of the populace, who are
under the illusion that he is just like the blessed Prince Carl [Christian]
August’, the hero of 1808. And Christian Frederick did manage to win
the confidence and support of most of the middle-class elites and mer-
chants, with the exception of Count Wedel Jarlsberg, who remained
sceptical.45


Prince Christian Frederick and Norway

Christian Frederick’s Norwegian mission was brought about by the
king’s wish to place Prince Frederick of Hesse, the governor in Norway
since 1809 and one of the king’s most trusted military commanders, at
the head of the Danish-Norwegian contingent that was to fight along-
side the allies against the French, which again showed how determined
King Frederick was to abandon Napoleon. It also showed that the deci-
sion to send Christian Frederick to Norway was a secondary concern on
the part of the king and also that the prince was not necessarily sent
there primarily to boost Norwegian morale. However, the decision was
one that Christian Frederick himself and several notable Norwegians
had been hankering after since 1810, in the knowledge that a royal pres-
ence in Norway would be likely to give a significant boost to dynastic
loyalty. And in this they were proven right.
  A vital part of the strategy of boosting Norwegian loyalty and patri-
otism was to stir up antipathy towards Sweden. In April the king had
urged the Norwegian authorities to make sure that the Swedes would
be blamed if his efforts to obtain peace failed and therefore that ‘the
Norwegians should be informed of the Swedes’ intentions, as noth-
ing will create a greater desire to defend themselves than this’. For this
reason Norwegian priests were instructed to curse Sweden and all its
works from their pulpits in order to imprint the alleged crimes and evil
intentions of the Swedes on the minds of the populace. The aim was
to follow up the agitation from the pulpits with a concentrated writ-
ten propaganda campaign in the form of pamphlets and other texts.46
Opposition to Sweden was not only expressed in terms of political and
financial arguments, it also took the form of savage public rhetoric.
