                                                   Endgames 1812–13   199


   This made it imperative for Christian Frederick to secure the unani-
mous support of Norway’s inhabitants. He even reached out to Count
Wedel Jarlsberg, remarking that ‘barring him from taking part in
our activities only aggravates his mind’s disquietude; including him
in them makes it easier to keep an eye on him’.49 Furthermore, on
15 December, Christian Frederick summoned most of Norway’s leading
merchants and businessmen to Christiania to establish what would in
reality become Norway’s first bank of its own. This was no small con-
cession from the government, given King Frederick’s previous refusal to
grant Norway a bank. Yet, what became known as the ‘Bank meeting’ in
Christiania was also important for other reasons. It appears to have been
the first time that the Norwegian elite more or less openly began think-
ing of Norway as a kingdom in its own right, with Christian Frederick
as monarch.50 This bears witness to the position Christian Frederick
had been able to achieve among Norwegians after only six months or
so as governor and it also demonstrates the desperation of the situation
in Norway and the gravity of the threat to the union with Denmark.
   Although many Norwegians had to a great extent begun to turn
against Sweden during 1813, this did not mean that faith in and loy-
alty to the union with Denmark was strengthened. In early April 1813,
an observer in Christiania said of Frederick’s continued alliance with
Napoleon that it was naturally a matter of honour for a monarch to keep
his word and not turn his back on his allies, but he questioned whether
it was right for a monarch to sacrifice what was practically speaking an
entire people in so doing.51 King Frederick was certainly aware of such
sentiments and it was crucial that he convince the Norwegians that he
was not continuing to make war for its own sake. It was imperative, he
wrote, ‘that Norwegians be informed through every possible channel
that I have done everything I could to obtain peace with the Swedes,
and that I never intend to begin a war unless it be absolutely necessary’,
and that ‘every attempt I have made in Sweden and in England to turn
them towards peace and reason has failed’. This was still a sore point for
Frederick as late as December 1813, when he wrote that ‘it would grieve
me if anybody should believe that I made war for my own amusement;
that has never been my intention’.52
   Even in Denmark royal power was being put under pressure. The situ-
ation there during the war has often been represented as far less critical
for the king than it was in Norway, which is essentially a reasonable
interpretation. But opposition to absolutism during this period has been
underestimated, and the criticism that had been voiced in 1807 was still
current. For example, a British informant reported in 1808 that the former
