200   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


love of the king had been replaced by fear. The unsuccessful attempts to
invade Scania in 1808–09, and the similarly abortive attempts in 1809–
10 to become the heir to the Swedish throne only made matters worse
and created widespread unrest in the population. This was reflected in
reports from British spies from 1811 and 1812, which relate that there
was strong dissatisfaction with Frederick VI in Denmark. While sources
of this type should be taken with a pinch of salt, the information they
provide in this case is in harmony with Danish information. The devel-
opment of the war and the state bankruptcy further undermined the
king’s prestige to the point where Denmark’s leading newspaper con-
tained no celebratory songs nor speeches on the occasion of the king’s
birthday in 1813. And the situation deteriorated even more after October
1813 when Denmark-Norway found itself at war with virtually the rest
of Europe, and posters and bills condemning the government and, not
least, the king’s adjutants, appeared all over Copenhagen. To top it all,
on 10 December a poster appeared demanding the execution of the
people responsible for the monetary conversion of 5 January.53 In brief,
towards the end of 1813, the government in Copenhagen was under
great domestic pressure, while external pressure continued to intensify.


War and Defeat in Holstein

At least until the French evacuation of Hamburg in March 1813, rela-
tions between the Danish and French armies in northern Germany
were cordial enough. Danish troops were called out to assist the
French in restoring order following the outbreak of a popular revolt
in Hamburg in late February, as French troops were preparing to leave
the city. The subsequent execution of a number of rebels by the French
created a crisis, however, as Danish troops appeared to have had a hand
in these executions. This was the cause of a great deal of disgust among
the Holsteiners. Moreover, it was also a diplomatic disaster, as the out-
raged Russian government was left with the impression that Frederick
VI was devoted to Napoleon and willing to follow him almost blindly.
Whether this played a role one way or another with respect to Russian
policy regarding Denmark-Norway in the spring of 1813 is a matter of
conjecture, but it certainly did not benefit the cause of the Danish-
Norwegian government.54
   Despite this, the inhabitants of Hamburg and elsewhere in northern
Germany were too bitter about the French to hold grudges against the
Danes, or the Holsteiners for that matter, in the long run. Danish troops
were not considered enemies, as was shown by the warm greeting they
