                                                   Endgames 1812–13   203


the Danish army eventually gained safety behind the city walls. More
problems lay ahead, however. Desertion, especially from the Holsteinian
regiments in the Danish army, was rife after a defeat at Bornhöved on 7
December and continued in Glückstadt to such an extent that it even-
tually led to the city’s surrender on 5 January 1814. The Holsteiners
had had enough of the war, and fighting on Napoleon’s side was now
considered an absolute absurdity.
  Furthermore, the Danish army was becoming increasingly unpopu-
lar with the civilian population of Holstein in the autumn of 1813, as
was noted by one of its generals with great frustration. Its unpopularity
was mainly due to logistical demands, which, as was the case elsewhere
in Napoleonic Europe, were a heavy burden on the population. But in
the case of Schleswig-Holstein the burdens of the campaign in the late
autumn of 1813 further increased the schism between the duchies and
Denmark, as the demands of the Danish army were seen as the conse-
quences of an unpopular war and an even more unpopular alliance with
Napoleon and only compounded common grounds for dissatisfaction.
This further strengthened local and regional attachments in the duch-
ies and reinforced the anti-Danish sentiment that would come to haunt
relations between the duchies and Denmark proper in later decades,
when the experiences of the Napoleonic Wars were increasingly viewed
from a national perspective.
  By 1813 clear evidence of change could be seen since the upsurge
of state patriotism in the duchies following the Bombardment of
Copenhagen. As if to emphasise the erosion of state patriotic senti-
ment as a result of the war, affection for the duchies was decreas-
ing in Denmark proper and giving way to a national discourse that
increasingly excluded the German-speaking parts of the state. This
showed that many people were increasingly beginning to think in
terms of nationality rather than in terms of loyalty to the cosmopoli-
tan dynastic state, not only in Holstein. In Copenhagen there were
references to a Danish ‘we’ and an army of Danish brothers fighting
on the banks of the Eider for the fatherland with no mention made
of the occupied parts of Holstein. 59 In Norway there was even less
concern about the fate of Holstein, despite the fact that the country’s
fate was virtually being decided on the battlefields of the duchies. In
other words, the three core elements of the Danish state – Denmark
proper, the duchies and Norway – were gradually moving towards
separation, the move being signalled by mutual indifference and, in
the case of the Holsteiners and the Norwegians, by growing resent-
ment of Danish rule.
