202   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


  The war in northern Germany and Holstein in the late autumn of
1813 was by and large a hopeless affair for the Danish auxiliary corps.
The French had dug in at Hamburg – where they would hold out until
Napoleon’s abdication – while the Danish corps was forced to retreat
north into Holstein from Altona. On 28 November the lines between
the two allies were completely cut by Charles John, leaving the Danish
army isolated. By this time, several of King Frederick’s advisors, includ-
ing Prince Christian Frederick, were openly encouraging him to aban-
don Napoleon altogether, no matter what the risk, to prevent the
dismemberment of the entire Danish-Norwegian state and with it the
end of the Oldenburg monarchy.
  It was in this desperate situation that Frederick summoned his
privy council for the first time since 1808. One outcome of the crisis
in late 1813 was therefore to bring about a minor palace revolution in
Copenhagen, as it marked the end of Frederick’s personal absolutist rule
and of the influence of the Red Feathers. The privy council could offer
the desperate and bewildered king little in the way of useful advice,
however, and it became increasingly clear that Denmark-Norway’s des-
tiny would be decided on the battlefield. A slender ray of hope was
offered by a last-minute Austrian attempt to mediate between Denmark-
Norway and the allies. On 21 November, Prince Metternich sent a
young diplomat, Count L.P. de Bombelles, to Copenhagen to persuade
Frederick to join the allies and threatened that if he did not, Austria –
the last of the major allied powers with which Denmark-Norway was
not at war – would support Sweden’s demand for Norway. Although
this was probably an attempt by Prince Metternich to obstruct Charles
John and retain a balance of power in Scandinavia, Austria’s ultimatum
was that the province of Trondheim be ceded to Sweden immediately
in return for compensatory territories elsewhere, and that Denmark-
Norway immediately enter into the anti-Napoleonic coalition.57
  As far as King Frederick was concerned, however, any voluntary sur-
render of part or of the whole of Norway was completely out of the
question, and any hope of a negotiated settlement vanished. In Norway,
rumours of the Swedish and Austrian demand created a sensation in
any case, with one observer remarking that he was happy that he did
not live in Trondheim, because swearing an oath of allegiance to the
Swedish king would be more than he could bear.58
  The war in Holstein was forcing the Danish-Norwegian government
ever further into a corner. In the early days of December orders were
given to retreat into the fortified cities of Glückstadt and Rendsburg.
After fighting its way through the allied lines at Sehested on 10 December,
