198   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


   For one priest in Christiania the very concepts ‘Sweden’ and ‘Swedish’
became repulsive, while another Norwegian priest at the end of 1813
described Sweden in poetry and prose as a degenerate country peopled
by oppressed dwarves who had betrayed their Nordic origin (includ-
ing Norway and Denmark) and their national character, as they had
thrown themselves into the arms of a tyrannical nobility, an unworthy
king and a foreign crown prince. The diatribe reflected not only the
fiery temperament of this particular priest but also a widespread feeling
among many Norwegians across a broader cross-section of the popula-
tion. Having toured the southeastern Norwegian borderlands in June
1813, where social and economic relations with Sweden were normally
extensive, Christian Frederick reported that even people in these areas
were full of ‘disgust with the Swedes’. A Swedish agent agreed, conclud-
ing bluntly that the uneducated segments of the populace ‘retain an
ingrained hatred of everything that is Swedish’.47
   At the same time, King Frederick was becoming more and more des-
perate. Time after time during the summer and autumn of 1813 he
advocated pre-emptive attacks on Sweden by peasant militias, if only to
seize Swedish corn and lay waste to the Swedish borderlands.48 When
Swedish territory was invaded, wrote the king to Christian Frederick on
the formal outbreak of war with Sweden in early September, ‘the par-
ties you send into the country can not only prevent the concentration
of troops, they can also acquire food for you’. This also showed how
intense the king felt the conflict with Sweden had become. Christian
Frederick had no plans to wage such a ‘total war’ on Swedish territory,
however. He suggested instead that they should conserve their energy
until the situation became more acute and until Denmark and Norway
could join forces against Sweden. Rather than launch an all-out attack
on Sweden, Christian Frederick set about consolidating his own posi-
tion and that of the monarchy, in preparation for what might happen
in the event of a French defeat.
   Napoleon’s defeat at Leipzig on 19 October 1813 was a sign of things
to come. In Norway, Christian Frederick learned what had happened at
Leipzig in early November. It was clear that from now on the war would
involve defending Norway, retaining the kingdom for the Oldenburg
monarchy and preventing Charles John from taking the prize he had
been promised. The reaction in Norway was to take urgent steps to
prepare the country’s military forces and to obtain as much corn
and as many other supplies as possible. It was also necessary to do as
much as possible to bring some order into Norway’s ailing financial
situation.
