206   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


about such views. But in that dark December of 1813, as the crisis deep-
ened and as the idea of Christian Frederick becoming king of an inde-
pendent Norway found relatively free expression, it took on a new and
greater force, which in turn created various possibilities for political
developments.
   Prince Christian Frederick had also let it be known that he was not
averse to resorting to radical measures to prevent a union of Norway
and Sweden. An idea that increasingly gained ground with the prince
from the late autumn of 1813 was that an enforced union with Sweden –
through a surrender based on a peace treaty, for instance – could be
avoided if Norwegians raised the flag of rebellion and put up resist-
ance. This would involve putting a spanner in the works of the practical
organisation of a formal surrender of Norway to Sweden on the part of
Denmark.
   The idea was fleshed out by Christian Frederick in a letter to the
king, known as the ‘Christmas letter’, on 25 December. His point of
departure in the letter was the Swedish and Austrian ultimatum regard-
ing the immediate surrender of the province of Trondheim, the rest of
Norway to be ceded to Sweden later. However, unlike the king, Christian
Frederick was not convinced that this was completely unthinkable.
Ceding Trondheim, he wrote, would leave it to the inhabitants of the
province to decide whether they would accept surrender or resist. He
did not anticipate that they would do the former, but pointed out that
‘the circumstances under which they would do the latter could not be
known’. His idea was that surrendering parts or all of Norway would not
necessarily involve the country’s immediate and de facto union with
Sweden, if the Norwegians themselves did not want it.
   For Christian Frederick, popular resistance to a union with Sweden
after a formal surrender of the country on the part of Frederick VI
would be a forceful expression of the will of the people, which was
something he assumed the allied powers would have to consider when
the inevitable question of enforcing Sweden’s claims by military means
arose. Furthermore, Sweden would be left with serious practical prob-
lems when the time came to enforce a takeover of Norway after its
formal surrender. In such a case, there would be two possible options
for Norway: either national independence or a (renewed) union with
Denmark. Christian Frederick made no bones about the fact that he was
chiefly thinking along the lines of the latter, although without exclud-
ing the former as an acceptable possibility. There can thus be no doubt
that, at the end of 1813, Prince Christian Frederick had set his sights on
