204   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


   Charles John’s invasion of Holstein soon obliged the Danish forces
to retreat. But before its decisive conclusion, Denmark-Norway’s war
against the allies in the duchies was briefly postponed by a cease-
fire signed on 15 December. Although this was primarily engineered
by Austrian efforts at mediation, Charles John was also motivated to
halt hostilities by the realisation that it could take him a long time
to oust the troops entrenched in Glückstadt and Rendsburg. But he
still hoped that his Danish-Norwegian counterpart would sense that
defeat was inevitable and that he would enter into negotiations to sur-
render Norway. This was far from King Frederick’s intention, however.
Clinging to the hope that Austria would somehow come to his rescue
by enabling him to defer or deflect the question of Norway, Frederick
saw no reason to cede Norway voluntarily. This enraged Charles John,
who was also deeply suspicious that Austria and the other allies were
preparing to deprive him of his Norwegian prize and admit Denmark-
Norway into the coalition. Such suspicions had been a source of friction
between Charles John and the allies for quite some time. One instance
was a British attempt to mediate between Denmark-Norway and the
allies in October that was furiously rejected by the crown prince with
the words, ‘once Zealand is in my power, no force on earth will remove
me from it. I will – if necessary – bombard Copenhagen and, if the
king hesitates to surrender Norway, I will plough up the soil on which
Denmark’s royal castle once stood’. He then proceeded to threaten to
dismantle the Oldenburg monarchy completely. While these outbursts
were no doubt a reflection of Charles John’s temperament and as such
should not be taken literally, they certainly indicate that a negotiated
compromise was not what he had in mind.60
   When the ceasefire expired on 29 December 1813, the question for
the Danish-Norwegian government was whether or not to continue
the war. A council of war was convened at Amalienborg Palace in
Copenhagen on 30 December to assess the military situation. The con-
clusions arrived at were bleak and were to all intents and purposes a deci-
sion to surrender. In the meantime Count Bombelles and the Danish
diplomat Edmund Bourke had travelled to Kiel to consult Charles John,
who now occupied all of Holstein. An extension of the ceasefire until
the night of 6 January was agreed, but Charles John made his terms
stricter. He now wanted all of Norway immediately and then only
agreed to the extension of the ceasefire if Trondheim was surrendered
to him immediately along with the major fortresses in eastern Norway,
while the rest was to be ceded after the conclusion of a general peace.
In return he pledged to try to help Frederick VI to obtain territorial
