210   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


with Denmark. The Norwegian historian Knut Mykland has made a
case for this, and while a ‘smoking gun’ has never been found there is
a good deal of circumstantial evidence to support the theory of Danish
double-dealing. There is no doubt that, before the separation, Frederick
VI, and several members of the government, discussed the possibility
of a Norwegian rebellion if the kingdom were ceded to Sweden. These
ideas were in veiled terms passed on to the heir to the throne in Norway
when, during the negotiations with Bombelles regarding the surrender
of Trondheim, the king wrote to Christian Frederick that ‘Cession could
be avoided if the inhabitants of Trondheim said “We want to stay with
our king”.’ The prince wanted this clarified and asked Frederick VI out-
right whether he should act independently of Denmark in the event of
a separation or whether he should abide by the terms of a peace treaty.
As mentioned, the king was aware of the contents of this letter before
the conclusion of negotiations in Holstein.5
   Knut Mykland cites five pieces of circumstantial evidence of Danish
double-dealing in connection with these negotiations. First, Frederick
VI stipulated that the allied occupation troops should vacate the duch-
ies immediately after the peace treaty was signed. Second, the king was
given a choice between initially ceding only Trondheim, and then the
rest of Norway following a general European peace, or of ceding the
entire kingdom immediately in return for Swedish Pomerania and one
million Swedish rix-dollars. According to Mykland, Frederick VI chose
the second option as it put all Norwegians in the same boat. The third
piece of circumstantial evidence is that Frederick offered to join the
allied crusade against Napoleon so that he would be seen as one of the
allies and could obtain a seat at the Congress of Vienna. Fourth, corn
shipments to Norway continued at an accelerated pace. To these four
pieces of ‘evidence’ Mykland adds the psychological desire common to
all people to win back what they had lost.6
   The question is simply whether all of these five pieces of circum-
stantial evidence need necessarily be construed as part of a Danish
deception. The Danish government knew that the Norwegians would
consider an uprising against the peace treaty, so this had to be taken
into account.7 However, this does not mean that it was part of a plan.
Furthermore, no monarch in his right mind would want to have hostile
troops occupying his territories any longer than necessary, so it would
make perfectly good sense for Frederick VI to get rid of the allied forces
in Holstein. Likewise it made good sense to seek compensation for
the loss of Norway, and was wise to become an ally of the powers that
determined the fate of the Danish state. As to whether Denmark was
