                            Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   209


January 1814, shortly after he had received the news about the Peace of
Kiel. Christian Frederick wrote to the king that the monarch had the
right to release the Norwegians from their oath of allegiance, but not
to deprive the royal family of its right of inheritance, protesting once
again on behalf of the nation. He not only saw it as his duty but as his
calling to stay at his post in order to prevent a civil war and a state of
anarchy and to support the Norwegians against oppression. The prince
begged the king to not yet consider Norway a Swedish province but
to send corn, gunpowder and bullets. In accordance with ‘natural law’
Christian Frederick held that, even if the king had the right to bypass
the line of succession, sovereignty could not be transferred to another
monarch. It had to be given back to the nation.2
   Before the Peace of Kiel, it had been clear to the prince that a
Norwegian uprising might be necessary if Norway were separated from
Denmark, and that this in turn could have serious personal conse-
quences for him, among them the loss of his right to the Danish throne,
of his estates and of his son. In addition he risked being branded a rebel
by the great powers. As early as November 1813, the heir to the throne
had written a ‘letter of conveyance’ in which he left all of his Danish
properties to his son. He also followed this up on 22 February 1814 by
asking the king to become the guardian of his son and to secure his
properties in Denmark for his son as it was doubtful whether he would
return. This Frederick VI agreed to do. Christian Frederick told the king
several times that he should disinherit him if this could in any way help
or save Denmark or Frederick VI himself.3
   So Christian Frederick made himself the leader of a rebellion, and his
immediate goal was to create an independent Norway with himself as
autocratic king. The prince had conceived this strategy in advance. He
had written to the military commanders on 17 January, before he knew
of the Peace of Kiel, about the course he intended to take if the king-
doms were separated, and he repeated this to them and to the heads of
the civil administration upon receiving the news of the peace on 25
January.4 Was this, though, the Danes playing a double game?


Danish Double-dealing?

There has been speculation among historians, as there was among
contemporary observers, about whether, in the event of the cession of
Norway, Frederick VI and Christian Frederick had a secret agreement
that the Danish prince should raise the banner of rebellion to preserve
Norway for the royal house and pave the way for a later reunification
