                              Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   211


indirectly attempting to provoke and support a Norwegian rebellion,
we know that the Danish government was divided.
  On the one hand, Foreign Minister Rosenkrantz advised Frederick VI
without reservation to live up to the terms of the Peace of Kiel, as the
Danish state would otherwise be at risk. On the other hand, his chief of
the general staff and in particular Christian Frederick’s adjutant, who
had delivered the prince’s Christmas letter on 5 January, supported the
idea of a rebellion. Frederick VI appears to have tergiversated, vacillat-
ing between the two views. He appears originally to have supported
the idea of a rebellion, but his doubts and fears won out in the end.
However, there can be no doubt that the king was personally sympa-
thetic to Christian Frederick and to his policy in Norway at the begin-
ning of 1814.8 On the other hand, the king tried to have the Norwegian
part of the fleet sent to Denmark. If Christian Frederick had not refused,
this would have left the Norwegians without a naval defence.
  Christian Frederick was informed of the Peace of Kiel on 24 January by
an emissary, who subsequently briefed him. According to Mykland, the
prince’s diary clearly shows that he was ‘left [ ... ] in no doubt about what
the king was thinking’, but there is nothing in the diary that appears to
confirm this view. On the contrary, Christian Frederick wrote,

   I can understand that the king was obliged to agree to the cession to
   obtain peace [ ... ]. But that the king could believe that the Norwegian
   people would surrender voluntarily and that he could believe that I
   would be so contemptible as to desert them at this time is more than
   I can grasp.

It makes little sense, therefore, to use the prince’s diary to argue that
there was double-dealing, as it is clear from the exchange of letters
and from the prince’s own notes that Frederick VI ordered him not to
defend Norway. However, the king’s lack of support did not stop the
heir to the throne, who also believed he was acting in accordance with
Danish interests. United with Norway, Sweden would be more powerful
than Denmark, which was obviously a danger to the Danish state.9
   The king’s actions have helped to lend weight to the theory of double-
dealing. On 14 January, the same day that the Peace of Kiel was signed,
the monarch ordered that corn shipments to Norway be stepped up, irre-
spective of the fact that the country was still being blockaded. Corn ship-
ments were accordingly intensified during the spring on Danish ships
with bogus papers. Christian Frederick gathered a group of Danes and
Norwegians in Denmark who shipped the corn with the king’s support.10
