                                                   Endgames 1812–13   205


compensation elsewhere in Germany or in Swedish Pomerania, and
offered him one million Swedish rix-dollars in cash if all of Norway was
ceded without further ado.
  On learning the new terms, it was King Frederick’s turn to go into a fit
of rage. Count Bombelles made it clear that there was nothing more he
could do, however, and that Frederick really had no choice but to cede
Norway, while he reminded him of the combined military power of the
allies. Foreign Minister Rosenkrantz emphasised that a rejection could
well lead to the fall of the entire Oldenburg dynasty and, with it, the
Danish state. In fact, detachments of Russian Cossacks under Charles
John’s command had already begun to appear as far north as Kolding
in Jutland, an event that led to the winter of 1813–14 being remembered
as the ‘Cossack winter’. Faced with the prospect of a wholesale invasion
of Jutland and possibly Funen, and with it total defeat, King Frederick
caved in on 7 January.


Room for Manoeuvre

Charles John now had Frederick VI in a stranglehold, but there was
still some time left to manoeuvre for Denmark-Norway if the Danish-
Norwegian government or its representatives in Norway were prepared
to make a number of radical decisions. By the Christmas and New Year
of 1813, it was no longer a question of whether something would be done
about Norway, but rather of what would be done and who would do it.
The goal for Denmark-Norway’s side was clear enough, at least to most
people: to avoid surrendering Norway to Sweden. But their underly-
ing motives were not necessarily the same. In some circles, solutions
that would secure Norway for the Oldenburg dynasty and include a
union with Denmark for the short or long term were considered, while
other circles favoured something more along the lines of a permanent
separation from Denmark. In the latter case, there were even a number
of influential members of the eastern Norwegian elite who regarded
a union with Sweden as a more attractive alternative to a continued
union with Denmark.
   By the Christmas of 1813, most Norwegians could agree that the gov-
ernment in Copenhagen had played its cards very ineptly. Extremely
critical opinions of King Frederick’s policy could be heard even from
members of the Norwegian officer corps, who were usually not ones to
criticise the king. Their primary criticism was that too little had been
done for Norway in government circles, and the little that had been
done had been characterised by negligence.61 There was nothing new
