                             Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   213


and some of the farming class, who harboured prejudices and antipathies
toward the Swedish state and did not wish to be subjected to what they
called the ‘Swedish yoke’. Few people believed the Swedish promises.
In one of the countless pamphlets, the civil servant Christian Magnus
Falsen pointed out that the Swedish promises were accompanied by the
demand that Swedish troops should take over the Norwegian fortresses
which, according to him, would pave the way for ‘French’ military
despotism. Falsen painted a picture of cultural genocide where every-
thing Norwegian would be abolished, Norway annexed to Sweden and
Norwegians made slaves of the Swedish aristocracy, and skilfully played
on the existing image of the enemy and on prejudices arising from the
new situation.12
  The general population feared that Norwegian peasants would be
forced to fight in remote countries in Sweden’s ‘eternal’ wars. Indeed,
the presence of Swedish troops in Germany and France in 1813–14 only
seemed to confirm these fears. They also remembered the many wars
that Norwegians had fought against the Swedish arch-enemy, and were
very much aware that Sweden had played a central role in the block-
ade. The Swedish ‘policy of starvation’ was a point that was emphasised
time after time both within the country by Christian Frederick’s well-
oiled propaganda machine and internationally in diplomatic appeals
to other European countries. However, evidence of animosity towards
Sweden among the Norwegian peasantry should not be seen as being
tantamount to a well-developed national identity, as some Norwegian
historians have suggested over the years, any more than anti-French
sentiment in the general German populace meant that they had been
gripped by the nationalist fervour of the educated classes.13
  The facts that the Peace of Kiel made Norway the property of the
Swedish king and that the Swedes were prepared to assert their claim by
force united the nation against the external threat. This led to Swedes
being described as everything that Norwegians were not: aggressive,
imperialistic, authoritarian and militaristic. There was a ‘pro-Swedish’
group associated with Count Wedel Jarlsberg, however, that attempted
to neutralise the image of a Swedish enemy, play up the Swedish-
Norwegian brotherhood, emphasise the ‘naturalness’ of a union
between the two kingdoms of the Scandinavian peninsula and the
political necessity of the union. Their contention was that the ‘national’
hatred between Swedes and Norwegians was exclusively the result of
an instrumental ‘Danish’ policy to keep the Norwegians in check. The
arguments of the Wedel group were fully in line with Swedish propa-
ganda, but they had no effect on the majority of a middle class besotted
