212   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


   For all that, the king was forced to dismiss Frederick Moltke, minister
and president of the General Customs House, who had helped to organise
the corn shipments, after a compromising letter en route to Norway fell
into Swedish hands. His dismissal did not, however, prevent huge quanti-
ties of corn reaching Norway in breach of Denmark’s obligations under
the treaty and to increasingly vociferous protests from Sweden.
   Frederick VI was under steadily increasing political pressure from
Sweden. This was bolstered by the continued military presence of the
allies in the duchies. The pressure was further increased when Charles
John persuaded the allies to support the Swedish demand for an imme-
diate stop of all help to Norway. This prompted Frederick VI to issue an
open letter in April to the effect that Denmark recognised the Swedish
king as the sole legal authority in Norway, while in a private letter he
encouraged Christian Frederick to give up his project in Norway. He
told the prince in no uncertain terms that his advocacy of Norwegian
independence was endangering the existence of Denmark. However,
Frederick VI did nothing to stop corn shipments to Norway until the
beginning of May, when it became known that a delegation from
the great powers was on its way to Copenhagen to find out whether
Denmark was honouring its obligations and to enforce the union
between Sweden and Norway. A prohibition against all trade and com-
munication with Norway was introduced on 11 May and tightened
on 28 May. The corn that had already found its way to Norway was,
however, a precondition for the bid for independence. Without Danish
corn the Norwegians would have been forced to accept the Swedish
demands outright. Paradoxically, it was thus the autocratic Danish king
who would pave the way for a Norwegian constitution.11
   Christian Frederick, however, refused to bow to pressure from the
king in the spring of 1814. On the contrary, he resolutely began to
mobilise the resources of the Norwegian population – mental, physical
and political – for a national struggle for liberty. However, a mobilisa-
tion of this sort takes time. The fact that Christian Frederick was left
with time to act can be attributed to a combination of three factors.
First, Charles John and the main body of his Swedish forces were on
the continent; second, the Swedish government was weak; and, third,
Christian Frederick was initially able to keep the Swedes in the dark.


Mental Mobilisation

Anti-Swedish propaganda in Norway the year before had fallen on fertile
soil. The Peace of Kiel was unacceptable to the Norwegian middle class
