                             Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   221


Norway was too weak economically and too culturally backward to
become independent and should therefore enter into a union.31 Exactly
the same view could be found among some of the ‘pro-Danish’ mem-
bers of the Independence Party. The difference between the two parties
lie in whom a union should be with.
   The pro-Swedish party was united in a belief that independence
was impossible in reality because the great powers would not permit
it. In so far as they had a choice, the Swedish sympathisers saw only
two options: a union with Denmark or a union with Sweden. Personal
experience and their aversion to absolutism and Denmark would play a
part here, and some became pro-Swedish because they feared reunifica-
tion.32 The pro-Swedish party wanted to establish a Norwegian govern-
ment that would draw up a constitution and negotiate a limited union
with Sweden. If this proved impossible, they were prepared to fight to
the death. Initially, the pro-Swedish party presented their plans openly,
but as hatred of them flared, they held their own council and, after
Eidsvoll, withdrew, resigning themselves to awaiting developments.
   The group around Christian Frederick did what they could to portray
the count and his followers as men who did not have the courage to
fight for independence. In the spring of 1814, they were referred to as
the lily-livered, half-witted or jittery party. Count Wedel’s open contact
with Sweden made him appear even more suspicious and un-Norwegian,
and the count and his party were watched carefully at Eidsvoll. The pro-
Swedish party was accused of treason time after time at the Constituent
Assembly. Some were so intimidated by the atmosphere that they dare
not voice their opinion. The simple fact that the Independence Party
and the Union Party called each other ‘pro-Danish’ and ‘pro-Swedish’
respectively showed how important it was for them to question their
opponents’ Norwegian sympathies.33
   The support shown by elements of the merchant class for a union
with Sweden prompted Christian Frederick to word the election rules
in such a way as to ensure that civil servants, officers and farmers
would be more strongly represented than merchants. Furthermore, an
oath, which Christian Frederick had dictated that Norwegians must
swear on the extraordinary day of prayer in the country’s churches,
bound the population as a whole and the representatives of the com-
ing National Assembly in particular to the prince’s person and to the
policy of independence. The normal procedure was to swear allegiance
to the new king on his succession, but the Danish heir to the throne was
not yet even king of Norway. Many people did probably feel that the
oath expressed traditional loyalty to the king. In principle, though, the
