                             Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   217


honourable discharge or received permission to enter ‘foreign’ service.
Few of them were prepared to swear allegiance to Norway, however,
until they could be certain that they would be released from Danish
service. Most of the officers in the Norwegian army, which, unlike the
navy, had been an independent Norwegian force, did not feel bound
to the same extent, but many of them still found it necessary to write
to Frederick VI to explain their actions and to obtain an honourable
discharge. By far the majority of Danish-born army officers, naval offic-
ers and civil servants in Norway chose to stay in Norway, which must
chiefly be ascribed to career opportunities, to family allegiance and,
for some younger officers, to the idea that they could best serve their
fatherland by fighting against Sweden.20
   Norwegian civil servants in Copenhagen founded the Norwegian
Association with the aim of enabling Norwegians in the city to help,
encourage and advise each other. The association issued a declaration
that Norwegians should regard Norway as their true fatherland, but
that those who were still Danish citizens had a duty to Danish society
and the Danish king. Frederick VI, out of fear for Sweden, had the asso-
ciation dissolved. However, he allowed a new and more discreet associ-
ation to be founded. The 900 Norwegian seamen in the capital applied
to the Swedish ambassador for passports that would enable them to go
to Norway, but when he demanded that they must first swear an oath
of allegiance to the Swedish king, they collectively refused to com-
ply, after which a collection was made in Copenhagen to pay for their
board and lodging in the city.21
   During the Constituent Assembly at Eidsvoll young Norwegian law-
yers from Copenhagen regularly arrived in Norway in the hope of
obtaining an appointment in the as yet ‘unborn state’. While what
motivated these young people to return home was often their love of
the fatherland, the importance of career opportunities should not be
underestimated. The statistics provide a clear picture and show that it
was the younger Norwegian civil servants and officers who returned
home, while those in good positions who owned property, were mar-
ried and had families chose to remain where they were.22


On the Brink of Revolution?

In spite of extreme war-weariness, it was still possible to inflame hearts
in Copenhagen. The students offered to go to Jutland to fight for the
fatherland and the union with Norway was rejected in friendly but firm
terms by the king shortly before the cession of Norway. The immediate
