                            Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   223


Constituent Assembly with the aim of investigating Norway’s relations
with other countries. The Independence Party immediately contested
the assembly’s right to do so on the grounds that it had been elected
for the sole purpose of writing a constitution. The pro-Swedish faction
undermined this argument pointing out that the assembly had already
set up a finance committee and a legislative committee. They added
that the people had placed their sovereignty in the hands of the assem-
bly through elections. Although the Union Party was in the minority,
their apparently incontestable defence won them many adherents to
their views. The Independence Party immediately fought back, how-
ever.
  In his speech at the opening of the assembly on 11 April, Christian
Frederick had made it clear that the oath sworn at the election sim-
ply entitled the assembly to write a constitution and elect a king. This
argument was also repeated in newspapers, possibly influenced by
the regent, who also made use of his allies among the deputies of the
Constitutional Assembly. The vote between the opposing sides tied at
55 to 55, which meant that the final decision was made by the president
of the assembly, who had been assigned a double vote. These he cast in
favour of the Independence Party. This meant that Christian Frederick
retained his unlimited control of foreign policy and could prevent
information from abroad undermining the course of his policy.36


The Ghost of Reunification

The question of a reunification of Norway and Denmark was constantly
waiting in the wings of the political stage. Conservative Norwegians,
such as ironworks-owner Jacob Aall, regarded the ‘divorce’ as a catastro-
phe that should make every Norwegian heart bleed.37 His sorrow was
in glaring contrast to the delight felt by others now that Danish fetters
had been cast off, but the most widespread feelings were bewilderment,
anger and disappointment that the Danes had not even fought to retain
Norway. Even though many people differentiated between the Danish
people and the despised Danish government, Danes were objects of
hatred. A Danish-born civil servant in Norway wrote in April 1814 that
the people

  in this country heap abuse on Danish civil servants and would like
  to see the back of the lot of them, as anybody who has not been
  rocked in his cradle on Norwegian soil is now considered a foreigner
  and should as such be excluded from everything.38
