222   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


roles had been reversed. People did not swear an oath of loyalty to the
king but to the fatherland and its independence. By making use of
the church ceremonies, Christian Frederick deliberately linked religion,
love of the fatherland and politics. After the ceremonies the priests and
local civil servants were instructed to confirm in writing that they and
their parishioners had sworn the oath with appropriate devotion to the
fatherland.34
   Very few people had any advance knowledge of the oath. Until the
moment when it was to be sworn, it had been kept secret, coming even
as a surprise to many civil servants. This left people with very little time
to reflect over what they were pledging, while its significance may very
well have been lost on many. Yet, the common day of prayer bound the
nation together in an imagined community, at least in the minds of
the educated elite, who were conscious that their countrymen in other
regions were swearing the same oath on the same day.
   In one way, then, the event could be described as a political coup
on the part of Christian Frederick. Yet, even though the full scope of
the political implications may not have been clear, the day was gener-
ally characterised by great solemnity and joy. In Bergen people were
recorded as having sworn the oath ‘with a heart that burned for the
fatherland’ and with joy over their fatherland’s independence. In
Christiania all the church bells in the town were rung, and the event
as a whole left many people deeply moved. The priest at Leirdal Church
in western Norway told his congregation that the day was decisive for
whether Norwegians were to be a free, independent people or slaves.
   An oath to the fatherland in God’s house was not to be taken lightly,
and the adherents of a union did not wish to swear to uphold a policy
of independence that they regarded as contrary to the country’s true
interests. But they felt forced to do so by Christian Frederick, as they
felt that they could not refuse without being branded traitors. At the
Constitutional Assembly, the priest, Nicolai Wergeland, demanded that
the oath be cancelled, as the nation’s representatives would other-
wise be robbed of the authority given to them by the people, and Count
Wedel Jarlsberg later argued that the Constituent Assembly at Eidsvoll
was above the oath. Others simply did not take it seriously. A pro-
Swedish priest asserted that what he saw as an irrational oath could be
broken without fear, ‘and heaven will not be angry!’35
   Christian Frederick had been in full control of Norwegian foreign
policy and had a firm grip on executive power in the country. The
Wedel group, however, challenged the regent’s power in relation to for-
eign policy. The instrument for this would be a committee set up by the
