218 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


reactions to the Peace of Kiel in Denmark were feelings of indignation,
disgrace and sorrow, combined with deep dissatisfaction with the king.
A caricature of the Danish army on the stock exchange depicted the
generals headless, the officers with sheep heads, while the soldiers had
the heads of lions. According to a Norwegian observer everybody in
Copenhagen turned against the king, while an army general stated that
Frederick VI had lost the respect and trust of his subjects. Dissatisfaction
spanned both social and geographical boundaries and went right up to
high government and military circles. Such damage had been inflicted
on Frederick’s reputation that a story emerged that he had been obliged
to sneak back into Copenhagen in disguise following the Peace of Kiel.
According to a high-ranking civil servant, the hereditary loyalty to the
king was disappearing.23
   Therefore, when the Norwegians rose under the leadership of the
Danish successor, even the most conservative civil servants were
gripped by enthusiasm for the rebellion. Every positive rumour from
Norway was received as gospel truth, with Christian Frederick playing
the part of the saviour. In spite of the fact that citizens did not have
the right of free assembly in Denmark and the country was obliged
by the terms of the treaty to support the Swedish claim for Norway,
arrangements were made for the benefit of the Norwegians and associa-
tions for their support were founded, while people at gatherings toasted
Christian Frederick and old Norway and sang the forbidden Norwegian
‘national anthem’. The enthusiasm and support were not only due to
love of Norway and hatred of Sweden, but also to the hope of a reunifi-
cation of the twin kingdoms.24
   A well-known philologist continued to refer to the Norwegians as his
countrymen and the highly influential priest, N.F.S. Grundtvig, called
the ‘twin kingdoms of the North’ his true fatherland. A Danish count
wrote, ‘For me, Norway is part of Denmark – just as I regard Denmark
as part of Norway.’ A Danish professor wrote to a Norwegian friend that
Norwegians should not judge Danes on the basis of the government’s
vacillating, feeble policy. His political creed consisted of Norway’s inde-
pendence, reunification and a Scandinavian union. In 1814, with people’s
hopes centred on the person of Christian Frederick, he was not alone.25
   Denmark broke its connection with Norway under international pres-
sure, but the king refused to agree to the Swedish demand that he dis-
inherit Christian Frederick as the successor to the throne. This could
have been due to family feeling, but the king must also have feared the
consequences of such a move, which according to some sources would
have resulted in an immediate rebellion in Copenhagen, where people
