220   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


treaty with Russia in 1813 without the acceptance of Frederick Wilhelm
in order to save Prussia. For Schill and Yorck, therefore, the nation and
the state weighed more heavily than loyalty to the monarch.29


A House Divided

In Norway the national mood was fundamentally different in the
spring of 1814, and the people were gripped by a national enthusiasm.
The public became politicised to an unheard-of extent, and a host of
civil servants in particular threw themselves into the task of drafting a
free Norwegian constitution.
   However, the ‘new’ Norwegian nation was a conflict zone, and this
was clearly in evidence in the internal disunity in the Constituent
Assembly. The Independence Party had its main bases in the western
and central parts of Norway. The party was often described by the ‘pro-
Swedish’ faction as ‘pro-Danish’ as its opponents believed that it would
strive for a reunification with Denmark. In fact, the Independence Party
obtained support from a number of partially opposed tendencies –
traditional loyalty to the government and the king, hopes of a reuni-
fication with Denmark, fear of the Swedes, anti-Danish sentiments,
Norwegian separatism and patriotism. All of these threads were skil-
fully gathered up by Christian Frederick in a national movement30 that
included prominent figures from the civil service and the clergy. The
party’s undisputed leader at Eidsvoll was Christian Magnus Falsen.
Together with Christian Frederick’s secretary, the Dane Johan Gunder
Adler, he had written a draft constitution – read and approved by the
prince – that constituted the basis of the negotiations of the constitu-
tional committee at Eidsvoll. Falsen’s close relations with the regent
and their ongoing discussions during the Constituent Assembly made
it possible for Christian Frederick to indirectly exercise influence over
the wording of the constitution and the political debate.
   The Union Party, which wanted a union with Sweden, was called
‘pro-Swedish’ by its opponents. The party had its main base in south-
eastern Norway, where there had traditionally been closer relations with
Sweden, and on the south coast of Norway. Its support came chiefly
from the business community, but a number of civil servants in these
areas also supported the party’s line. Its undisputed leader was Count
Wedel Jarlsberg. Several ‘pro-Swedish’ members wanted independence,
but their policy was characterised by a mixture of pragmatism, level-
headed considerations of practical policy and an anti-Danish attitude.
Other ‘pro-Swedish’ members, including Wedel Jarlsberg, believed that
