                             Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   219


already were talking privately about deposing the king in favour of his
successor. The king wrote that disinheriting the prince would turn him
into a martyr, while he would lose the love of the people.26
   Letters from Denmark to Christian Frederick predicted that the king
would be deposed within four weeks, while the Swedish ambassador
in Copenhagen reported that there were pamphlets demanding a con-
stitution akin to the Norwegian model – a demand that, according
to the ambassador, found favour in many circles. Furthermore, three
Danes wrote a draft Norwegian constitution, which was sent to the
Norwegian Constituent Assembly. One of the authors, Count Holstein-
Holsteinborg, had described what a Danish constitution should con-
tain as early as January 1814. In his treatise, A Dane’s Wishes for his
Fatherland, the count emphasised that in a situation in which the
Danish kingdom was shaken to its very core and the state’s finances
were in ruins, all citizens should come forward and give expression to
their thoughts about a constitution. It was necessary for the royal father
of the country to meet the people half-way so that they could approach
him with respect and freely tell him where they felt the best interests of
the country lie. Count Holstein-Holsteinborg envisioned a combination
of a heritable kingdom with a king who possessed executive power and
a parliament in Copenhagen that possessed legislative power. Electoral
eligibility and the franchise would be conferred on citizens without a
criminal record who were over 25 years of age and owned property.27
   The desire for greater freedom of the press was expressed in a news-
paper exactly as it had been in 1807, while a well-known poet wrote a
series of articles pouring out his pent-up rage against the former ally of
the state, Napoleon, comparing him to the emperor Nero. The poet had,
however, miscalculated. He had underestimated the government’s will
to accept anything that could conceivably be interpreted as a criticism
of the king’s foreign policy since 1807. The matter resulted not only
in the suppression of the newspaper in which the articles had been
published but also in a further tightening of the legislation governing
freedom of the press.28
   There is much to suggest a concept of kingship that was subordinate
to the welfare of the nation, and a conviction that a monarch who broke
his contract with the people could be deposed. The alternative to abso-
lutism seems to have been popular sovereignty and a constitutional
monarchy. Such thinking was common in Europe, Prussia being a good
example. The Prussian Major Schill tried to spark off a rebellion against
Napoleon in Germany in 1809 in the name of the nation and against
the wishes of the Prussian king, while General Yorck signed a peace
