                             Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   215


Frederick then sent letters to a number of European princes in which he
laid claim to the Norwegian throne, in accordance with the Norwegian
Act of Sovereignty from 1661 and Lex Regia from 1665, and declared
that Norway was at peace with all powers that were not its enemies. The
former would later prove to be a strategic mistake, but not an irrevers-
ible one.
   During the days from 11 to 14 February Christian Frederick received
complete copies of the peace treaties with Sweden and Great Britain, as
well the king’s open letter dealing with the cession of Norway. In the
original draft of the proclamation, Foreign Minister Rosenkrantz had
emphasised that the cession was ‘for all eternity’ and that it applied
not only to the king but also to his heirs. However, the cabinet in
Copenhagen had this wording changed. What might appear as a mere
formality was probably an attempt on the part of the Danish ministers
to keep the door open for a later reunification in the hope that if the
expected rebellion should break out it would succeed.16
   The time to act had arrived. On 16 February, many of the leading
civil servants, clergy, nobles and officers from southeastern Norway
convened at Eidsvoll Ironworks for what was known as the ‘Meeting of
Notables’. Of the 21 people who attended the meeting, 19 advised the
prince to accept the principle of the popular sovereignty in return for the
Norwegian crown and executive power: an offer that Christian Frederick
accepted pragmatically. He officially gave up any thoughts of absolut-
ism and instead proclaimed himself regent, announced a general day of
prayer in Norway and convened a Constituent Assembly at Eidsvoll on
10 April 1814. The new regent appointed a cabinet on 2 March, but the
policy was still determined by him alone.
   The Meeting of Notables lent an air of legitimacy to the Norwegian
rebellion domestically and abroad, while the elections to the Constituent
Assembly were linked with the general day of prayer in the country’s
churches on 25 February. From now on, the new regent would fight on
constitutional lines, and his proclamation that he taken over power and
convened a Constituent Assembly led to scenes of celebration in the
new capital, Christiania.
   Three days after the meeting at Eidsvoll Christian Frederick wrote
to his autocratic cousin that he had made himself regent and that
his goal was to ‘safeguard the rights that have been returned to the
people’. This remained Christian Frederick’s policy throughout 1814.
Paradoxically, the Danish prince who was the embodiment of autoc-
racy came to champion the principles of popular sovereignty, while the
former revolutionary general, Charles John, despite his promises of a
