214   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


with nationalism,14 while Christian Frederick’s men skilfully exploited
the national hatred of the Swedes. Indeed, newspapers, periodicals,
pamphlets, sermons, speeches, songs and poems all helped to create a
uniformly negative stereotype of ‘the Swede’ as a foreign assailant who
wished to oppress Norwegians.


The Prince’s Policy

The intellectual and cultural attainments of the heir to the throne were
far superior to the mediocre abilities of the king. In 1814, Christian
Frederick proved to be a shrewd, sensitive politician who was able to
take stock of the situation and change his course in accordance with it,
a skilled negotiator and accomplished administrator, but, as supreme
commander of the army, he failed miserably on the battlefield.15 Until
the spring of 1813 Frederick VI, had denied him political influence and
his appointment as governor of Norway threw him from the frying pan
into the fire. However, thanks to hard work, his native charm and natu-
ral political talent, he succeeded in turning the tide in Norway in his
favour and made himself a political and national Norwegian figurehead.
The 28-year-old Christian Frederick appeared to some Norwegians to be
almost infallible, but nobody would have been capable of living up to
such superhuman expectations, and Christian Frederick was extremely
human. His character, marked as it was by humanism and rationalism,
prompted him to avoid all-out war with Sweden, but his own propa-
ganda had set the stage for such a war and members of the elite, espe-
cially in western Norway and Trøndelag, expected it of him.
   Christian Frederick bought himself time in January and at the begin-
ning of February by travelling from Christiania to Trondheim, the seat
of the medieval Norwegian kings, where he sounded out the mood of the
people as regards a potential rebellion. At the same time, this deferred
the date on which he would receive the message from Frederick VI that
he had released the Norwegians from their oath of allegiance – a mes-
sage that would oblige him to act. The question therefore was whether,
if the prince placed himself at the head of a Norwegian rebellion, he
should agree to be crowned king of Norway, as several of the older, more
conservative civil servants wished, or whether he should take the course
of becoming a constitutional monarch, as the younger, more progressive
civil servants and the majority of the middle class wished.
   Before leaving, the prince went to Eidsvoll Ironworks, northeast of
Christiania, where he presented his policy, following the conservative
line, to those civil servants closest to him, who supported it. Christian
