                            Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   227


spring it is important to remember the situation Norway was in. For
the independence project of the elite to succeed, it had to be supported
by the population as a whole. The hope was that, by giving the people
responsibility, their support for the nationalist concept would be won.
All Norwegian men aged 25 and over who either were civil servants,
owned registered land or owned property worth 300 national bank
dalers in silver were entitled to vote in elections. This corresponded to
c. 40 per cent of the male population, so war and nationalism would
appear to have had a democratising effect. Elections, however, were
indirect, which helped to give civil servants a monopoly of power.
They had ruled in the name of the king before 1814; now they ruled in
the name of the nation.45
   Norwegians swore allegiance to the new king of Norway, Christian
Frederick, and the new Constitutional Act was read out at public assem-
blies throughout the country and to soldiers in the army. Norway was
now an independent kingdom with its own constitution. It is debat-
able, however, whether ordinary Norwegians understood the situation.
A young officer wrote later that ‘we were very pleased that we would not
become Swedish subjects; I believe we thought we had enough freedom
because we did not have the faintest idea what a so-called constitution
meant’.46 If this young, well-educated officer hardly knew what a con-
stitution was, it is unlikely that many peasants would have known.
   This changed as time went on and as the Constitutional Act, which is
celebrated each year on 17 May, became the foundation of a Norwegian
sense of self. What was central in 1814 was the election of the king,
a Danish prince paradoxically becoming the symbol of a resurrected
Norway. That the focus later switched from the king to the constitu-
tion is largely due to the fact that the national kingdom established at
Eidsvoll was forcibly replaced by a Swedish-French monarchy that was
initially regarded as foreign. Christian Frederick was compared to the
ancient Norwegian hero kings from the time before the union with
Denmark, and in Christiania Cathedral people sang, ‘Each time we
voice our fatherland, our heart is praising Christian’.47
   Christian Frederick’s supporters each saw in him what they wished to
see, so he was regarded in various guises as the embodiment of liberal-
ism, of nationalism and of traditional Danish-Norwegian royal power.
According to one of the deputies of the National Assembly, Christian
Frederick was perceived in the spring of 1814 as an earthly messiah,
which underlined the quasi-religious adoration of the prince. He was
made an infallible national symbol who was at one with the nation while
at the same time standing, paradoxically, for hopes of reunification.
