                            Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   233


been aware that Norway’s fate was in the hands of Great Britain and
Russia. Even before the Constitutional Assembly had been convened,
he had written to Frederick VI and Niels Rosenkrantz and also noted
in his diary that, if the Norwegian independence project proved to be
hopeless, he would not hesitate to do his utmost to ensure that Norway
obtained the best possible terms in a union with Sweden, and that he
would not allow his own personal interests to obstruct this. This union
needed to be based on the constitution that the Norwegians were about
to create, as it would ensure the country’s independence. The regent
hoped that British mediation would prompt the Swedes to accept a con-
stitution adopted by Norwegians themselves as the basis of a union. If
they refused, Norway would oppose the union by force.58


Swedish Policy

On 8 February, King Charles XIII sent a letter to the Norwegian people.
In ceremonious terms, the real author of the letter, Charles John, prom-
ised them freedom, brotherhood and a constitution. This appeared
attractive on the face of it, but the Swedish crown prince also made it
clear that he did not approve of any thoughts of popular sovereignty
and that the future constitution would have to meet with his approval.
At the same time Charles John demanded that the Norwegians should
receive the troops of the Swedish occupation with open arms. With the
latter in mind, it is not surprising that many Norwegians took a scepti-
cal view of their traditional arch-enemy.
   Initially, the Swedes were not sure what was happening in Norway. It
was only at the beginning of March that it became clear to the Swedes
that they had been made fools of, but even then they hesitated to resort
to the use of brute force. This can be partly explained by their fear of
appearing to be the aggressor but equally by the simple fact that the
Swedish field army was then in continental Europe. At about the same
time as the news of what was going on in Norway reached the Swedish
government at home, it also reached the Swedish crown prince, who
angrily issued a new proclamation threatening death and destruction
to all Norwegians.59
   Charles John applied to the allies for help in enforcing the Swedish
demands in Norway. His diplomatic efforts were given extra impetus as
it increasingly became clear to him that the French crown was beyond
his grasp. This diplomatic pressure was not only applied to Norway but
also to Denmark in the suspicion that the Danes might have a hidden
agenda. However, the tirades of abuse and bombastic proclamations
