                            Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   225


   It was quite clear that the dispute was very much a question of
whether Danes would be entitled to obtain official posts in Norway,
and the discussion about citizenship can be found in many of the draft
constitutions and addresses to the National Assembly, where several
people questioned the patriotism of Danes and foreigners.41 The dis-
tinction made here shows that Danes were at one and the same time
inside and outside.
   The point of departure for one of the most heated debates at Eidsvoll
was the law on citizenship of 1776. The National Assembly’s constitu-
tional committee proposed that anyone who had sworn to uphold the
constitution, was over 18 years of age, spoke the country’s language and
who either had Norwegian parents or had lived in the kingdom for five
years was a Norwegian citizen. Any foreigner who had already sworn
to uphold the constitution and who resided in the country should, like
the many Danish-born civil servants, be regarded as Norwegian citi-
zens. This liberal proposal divided the assembly. Cultural nationalists
argued that only native Norwegians could occupy state posts. Native
Norwegians were understood as (1) those born within the borders of
the Norwegian state of parents who were subjects of the state; (2) those
who had been born of Norwegian parents who were travelling abroad;
and (3) the non-native civil servants who had already sworn an oath
of loyalty. The proposal meant that the Storting could not naturalise
Danes or foreigners, the fear being that they would remain loyal to their
country of birth.42
   The arguments were countered by pro-Danish voices who claimed that
there was a serious lack of civil servants in the state, which it was only
logical to remedy by employing Danes, a ‘people who had language and
customs in common with us’.43 The result was a compromise between
voluntarism, country of birth and language. State posts were reserved
for Norwegian citizens who subscribed to the evangelical Lutheran faith,
had sworn loyalty to the constitution and the king, spoke the country’s
language and lived up to one of four criteria: (1) that they had been born
in the country; (2) that they had been born abroad of Norwegian parents;
(3) that they had had permanent residence in the country before the
separation and had not refused to swear the oath on Norway’s independ-
ence; or (4) that they have lived in the country for ten years. Teachers
at institutes of higher education and doctors, however, were exempted
from these conditions. Furthermore, the Storting would have the power
to naturalise foreigners. This power had been deliberately withheld from
the new king as it was feared he would use it to employ Danes in state
posts and undermine their newly won autonomy.
