232 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


the legitimist party at the Congress of Vienna would later sweep
Napoleon’s former Marshal Murat off the throne of Naples.
   Christian Frederick placed his trust in the Prussian Foreign Minister
Hardenberg, to whom the Norwegian regent passed a letter via the min-
ister’s own son, Baron C.H.A. Hardenberg-Reventlow, a Danish land-
owner and friend of Christian Frederick. In this instance the young
Hardenberg-Reventlow acted as an emissary both of the Norwegian
regent and of the Danish government, which was attempting to arrange
a peace treaty with Prussia at the time. The Danish–Prussian peace
treaty was signed on 2 July, but the attempt to win Prussian support
for Norwegian independence was unsuccessful. On the other hand,
it appears that Hardenberg-Reventlow did succeed in creating a more
favourable Prussian attitude to the Norwegian cause, and this was sig-
nificant for the delegation from the great powers sent to Norway.57
   Christian Frederick also tried winning the Swedish king for the plan
of a Scandinavian union at the expense of the Swedish crown prince.
Christian Frederick argued that in the event of Charles John’s death
or relinquishment of his Swedish title to obtain another throne, the
king should adopt the Danish prince. This attempt was unsuccess-
ful, and in the eyes of posterity it may appear to have been a desper-
ate measure, but the situation Christian Frederick and Norway found
themselves in was desperate and this meant that no stone was to be left
unturned. Christian Frederick’s approach to Charles XIII was not really
as strange as it might appear, however. It should be remembered that
Christian Frederick had been among the candidates in the election of
a Swedish crown prince in 1810, in which he was supported by Charles
XIII. Furthermore, it could well have been clear to the Swedish govern-
ment in the spring of 1814 that Charles John was prepared to set aside
Swedish interests for the benefit of his French project. On the other
hand, the situation in Sweden in 1814 was fundamentally different to
what it had been in 1810, and it can hardly have been of much interest
to anyone in Stockholm to replace Charles John with the heir to the
Danish throne when the old Swedish dream of acquiring Norway was
on the verge of being realised.
   Christian Frederick was not the only person in Norway to dream of a
Scandinavian union. The leader of the Independence Party, Christian
Magnus Falsen, shared the prince’s ideas but he was probably not aware
of how unstable the foundation of this policy was. As regent, Christian
Frederick deliberately attempted to prevent Norwegians from learning
the truth about the difficulties besetting his foreign policy. Long before
Napoleon’s final defeat in the spring of 1814, Christian Frederick had
