226   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


   While Danes could now obtain Norwegian citizenship, there were
other groups that could not. The Constitutional Act stated that
Lutheranism was the state religion. This was emphasised by the fact
that only Lutherans could be appointed to civil service posts in Norway,
and was underpinned by a prohibition against Jesuits, monastic orders
and Jews settling in Norway. This should be set in the context of the dis-
like felt for merchants by many Norwegian patriots, of quite widespread
European anti-Semitism and of the need to create a statutory exam-
ple. Paradoxically, the same year the autocratic Frederick VI granted
Danish Jews (almost) full citizenship in spite of some public opposition.
Progressive forces in Norway abolished the ‘Jewish clause’ of the consti-
tution in 1851, but Jesuits had to wait until 1956 before they would be
welcome in Norway.


The Norwegian Constitutional Act
and the National Monarchy

The National Assembly created the most liberal constitution in Europe,
but to call it democratic would be an anachronism. The constitution
was based on the idea of a monarchy and devoid of references to repub-
lics and democracies. The concept of democracy was popularly con-
nected with radicalism and Robespierre’s reign of terror. The men at
Eidsvoll were liberals in a nineteenth-century sense. They believed
in the tripartite separation of powers between a legislative, an execu-
tive and a judicial power, which in the case of Norway consisted of the
parliament, the king and the courts of law, alongside an assurance of
the basic rights of citizens. It envisaged strong royal power, which had
similarities with the theory of ‘of absolutism governed by public opin-
ion’, with the monarch as an independent instance who had no private
interests and served the people. Christian Frederick took on in large
measure the functions and authority of an absolutist king. A district
recorder held that one would live and die with Christian Frederick, and
the notion that he would rule the country like a father ‘and treat us all
as the country’s children’ was characteristic of this thinking.44
   The number of people who were entitled to vote in Norway was
greater than in most other liberal states between 1814 and 1848. The
status of the farmer with an allodial title as a national symbol meant
that the franchise became widespread. Prominent figures such as
Christian Magnus Falsen were deeply enamoured of the farming class,
while others were afraid that enfranchising farmers would lead to a
mob rule dominated by ignorance. To understand the events of the
