230 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


   The self-proclaimed Norwegian regent was obliged to act on the basis
of scant and inaccurate information filtered through Charles John’s
headquarters or from the British Foreign Minister, Lord Castlereagh,
who was on the continent. He could not trust Swedish information,
while the British information did not initially cause him concern.
Furthermore, Christian Frederick placed considerable weight on politi-
cal developments in Great Britain, where he hoped he would be able
to influence the prevailing mood.54 To this must be added the general
awareness that the Napoleonic era was characterised by abrupt political
reversals and new alliances, during which ancient thrones and royal
houses fell, states were swallowed up and new states arose. Christian
Frederick therefore attempted to exploit the opportunities that might
crop up. In this situation it was sensible to play for time, try to drive a
wedge between the great powers and win the support of Britain, while
at the same time uniting the nation and creating a new constitutional
monarchy so that he could present the international community with
a fait accompli that was an expression of the Norwegian people’s will.
In this connection, the Constitutional Act was probably more of an
instrument to this end than a goal in itself for Christian Frederick. The
prince, who was extremely well informed about conditions in Europe,
probably knew that the government of Bavaria in 1808 had passed con-
stitutional acts in order to keep Napoleon at bay, as such constitutional
acts prohibited outside interference.
   In March, Christian Frederick sent his old friend and loyal supporter,
ironworks owner and civil servant Carsten Anker, to Great Britain in
order to gain the support of British politicians and public opinion for
a free, independent Norway. In London, Anker succeeded in gaining
the support of the public, some members of the royal family and the
liberal opposition in parliament for Norwegian views, but the govern-
ment remained unshakeably committed to Britain’s treaty obligations.
The official explanation was that the government would not go back on
its promise to Sweden, and emphasis was placed on Christian Frederick’s
title of heir to the Danish throne. The British government would also
have been reluctant to challenge Sweden’s Russian ally, who whole-
heartedly supported the Swedish demand in general and Charles John
in particular. Support for the Swedish acquisition of Norway was the
price Russia gladly paid to avoid a future Swedish revanchism in relation
to Finland. The British attitude was a death sentence for an independent
Norway.
   Christian Frederick, however, was betting on two horses. He repeatedly
told the many Swedish emissaries that Norwegians were not opposed to
