224 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


This attitude was chiefly due to the fear felt by many Norwegians that
the Danish-born inhabitants were working behind the scenes to bring
about a reunification.
   The struggle over one of the most burning issues of the day took place
at Eidsvoll: should Norway be reunited with Denmark? Historians have
disagreed as to the extent of any Norwegian desire for such a reunion in
the spring of 1814. That prominent ‘pro-Danish’ men wanted a reuni-
fication is indisputable, but they wanted it on completely different and
equal terms. Others hoped for a Scandinavian union under Christian
Frederick. On the other hand, it was clear that many of the patriots
in the Independence Party did not want a new union with Denmark.
Several pro-Swedish figures, such as the priest Wergeland, openly fought
the independence movement because it was led by a Danish prince sur-
rounded by Danish civil servants, and they feared that the ‘independ-
ence’ policy would bring the country back under Danish rule.39
   It is impossible to provide a definitive answer, but there is no getting
away from the fact that the election of the heir to the Danish throne as
the king of Norway as well as the wording of the constitution of 1814
itself made reunification not only possible but probable in the long
term. The pro-Danish contingent argued that even though the union
with Denmark had had its drawbacks, a new union in the future would
be both useful and necessary. This can be understood to mean that the
choice was between Sweden and Denmark and that the latter was the
lesser of two evils, but it is not improbable that another circumstance
played a role in the deliberations over reunification. There were rumours
circulating at Eidsvoll of a forthcoming revolution and a new constitu-
tion for Denmark, and these were lent credence by the fact that the Danes
had sent a draft Norwegian constitution across the Skagerrak. There was,
therefore, an expectation that any new union would be fundamentally
different to the old one. Even though most adherents of reunification
envisioned an equal, constitutional union, then, a large minority at
Eidsvoll was still opposed to a new union with Denmark in any form.40


The Struggle over Citizenship

The thorny issue of Norwegian–Danish relations also came to the fore-
front in the debate on citizenship at the National Assembly. Nationality
was not seen simply as a question of a subjective feeling or of objective
criteria. It was also a practical question of the individual’s status under
constitutional law. Differences lie between a civil and an ethnic view
of nationality.
