                              Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   229


of general conscription created a heated public debate in 1815 with both
parties arguing in the name of the nation. Opponents of conscription
asserted that a large army was no longer affordable or necessary, and
that true love of the fatherland was not created on the drill ground but
in the schoolroom.51 This opinion won the day, as a majority in the
Storting had begun to take a less radical line after the defeat of 1814.
The Conscription Act retained the principle of general conscription as
a personal duty but introduced a whole range of exceptions that were
carefully tailored to the interests of the civil servant class.52


Contributions on the Altar of the Fatherland

Norwegians had been bled dry after seven years of war, starvation and
blockade, but the prospect of national independence and resistance to the
feared ‘Swedish yoke’ created not only widespread euphoria in the spring
but also enabled one last financial effort to be made. The people donated
large sums as well in gold, silver, copper and food to the ‘reborn’ father-
land, while women gave their jewellery to make a crown for Christian
Frederick. However, donations were not always voluntary. Merchants in
Trondheim were summoned to the council hall on the orders of the prince
to state how much corn they would donate. Those who refused were writ-
ten up in the register as ‘wicked men in the community’, while those who
did donate corn could count on finding favour with the regent. There can
hardly be any doubt that the authorities used nationalism instrumentally
and that this sometimes amounted to coercion, serving the interests of
the elite and of social control. But, as the entire public domain, includ-
ing people’s letters and diaries, was saturated with references to national-
ism in 1814, this cannot be seen solely as an identity imposed on people.
The actions performed by members of the elite were based on existing
national or patriotic ideas and not solely on Christian Frederick’s policy.53


A Free Norway or a United Scandinavia

Although Christian Frederick built his policy supported by the patri-
otic idealism and nationalistic enthusiasm of the Independence Party,
he had no illusions either as regent or as king. On the contrary, he
shared the view of the pro-Swedish party that an independent Norway
would never survive without international recognition. In hindsight it
may appear obvious that the Norwegian project was doomed to fail-
ure because the great powers supported the Swedish demand, but one
should not leap to over-hasty conclusions.
