228 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


Conscription and the Will to Defend the Country

The exploitation of historical examples and nationalist rhetoric in the
war propaganda fell on fruitful soil. One author claimed that Charles
John and his dastardly army would be annihilated in the same way
as the Scottish colonel George Sinclair and his 300 mercenaries had
been slaughtered by Norwegian peasants in Gudbrandsdalen in 1612.
Another woman went even further in a notice in a newspaper when she
offered to organise and lead a female army corps ‘like some Amazon or
shield-maiden’.48
  There was military conscription in Norway and had been, in various
guises, since 1628. But it was not a matter of general conscription as
there were still plenty of exemptions as well as a right to buy substi-
tutes. Proposals for general conscription emerged as early as 1807, with
references to ancient Sparta and contemporary France as well as to the
idea that every citizen had a duty to defend his country. However, the
idea only took on a political dimension in 1814. The Constitutional
Assembly saw a clash between the interests and ideals of the elite.
The main question was whether young students should be exempted
or whether conscription should be the personal duty of every citizen
regardless of social rank and occupation. Arguments for general con-
scription rested not only on middle-class ideals of equality, civic duty
and self-sacrifice, but also on nationalist ideas that conscription would
awaken the spirit of the people and strengthen the national character.49
  Opponents, on the other hand, emphasised the fear that general con-
scription would threaten the freedom of individuals (i.e. of the elite),
their refinement and their performance of civic functions. The question
was to what extent the traditional class society should be broken down
for the sake of the universal rights and duties of all inhabitants of the
country. A particular element in the Norwegian debate on conscription
was the inspiration derived from the historian Laurits Engelstoft’s work
on national upbringing and, through that, from the French Revolution.
The chief spokesman for general conscription wanted all boys from
the age of 13 to perform military exercises and attend lectures on the
Constitutional Act, history and geography.50
  The peculiar situation in the spring of 1814 initially secured victory
for the radical point of view, but disagreement among the elite meant
that there would have to be a debate at the first assembly of the Storting
to decide whether the provision should be circumscribed in practice.
Furthermore, there was no immediate attempt to realise the plan for
national upbringing on practical and ideological grounds. The question
