                             Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   231


an equal union with Sweden in principle but did fear a merger with
Sweden that might lead to their being ruled by a foreign prince such
as Charles John, who had no understanding of the country’s practices,
customs or language. In other words, Christian Frederick regarded the
French-born crown prince as the primary obstacle to a peaceful union
of the two kingdoms. The solution for the Danish-Norwegian prince
was naturally to try to remove Charles John from the running and to
take his place, which in the longer term would pave the way for a federal
Scandinavian union ruled by Christian Frederick. This might suggest
that the prince had miscalculated by underestimating the opposition
he would meet in Stockholm and the difficulty of getting rid of Charles
John. The question is perhaps rather whether Christian Frederick was
attempting to consider any solution whatsoever.
  Paradoxically, Charles John was indirectly assisting Christian Frederick
in his plans, as the Swedish crown prince was energetically attempt-
ing to exchange his title as heir to the Swedish throne for the French
crown at the expense of the Bourbon dynasty. If this scheme had been
successful, it would not only have left Sweden without a crown prince
but also without a leader. In that situation the election of Christian
Frederick would peacefully bring Norway into a union with Sweden,
exactly as Swedish politicians had hoped with Christian August in
1809. Charles John’s person and his actions in the campaign against
Napoleon had, however, brought him an increasing number of ene-
mies among the allies. Therefore, by the time Charles John reached
Paris in April, his chance of winning the French throne had already
been lost. The prospect of gaining a Polish-Saxon throne had also been
of interest to Charles John for a while, something that shows how he
used his status as Swedish crown prince to help him pursue his per-
sonal interests.55
  Christian Frederick was very much aware that a settling of accounts
with the Napoleonic era was in the air. With the help of Anker in
London and by writing letters to the heads of all of the European great
powers, he attempted to gain their support for the idea that Charles
John and the ‘Napoleonites’ should be deposed as part of a general
European restoration. He hoped that arguments of this type would be
more palatable now that Napoleon had fallen, an event that had taken
place, it should be noted, without Charles John’s help, since he had
set his own ambitions in Scandinavia before the allies’ war with the
French emperor. Christian Frederick attempted to win over the Russians
in support of his plan to gain the ‘Scandinavian throne’ by offering to
marry the Tsar’s sister.56 This idea was not conjured out of thin air, for
