236   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


Madame de Staël. He could hardly argue for the right of the French to
elect their own constitutional king while denying Norwegians’ right
to do the same. Third, Charles John feared a Gustavian restoration in
Sweden. If that happened, it would be an advantage to have an addi-
tional kingdom at hand, but this naturally required a cautious approach
in Norway. He also feared that any brutal suppression of the Norwegians
could lead to interference on the part of the great powers, especially
Great Britain. Charles John had promised the British in 1813 that he
would secure the freedom and happiness of the Norwegian people.64
   Charles John later delighted in depicting himself as the person who
had given Norwegians real freedom with the Peace of Kiel. In some
respects this is true, as the peace treaty in Holstein was the decisive
factor in creating the basis for Norwegian independence and the
Norwegian constitution. Norwegians could also thank Charles John for
the restrained policy that eventually helped to create a union between
Sweden and Norway on reasonable terms. But Charles John acted
as he did for his own sake and not to benefit the Norwegians. As a
Swedish and Norwegian king he not only strove to create a far closer
union between the two kingdoms than Norwegians wanted, he also
attempted to strengthen his power at the expense of the Storting, the
Constitutional Act and freedom of speech. Many of the liberal con-
cessions he had given to the Norwegians as crown prince in 1814 he
attempted to withdraw as king – but without success.


Targeting the Common People

As had been the case in previous years, the common people in Norway
were a main target for the Swedes in 1814. There was a firm belief in
Swedish political and military circles that, while the peasants – especially
in the borderlands – may not have been terribly keen on Swedish rule
they were inclined at least to accept a union in 1814 and thus turn their
backs on Christian Frederick and those among the elite who opposed it.
  Some historians have made much of hints of a Norwegian consti-
tution in Swedish proclamations, but they also contained many less
abstract promises primarily targeting ordinary people in the rural
borderlands. One proclamation provided an account of what had hap-
pened at Kiel and went on to inform the people that as ‘a consequence,
Swedish troops will cross your borders. Receive them with calmness
and trust. They will come as brothers, as soldiers of a natural, common
nation’ and ‘bring you rights and liberty’. Furthermore, it emphasised
that the Swedes ‘have done everything possible to hasten grain supplies
