234 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


that Charles John spat out at Danish, Swedish and allied statesmen
should no more be taken at face value than his threats to bombard
Copenhagen and raze the Danish royal castle to the ground. In London
Charles John’s broadsides were referred to as ‘gasconades’ in scarcely
veiled reference to the Swedish crown prince’s choleric temperament
and origins.60
   However, Charles John’s impetuous statements should also not simply
be written off as imaginary plans conjured out of thin air. His threats
should be seen to reflect not only his desire to force through a union
between Sweden and Norway but also his attempts to erase Denmark
from the map. The German romantic poet August Wilhelm Schlegel,
who acted as Charles John’s secretary, was instructed to draw up a pam-
phlet entitled Praeterea censeo, Daniam esse delendam (Moreover, I Believe
that Denmark Must Be Destroyed). This pamphlet presented what Schlegel
saw as decidedly Danish faithlessness. His central criticism was con-
nected with Germany: he disapproved of the fact that, after the dissolu-
tion of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806, Denmark had made Holstein
an integral part of the Danish state and prevented the region taking
part in the national struggle for liberation against the French. Schlegel
saw Denmark as a country that, like Carthage, deserved destruction,
and he assigned the role of Rome to Britain.
   Charles John enjoyed the support of the tsar. The close relations
between Sweden and Russia since 1812, Charles John’s well-publicised
threats and the Russian army of occupation in Holstein, which
amounted to 60,000 men, gave Frederick VI good grounds to fear for
the future of his state. Charles John had shown a warm interest in
Zealand in particular, which he wanted to annex to Sweden, but his
dreams in this respect collided with the problem that ever since 1658
the great powers had opposed any state attempting to control both sides
of the Sound – and thereby the entrance to the Baltic. However, this
did not prevent the crown prince pestering the great powers with a
steady stream of plans as to precisely how Denmark could be carved up
between Sweden and various powers, including Great Britain, Prussia,
numerous German duchies and Russia (which could have northern
Norway).61 Among Charles John’s more imaginative plans was the
establishment of a Cimbrian kingdom in the Jutland peninsula, a refer-
ence to the ancient people who had lived there before Christ.
   In the spring of 1814, however, the allied powers had other things on
their mind than sending troops to a rebellious Norway or dismantling
Denmark. The blockade of Norway was, however, maintained, while
a commission comprising representatives from Russia, Austria, Prussia
