                            Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   239


on advancing troops’, which was what had happened to Bavarian and
French troops in Tyrol in 1809.71
  Anxiety about what might happen in a war with Norway, however,
was not universal – and was not shared by Charles John himself. He was
certainly bent on avoiding a prolonged and costly war, but he does not
seem to have been seriously concerned that the invasion would turn
into a desperate guerrilla war. Rather, ferocious resistance in Norway
was seen as one of several possibilities, but nonetheless one that could
be dealt with pragmatically.72


The Diplomatic Endgame

Before the international commission arrived in Norway, the British
government had sent the diplomat John Philip Morier to the country.
Morier, who soon developed a sympathy both for the Norwegian cause
and for Christian Frederick, made it clear to the newly elected Norwegian
king that the British government insisted on a union between Norway
and Sweden. Christian Frederick accepted the inevitable but demanded
that the union should be personal in which Norway would be ruled by
a common king independently of Sweden. At the same time, it appears
that he had not yet quite given up his Scandinavian dream, since he
suggested that, in order to reduce national hatred, there should be
a ‘dynastic’ agreement under which the union of the two kingdoms
would be deferred until one of the two dynasties in either Norway or
Sweden died out, whereupon a representative of the surviving dynasty
would take over the thrones of both countries. A scheme of this kind
was completely unrealistic at the time, though Morier actually appears
to have been amenable to it. However, it was not a view shared by either
Charles Karl XIII or Sweden’s real leader, Charles John, and that was the
decisive factor.
   More importantly, Christian Frederick had asked for British media-
tion and declared that he was willing in principle to agree to Morier’s
demand that he should convene the Storting in accordance with the
Constitutional Act in order to settle the question of Norway’s future.
The king initially convened a meeting of the cabinet, who supported the
idea of an extraordinary session of the Storting at which a union with
Sweden could be discussed, and voting arrangements were immediately
set in motion. While Christian Frederick had dreamt of the reunifica-
tion of Denmark and Norway and of preserving the Oldenburg dynasty,
it is clear from his letters and diaries that the factor determining his
policy was his concern for the well-being of the Norwegian people.
