                            Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   235


and Britain headed first for Denmark and then for Norway to enforce
the Swedish demands. Christian Frederick received news of this on
18 May, the day after he had been elected king of Norway, and he began
to doubt whether he should accept the Norwegian throne at all. In the
event, however, he decided to use his election and the new constitution
to create the best possible bargaining position for Norway. Christian
Frederick made it clear from the beginning of the negotiations with
the international commission that he was prepared to relinquish his
crown but that he was bound by the Constitutional Act not to pass it
on to others. According to the Act, the power to do this lay exclusively
with the Storting. The constitution and the national enthusiasm that
the rhetoric and policy of Christian Frederick and the Independence
Party had created among the population permitted first the king and
then the Norwegian politicians to refer to what the Norwegian peo-
ple would accept before they could enter into a peaceful union with
Sweden. Charles John and the Swedish negotiators were susceptible
to arguments of this type, precisely because they feared that if they
attempted to establish a union by force and annex Norway, the country
could turn into what Spain had been for Napoleon or what Tyrol had
been for Bavaria.62
  This argument also became central to determining which Swedish
policy would prevail in deciding how the union between Norway and
Sweden should be implemented. Traditional Gustavian policy towards
Norway had involved annexing the country fully to Sweden or turn-
ing Norway into a Swedish dependency. On the face of it, to judge
from the Peace of Kiel, this was the policy that had prevailed.63 Charles
John, however, had other plans for Norway that were far more in line
with Norwegian wishes than those expressed by the old aristocrats
in Stockholm. This had already become apparent in the peace treaty
where, in accordance with his wishes, article four made it plain that
Norway was not to be annexed to Sweden, but to be united with it
under the Swedish king.
  Some contemporaries, considering Charles John’s revolutionary back-
ground, ascribed to him a liberal frame of reference, but the crown
prince’s attitude might better be interpreted as out-and-out pragmatism
with a good splash of opportunism. First, support for the Swedish crown
prince in Norway was based on the promises of Norwegian autonomy
and a Norwegian constitution that he had given to pro-Swedish parties.
Second, as long as Charles John still nursed the hope that he could gain
the French throne, he would pursue a cautious policy in order to win
the support of liberal circles associated with Benjamin Constant and
