242 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


inglorious war, lasting no more than three weeks from the outbreak of
hostilities on 26 July until a final truce was signed on 14 August.75
  The armies of both countries exercised such moderation that fight-
ing in Norway in the summer of 1814 resembled some of the largely
bloodless wars of manoeuvre of the eighteenth century rather than
Napoleon’s all-out combat. The extreme caution exercised by both sides
and the absence of large-scale pitched battles was the reason why some
contemporary observers referred to the war as a War of Cats, in the
sense that it was mainly about the two opposing armies maneuvring in
competition for strategic positions whilst hissing at each other. One of
the reasons for Swedish moderation was that a brutal war of conquest
could trigger a Norwegian guerrilla war. Such a situation would create
so much mutual enmity that it would jeopardise any union between
Norway and Sweden and possibly even alienate Sweden’s allies. What
was more, Charles John was painfully aware that Sweden’s finances did
not allow for a prolonged war and he therfore sought to bring it to a
rapid and negotiated end.
  The Norwegian army chose a distinctly defensive strategy, which was
based on the expectation that the Swedes would repeat their plan of
1808 by advancing over a broad front in southern Norway and concen-
trating on the area around Kongsvinger. To the Norwegians’ surprise,
however, Charles John set up a more concentrated attack in the south-
easternmost Norwegian borderlands where the Swedish army’s advance
could be supported by the navy in the Christiania fjord (Oslo fjord).
This forced the Norwegians to retreat, the only resistance in the south-
ern border areas coming from the Fredriksten fortress at Frederikshald
(Halden). Christian Frederick prepared for a decisive battle at Rakkestad
but – to the dissatisfaction of the soldiers – decided instead at the last
moment to retreat and continue negotiations which had already begun.
There were, therefore, no pitched battles during the war but only a few
skirmishes in some of which the Norwegians emerged victorious, such
as at Lier, Matrand and Skotterud. However, the Swedish army forced its
counterpart into a continuous retreat in the direction of Christiania. By
10 August it only seemed to be a matter of time before the Norwegian
army would be forced to its knees. In this situation Christian Frederick
found it necessary to negotiate a truce and peace rather than spilling
blood in what he perceived as a hopeless war, although some Norwegians
were still spoiling for a fight. Moreover, a major Norwegian defeat would
have worsened the country’s bargaining position.
  Christian Frederick’s defensive strategy, his depressed state of mind
and his unwillingness to engage in major, decisive battles was seen by
