240   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


   The international commission did not arrive in Christiania until
30 June. The reasons for the delay were twofold. On the one hand
the Russian, Austrian and Prussian emissaries had been obliged to wait
before they were joined by the British diplomat, August John Foster,
and on the other, the British – influenced by the reports from Morier in
Norway – surprisingly began to reverse their policy. Foster attempted to
prevent the mission, and allegedly expressed the opinion that an inde-
pendent Norway could not harm anyone. However, the commission
arrived in Norway and began negotiations with Christian Frederick,
with whom they were able to reach a reasonable measure of agree-
ment. The Norwegian king would accept a union if it involved a certain
degree of Norwegian independence and a strong viceroy in the country
(a role that Christian Frederick was willing to assume). This was under
the condition, however, that there was a truce while an election was
held to the Storting that would approve the agreement, which, in prin-
ciple, would be based on acceptance of the Eidsvoll constitution. The
four emissaries were in full agreement here, but as a condition for the
truce they demanded that the Norwegian army should withdraw from
the area east of the River Glomma and surrender the border fortresses
of Fredrikstad, Frederiksten and Kongsvinger to the Swedes. It was this
demand that in the final analysis led to the breakdown of negotia-
tions, as the Norwegian minister claimed – correctly – that it would be
a violation of the Constitutional Act and that the Norwegians would
not accept it.
   On 22 July the representatives of the great powers presented a draft
settlement to Charles John, who was now encamped on the Norwegian
border with a Swedish army that had returned from its European cam-
paign. The meeting soon began to teeter on the brink of a breakdown,
because the draft document presented by four emissaries was almost
identical to the Norwegian proposal, but a compromise was arrived at.
Christian Frederick would abdicate, the blockade of Norway would be
lifted and the Swedes would occupy Fredrikstad and Frederiksten, but
not Kongsvinger. In return, the Norwegians would be entitled to have
their own parliament. The demand for Christian Frederick’s immedi-
ate abdication must be ascribed to Charles John’s fear of a Norwegian
delaying tactic and a winter war in Norway. The Norwegian king and
his minister, however, refused to accept these terms, as Christian
Frederick’s abdication without the approval of the Storting would be
a breach of the Constitutional Act, which would undermine all their
efforts to retain it before the unavoidable union with Sweden. As far
as the border area and the fortresses were concerned, the Norwegians
