                            Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   237


for you. Your renewed, enlivened trade and your ports that are now
open will help us in our efforts and will pave the way for the prosperity
that you have lacked for so long’.65
  These promises fell on deaf ears, however, and Swedish hopes were
dashed. Their response was to tighten the Swedish-British blockade of
Norway from March 1814 onwards, the aim being to turn the populace
against Christian Frederick and the government by claiming they were
to blame for the renewal of the blockade and consequent misery in
Norway. A wide assortment of propaganda to this effect was distributed
across the border.66
  There is little to suggest that there was much in the way of heartfelt
sympathy for Swedish rule or other pro-Swedish sentiment in the bor-
derlands and the Norwegian authorities seem to have had far more faith
in the loyalty of the people in 1814 than had been the case six years
previously. But the prospect of yet another invasion was instrumental
in tempering and cooling the general enthusiasm towards the policy of
national independence pursued by Christian Frederick and many mem-
bers of the elite.


A People’s War as a Political Instrument

Even if, as some have argued, Christian Frederick did not expect war, he
had to consider it a possibility and make preparations for it. He there-
fore issued a proclamation on 9 June that called for all able-bodied
Norwegian men to take up arms. This has been construed by many
historians as an appeal for voluntary enlistment. Christian Frederick,
however, knew perfectly well that the proclamation called rather for
the organisation and training of the traditional peasant militia based
on mandatory service.
   This is an important, and new, point. Christian Frederick’s inten-
tion was for the peasant militia to act as a deterrent, and in this sense
the general mobilisation in Norway in 1814 was chiefly for the sake
of appearances. By making it appear as though the militias were vol-
untary rather than conscripted, he was trying to create an impression
of national unity and unanimous support for the constitution and
national independence. This, in turn, could possibly persuade the allies
and Sweden to opt for a negotiated solution rather than war. It was no
coincidence that the proclamation of 9 June was issued immediately
after informal negotiations with an unofficial English emissary had
broken down, thereby creating the impression that Norwegians could
constitute a formidable obstacle to Sweden in the event of a war.
