                             Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   241


were willing to vacate them but would not agree to the Swedes occupy-
ing them. Christian Frederick had the exchange of memos published to
inform the Norwegian people of the situation in an attempt to prepare
them for what they could expect. He made it clear that he was prepared
to abdicate in principle, if this would ensure that the Eidsvoll constitu-
tion could be retained.73 The lines of battle had been drawn up, the
diplomats had spoken, and now it was the turn of the canons.


‘The War of Cats’

The Swedish and the Norwegian armies were very poorly matched. The
Norwegian field army comprised about 30,000 men, who could not
measure up to the 45,000 Swedish troops with regard to equipment,
training or leadership. True, there were in Norway militias, so-called
free battalions, which had been created during the years 1811–12, and
territorial reserves, so that, in total, the Norwegian army comprised
what was on paper a formidable force of approximately 115,000 men.74
In reality it was a paper tiger, however. The army may have constituted
in theory a total mobilisation, as it amounted to some 13 per cent of the
total population, but the majority of soldiers did not take part in exer-
cises in peacetime and most were in fact not mobilised at all in 1814.
The free battalions, the territorial reserves and the militias were only to
be called up in the case of an invasion and would in principle only oper-
ate within their local areas, but in the chaos that ensued the invasion
these units proved in most cases impossible to form.
   The fact was that Norway was without allies, was cut off from the out-
side world by a Swedish-British blockade and could not, in the longer
term, feed its population or its army. Moreover, the Swedish field army
was superior and could also count on the support of the Swedish navy.
Furthermore, Russia and Prussia had also promised assistance for Charles
John should this prove necessary. In this situation, the Norwegians’
only faint hope as far as military means went appeared to lie in waging
guerrilla warfare. There were those within the Norwegian army and
elite who argued along these lines. Christian Frederick, however, had
only wanted to threaten Sweden with a people’s war, but not to unleash
it. There was, therefore, no mass military mobilisation in Norway. Some
historians, however, have nevertheless exaggerated the extent of vol-
untary participation and even the scope of military mobilisation in
1814, making it appear as if a Norwegian people in arms stood poised
to throw itself at the Swedish army. This was a far remove from the
reality. It was rather a short and, at least seen through Norwegian eyes,
