                            Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   243


contemporaries in some Norwegian circles as proof that he had simply
been fighting for a reunification with Denmark and that now it was
no longer possible – he had thrown in the towel. This interpretation
was reiterated as a permanent mantra in older national Norwegian his-
toriography and one that conveniently relieved the Norwegian nation
of any responsibility, and it is still to be found in recent academic and
popular views.76 As has been pointed out, it is highly probable that
Christian Frederick’s ideal solution was reunification, as it was for a
number of leading Norwegians, but it seems meaningless to attempt to
find an explanation for the king’s strategy on these grounds. Christian
Frederick was under continuous mental pressure, but his strategy was
neither ‘Danish’ nor irrational. He always acted so as to provide maxi-
mum protection for Norwegians and to obtain the best possible agree-
ment by continuing the war until Charles John was prepared to accept
Eidsvoll as a basis for a union, and he succeeded on both counts. The
parties agreed on a truce at the Convention of Moss, and the Storting
was convened in order to amend the Constitutional Act and make a
union with Sweden possible. The condition for this, however, was that
Christian Frederick had to agree to two secret articles stipulating that
he must promise to abdicate as soon as the extraordinary session of the
Storting opened and to leave the country immediately after transferring
power to the cabinet.
  Charles John’s policies were crucial in ensuring that Norway was
allowed to retain its constitution in 1814. Equally important, however,
was the fact that these policies were also crucial in determining the
popular response and reaction to the war and to the occupation in 1814.
The Swedes did little in Norway that made much difference to the way
in which Norwegians got on with their everyday lives. While this did
not necessarily generate the kind of popular support for Swedish rule
that some historians have ascribed to the inhabitants of the border-
lands, it did ensure minimum resistance and made it far easier to accept
the union.77
  This does not mean that Charles John intended to invade Norway and
dethrone Christian Frederick, and then simply leave the Norwegians to
do as they pleased. Three county governors accompanied the Swedish
army with instructions to take charge of the civilian administration of
the occupied areas, and Field Marshal Hans Henric von Essen had been
appointed governor general of Norway prior to the invasion. As Norway
had been formally ceded to the king of Sweden, it was lawful to demand
that the people living in the occupied areas should swear an oath of
allegiance. However, in order to indicate that the full incorporation of
