                              Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   253


around to sending the troops against Napoleon that it was obliged to,
and the French regarded hostilities between the two states as having
been concluded with the Treaty of Paris. A peace treaty with Russia was
signed at Hanover on 8 February, but this could not be ratified before
the Norwegian rebellion raised the question of whether the Danish gov-
ernment was double-dealing. The situation in Norway not only pre-
vented the conclusion of a Danish peace treaty with Prussia and Spain
and the ratification of the peace treaties with Britain and Russia, it also
led the Swedes to refuse to live up to their obligations in spite of the rati-
fied peace treaty, as Charles John claimed that the Norwegian rebellion
was a violation of the treaty. This meant that Sweden refused to hand
over Swedish Pomerania and the duchy of Rügen, to pay Denmark the
one million rix-dollars and Norway’s share of the national debt. On the
contrary, the Swedes used the Russian army of 60,000 men as a threat
to Denmark’s existence itself.
   Denmark’s situation improved slightly when the international com-
mission rejected the charge of double-dealing on the part of Denmark,
but the rest of the Danish composite state was still in danger. The ratifi-
cation of the Danish–British peace treaty on 7 April was an important
step on the path to normalisation, while peace treaties were signed with
Spain on 14 August and with Prussia on 25 August. The peace between
Denmark and Prussia involved handing over Swedish Pomerania and
Rügen to Prussia when Denmark took possession of them, in return for
territorial compensation in northern Germany close to the border with
Holstein. The problem remained for Frederick VI, however, that Sweden
and Russia were preventing the normalisation of relations.
   This is the context in which the Danish king’s participation in the
Congress of Vienna should be seen. Frederick VI had not been officially
invited to the congress, but, encouraged by Austria, the king decided
to go to Vienna. Austria was alone among the allied powers with
which Denmark had not been at war, and Austrian diplomats had been
instructed by Count Metternich during the war’s endgame to do their
best to prevent the annihilation of the Danish state. Danish participa-
tion in the congress had four partly connected aims.
   The first goal for the Danes was ratification of the peace treaty with
Russia and of Russian withdrawal from Holstein. The second goal was
to obtain the help of the great powers to put pressure on Sweden to
meet its obligations under the Peace of Kiel, which was a precondition
for Prussia’s takeover of Swedish Pomerania and Rügen. The third goal
was to prevent the Danish state, or parts of it, being allotted to other
states by the great powers as territorial compensation. The fact that
