248   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


   In the autumn of 1814, Hans Nansen, who later became an oppo-
sition politician, spoke about how pitiful and unnatural the hatred
between the two nations was and mentioned the possibility that
Norwegians could in time learn to love the Swedes as brothers, as they
had previously done with the Danes. In figurative language strongly
inspired by the union with Denmark, he spoke of the common origins
of Norwegians and Swedes, of how they were surrounded by similar
landscapes, had similar cultures and spoke almost the same language.
Nansen was attempting to sell the union to the nation by showing that
the Swedes were almost like Norwegians. He therefore felt that the two
nations were like offspring of one father and could live in complete
equality, agreement and brotherly love.90
   As had been the case with the Danish–Norwegian union, the demand
for equality would come to haunt the Swedish–Norwegian union and
lead to its dissolution in 1905. Charles XIII was elected king of Norway
to a claim that the two ancient kingdoms of the Scandinavian pen-
insula, which had always been united by the hand of nature, were
now united in an indissoluble bond, and that happy times would fol-
low when Norwegians and Swedes embraced each other like brothers.
However, there was clear political recognition of the fact that elaborate
panegyrics would not wash away the prejudices of generations. There
was, it is true, a constrained reconciliation at the Storting in the autumn
of 1814, but politically and symbolically the deputies created as many
barriers between the two nations as they possibly could.
   Developments, had, however, now given the pro-Swedish parties a
more acceptable face. The moderation that Wedel Jarlsberg and his circle
had previously demonstrated gave way to attacks on the independent
parties, Danes and the defeated Christian Frederick who, in prolonging
the nation’s agony, had been instrumental in condemning it to conflict.
However, even if circumstances had changed, the die-hard patriots and
pro-Danish Norwegians neither forgave nor forgot. Those pro-Swedish
parties who had formerly acclaimed the Oldenburgs were now con-
demned as hypocrites and poetic mercenaries, while many people still
regarded the pro-Swedish Count Wedel Jarlsberg as a traitor.
   The count was far from alone in being accused in this way, for this
was a disillusioned Norway in which a mythology of backstabbing had
arisen that ascribed defeat variously to treachery, bribery and inept
leadership. Even after the union with Sweden had become a reality,
several leading officers were impeached. Many contemporary patriotic
poets expressed their deep sense of frustration in poems that mocked
the Norwegians for their lack of courage, ability and will. They were
