252   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


Norway after the union were now regarded with the greatest indigna-
tion as ‘Swedes’. The conservative reaction to the ideas of the French
Revolution that flowed throughout Europe, including Denmark, cre-
ated animosity against Norwegians in Denmark in some circles, as it
was feared that they harboured liberal tendencies. The atmosphere in
Norway, however, was no better. A small number of officers refused
to swear the oath of allegiance to Charles XIII. There were consider-
able numbers of people who considered emigrating – to Denmark in
particular – after 1814, especially Norwegian civil servants, but few of
them actually did so, while others were prevented by Frederick VI’s fear
of employing ‘revolutionary’ Norwegians.98
   For centuries Denmark as a whole and Copenhagen in particular
had been influenced by the thousands of Norwegians who lived in
the country and the city. In Copenhagen, there were Norwegian stu-
dents, seamen and soldiers who served in the Royal Life Guards. But the
capital was far from the only place in Denmark with links to Norway.
Jutland, especially northern Jutland, had close ties with the south coast
of Norway through the exchange of goods and people. As many as
40,000 Norwegians were said to live in Denmark in 1770.99 That corres-
ponded to approximately 5 per cent of the population, but as the great
majority of them lived in towns, the concentration of Norwegians there
was far higher.
   This all changed after the separation in 1814. Although the ties
between the two countries remained close during the nineteenth cen-
tury, there were no longer any Norwegian soldiers in the Royal Life
Guards, no more Norwegian seamen, and the flood of Norwegian stu-
dents who lived in Copenhagen dwindled to almost nothing. In a simi-
lar manner the separation broke off contacts between Danish towns
and Norway. Much trade between Denmark and Norway ceased in 1814,
and problems in settling the national debt meant that there was no
Danish-Norwegian commercial treaty until 1826. This was a hard blow,
especially for northern Jutland, as this was where shipments of corn
had traditionally left for Norway. The separation of 1814 meant that
many of the close material, financial and human ties were cut.


Denmark and the Congress of Vienna

The Peace of Kiel did not end hostilities for Denmark, as the country
was still at war with Russia, Prussia and Spain as well as with France.
Denmark had been obliged to declare war on the latter by the terms of
the peace treaty with Britain. The Danish government had never got
