246   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


the mood in the diocese of Bergen as that of a lion that had been bated;
even old men were ready to face death with weapons in their hands
rather than submit to Sweden.83 The statement reflected the atmos-
phere of the city. The underlying motive force of this ultra-patriotism
was the ancient bishop, Johan Nordahl Brun, who burned with an all-
consuming patriotic flame. He wrote to the chaplain in Christiania,

  Peasants and soldiers are the nation here; they stand on as yet unde-
  filed Norwegian ground waiting for a sign to go to war. Norway is
  still Norway, and Christian is Norway’s king, and it should cost [the
  lives of] 20,000 Norwegian men before this changes.

Those citizens and civil servants in southeastern Norway who were of a
different opinion were, according to Brun, ‘rascals’ who the king should
‘dismiss, degrade or shoot, according to the circumstances’. A priest,
Niels Hertzberg from Hardanger, also in the diocese of Bergen, sug-
gested executing any commander who surrendered his fortress and who
was not prepared to burn down a neighbouring village and to execute
every citizen and peasant who refused to set fire to his own house when
the area was occupied by Swedes. All who were taken prisoner by the
enemy without being unfit for combat should also, in Hertzberg’s own
words, ‘dangle at the end of a rope’.84
   It was not only members of the clergy who were capable of coming
up with such doomsday pronouncements. Such ravings could also be
found among the military. One senior commander advocated not only
laying waste to most of the territory east of the River Glomma, but also
making incursions into western Sweden and destroying everything
there. His intention was to create an uninhabitable desert between
Norway and Sweden, by which means the borderland would not require
the same level of costly attention and would make it almost impossible
to carry out military operations there.85
   However, the desire to continue the war was voiced chiefly by mem-
bers of the educated elite. Ultimately it only amounted to empty rheto-
ric that had little influence, especially on the common people. This led
one officer to remark laconically that the eagerness for war was ‘as usual
greatest with the gentlemen sitting comfortably in their living rooms
by the fire in the winter, and the bravest of them were in Bergen’.86
Above all, the inhabitants of the borderlands wanted an end to the war.
   While the war of 1814 had thrown most of the middle class into a
state of despair, the pro-Swedish priest Nicolai Wergeland was almost
triumphant when, without permission, he gave a political speech to
