250 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


interests. This one-sided criticism occasionally led to a backlash, which
was the case with a prominent editor who wrote that it had been the
heir to the throne who had made a free constitution possible in 1814,
and that Norwegians should be eternally grateful to him. The view of
the chronically suspicious Swedish civil servants was that the ‘Danish
prince’ still lived on in many Norwegian hearts, and that, although
the Norwegian uniforms were now blue (like those of the Swedes),
Norwegians’ blood was still red (like the Danish uniforms).94


The New Norway

For the Norwegian middle class, 1814 was a watershed as regards their
identity, their loyalty and their conceptual basis, as other institutions
were placed on an equal footing with or actually given precedence
over the king in a national and political hierarchy that included the
Storting and the Constitutional Act. While these were new construc-
tions in Norway, they were ascribed historical and political legitimacy
and a symbolic value that had formerly been associated with the mon-
arch. The Storting with its two chambers, the Odelsting and the Lagting,
whose names referred back to the ancient Norse and proto-democratic
institution of the ‘thing’ or moot, reflected the desire to link the ‘old’
and the ‘new’ Norway. This is a clear example of what Eric Hobsbawm
called ‘invented traditions’, that is, new traditions that are invented as
a reaction to a new situation in order to promote a given set of values,
for which legitimacy is sought by referring to a recent or remote past.95
   The political and national legitimacy and symbolic role of the Storting
become clear in the perception of the institution as a national assembly
and of its members as the people’s representatives and interpreters who,
without considering special interests, worked for the common good.
For the opposition the Storting was associated with ideas of the nation’s
dignity, autonomy and liberty, while membership of the Storting was
accounted a sacred duty exercised out of love of the fatherland. For
‘patriots’, the Storting also constituted the nation’s bulwark in an ongo-
ing struggle against being merged with Sweden. However, the Storting
did not always enjoy the respect of the people, as it was too divisive
and the atmosphere too toxic for this to be the case. For those who sup-
ported the idea of representative government, however, the Storting was
a precondition for the lasting happiness of the people. Lack of political
experience came to weaken the very public spirit that such parliamen-
tarians were attempting to strengthen. Endless negotiations, nit-picking
and internal division detracted from these lofty expectations and under-
mined many people’s faith in the new system. Paradoxically, the status
