                             Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   251


of the Storting as a national symbol that was beyond challenge only
emerged when Charles John challenged its power.96
   This applied equally to the Constitutional Act, which was based on
the liberal thinking of the Enlightenment and had derived considerable
inspiration from the experience of the United States, Britain and France.
Contemporaries were aware of this, but it was still the feigned connec-
tion with Norwegian history that was emphasised. The civil servant and
politician Christian Magnus Falsen maintained that ancient Norway
had been a constitutional monarchy based on popular sovereignty, and
that the Constitutional Act was therefore simply a return to the consti-
tution of their Norwegian forefathers. This attempt to create historical,
political and national continuity, authenticity and legitimacy was the
rule rather than the exception in the ‘new’ Norway, and represented an
attempt to anchor the changes in a bygone golden age of the nation,
the Viking era and the Middle Ages. The Constitutional Act was seen as
the very symbol of an independent Norwegian nation across most party
lines. Furthermore, it not only gave Norwegians grounds for pride, it also
raised them above their neighbours in that free and equal Norwegians
were set alongside Danish subjects and Swedish noblemen.97
   In the atmosphere of political nationalism that found expression in
Norway, the Constitutional Act was described as a sacred text and a
civic catechism, an expression of the people’s will that all were obliged
to recognise. The opposition in particular associated the constitution
with nationality and considered it a tool that would shape the nation’s
character. Cultivation of the Constitutional Act, which was closely con-
nected with the concept of the nation, underlines the perception of
nationalism as a kind of secular religion, and this in itself shows that
at least some members of the Norwegian elite had taken a decisive step
away from old-fashioned sovereign-centred patriotism and embraced
a national identity. The events of 1814 permanently changed Norway,
and the year saw the beginning of a nation-building process that lasted
through the nineteenth century with the creation of national symbols
such as a Norwegian flag, a Norwegian national anthem and a national
landscape, followed by the birth of a national literature and a change
of the written language in a ‘Norwegian’ direction. The aim was to
show that Norway was an independent nation in its own right, and that
Norwegians were not simply ‘pseudo-Danes’.


The Immediate Consequences of Separation

Norway’s union with Sweden brought the flow of people travelling
from Denmark to Norway to a halt. Those Norwegians who left for
