                             Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   247


his congregation from his pulpit in Christiansand. His theme was
national unity, which he illustrated by telling the people who their real
friends were. He stressed that what was needed was a united national
front that would openly and honestly negotiate with the Swedes on the
basis of true Norwegian interests, and that people should not hate the
Swedish people because Christianity forbade national hatred.87
   Wergeland was later suspected of having been in the pay of the
Swedes, but the truth was that he had no Swedish acquaintances at
all. His speech was based on his own convictions, genuine love of his
fatherland and an unquenchable hatred of Denmark, and he used the
occasion to lay the blame for the war of 1814 on those with Danish sym-
pathies and on the idea of reunification. Wergeland’s speech reflected
the views of the Wedel circle, but the count and his sympathisers found
it unnecessarily smug and politically unwise at a time when the witch-
hunt for them was still in progress. The open expression of Swedish
sympathies in places such as Trondheim led to written, legal and physi-
cal conflict, especially during the election process for the extraordinary
session of the Storting in the autumn of 1814. The election resulted in a
landslide victory for the Independence Party. Thus the majority of the
electorate still seemed to be gripped by the nationalistic principle of a
free Norwegian national state.88
   The division of opinion among the country’s various factions cre-
ated widespread concern at the extraordinary session of the Storting.
The delegates from Bergen had been given a mandate forbidding them
to vote for a union with Sweden, while it was feared that no delegates
would be sent from Trondheim and the country’s northern areas, which
could result in the Convention of Moss and the extraordinary conven-
ing of the Storting being invalidated. Christian Frederick had expressed
the same fear in his declaration on the Convention of Moss, while
others – both Norwegians and Swedes – were afraid that the war would
be resumed if the inhabitants of western and northern Norway opposed
peace and the union with Sweden. The continuing recalcitrance of the
delegates came under fire, however, when they arrived at the Storting in
Christiania in October, when they could sense a change of mood in the
city. One officer remarked that the tone here was completely different
from the rest of the country, as people were talking about the necessity
of a union with Sweden and the impossibility of defending Norway. The
word now was that there was a difference between becoming Swedes
and having a Swedish king. The mood influenced the delegates, who
grudgingly changed their attitudes in order to save the nation and
ensure the greatest possible autonomy in the union.89
