244 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


Norway into Sweden was not his intention, Charles John repeatedly
promised self-rule and respect for the constitution if Norwegians would
simply accept the terms of the Peace of Kiel.
   The war in the summer could have changed everything, however.
Some Swedes were furious that the Norwegians had rejected the Peace
of Kiel and made it necessary for Sweden to embark on a costly war
to enforce a lawful treaty. Therefore, when Christian Frederick opted
to negotiate and a ceasefire was agreed on 10 August, some Swedes
regarded it as a military victory and expected Charles John to adopt
Gustav III’s policy of annexing Norway and amalgamating the two
nations, if only to punish the Norwegians for their obstinacy. Their
perplexity and outrage became even more intense when Charles John
signed a final convention agreed at Moss on 14 August, which tacitly
recognised the Storting and with it Norwegian autonomy.78
   Charles John approved the lenient terms for reasons of practical poli-
tics. Continued hostilities would not only involve considerable losses
and expenditure, but could at worst lead to the feared guerrilla war. The
confused situation was also a problem in relation to the Congress of
Vienna, which was about to begin. The sensible thing to do was to take
possession of Norway and avoid an unsettled situation that could lead
to the reversal of those agreements that had been reached. Furthermore,
by being cooperative, Charles John could facilitate his future control of
Norway and ensure that his dynasty would have a separate kingdom in
the event of losing power in Sweden. The French-born Bernadotte dem-
onstrated in this way that he was capable of a certain moderation that
his former colleague, Napoleon, had often lacked.
   Any possibility of reunification with Denmark died with the Conven-
tion of Moss on 14 August. For many Norwegians the desire for a return
to such a union had gone, but there were exceptions, such as the ven-
erable Carsten Anker, who was prepared to attend the Congress of
Vienna in order to argue the Danish-Norwegian cause. Yet, for those
Norwegians who still harboured such hopes, the only realistic possibil-
ity was a Scandinavian union.79


Deserters

Most Norwegian troops were demobilised after the Convention of Moss on
14 August. Some sections of the army of the line, which were supposed to
remain mobilised during the peace negotiations, almost disintegrated as
soldiers deserted in their hundreds. These mass desertions have often been
explained as being caused by dissatisfaction at what the soldiers regarded
