                             Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   249


often compared to the Norwegians of antiquity who had possessed all
of the virtues that had now been found lacking.91
   With the Convention of Moss and the later union with Sweden, the
winds of change also began to cool relations to the formerly adored
Christian Frederick, who now became an object of hatred as he had
proved to be more earthly than messianic. The young king’s refusal to
sacrifice lives in a hopeless war led those very people whom nationalism
had stirred to turn their backs on him in disappointment at his human
frailty. This led to personal attacks on the king for cowardice and frivol-
ity, with fingers being pointed at the war and at the monarch’s ability
literally to seduce. Some people refused to believe what had happened,
while others felt they had been made fools of and resigned from their
posts in protest. It was symptomatic of some of the criticism that it was
based on national feeling. While Christian Frederick’s character was
attributed to his Danishness, his lack of will to take part in the strug-
gle was linked to his lack of love of the fatherland, as he was not, like a
Norwegian, connected to the country by family ties, origin or property.
The springtime hero had become the scapegoat of autumn, while the
Independence Party refused to accept any responsibility and lacked the
will or ability to understand what had been possible and what had been
achieved.92
   It has correctly been pointed out that this was almost inevitable, as
Christian Frederick’s national rhetoric had helped to promote the idea
of total mobilisation and a fight to the death. Christian Frederick’s nec-
essary outward idealism in the spring made it impossible to accept his
realism in the autumn. The king still had his supporters, but they were
chiefly Danish-born officers and recent appointments to the civil ser-
vice whose jobs depended on Christian Frederick’s person. He was still
a national symbol for those who wanted to continue fighting, and the
greater the distance from Christiania and the war, the stronger was
the image of the king. Love for Christian Frederick was still palpable at
the extraordinary session of the Storting, where there were proposals for
a commission to vindicate the monarch, for a memorial in his honour
and for the continuation of his annuity after his abdication. The propos-
als were all withdrawn under Swedish pressure, though the king was
allowed to receive an address in expression of the people’s gratitude.93
   After Christian Frederick had left the country on 10 October 1814, his
role as the scapegoat for the collective shame became permanent. The
tendency was most pronounced among military personnel. There was
criticism across party lines, but it was linked by the pro-Swedish parties
to the theory that Christian Frederick had been motivated by Danish
