                              Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   245


as appeasement and cowardice on the part of Christian Frederick and some
of the military leaders. This could give the impression that the soldiers felt
an ideological bond with the fatherland and that those who deserted did
so in protest against Christian Frederick and the army commanders, who
they felt had not done enough to defend Norway’s independence.80
   However, what is striking is that the deserters were almost invariably
men whose homes were in the areas occupied by the Swedes. The prime
motive for desertion may have been that these soldiers wanted to pro-
tect their homes and families against the Swedish army – and not that
they were ideologically motivated or wished to protest against Christian
Frederick and the military leadership. Any desire they had to protest
may have been due to their sense that their home grounds had been
left in enemy hands, rather than because they felt that Norwegian inde-
pendence had not been defended energetically enough. Conversely, the
fact there was no irregular resistance in the areas the deserters belonged
to suggests that the Swedish army behaved well and that no one was
prepared to defend Norway’s independence to the last man. The most
important thing for these peasants from the borderlands was the safety
of their native grounds and their families.81


Autumn in Norway

The truce came as a shock to many Norwegians. Particularly in south-
eastern Norway, closest to the front line, the mood was despondent. The
period from the end of August to the beginning of September has been
called the ‘time of the turncoats’, when many of the former proponents
of independence came out in the union’s favour. For all that, there were
people in many towns who wanted to continue fighting to avoid becom-
ing Swedish. Even though the mood in the capital, Christiania in south-
eastern Norway, was dejected, the hungry inhabitants refused to accept
Swedish corn supplies and attempted instead to lynch the Norwegian
generals, Haxthausen and Staffeldt, who had been responsible for supply-
ing the army, as well as General Magnus Björnstjerna from the Swedish
delegation. Every morning, the town’s inhabitants woke to find new post-
ers that encouraged people to fight with renewed courage for independ-
ence. The people of the city of Tønsberg apparently held the pro-Swedish
Count Wedel Jarlsberg responsible for the Convention of Moss and were
prepared to stone him and burn down his residence. The plan was never
realised, however, as the count was not at his Jarlsberg estate.82
  Feelings ran even higher in western Norway and the province of
Trøndelag in the middle part of the country. A civil servant described
