254 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


Frederick VI had stuck by Napoleon so long had created considerable
dislike of the Danish monarch in many places, which could easily come
to cost the state even more. The kingdom of Saxony was a good example
of the fact that this was no irrational fear. As Danish diplomats were
painfully aware, the example of Saxony, together with the presence of
the Russian army in Holstein and Charles John’s constant attempts to
divide Denmark, were what Frederick VI feared most. The best thing for
Denmark would be for all to forget the past, so that the country could
once again become part of ‘Europe’s great family’. The fourth and final
goal for Denmark was to safeguard the state’s interests in a reorganisa-
tion of Germany, which would almost inevitably involve Holstein.
   The first goal would prove to be the most difficult. At the congress
itself the Danish king was treated as a tragic figure who, like his country,
had undergone immense suffering. There was therefore a certain good-
will towards the Danish monarch. There were also hopes that the king’s
personal presence at the congress could reconcile him with the tsar,
but this proved to be more difficult than expected. In spite of countless
promises, the Danish monarch was obliged to wait until 14 November
before the tsar finally decided to ratify the peace treaty of 8 February
and ordered his troops to begin their withdrawal from Holstein. This
only happened after the British Foreign Minister Castlereagh had inter-
vened on Denmark’s behalf, as he wanted to prevent Russia growing
even stronger. This put a definitive end to the war and the threat to
Denmark’s existence.
   It took even longer to achieve the remaining goals. Danish attempts
to obtain more compensation for the loss of Norway were unsuccessful,
and Sweden still refused to abide by its obligations under the Peace of
Kiel. For their part, the Swedes attempted to bypass Denmark and reach
an agreement with Prussia in relation to Swedish Pomerania and Rügen.
The issue was only resolved after pressure was applied by the Russians
in the form of a piece of horse-trading in June 1815, after which Prussia
received the areas in question from Sweden, while Denmark received
the Hanoverian duchy of Lauenburg, after Prussia had surrendered
the bishopric of Hildesheim, among other territories, to Hanover. The
Danish polity could then be redrawn on the map of Europe.
   The composite state of which Frederick VI was monarch in 1815,
however, was fundamentally different to the state he had ruled before
1807. The government in the bombed-out city of Copenhagen was
geographically – if not demographically – the biggest loser of the
Napoleonic Wars, as the Kingdom of Norway, with an area of 385,252
km2, almost a million inhabitants and major natural resources had been
