                            Denmark and Norway after Denmark-Norway 259


   That things turned out as they did was no foregone conclusion, how-
ever, as witnessed by the sudden death of Crown Prince Carl August
of Sweden and the subsequent election of Crown Prince Charles John
in 1810 and Frederick VI’s decision to stick with Napoleon in 1812 and
1813. History could easily have taken a different turn in each of these
cases, and it is only the eyes of posterity that erroneously perceive the
course of events to have been preordained. The outcome, however, in
large part laid the foundation for the Scandinavia with which we are
familiar today. As far as Norway is concerned, 1814 marks the fall of
absolutism, the introduction of a free constitution and national inde-
pendence. The outcome of the eventful years in Norway must be ascribed
to a coincidence of the acts of the Norwegian elite and the policies of
Christian Frederick, Charles John and the great powers respectively.
Charles John had already promised the Norwegians a free constitution,
but it is doubtful whether the terms of a union between Sweden and
Norway would have been equally favourable without the Norwegian
rebellion under the leadership of the Danish prince. Furthermore, 1814
was also the year when after centuries of war the Scandinavian coun-
tries buried the hatchet. The borders between the three countries have
remained almost unchanged since 1814, with the notable exception of
the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein. The changes that came about
were also political and national. Sweden and Norway gained constitu-
tions, while absolutism in Denmark fell into discredit. For Norway this
was the foundation for present-day democracy.
   In Norway national patriotism and state patriotism were now replaced
by a political nationalism among the country’s elite that gradually
spread to the broader population, where it was supplemented over time
by a well-developed cultural nationalism. Things in Denmark were dif-
ferent. State patriotism continued to live on there, as the Kingdom of
Denmark constituted the centre of a mini-empire. It was weakened,
however, by the war and the separation from the Norwegians, who were
closely connected culturally and linguistically with the Danes, and a
Danish cultural nationalism based on a combination of the cultivation
of a common, ancient Nordic past and a separate Danish golden age in
the Middle Ages grew in strength.
   The situation was not improved by the fact that separation from
Norway created a decidedly small-state mentality and an existential
anxiety in Denmark. The war had also left the state’s German citizens
in the duchies with bitter memories of ‘Danification’, with the idea of
German unity subsequently surfacing among a few professors at the
University of Kiel. Furthermore, the struggle for the Swedish throne and
