258   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


   Before the outbreak of war in 1807 Denmark-Norway had enjoyed
the fruits of peace since 1720. The policy of neutrality had created
economic progress, a liberalisation of the economy and, particularly
in the Danish and German regions of the state, the government had
enacted comprehensive reforms in keeping with the spirit of the times.
Denmark-Norway had constituted a medium-sized polity with major
national and merchant fleets and, despite its close ties with Russia, the
country enjoyed a certain latitude in international affairs. During the
years between 1807 and 1814 this polity was destroyed in upheavals
that led to financial ruin and domestic division.
   Danish and particularly Norwegian historians have traditionally judged
Frederick VI harshly, while he has been portrayed by several interna-
tional historians as blindly loyal to Napoleon. In the final analysis he
has shouldered the blame for Denmark-Norway having ended up on the
losing side in the Napoleonic Wars, and not without good grounds. The
Danish-Norwegian king was neither a political nor a military genius,
and during the course of the war he exhibited a growing tendency to
refuse to recognise his own limitations. This had consequences for his
political decisions and for the ability of his administration to act as best
it could. On the other hand, it is inaccurate to describe Frederick VI, as
several historians have done, as irrational or feeble-minded. Frederick’s
policy should be understood with reference to the freedom of action
available to him. Although the king was stubborn and self-righteous,
it appears unreasonable to chide him for not accepting the British ulti-
matum in 1807, as it was a fundamental threat to the state’s independ-
ence and cohesion and would have led to a French occupation of large
areas of the country. Furthermore, it was scarcely irrational to side with
Napoleon and his army of 500,000 men when the Emperor invaded
Russia in 1812, even though with the benefit of hindsight it can be seen
as the wrong choice. However, there is more justification for the charge
that he failed to take Norway’s interests sufficiently into consideration
during the war. Frederick’s choice should be seen in the light of his
role as regent of a composite polity and of his well-founded fear of a
French occupation of the duchies, Jutland and Funen, if he fulfilled the
wishes of the Norwegians. In other words, the price he would have paid
for alleviating the large-scale Norwegian sufferings would have been
an increase in the burdens of the Danish and German inhabitants of
the state. It would also have completely stopped corn shipments from
Denmark to Norway, making it necessary for the Norwegians to obtain
these vital supplies elsewhere, which clearly would have been more eas-
ily said than done.
