260 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


Frederick VI’s policies had created animosity between the king and the
Duke of Augustenburg, and the balance of power between the various
nations within the state shifted decisively with the loss of Norway. This
antagonism and these changes, together with budding nationalism,
would have catastrophic consequences in the long term.
   Proto-Scandinavianism, which had arisen with the Nordic renaissance
at the end of the eighteenth century and had gained strength during the
period leading up to the election of the Swedish crown prince, did not
disappear. The gradual increase in strength that began at the end of the
1820s was borne along by the new peaceful conditions in Scandinavia and
the common goal of somehow returning to a period of antiquity when
Swedes, Norwegians and Danes ostensibly spoke a common language and
had a common culture. The Scandinavianism that bloomed during the
1830s and 1840s was initially cultural, but the idea of a political union
also grew stronger in some academic and political circles. This was par-
ticularly the case in Denmark, where for many people Scandinavianism
became an integral aspect of Danish nationalism, which partly reflects
national tensions arising between Germans and Danes as the state devel-
oped. Political Scandinavianism in Sweden, on the other hand, was seen
against the threat from Russia, while it had a less firm footing in Norway,
since many people were more interested in cultivating what was charac-
teristically Norwegian and were apprehensive about anything that could
be seen as a surrender of national sovereignty.
   Scandinavianism should be seen as part of contemporary national
liberalism in Europe. Liberals of the day believed that a state must be a
certain size in order to survive, and that Europe should ideally consist of
no more than eleven states in all, one of which would be Scandinavia.2
Nationalism in the mid-nineteenth century went hand-in-hand with
a threshold principle, which was based on the idea that those nations
considered too small to constitute states in their own right should join
forces with nations they were related to by culture, language and history
and form states in this way. This was the background for what could be
called the ‘pan’ movements of the day, among them pan-Scandinavi-
anism and pan-Slavism. Furthermore, it could be argued that German
unification and especially Italian unification were also movements of
this kind. Swedes and Danes certainly had no less in common than did
Italians from Turin and Italians from Sicily. Only a minority of Italians,
consisting of liberals and radicals, wanted unification, and people in
many areas were explicitly and even violently opposed to it.
   For these ‘pan movements’ to succeed they had to combine some
measure of popular sovereignty with the idea of a nation based on a
