                            Denmark and Norway after Denmark-Norway 261


common language, culture, history and descent. Forming such an idea
of nationhood would naturally be a selective process, nation-building
being as much about forgetting as about remembering. This was just as
true of Scandinavia as of Italy in that it could be argued that both geo-
graphical areas shared language, history and descent. According to this
analysis, Scandinavianism seems to have been a more realistic project
that the constitutional Danish-German composite state that was unsuc-
cessfully tried out in the 1850s in Denmark, since the former combined
the ideas of nationalism and popular sovereignty. However, in the end,
political Scandinavianism came to nothing when the military aid that
was promised by the Swedish-Norwegian king did not materialise in
the Danish–German war of 1864 (despite very serious efforts to pro-
mote it, including high treason, plans for rebellion and government
as well as royal offers to create a federal Scandinavian state). Cultural
Scandinavianism on the other hand survived, and still has an effect on
Scandinavian society and on the identity of Danes, Norwegians and
Swedes.
   Scandinavianism is, then, an important part of the legacy of the
Scandinavia that was created in 1814. However, when writing on
Scandinavianism in general and political Scandinavianism in particu-
lar, historians often focus on the relationship between Denmark and
Sweden, leaving Norway to some extent as the odd one out. Moreover,
there is a rich literature dealing with the union between Sweden and
Norway, 1814–1905. In other words, until quite recently few cared
about the how the upheaval of 1814 affected the relationship between
Denmark and Norway. This is something of a paradox, since the effects
of the separation of the two countries can hardly be underestimated
when trying to understand politics and nation-building in Norway and
Denmark in the nineteenth century. To try to balance the books, so to
speak, the remainder of this epilogue is therefore dedicated to an analy-
sis of Denmark, Norway and especially Danish–Norwegian relations in
the aftermath of the Napoleonic Wars.


A Norwegian Model

Influenced by the memoirs of the prominent national-liberal politician,
Orla Lehmann, Danish historians have branded the years between 1814
and 1830 as a period of hysterical love of the king, and the dilettantish
and bungled attempt to overthrow the autocratic system of government
in 1820 has been regarded as an isolated occurrence. This interpretation
is well supported by the fact that the inflamed atmosphere in Denmark
