262   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


had cooled by the time Frederick VI returned to the country after the
Congress of Vienna in 1815. The adulation with which the king was
received has normally been ascribed to his being seen as the saviour of
the country, since, in the eyes of the people, his presence at the con-
gress had saved the state from certain destruction. This interpretation is
backed by many contemporary statements and must be taken seriously.
On the other hand, there are other factors that may also have played a
role in the wildly enthusiastic reception of the king.3
   A closer look at the Danish sources, the European context and rela-
tions with the duchies reveals a more variegated picture. Sweden was
given a constitution in 1809 and the Norwegian elite, educated in
Denmark, created a liberal constitution in 1814. Germany was awash
with national-liberal movements and revolts had broken out in Naples,
Spain and Greece. Liberal literary societies and student organisations
were established in Copenhagen, while the king considerably strength-
ened the police force in general and the secret police in particular.
Danish civil servants who had been trained in the 1790s were still
influenced by ideas spawned during the French Revolution. Traces can
be seen not only in the Danish draft of a Norwegian constitution and
the treatise on a constitutional monarchy in Denmark but also in the
requests for a Danish constitution alongside extant drafts and prepar-
atory work published or written between 1815 and 1818. In addition
there are the posters, flyers and proclamations printed during the per-
secution of the Jews from 1819 to 1820 demanding liberty, equality
and the abolition of absolutism. As mentioned in the previous chapter,
Frederick VI had also accepted the obligation imposed by the Congress
of Vienna to grant the German duchy of Holstein a constitution, which
would hardly have gone unnoticed by educated Copenhageners. The
king’s obligation to the people of Holstein led to a constitutional move-
ment not only in Holstein but also in the Danish duchy of Schleswig,
with which it was connected.4
   This is the light in which the Prussian emissary’s report to Berlin
concerning Frederick VI’s return to Denmark in 1815 should be seen.
He wrote that the Danes had expected the king to return with a con-
stitution for his subjects, not an unreasonable expectation given his
promise to the people of Holstein in Vienna. When it became known
that he refused to do so, the result was, according to the emissary, wide-
spread dissatisfaction. With this in mind, the enthusiastic reception of
the king might have been generated by political expectations among
Danes for a constitution in accordance with the Norwegian model. The
restrictions on freedom of expression at the time and subsequent lack
