                             Denmark and Norway after Denmark-Norway 263


of research make it very difficult to determine how widespread these
attitudes were, but we do know that constitutional ideas were discussed
in a club by the name of Clio, and that men such as Professor Laurits
Engelstoft were perfectly willing to voice their liberal opinions in pri-
vate. The police, however, had been keeping an eye on the association
ever since it had been founded in 1816, as its many Norwegian-born
members made it in their eyes a potential breeding ground for revolu-
tionary ideas.5
   Odense, the largest city on the island of Funen, is not alone in dem-
onstrating that these ideas were not restricted to the capital. Having
been received as a hero on his return from Norway, Christian Frederick
now became a central figure for the opposition, and for this reason was
exiled to Funen as governor, a superfluous post that had never existed
before. A number of citizens in Odense founded a literary society on
17 May 1815 and elected the new governor – formerly the constitutional
king of Norway – as its president. It was the first anniversary for the
Norwegian constitution, and their choice of date must be seen as a clear
indication of their liberal attitudes and as a protest directed against the
absolutist regime.6
   The Norwegian constitution and the free political life enjoyed by
Norwegians became an ideal for all liberal forces in Denmark. Christian
Frederick was working on a Danish constitution at this time but he was
unable to solve the problem of the duchies. In this he was not alone. As
previously mentioned, the mixed population of Schleswig and the com-
plex issues involving constitutional law and the right of inheritance
in both Holstein and Schleswig led to two civil wars later in the cen-
tury. In Christian Frederick’s view the majority of Danes (the peasants)
still supported absolutism but the ‘educated segment of the people’ (the
middle class) wanted a constitutional kingdom modelled on Norway
and Great Britain.7
   The (almost) free Norwegian press allowed Danes to read, in their
own language, texts mercilessly attacking absolutism and defending a
free constitution. Frederick VI and his henchmen saw such input from
Norway as a threat, which was one reason why the postal service to
Norway was discontinued during most of 1814 and was later system-
atically monitored. At the request of the Swedes, a major survey was
carried out in Jutland in 1821 to examine a rumour that the popula-
tion sympathised with the defence of the constitution by the Storting
against Charles John. The conclusion of the secret internal Danish
study was that there was no ‘Norwegian party’ on the peninsula, which
was exactly what the Danish government had expected. A similar study
