                             Postlude – Freedom and Suppression, 1814–15   255


exchanged for the 1200 km2 duchy of Lauenburg with 40,000 inhabit-
ants and a feudal landowner structure. Seen through military eyes, the
navy, for centuries considered the very key to the state’s existence, had
been irretrievably lost. Geographical, demographic and military losses,
together with a ruined economy meant that the state’s former political
status had also been lost. It was therefore asserted in the 1820s that
official Danish foreign policy was that the state had no foreign policy.
   The Napoleonic Wars had also changed the Danish state in one other
decisive way. Before 1814 Danish speakers (i.e. Danes and Norwegians)
had comprised 75 per cent of the population of Denmark-Norway, while
German speakers comprised 25 per cent. This had now changed to
60/40. This displacement was not insignificant for the residual develop-
ment of the Danish polity, where German speakers in the duchies and
Danish speakers in the kingdom had become increasingly conscious of
nationality during the Napoleonic Wars.
   The Congress of Vienna left Denmark with another inheritance that
foreshadowed later political turmoil in the nineteenth century. Among
the final issues negotiated in the Austrian capital was the German
Confederation, which would replace the former Holy Roman Empire
that had been dissolved in 1806. Holstein had been formally annexed
to the Danish state for nine years, but in the spirit of restoration in
Vienna the government in Copenhagen found it wisest to submit to the
demand that Holstein be part of the German Confederation.
   This had a decisive effect on the subsequent course of history in two
senses. In a positive sense it meant that Frederick VI was in principle
obliged to give Holstein a constitution and a national assembly in accord-
ance with the text of the Confederation. Even though the conservative
monarch would not initially grant the people of Holstein a constitu-
tion, he felt obliged to do so in the wake of the French Revolution of
1830. An advisory national assembly was granted not only to Holstein
but also to Schleswig and the Kingdom of Denmark, as it was found
politically impossible to differentiate between the state’s various popu-
lation groups. The German Confederation was partly responsible, then,
for a liberal development in Denmark that culminated in the Danish
Constitutional Act of 1849.
   Holstein’s connection with the Confederation, however, also gave
the German states, including Prussia and Austria, both a right and a
duty to interfere in the domestic political affairs of the Danish state,
which gradually came to a head as the nationalist movements increased
in strength among Danes and among the inhabitants of Schleswig
and Holstein. Schleswig, whose cultural, political and identity-related
