272 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


treated equally during the years before the separation, and many sym-
pathised with them. At the same time many Danes felt that these com-
plaints were sometimes exaggerated or were due to misunderstandings.
The disparity between Danish and Norwegian memories of their com-
mon past can be compared to Peter Burke’s observations of British–Irish
relations, which show in both cases that the ‘stronger’ party remembers
the good times and forgets the bad times, while the reverse is true of the
‘weaker’ party. This ‘social amnesia’, to use Burke’s phrase, may reflect
the different needs of the two nations in their nation-building but cre-
ates bitterness in the opposite party.23
  Wergeland’s work made him the incarnation of everything that
Danes hated about the ‘new’ Norway. There are many sarcastic remarks
in periodicals and letters about Wergeland’s publication but, with a sin-
gle exception, there were no ‘replies’ to his charges from the Danes.
There is no doubt that several of the academic ‘gladiators’ in Denmark
wished to take Wergeland to task. The reason why this did not happen
can be found in Frederick VI’s dislike of discussing politics in general
and in the traumatic effect of the loss of Norway in particular.
  Official Danish policy was that Norway should be ‘forgotten’ and
memories of the former union repressed, which was made all the easier
by the Norwegian provocations. The king had attempted to influence
public opinion as early as 1814 by publishing pseudonymous pam-
phlets. These commissioned works argued that the ‘loss of Norway’ was
really a blessing in disguise, as the country had been a financial burden
for Denmark, which was a downright lie as the loss of the Norwegian
market was a considerable problem for the Danish economy.24


An Independent Language by Name or by Nature

The dissolution of the Danish-Norwegian state had immediate conse-
quences for language in Norway. In February 1814 an observer noted in
his diary a tendency for people to talk about the Norwegian language
instead of the Danish language. He called this ridiculous, as Danish
and Norwegian were one and the same language, but in his diary
entries later in year he himself began to refer to the spoken language as
Norwegian. On the other hand, he continued to maintain that the writ-
ten language and the language used in schools was Danish, underlining
his wish – and the wish of many educated Norwegians – to maintain
close cultural ties between the two countries.25
  The tendency to call the language Norwegian became official pol-
icy. The majority of the Norwegian elite regarded any merging with
