270   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


   Wergeland’s history was not allowed to go uncontested. On the con-
trary, it sparked the first true literary feud in Norway. A whole range of
pro-Danish Norwegians launched vehement attacks against him, while
others defended Wergeland and wanted his book translated into the
principal languages so that people in other countries could learn about
the Norwegians’ sufferings and the Norwegian nation’s autonomy. In
the short term Wergeland lost the public battle, but many people sided
with him in subsequent years, and such support must be seen as part of
a national development that placed the nation’s dignity at its centre. In
other words, history in Norway became a battlefield in a national zone
of conflict in which each adversary saw the other as the enemy within.
   Pro-Danish Norwegians were not blind to the disadvantages of the
former union and their judgement of the time before 1660 was harsh,
but they emphasised the advantages of a lenient Danish government,
civic liberty and the long period of peace. In their eyes the union had
been beneficial for Norway, but only a small number of them wished to
see it resuscitated after 1814. The professors at the university, who were
either pro-Danish or Danish-born, were severely affected by the separa-
tion. Whatever their individual views of the former royal power, they
differentiated between the Danish people and the previous government,
the latter being the only instance they felt could be reproached for any-
thing. These Norwegians had been shaped by their lives in Denmark
and they loved the country, the people and the culture, which they
were part of themselves.
   According to one Norwegian professor, Denmark was a nation worthy
of respect, one to which Norwegians had an emotional bond. Danes
and Norwegians had a shared language and shared memories, and their
peoples were still connected by ties of friendship, family and affection.
Furthermore, there were many Danes still living in Norway. The separa-
tion and the union with Sweden neither could nor should change any
of this. The two nations were connected so closely and their families
so tightly knit that what affected one people also affected the other.19
   Pro-Danish Norwegians reacted instinctively to statements about
Denmark they regarded as unreasonable and vindictive. A Norwegian
professor wrote to a Danish colleague that every bitter word between
Danes and Norwegians pained him more than any personal affront. And
an observer wrote in a Norwegian newspaper that he felt it was his duty
to protest against foul and foolish talk of Norwegians’ power and their
‘shameful clamour against Denmark, as though it were the source of
all our ills’. In the same vein one professor argued that the anti-Danish
attitudes that hid behind the mask of national feeling were expressions
