                            Denmark and Norway after Denmark-Norway 273


Sweden with foreboding, as was evident from the Constitutional
Act of November 1814, in which Sections 47 and 81 emphasised and
secured the name and status of the Norwegian language. The Storting
received academic backing for this ‘language coup’, as it later became
known, in a statement from the University of Christiania, which con-
cluded that the written language had been jointly developed and was
therefore as Norwegian as it was Danish. Later in the century powerful
movements advocated the creation of a ‘truly Norwegian’ written lan-
guage. However, in the years immediately after 1814 few people went
any further than demanding that the written language of Norway be
called Norwegian despite the fact that it was identical with Danish.
Nevertheless, the language coup must be seen as an expression of the
emphasis placed on the link between the nation and the language. As
the nation had not yet achieved full political independence, Norway
needed to position itself symbolically and conceptually in relation to
both Sweden and Denmark. In other words, there was a need for exter-
nal recognition and a national sense of self alongside the right to the
greatest possible national autonomy and self-expression.26
   The official status conferred on the ‘Norwegian’ language in the
Constitutional Act did not, however, decide the matter once and for all.
Danes wanted to maintain a linguistic and literary fellowship not only
in nature but also in name, and the language coup was a blow to Danes’
self-perception, which had already suffered a serious blow.27 For Danes
the Norwegian language was and remained throughout the period up
to the 1830s either a dialect, the language of Norwegian peasants, or the
name of a language spoken in Norway in the Middle Ages. A prominent
Danish linguist spoke scornfully of ‘the royal Norwegian tongue’ and
made it clear that, if Norwegians really wished to cultivate their rus-
tic dialect, that language must be called Norwegian, but there was no
mistaking his view that it was a mad idea. In Danish eyes, this was all
an attempt by some Norwegians to undermine the spiritual fellowship
that Danes and Norwegians had been building up for centuries and that
was symbolised and guaranteed by their common language. In other
words, Norway’s cultural secession was instrumental in breaking down
an integral aspect of people’s sense of self south of the Skagerrak.28
   The numerous Danish objections led to an intense debate about lan-
guage in Norway. Immediately after separation there was no consensus
about the name of the language in the country, but people gradu-
ally began to use the term ‘mother tongue’, as a kind of compromise.
However, the controversy lingered on. For Norwegian nationalists the
heart of the matter was national independence. For the language of the
