264 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


had been carried out during the previous year on the government’s
initiative at Odsherred in Zealand where it was feared that there was
Norwegian influence.8
   Such a fear was not irrational. Norwegians were still travelling to
Copenhagen, correspondence between the two countries was busy, not
least on the part of the younger liberal generation, and the Norwegian
press supported Danish liberalism, as can be seen in the publication of
proclamations dealing with a Danish constitution in Norway in 1819
and in anonymous Danish contributions to Norwegian newspapers.
Many articles cautiously arguing for greater liberty, indirectly criticis-
ing the government and expressing the idea of an opposition- controlled
absolutism were published in Denmark. This must be regarded as the
limit of what it was possible to print at the time. The proposal for a
monument to honour the reformist policies of the mentally ill Christian
VII at the end of the eighteenth century could similarly be seen as a
demand for new measures, rather than as a tribute to an ‘enlightened’
autocratic monarch.9
   The attempted Danish insurrection initiated by the philologist Jacob
Jacobsen Dampe in 1820 has not unreasonably been described in his-
tory books as harmless. On the other hand, it is important to empha-
sise that the authorities did take Dampe’s activities seriously, and that
they have to be seen as one expression of the unrest widespread in the
capital and in other Danish towns from 1819 to 1820. Recent research
has shown that the authorities connected Dampe’s activities with what
became known as the ‘physical persecution of the Jews’ that prevailed in
Copenhagen and other parts of Denmark during this period and which
was far more widespread than has hitherto been assumed. The perse-
cution of the Jews was triggered by similar outrages in Germany and
by the state of the economy, but it is important to emphasise that the
populace blamed not only the Jews for the economic crisis but also the
government and the king. The crisis, which began in earnest in 1818,
could be traced back to the war and the state bankruptcy of 1813, as was
made explicit in posters, flyers and proclamations that also contained
demands for the abolition of autocracy and the introduction of a con-
stitution. The government as a whole was panic-stricken, and Minister
for Justice Frederik Julius Kaas was afraid that this was the ‘Introduction
to the Final Act’ – the revolution. His concern should be seen in the
light of contemporary insurrections in Naples and Spain and the unrest
closer to home in Germany, which resulted in the Carlsbad Decrees in
1819 limiting the freedom of the press, for example, in several German
states, including Holstein.10
