                             Denmark and Norway after Denmark-Norway 269


had and maintained a positive view of Danish culture, which they saw
as common ballast from the days of the union. Copenhagen was the
‘Scandinavian Athens’ and the gateway to a world that was open to
Norwegians by a cultural union. The heritage of the union and the con-
tinuing inspiration from the old capital could and should be used to
build up the new Norway and to continue the struggle against Swedish
influence. Views such as these provoked the pro-Swedish Norwegians
and cultural nationalists, who felt that political emancipation from
Denmark should be followed by cultural emancipation.
   Some members of the Norwegian elite still feared Danish influ-
ence, believing it had a corrupting effect on Norwegians and kept
them in chains.17 In some places, this attitude led to poor treatment of
‘Jutlanders’ (as the Danes were disparagingly called). The priest Nicolai
Wergeland and his ilk spent the years after the separation wallowing
in the deprivations that Norwegians had suffered during the union, as
they could now give their pent-up anger free rein and whip up a mood
of ever-mounting hatred. It should be remembered here that, while it
was now acceptable to criticise Denmark and absolutism, people had
to be more careful about criticising Sweden and the new royal house.
Attacks on the past could serve as thinly veiled warnings directed at the
union with Sweden and at a king with absolutist ambitions.
   In 1814 Nicolai Wergeland invented the terms ‘Danomania’, ‘Danoma-
niac’ and ‘Danish-minded’ to denote what in his eyes was the unnatu-
ral predilection felt by many Norwegians for Denmark. He attempted
to set this to rights in his book A Truthful Account of Denmark’s Political
Crimes against the Kingdom of Norway from 955 to 1814 (1816). It was
characterised by a form of ‘political archaeology’ that involved using
anything in history that could fit in with a nationalist interpretation
while everything else was ‘forgotten’ or explained away as treachery.
The past, Wergeland argued, was not only a mirror in which the nation
could see itself. It was also a battlefield and a weapon in Norway’s set-
tling of scores with Denmark, and the work, in Wergeland’s own words,
was a catalogue of sins that was just as long as Scandinavian history. For
Wergeland the book was a project designed to open Norwegians’ eyes,
and the second edition stressed that it was intended as evidence that
would expose Danish crimes to the rest of Europe and make Norwegians
realise that, prior to the deplorable Kalmar Union (the formal unifica-
tion of Denmark, Norway and Sweden in 1397), Norway had been a
proud nation. For him it represented a national battle for political truth,
waged between genuine Norwegians and those who loved Denmark
more than their own fatherland.18
