                            Denmark and Norway after Denmark-Norway 267


closeness of Norwegian–Danish ties, as the Norwegian negotiators were
either Danish-born, related to the Danish negotiators or had lived in
Denmark most of their lives.
   In the Peace of Kiel, the Swedes had promised on behalf of Norway
that the Norwegians would pay a share of the common national debt,
an issue that plagued relations between Norway and Denmark until
1821 to such a degree that there were those on both sides who consid-
ered going to war over it. The fear of such a conflict was exaggerated,
but this did not change the feelings it created. Some Norwegians, such
as the first Norwegian to negotiate the debt, Jørgen Herman Vogt, felt
that the Danish demands were reasonable, but he was well aware that
most Norwegians felt otherwise. In the autumn of 1814 the Storting
recognised the need to settle the debt with Denmark but felt that the
agreement should be based not on the Peace of Kiel but on a total state-
ment of the state’s assets and liabilities. The Norwegians demanded the
return of their former tributary countries, Greenland, the Faeroes and
Iceland (which Denmark had kept after the peace of 1814), compensa-
tion for the Orkney and Shetland islands (pledged to Scotland in 1468),
compensation for the Norwegian money that had helped to pay for the
construction of Danish palaces and all other state-owned institutions
located in Denmark. The fleet seized by the British in 1807 and the
Sound Dues were later added to this. A Norwegian newspaper went even
further and demanded a Norwegian share of the common colonies in
the East and West Indies. All in all, the Storting was of the opinion that
it was Denmark that owed Norway money.14
   The dispute dragged on and was beset by deliberate Norwegian and
Swedish obstruction, but it was unrealistic to believe that the debt
would be waived, as the great powers were on the side of Denmark,
and the Norwegians would therefore have been faced with the threat of
war if they refused to cooperate. Norway ended up paying a consider-
ably smaller sum than that agreed between Denmark and Sweden, but
this still failed to appease public opinion in Norway. Some people felt
that Sweden or the king should pay for the promise that they had made
to the Danes in Kiel in 1814, others were prepared to go to war with
Denmark, the great powers and Sweden, while a majority felt that there
was no alternative but to pay. Their argument was based on the idea of
autonomy, as they believed that to let the king or the Swedes pay would
undermine Norway’s independence. The result was that the Storting,
pressured by troop manoeuvres ordered by Charles John outside the
capital that seemed to hint at a coup d’état should the parliament not
cave in to his demands, recognised under protest the convention agreed
