266   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


from the Norwegian celebration of 17 May, which was at the time an
element in the struggle against Charles John’s absolutist inclinations.
   The liberal hope was that absolutism would die out when Frederick
VI gave up the ghost and that the former constitutional Norwegian
king, Christian Frederick, would grant the country a constitution as
the new Danish monarch. Therefore, when the old king finally died
in 1839, students wasted no time in drafting an appeal to the ‘famous
creator of the Norwegian constitution’.13 To their great disappointment,
however, they were snubbed by a remark from their former liberal hero
to the effect that he did not find the Norwegian constitution particu-
larly worthy of imitation. This statement, which is contrary to what the
king himself had written previously, can be explained by the fact that
Christian VIII – Christian Frederick’s royal Danish title – had become
more conservative over the years, that he feared Russian interference if
there should be a liberal revolution, or that he was afraid that a consti-
tution in the current situation would dissolve the union between the
kingdom and the duchies. During the last years of his life, the king
attempted to solve the state’s problems with the help of a common con-
stitution for the Danish composite state, but instead his sudden death
in January 1848, the February Revolution in France and national con-
flicts propelled the country into a state of civil war. In 1849 Danes were
finally given a constitution inspired by the constitutions of Norway
(1814) and Belgium (1831).


The Settlement of the Danish-Norwegian Estate

As mentioned above Danish-Norwegian relations were influenced by
the different systems of government in the two countries. However,
this was far from the only thing putting a strain upon the relationship
between Danes and Norwegians. Relations were affected, for example,
by the problems relating to the settlement of the estate after the union
between Denmark and Norway had been dissolved. One of the issues
in question was the small fleet of warships that the Norwegians had
built up during the war, which the Danes demanded as state property,
a demand that the Norwegians compared to the British seizure of the
Danish-Norwegian fleet in 1807. Not unreasonably, the Norwegians
considered this to be in bad faith, as Denmark, already in possession
of most of the common property, was demanding one of the few assets
left in Norwegian possession. In the end, the Norwegians were forced to
pay for their own ships, which fed the fuel of hatred against Denmark.
At the same time the negotiations had paradoxically underlined the
