                             Denmark and Norway after Denmark-Norway 265


   According to a Danish emissary in Germany, Christian Frederick,
who was on his way back to Denmark after a prolonged trip abroad,
was redirected by the government to Italy as the dissatisfied inhab-
itants of Copenhagen were said to have expressed the hope that the
prince would reverse the government’s policies. By chance, the former
Norwegian king and rebel-leader was visiting Naples just as the revolu-
tion broke out in Southern Italy in 1821. Christian Frederick’s activities
in Norway had made him the logical focus for hopes of a liberal revo-
lution. A Danish diplomat in Germany wrote in a letter the year after
Dampe’s ‘rebellion’ that, given its purposeless opposition to a constitu-
tion, only the government could be blamed for such a turn of events.
The letter also contained the following view: ‘In my opinion, this will
mark the death throes of the aristocracy, and all European states will
have free constitutions within a few decades.’11
   There can be no doubt that the public sphere in Denmark during
the 1820s was controlled by conservative and moderate forces, and that
the period was characterised by a fear of revolution and a lack of dyna-
mism. Prominent cultural personalities defended absolutism against
liberalism in lofty panegyrics. This clearly supports posterity’s view of
the period as royalist but should not overshadow the fact that collec-
tions were made for the Greeks’ struggle for liberty and that there were
examples of moderate men working for a free press and informed public
opinion. By the end of the 1820s, this had resulted in more freedom for
periodicals, while the members of the Athenæum literary society dis-
cussed politics and read foreign newspapers and written constitutions.
The elite generation that had grown up in the 1820s was in no doubt
that absolutism as a system was on its last legs. Their thinking went
hand-in-hand with the desire for a constitution and the sovereignty of
the people, and this in itself carried the seeds of political nationalism.12
   Norwegian influence on conditions for the Danish monarchy could be
clearly seen when the revolutionary wave reached the banks of the Elbe
in 1830. The landmark publication by the Holstein civil servant, Uwe
Jens Lornsen, entitled Uber das Verfassungswerk in Schleswigholstein, was
doubly inspired by conditions in Norway. Lornsen not only envisaged a
constitution along the lines of the Norwegian model but also wanted to
see the relationship between Schleswig-Holstein and Denmark changed
to a personal union in accordance with the Swedish–Norwegian exam-
ple. Lornsen’s efforts were unsuccessful, but assemblies of the States of
the Realm were instituted throughout the Danish state on 28 May 1831,
and in liberal circles there were celebrations on this date in subsequent
years. This makes it natural to believe that they had derived inspiration
