                             Denmark and Norway after Denmark-Norway 271


of arrogance and egoism, and he more than hinted that, after the disap-
pointment of 1814, Norwegians were attempting to put the blame for
their own mistakes on the Danes.20 The middle-class Norwegian percep-
tion of Denmark says far more about domestic divisions and nation-
building in Norway than about their former Danish ‘brothers’.21


Danish Relations with Norwegians Shortly
after the Separation

After the separation Danes still wanted to maintain close cultural ties
between the two countries, but it would have to be on Danish terms. As
late as 1819 a Danish historian could speak of a Danish-Norwegian peo-
ple that was still one with regard to faith and culture, while the Danish
translations and publication of Icelander Snorre Sturluson’s Norwegian
kings’ sagas Heimskringla (c. 1220–35) and Saxo Grammaticus’s Gesta
danorum (c. 1200) by the great priest and poet N.F.S. Grundtvig were an
attempt to remind the two peoples of their spiritual union by which,
according to the poet-priest, they were still bound.22
   The severing of the political link in itself resulted in widespread and
intense distress. It comes as no surprise, therefore, that the hope of
reunification was expressed in poetry, prose and letters during the years
immediately after 1814. The poem Dannemark (1816) emphasises how
the love between the two ‘sisters’, Denmark and Norway, was so strong
that the poet feels there must be a reunification. This hope changed
over the years, turning into Scandinavianism and/or the view that sep-
aration had been necessary as an expression of popular sovereignty.
From a purely political point of view, the idea of reunification was com-
pletely unrealistic. This was due not only to opposition from Sweden,
the great powers and Norway, but also to the two different systems
of government. Norway constituted a model for younger liberals in
Denmark but was anathema to Frederick VI. Like most other European
countries, Denmark was caught up in the conservative reaction that
followed 1815, which resulted in suspicion being cast on Norwegians,
almost by definition, as potential revolutionaries. Set alongside the
issue of settling their debt, this created bad blood between the ‘sisters’.
   There were two other decisive factors that were instrumental in dis-
tancing Danes from Norwegians: anger and denial. The separation had
been a humiliation for Denmark and Danish self-understanding and
was exacerbated when Norway settled accounts with a common past, a
common culture and a common language. Danes were conscious of the
Norwegians’ complaints that they had been ignored and had not been
