268   Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


upon. But the whole issue strengthened the opposition and heaped fuel
on people’s dislike of Denmark, Sweden and the king.15


The Norwegian View of Denmark in the Wake
of the Separation

Ernst Renan and Joop Leerssen have emphasised how feelings of oppres-
sion, defeat and injustice can help to strengthen a sense of fellowship, as
was the case with the Irish, while Chris Lorenz has pointed out that trau-
matic events can cause a nation to reshape elements of its past into their
antithesis. Both factors are clearly present in Norwegian nation-building,
where, in distancing themselves from Denmark and from what was seen
as uncritical Norwegian accommodation before the separation, many peo-
ple strengthened their national identity. In so doing, they imposed on the
past a nationalist interpretation as a time when Norwegians had failed to
live up to the demands for national dignity and autonomy that now made
themselves felt. Pointing up the contrast between a Norwegian rebirth
in 1814 and the preceding ‘Danish night’, as the union also has become
known in Norway, became increasingly common. However, Norwegians
were and still are to some extent divided as regards the past. As late as
1830 there remained divisions between those who spoke of the separation
with delight and those who harked back to the brotherly union.16
   Behind such divisions lay different interpretations of the past and
of the political events of 1814, which had created deep splits in soci-
ety. Many patriots at Eidsvoll nursed a cordial loathing for Denmark
and wanted full independence, but as a general rule negative attitudes
towards Danes were connected with a positive or a pragmatic view of
the union with Sweden. The divisions created at Eidsvoll suffused the
bitter debates of the years that followed. The frequent literary attacks
on Denmark and the Danes in this period therefore had less to do with
Denmark and the Danes than they had with the settlement of the polit-
ical accounts amongst different political fractions in Norway dating
back to the Constitutional Assembly.
   Other factors, such as age and careers, were also significant in deter-
mining attitudes towards Denmark. On the one hand, there was the
younger generation who could not remember the time before 1807 and
therefore judged the union harshly, and on the other those of the older
generation who had had strong ties with Denmark and had prospered
were more lenient in their judgement of the union. Pro-Danish and
pro-Swedish Norwegians created two different stereotypes of ‘the Dane’,
based on a feeling of (high) cultural Norwegian inferiority. The former
