                            Denmark and Norway after Denmark-Norway 277


independence and the dissolution of the union in 1905. Danes were
completely in support of Norwegians in their national struggle, which
in the years that followed turned the Swedes first against Norway
and then against Denmark. This did nothing, however, to strengthen
Danish–Norwegian relations. Political emancipation and national enthu-
siasm prompted many Norwegians to demand a cultural settlement
of accounts with the Danish period and with the continued links with
Denmark. Just as in former colonies, attempts were made to erase those
traces of history that did not conform to the national self-image. Among
other things, this took the form of changing the names of towns,
particularly those towns that had been named after ‘Danish’ kings.
Christiania became Oslo, Frederikshald was changed to Halden and
Trondhjem became Nidaros, which was changed again to Trondheim as
a compromise in response to protests.
   In 1907 the first in a long series of spelling reforms began that dis-
tanced Norwegian from Danish, but without it being possible to amal-
gamate ‘new Norwegian’ and ‘book language’. National rearmament
led, among other things, to new demands that included the return of
Norwegian documents from the National Archives in Copenhagen,
the repurchasing of the rights to the works of Norwegian authors by
Norwegian publishers, and the struggle for (eastern) Greenland, which
Norwegians felt had been stolen from them in 1814. Norway went so
far as to occupy parts of eastern Greenland, at which point Denmark
successfully took the matter to the International Court in the Hague in
1933. The issue whipped up popular resentment and seriously damaged
Danish–Norwegian relations. The Norwegian government had recog-
nised the ruling, but the situation changed again with the outbreak of
the Second World War.
   Both countries were occupied on 9 April 1940, but while the Norwegian
government went into exile, the Danish government chose to collabo-
rate with the German occupiers in order to protect the civilian popula-
tion. This made Denmark’s status ambivalent in relation to the Axis
Powers and the Allies. That Denmark ended up on ‘the right side of
history’ was due both to the breakdown of the policy of collaboration
in 1943, the resistance movement and skilful diplomacy on the part
of the Danish ambassador in the United States, who acted indepen-
dently of the government in occupied Denmark. The foreign minister
of the Norwegian government in exile, however, went to great lengths
to thwart him in an attempt to regain Greenland for Norway. But the
diplomatic Norwegian offensive came to nothing, as it contravened the
Monroe Doctrine and the agreements the United States had made with
the Danish ambassador to build US bases in Greenland.32 At the same
