274 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


nation to have its own name emphasised the fact that Norwegians were
a people separate from the Danes, even though the written language
might be identical, while calling the language Danish emphasised
Danish ascendancy over Norway.
   By about 1830, however, the term ‘Norwegian’ as a language appears
to have found favour with the public, while the language taught at the
university was called Danish up to the 1820s, and several Norwegian
grammar schools only changed the name of the subject they taught from
Danish to Norwegian in the 1830s or 1840s. This initial victory for the
‘Norwegian’ language went no deeper than the name and had little to
do with content. In other words, the written language to all intents and
purposes remained Danish. This can be explained by the deep-rooted
middle-class fear of the severance of cultural ties with Denmark. However,
the Norwegians’ struggle with the language continued. Some measure of
pragmatic ‘Norwegianisation’ was used by the elite to pepper their written
language without really breaking with Danish. But for some this was far
from enough. In the spirit of national romanticism they wanted to return
to the past and the true ‘essence’ of the nation. They did this by con-
structing an artificial Norwegian language based on dialects collected in
West Norway, which allegedly reflected the original, genuine Norwegian
language – before it had been polluted by Danish. Norwegians dubbed
the new language landsmål (language of the country), but this was later
changed to nynorsk (new Norwegian), while the Danish-influenced lan-
guage was called rigsmål/riksmål (language of the realm) at the time, which
today, in its ‘Norwegianised’ version, is called bokmål (book language).


The Fellowship Continued

The close and time-honoured connections across the Skagerrak, together
with the affection of the ‘Danomaniacs’ for Denmark in general and
for Copenhagen in particular meant that the cultural union lived on
somewhere in the region of a hundred years after the political union
had been dissolved. This was in no small part due to the Danish capital
being able to maintain its position as a centre of culture for Norwegians.
Norway’s new capital, Christiania, was not as yet considered an undis-
puted centre for Norwegians. The town was only half the size of Bergen,
and even though the first Norwegian university had been founded
there in 1813, it contained few other cultural institutions. Compared
to Copenhagen, Christiania could still only be considered a provin-
cial town. The Danish capital was not only ten times larger than its
Norwegian counterpart, it was also the home of institutions such as the
