                              Denmark and Norway after Denmark-Norway 275


Royal Theatre, the Royal Library, the Academy of Fine Arts and a host of
publishing houses, in addition to the large number of poets, artists and
scientists who lived there. Norway did not as yet have a well-developed
literary or cultural infrastructure, and Norwegians were therefore still
obliged to make use of the Danish facilities, even after the separation.29
   While Frederick VI suppressed political activities, art and culture flour-
ished in what posterity has called the Danish ‘golden age’. This meant
that Norwegian painters, sculptors and musicians, whose opportunities
for developing their talent at home were extremely limited, quite natu-
rally flocked to Denmark and, after it opened in 1829, the Polytechnic
College acted as a magnet for Norwegian students until 1900.
   The leading Norwegian national romantic painters and sculptors
received their training at the Academy of Fine Arts in Copenhagen, while
the foremost Norwegian national romantic composer, Edvard Grieg, was
strongly influenced by the Danish composer Niels W. Gade and wrote
several of his greatest works in Denmark. As for the theatre, Norway
had to make do with amateur theatricals and travelling (Danish) theatre
troupes until 1827. This was the year when a Swede founded Christiania
Theatre hoping to use Norwegian-born actors, but the project was soon
abandoned, and Danish actors continued to be imported until the sec-
ond half of the nineteenth century. The same applied to plays, which
were for a long time Danish or Danish translations of German plays.
   For many decades after the separation Norwegian schoolchildren
read Danish schoolbooks or Norwegian schoolbooks primarily contain-
ing Danish texts. The explanation for this was that no independent
Norwegian literature was yet available. Until about 1850 cultural links
went only one way between the two countries, and what was known as
‘the national breakthrough’, with the collection of Norwegian folktales
and the creation and introduction of new Norwegian, does not alter the
fact that the major Norwegian authors from the second half of the nine-
teenth century derived their primary cultural inspiration from Danish
golden-age art, just as the breakthrough of modernism in Danish lit-
erature was also very important for Norwegian artists. Furthermore,
Henrik Ibsen, Knut Hamsun and about 90 of Norway’s major authors
all published their works in Copenhagen. This was because Norwegian
authors received more professional treatment from Danish publishers
and because they had far more readers in Denmark. There was, there-
fore, a common Danish-Norwegian market for books until the begin-
ning of the twentieth century.
   The talent and the popularity of the Norwegian authors in Denmark,
however, changed the relative strengths of Danish and Norwegian
