276 Experiences of War and Nationality in Denmark and Norway, 1807–1815


literature. As a Danish author correctly pointed out at the end of the
nineteenth century, it was now Norwegians who dominated the common
culture. Norway and Norwegians became fashionable in Copenhagen,
and it was said in all seriousness in Danish circles that Norwegian was
quite simply a better language for lyrical expression. However, it must be
pointed out that Norwegian and Danish were still extremely close to each
other (the language used by Ibsen is closer to that of present-day Danish
than present-day Norwegian). Although there were doubtless Norwegian
artists and intellectuals who had an ambivalent and sometimes hostile atti-
tude to Denmark and the days of the union, most of the great Norwegian
authors regarded the continued connection with Danes as a benefit.
Henrik Ibsen wrote that he desired to be as closely connected to Denmark
as possible, while a Norwegian author who felt she was misunderstood in
the more puritanical Norway, had the following words engraved on her
tombstone: ‘Danish citizen, Danish subject and Danish author’.30
   The victory of parliamentarism in Norway in 1884 may have given
impetus to the Danish Left (the liberal farmers’ party in Denmark), but
the cultural policy of the Norwegian Left (the liberal farmers’ party in
Norway) was a tremendous disappointment for progressive Norwegian
authors who had formerly supported the party, and this proved to
be a nail in the coffin of Danish–Norwegian cultural fellowship. The
Norwegian farmers who now came to power conducted a consistently
national and pietistic policy that curbed authors’ freedom of expression
and placed new Norwegian on an equal footing with ‘book language’.
The prominent author, Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson, who had criticised the
close ties with Denmark earlier in his career, defended the closest lin-
guistic links between the countries as he grew older and wrote, ‘we must
not sever our connection with Denmark. Danes are the world’s most
enlightened people and are therefore the most skilful’.31 While this is a
statement that begs discussion, there can be no doubt that Bjørnson and
his like-minded compatriots saw Denmark as a gateway to the world.
Their national feeling gave way to a cosmopolitan view, while the agrar-
ian nationalism of the Norwegian Left was introverted and saw democ-
racy almost as a Norwegian phenomenon that could be traced back
to the Viking era. Parliamentarism therefore brought to prominence a
domestic Norwegian division between town and country, which can
still be seen today.


1905 – The Waterloo for the Common Culture

The national line pursued by the Norwegian Left undermined the
Swedish–Norwegian union and paved the way for full Norwegian
